FT921-1512

FT  24 MAR 92 / UK Company News: US casualties at property blackspot /
Assessing the consequences of Randsworth's losses


   By VANESSA HOULDER


LONDON'S reputation as one of the world's worst property blackspots has been
underlined by the heavy losses sustained in the first large foray by US
funds into the UK property market.
The Pounds 258m acquisition of Randsworth Trust at the peak of the market in
1989 has resulted in estimates of a Pounds 70m loss for Citibank and a
Pounds 238m loss for the clients of JMB Realty, a Chicago real estate group.
The losses demonstrate the severity of the decline in London office values.
At the time of the acquisition, the Randsworth portfolio was worth Pounds
473m. In April 1991, it was valued at Pounds 353m. The latest assessment
puts the value at about Pounds 260m.
This slump is worse than average. After soaring between 1985 and 1989, West
End office values have fallen by 30 per cent from the peak as the recession
took a particularly heavy toll on the service businesses in the area. The
retail market was also badly scarred by increased rates charges and the
impact of high interest rates.
The Randsworth portfolio, which comprises 650,000 sq ft of office space and
300,000 sq ft of retail space in Oxford Street, Mayfair, Knightsbridge,
Kensington and St James's, may have been particularly badly-hit because of
the development properties within its portfolio. Its best-known development,
in Berkeley Square, which aims to be one of the most expensive addresses in
London, has been empty for several months.
Randsworth's problems were exacerbated by the highly geared structure of the
acquisition vehicle. Investors put up Pounds 95m of equity and Pounds 95m of
loan notes, while Citibank put up Pounds 180m of debt. The Citibank debt
ranked second to a Pounds 135m debenture held against the assets of London &
Provincial Shop Centres, the company's main asset.
JMB has been in talks for 15 months in an attempt to raise more equity and
persuade its bank to swap debt for equity. After putting in an extra Pounds
58m at the start of 1991, its investors called a halt to further cash
injections. 'The money was running out faster than it was being put in,'
said one adviser.
The collapse of the Randsworth deal has important consequences for the
perception of the UK property market for US investors. JMB's misfortunes
have been followed with intense interest. It is seen as one of the largest,
controlling some Pounds 10bn of property funds, and most skilled property
investors in the US.
For some US commentators, the failure of Randsworth highlights both the
insecurity of the London market and the extra risks entailed by venturing
into unknown territory.
JMB was attracted to London because of the relatively high investment
returns. However, at the same time that it and other overseas investors were
putting funds into the UK market, UK institutions were taking money out of
London property.
The company also made large losses on its stakes in Rosehaugh and Priest
Marians, two high-flying property companies which came close to collapse by
the decline in the market.
Not all US investors have been deterred from exploring the UK market. The
O'Connor Group, a real estate fund, has been talking to Hammerson about a
joint acquisition of the Merry Hill shopping centre in Dudley, West
Midlands. 'The more astute realise they are looking at an different market,'
says a US pensions fund adviser.
But some commentators think that the failure of JMB's long-running attempt
to salvage the business is fundamentally a vote of no confidence in the
London market.
If the investors believed that the UK market was likely to see an upturn,
they would be prepared to see the Randsworth deal through. Randsworth's
demise, coming in the same month as the well-publicised problems of Olympia
& York, another North American investor that put money in the London market,
is a sobering precedent for future investors.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920324

