FT922-4345

FT  05 JUN 92 / Abu Dhabi warns on BCCI payout


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


THE Abu Dhabi shareholders in the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce
International yesterday warned creditors that the offer of at least a 30 per
cent payout was final and there would be no other.
'These arrangements represent the result of over six months of discussion
with the liquidators, who best know the factual situation within BCCI, and
who have recommended the arrangements to creditors. The arrangements,
including the amounts to be paid under them, are not open to renegotiation,'
the shareholders said in a statement.
However, the shareholders appeared to be heading for a conflict with a group
of creditors, representing at least 10 per cent of the bank's worldwide
claims, who have voted to risk litigation in an effort to secure better
terms. Among other things, the group is also unwilling to surrender its
right to sue the government of Abu Dhabi as called for in the offer.
The group has been advised by solicitors Norton Roise who had urged caution
in accepting the offer. The solicitors noted that the offer is worthy of
consideration by creditors, because, although far from generous, there are
grave risks in attempting to recover through litigation.
Seven of the BCCI Creditors' Committee's eight members have voted to reject
the proposed settlement, according to a document obtained by the Financial
Times. The sole supporter is the Bank of England-backed Deposit Protection
Board whose members have paid levies to a fund which reimbursed UK
depositors for losses of up to Pounds 15,000 each.
The Creditors' Committee has been seeking to delay a move by liquidators to
obtain High Court approval to accept the settlement offer made to it by the
Abu Dhabi shareholders. Yesterday, they suffered a further setback when Sir
Donald Nicholls, the vice chancellor who has been presiding over the
settlement hearings, paved the way for the liquidators to appear before the
High Court on Monday.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920605

