FT924-11553

FT  24 OCT 92 / It's not business, Gorby, it's strictly personal: The
judgment of Solomon is needed in the court case involving ex-Soviet
president Gorbachev


   By JOHN LLOYD


THE MATTER OF former Soviet President and Communist Party General Secretary
Gorbachev vs the Constitutional Court of Russia is, of course, personal.
Mikhail Gorbachev did not refuse to appear before the court on a mere point
of law: Boris Yeltsin did not ban his foreign travel because it was the
appropriate legal sanction - nor did he relax the ban to allow him to attend
Willi Brandt's funeral because he had been advised that the original
decision was legally faulty.
It could not be other than personal. These two men have loomed over Soviet
and post-Soviet politics like battling mastodons since 1987. Then Yeltsin,
having been raised by Gorbachev to the politburo and the leadership of the
Moscow party, was summarily dismissed after a humiliating process which, on
Yeltsin's account, nearly killed him.
His comeback over three years, when he gained popular support as Gorbachev
lost his, seared the Soviet president's soul: the humiliation he visited on
Gorbachev before the Russian parliament, after the collapse of last year's
coup attempt, was sweet revenge, but not the end of the story.
At stake has been not only leadership of the country, but the mantle history
will bestow. There is still no question as to which of the two is the more
popular abroad, especially in the US: Gorbachev's trip there in May of this
year had most of the trappings of a presidential visit.
Unable to conceal his spleen, Yeltsin used a post-conference briefing, at a
meeting of the heads of the Commonwealth of Independent States in Tashkent,
to mock his predecessor's pretensions to 'head a world government.' Yeltsin
also attacked his idiocy for 'clinging to the ideas of socialism'.
In this bitterness, one can detect the bafflement that foreigners should
think more of a man who destroyed the Soviet Union than one who is
struggling to rebuild Russia - a puzzlement which has a rational basis.
The matter which the Constitutional Court is trying is also, inevitably,
political. This fledgling institution has been given a responsibility before
which any legislative assembly would shrink. It must decide on the charge,
brought by former communists, that the Russian president's decrees banning
the Russian and the Soviet communist parties were illegal. Further, it must
adjudicate on the counter suit, brought by the Gorbachev, that the Communist
Party was itself unconstitutional.
Andrei Makarov, lead advocate for the Yeltsin camp, began his case by
claiming the party had visited a reign of terror on the Soviet people
'unprecedented in history'. Even when the court decreed that the evidence
should be limited to the period after March 1990, when the party lost its
formal monopoly of power, the arguments have continued on whether the party
had succeeded in transforming itself into a legal party with power limited
by democratic checks and balances.
The personal and the political energies unleashed by the process are
inescapable: they would be present in any similar case in any country, no
matter how time-honoured its civil and judicial institutions were. However,
the root question is whether there exists in Russia a sufficiently well
developed legal and constitutional base to cope with these energies, to sift
from their passionate advocacies what is germane, and to arrive at a
judgment which is seen to be just.
The signs of this are at best mixed: and the Gorbachev affair, as one of
these signs, is itself confused. Gorbachev has been consistent in his
refusal to appear - but he has not argued on a point of law. Instead, in his
deposition to court on September 28, he justified himself on the grounds
that 'as it loses support for its policies, the other side (Yeltsin's) looks
for scapegoats and seeks to put history itself in the dock' - an attempt
which 'may trigger the suppression of dissidence and bring about a climate
of purges for political views and convictions'.
There seems no doubt that Valery Zorkin, the young head of the
Constitutional Court, has been within his rights to seek to compel Gorbachev
to appear as a witness - although he did not himself impose the ban on
travel, instead appealing to the Yeltsin, as president, to impose it.
Yeltsin, in consultation with Andrei Kozyrev, the Foreign Minister, acceded
to the request: the lifting of the ban on October 13 was said by Yeltsin to
be for 'humanitarian reasons.'
Besides the deprivation of the right to travel, Yeltsin also, on October 8,
ordered the seizure of the buildings housing the Gorbachev Institute on
Leningradsky Prospect. Yeltsin's view is that it is not legally leased,that
there are irregularities in the income of the Gorbachev Foundation and that
Gorbachev does not need all that space anyway.
It gave Gorbachev a street platform from which to accuse the Russian
president of authoritarian tendencies and of conducting an act of political
revenge - charges which appeared as justified as those made against his own
actions towards Yeltsin five years earlier.
In all of this, the court has failed to remain above the storm. Zorkin,
allowed himself to be persuaded to give a press conference on Monday on the
affair. That was unwise, because while he may be a fine lawyer, he is a bad
politician. The press conference, held in the courtroom, was moderated by a
rather bumptious TV reporter who condescended to Zorkin. Zorkin, especially
when speaking to foreign correspondents, plaintively justified his actions
by referring to the practice in other countries. He was led into being rude
about Gorbachev, referring to him as a 'citizen of the world' who should
remember that it was as a Russian citizen that he would be called to
account.
Gorbachev's problem, however, is that there is no substantial section of
Russian opinion which wishes to make his case their own. The Yeltsin camp,
which includes those who would still call themselves democrats, largely see
him as a man trying to cling to the remnants of power and compromised by his
party past.
Yet the efforts to tar him with the party's authoritarian brush have been
unsuccessful - although Mikhail Poltoranin, the Information Minister,
yesterday promised some juicy scandals from the politburo files. Yeltsin's
side alleges that Gorbachev covered up the massacre of 14,000 Polish
officers in Katyn forest in 1940 by not publishing the politburo documents
on the affair - which he did not.
He did, however, admit Soviet guilt in the affair (it had always before been
blamed on the Nazis, long after no-one else believed it). He claims that he
gave the secret files to Yeltsin when he handed over power at the end of
last year, legitimately going on to ask - why only now is he revealing them?
The case, moving to its final stages, has appeared to have proved nothing -
except that it is hard, perhaps impossible, for any court to sustain the
weight which is being put on it.
Society was promised a kind of Nuremberg process, in which men guilty of a
nation's humiliation would be put in the dock. Yet those who have come
forward - such as Nikolai Ryzhkov, the former premier under Gorbachev, or
Arkady Volsky, a former Gorbachev adviser, or even Yegor Ligachev, the
former politburo number two - were in their different ways trying to reform
the party, to give it a legal foundation.
The prosecution is in the name of Yeltsin, a former politburo member, whose
career was made under the authoritarian rule of Leonid Brezhnev, accusing
his former fellows of crimes allegedly committed when the party was
attempting to become less totalitarian.
The process cannot rid itself of the sense that it is a dispute among former
comrades: it has about it the smell of show trials, if nothing like the
ferocity or the sinister potential. It will take a judgment of Solomon to
raise it above that, and make it a foundation stone of a law-based state.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921024

