FT923-11010

FT  27 JUL 92 / European Bonds: Bundesbank fails to erase fears of interest
rate rise


   By SARA WEBB


EUROPE's government bond markets remain volatile as the recent increase in
Germany's discount rate failed to erase fears of further rate rises by the
Bundesbank, and left higher-yielding European markets particularly
vulnerable.
Mixed German economic data last week took its toll on the bund market. On
Wednesday, money supply figures showed annualised M3 growth slipping to 8.7
per cent in June from a revised 8.8 per cent in May - well above the
Bundesbank's target of 3.5 to 5.5 per cent.
The markets have speculated about further increases in German rates -
specifically the Lombard rate - although some economists say that after the
Bundesbank raised the discount rate from 8.0 per cent to 8.75 per cent on
July 16, a further rise in German rates is unlikely.
More favourable were inflation figures for three western German states last
week. The July annual inflation rate for Baden-Wurttemberg fell to 3.2 per
cent from 4.2 per cent in June, while in Hesse, it fell from 3.7 to 2.7 per
cent, and in North Rhine-Westphalia from 4.3 to 3.3 per cent. With Bavaria
still to report, economists expect western German inflation to fall below 4
per cent in July.
Meanwhile, tensions within the ERM are playing havoc with some Mediterranean
markets. On Thursday, Spain increased its key intervention rate from 12.4 to
13 per cent - following spending cuts and tax increases earlier in the week
 -pushing up yields on Spanish government bonds.
The lira has come under speculative pressure during the last month, with the
markets wondering nervously if it will be devalued - forcing the Bank of
Italy to raise interest rates. The Italian bond market has see-sawed wildly
recently, and last week was no exception with continuing devaluation fears.
News that the main credit rating agencies were considering downgrading some
state-controlled enterprises did not help sentiment.
Tensions within the ERM seem likely to remain as the spectre of higher
interest rates hangs over European bond markets and ahead of the French
referendum.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920727

