FT922-434

FT  27 JUN 92 / Arts: Brief encounter with Delft - William Packer enjoys
Vermeer and de Hooch at the National Gallery


   By WILLIAM PACKER


BRIEF ENCOUNTERS is a series of occasional exhibitions at the National
Gallery founded on a principle so simple, elegant and obvious, that we can
only wonder it has not been a commonplace of public gallery practice since
public galleries began. A loan from another great collection is requested or
becomes available, whereupon a comparable or related work from the Gallery's
permanent collection is set against it and a small explicatory display
arranged around the pair.
This current encounter brings together the 'Street in Delft' of circa 1659,
from the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, one of only two surviving townscapes by
that rarest of painters, Jan Vermeer, and the National Gallery's own
'Courtyard of a House in Delft', of 1658, by Pieter de Hooch. The mutual
context is further established by two more paintings from the collection:
the tiny 'View of Delft', of 1652, by Carel Fabritius; and Egbert van der
Poel's 'View of Delft after the Explosion of 1654', in which disaster
Fabritius was killed. Thus is set out something of the nature of
topographical realist painting at a most crucial stage in its development,
albeit within the brief scope of four small, exquisite works made in one
small city within one short decade.
De Hooch, born in 1629, was three years older than Vermeer. In 1652 he moved
from Haarlem, where he had trained, to Delft, where Vermeer had been born,
and it is not unreasonable to suppose that by the late 1650s, with both of
them in their late twenties, there was at least some familiarity between the
two men. Yet for all the consonance of interest in their subject-matter, and
the apparent similarities of meticulous observation and pains-taking
technique, the real differences between them are profound.
Both painters present the image and the pictorial space four-square, as upon
a stage, a facade or screen laid flat across the canvas. And both of them
pierce this screen selectively, opening up now a deeper, now a more shallow
space, near and far. But where De Hooch brings the viewer in much closer to
his subject, and is much more particular in the characterisation of his
principal figures that animate the scene, Vermeer remains remote, detached
and not a little mysterious. His facade remains in part impenetrable, the
windows shuttered, the arched door firmly closed, the alley blocked at its
far end, even the interior impossible to penetrate beyond the faceless woman
sewing at the open door.
As for the detail and the handling, the similarities are apparent only to
deceive. Where de Hooch marks every brick and paving-stone, Vermeer's bricks
and cobbles, shutters and window lattices are miracles of generalised
suggestion. It is not that the de Hooch is not fresh and painterly in the
handling, but that Vermeer is so much the fresher, and so painterly as to
prefigure a much later age - Degas, Whistler, Sickert. The radical nature of
his design in the passage across the ground floor of the street-front - the
indian red and green blocks of the shutters, the black of the open door and
the closed arch, all set against the bright white of the plaster - comes
close indeed to the abstract preoccupations of Whistler or William
Nicholson, hints even at Mondrian.
So convincing are both paintings in the architectural spaces they propose,
both open and solid, that the use of the camera obscura, evident in the
forced monocular perspective of the tiny Fabritius, has been mooted as an
enabling device. There are, however, certain awkwardnesses and
inconsistencies of perspective in both paintings that make this unlikely,
more obvious in the de Hooch, more surprising, perhaps, in the Vermeer, in
which the eye-levels and vanishing-points simply do not match up. The
figures, too, are relatively too small to make literal sense.
Yet it is the magic of painting, that eye and hand must ever accommodate to
a binocular vision and a shifting perception of reality. It was never a
literal exercise, more a question of making true sense, which is to say what
is truly felt and intuitively understood. Even the Fabritius is transformed
by a unique sensibility into an elegiac image, poetical and infinitely
strange. The dreamer sits outside the inn in the evening sunshine, the
mother brings her child in from the garden, the old woman sits sewing at her
door as the children play outside. It might have been yesterday. Life goes
on.
Brief Encounters: Vermeer - de Hooch: The National Gallery, until August 31:
sponsored by the Bernard Sunley Charitable Foundation.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920627

