FT922-446

FT  27 JUN 92 / Travel: Thailand: how to survive those long, hot nights - In
Bangkok Justin Wintle confronts the deadly and squalid side of the country's
much-publicised sex industry


   By JUSTIN WINTLE


IT WAS entirely my fault. One night in Bangkok I took my companion to
Patpong to bargain-hunt among the stalls. Patpong is famous for its
well-made imitation Rolex watches, Dunhill wallets, Cartier handbags and
Chanel or Hermes silk scarves.
So good have some of these products become that connoisseurs no longer call
them fake Rolexes but Thai Rolexes. There are other things as well,
including indigenous Thai goods: scarves, T-shirts, wood-carvings, silk
skirts. Indeed, since Thais have as much flair for design as they do for
copying, it always beats me why they do not concentrate more on making
originals.
But Patpong, three narrow lanes between the Suriwongse and Silom Roads, has
been famous for things other than its busy night-mart. The central lane is
lined with girly bars. There are also boy bars and massage parlours and
places that put on 'special shows.' Whatever your fancy seeks, Patpong can
supply it, for Patpong is the heart of Bangkok's well-canvassed sex
industry.
The bars you can just walk into, although most potential clients will find
themselves pulled in by young women usually clad in not much more than a
bikini. Inside there are many more scantily-dressed females, some of whom
dance on raised catwalks around which clients sip or gulp beer. Although the
girls are paid to dance, they are also for sale. To overcome any language
barriers they wear numbers, so all you have to do is give a waiter or
waitress the number of your choice and you are away.
The special shows are marginally harder to get into. Mostly they are found
up seedy and uninviting staircases. Pimps hang around and invite customers
inside. To overcome any difficulties of communication, they carry cards that
have a bill of attractions printed in English. Not a lot is left to the
imagination.
As it happened, we were more interested in the cards than in their contents.
If one is going to buy a souvenir in Bangkok then one should at least come
away with something representative. So, having had three or four cards
flashed under my nose, I started bargaining.
The pimp in question was taken aback. This was a perversion he had not
previously encountered. 'You want card, mister? What can mister do with
card?' That I did not tell him, but I did offer 50 baht, about Pounds 1.20.
At once he demanded 100 baht. The cards were hard to come by, he said; in
any case, they were not for sale.
At this point the Scottish in me started to surface. I was damned if I was
going to pay Pounds 2.40 for a piece of paper. After a lot more haggling,
therefore, we struck a different sort of deal. We would go with him to the
den he worked for, sit inside for five minutes and buy one beer at a cost of
55 baht. In return, we would be presented with a card free of charge.
Unfortunately, having taken us around a corner and up some back-stairs, he
neglected to inform the management of our arrangement. Instead he scarpered.
'Superstars,' as it was called, struggled to live up to its advertising. I
could see no ping-pong balls, although through a smoke-filled haze I did
discern a female, naked and recumbent, playing with a Marlboro.
Otherwise, the place was similar to the bars at street level. Very loud
music accompanied the various gyrations of underclad lovelies caressing the
chrome uprights that connected the raised catwalk to the ceiling. Fearful of
what might have been slipped into it, I drank one-third of my beer.
Then we made our way to the cash desk. Instead of being asked to pay 55
baht, however, we were asked to pay 1,200. A previously concealed notice was
now revealed to us. We had both sat down, so that alone cost us 400 baht
each. We were also expected to cough up for non-existent face-towels and
'ladies drinks.'
The Scottish in me combined forces with an English upper lip. I refused to
pay, and demanded to see the manager. The man I was talking to replied that
he was the manager, and in no time at all became extremely abusive,
physically as well as verbally. Simultaneously, four or five other louts
materialised around us.
This upset me. Nor was the magic phrase 'tourist police' to much avail. The
man simply got more excited. It was this, however, that eventually reduced
the bill by 1,000 baht. To lose your cool is very un-Thai, and the more cool
he lost the weaker his position became. In the end we settled for 200 baht,
or something under Pounds 5.
Bearing in mind the availability of cheap and lethal flick-knives on the
street outside, we were probably lucky to get away for under Pounds 5. My
instinct was to head for the first policeman I saw. But the problem here was
that there were an awful lot of policemen about, and most appeared to be
holding hands with pimps.
I thought about contacting the tourist police from my hotel, but quickly saw
that it would lead to more trouble than it was worth. If I had brought a
charge I would probably have had to stay longer in the country. In addition,
it might have given the opposition a hook on my identity, and that I did not
want either.
In the end we chose to forget about it. But the real moral of the tale is
that we were lucky. Contact with Thailand's sex industry can be deadly, and
not just because of flick-knives. In the old days it was the 'gift that goes
on giving,' gonorrhea or syphilis. Today it is the 'gift that one day
kills,' Aids.
The statistics are terrifying. Four years ago the Thai government would only
admit to six cases, all of them 'imported.' Since then officials have been
obliged to open their eyes. By 1995 it is expected that there will be about
1.5m HIV carriers in Thailand.
Matters are exacerbated by the widespread use of needle-injected drugs,
particularly among women prostitutes, or men whose habits they are
supporting, and by a reputedly high incidence of bisexuality. The underlying
epidemological explanation must reside in the scale of Thai prostitution
itself.
A shock-horror headline story in the Thai press last year concerned a
suburban 'tea-house.' A distressed husband found that his wife had been
abducted by the owner and put to gainful employment. A police raid liberated
the wife and 17 other such women. Tests showed that all 18 were HIV
positive.
Tea-houses represent the bottom of the market. They are knocking shops whose
'employees' are expected to 'entertain' 15 or more clients a day, at perhaps
100 or 150 baht a head. Above and beyond the tea-houses, however, is a
devastating array of facilities: massage parlours, cocktail lounges, go-go
bars, nightclubs and hostess clubs.
In all, it is estimated that there are upwards of 800,000 women involved.
The pricier the establishment, the more say they will have in the choice of
customer. But in the long run that offers little or no protection.
A common misconception is that Thailand's sex industry has grown up as a
tourist attraction. In fact, most transactions are with Thai men. I have met
very few Thai males whose idea of a night out is not a few bottles of beer
either preceded or followed by a woman, or both. The evidence is that
foreign visitors are gradually turning away from the bar-girls, except at
the spectator level, but that the domestic scene is as lively as ever.
Condoms are widely available, but how widely they are used is a different
matter. Medics fear that mechai, as they are called, after Mechai
Viravaidya, the first and seemingly only government minister to concern
himself with what in Thailand must become a devastating plague, induce a
sense of false security. As one doctor said to me: 'Anything can happen to a
mechai. It can slip off, it can puncture, it can burst, it can run out, or
it can just sit quietly by the mattress.'
In Thailand, there are only two sure-fire prophylactics. One is to keep
saying 'No,' the other is to stock up with sleeping pills. That way you will
survive those long hot oriental nights.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

920627

