FT922-7354

FT  19 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Moscow to ease oil tax for
joint ventures


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


THE RUSSIAN government said yesterday it planned to ease the oil export tax
burden for joint ventures.
'I would like to stress that for joint ventures we are introducing revisions
which will help them maintain the conditions on the basis of which many
agreements were signed,' Mr Vladimir Lopukhin, the oil minister, told a news
conference.
A tax of Ecu26 a tonne (Dollars 5 a barrel) has been the subject of major
lobbying by western consultancies and oil companies which claim it is a
major obstacle to foreign investment in Russia's flagging oil production
sector.
Mr Lopukhin also suggested it was possible that new export tariffs which
were due to be introduced later this month could be lowered for other
exporters.
Mr Andrei Nechayev, the economics minister, said the phased liberalisation
of internal oil prices, due to come into effect soon after May 21, could
lead to the removal of all controls on the price paid by domestic
enterprises in three months time.
But Mr Lopukhin admitted he could not say whether Russian oil producers
would use the opportunity to reinvest the profits which would result from
the higher prices. He said he was still in the process of preparing
anti-monopoly measures to make them more responsive to market pressures.
But defying more pessimistic expectations, he told a news conference he
expected exports to remain constant this year at last year's level of 60m
tonnes.
He also revealed that republics which already had a special bilateral treaty
with Russia, such as Belarus, would be paying about the same as Russian
enterprises for their oil. He could not say however what Ukraine, the second
richest republic, which has been at odds with Moscow for months over a host
of political and economic issues, would be charged as the price had yet to
be negotiated. But he confirmed that the Baltic republics would soon be
paying close to world prices for oil.
The government on Friday unveiled plans to abolish the fixed price of Rbs350
a tonne in favour of a range of Rbs1,800 to Rbs2,200.
This would be enforced through special taxes on enterprises which charged
more than Rbs1,800 but up to Rbs2,200 and by fines and administrative
sanctions for producers which charged more than Rbs2,200.
The new range corresponds to the present free market price within Russia but
is still about a third of international oil prices.
Mr Nechayev said the government would use the money made from the taxation
and fines to help certain enterprises and ordinary citizens weather the
impact of the price increases.
The resolution in which the plan was announced, however, says the proceeds
will be used mainly to rebuild the oil sector, leaving plenty of room for
confusion on the fund's final destination.
Mr Nechayev said, however, that he expected to make Rb160bn from the
punitive levies and Rbs300bn from extra VAT revenues.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920519

