FT924-1071

FT  19 DEC 92 / Condemned to months of silence: Christina Lamb meets
Brazil's most notorious priest


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


LEONARDO Boff cheerfully admits that in former times he would have been
burnt at the stake. Boff is a harmless looking man with big glasses, who
favours home knitted sweaters. He has the kind of benevolent air that would
make him a natural department store Santa Claus. Yet he is Brazil's most
notorious priest and is considered so dangerous by the Roman Catholic Church
that he has been subjected to 11 months of 'obsequious silence', banned from
writing, making speeches, and this August from teaching.
Able to stand no more, Brother Leonardo Boff recently reverted to plain
Genesio Darcy, leaving the Church and the Franciscan order after 25 years,
accusing the Vatican of 'destroying all hope' and practising the same
repression as the military regimes it once opposed.
He describes the decision as 'difficult and sad' but unavoidable.
Boff, 53, symbolises the distance between the doctrine meted out from the
palaces of Rome and the reality of poverty-stricken Latin America, a gap
that has widened with the centralisation of the Roman Catholic Church under
John Paul II, the most conservative pope of recent times.
Many have seen Boff's departure from the Church as signifying the collapse
of liberation theology, the movement which emerged from the Medellin
conference of Latin American bishops in 1968 proposing a more open, less
hierarchical model of the Church with more participation in social and
economic issues. Boff was one of the movement's founders and its principal
proponent in Brazil, the world's largest Catholic country.
He travelled the world and wrote 60 books, infuriating the Vatican by
criticising its lack of internal democracy, its distance from the people and
the use of big cars and palaces by bishops whom Boff describes as 'appearing
to the poor as if they are on the side of the oppressors'.
Boff practises his preachings and is an advocate of Base Communities -
groups which meet at least weekly to apply the Bible to everyday problems.
These were particularly active during Brazil's military years of 1964-85 as
a shelter for political dissidence, producing most of today's leftist
politicians and union leaders.
CEBs use theatre, dance and folk art in sessions which often go on all night
and which are run by laypeople, often women. According to Boff, 'the idea is
to create a dialogue people understand - people to whom no-one ever listened
here feel God is listening to them'.
CEBs help with food, housing, education and health. In Brazil's
drought-stricken north-east, members check that ovens have been lit as a way
of finding out if people have food.
In the 1960s and 1970s, when the Church was at the vanguard of the fight
against military regimes all over Latin America, the common enemy helped
bridge the differences between the two models of the Church.
But as the dictators fell, Boff's criticisms caused increasing irritation in
Rome, particularly to Cardinal Ratzinger who heads the Sacred Congregation
for the Doctrine of the Faith, the old Inquisition. In 1985 Boff was
punished with 11 months of 'obsequious silence' for his book Church,
Charisma and Power which sold 100,000 copies in Brazil and was reprinted in
15 languages. Since then his work has been censored.
The Vatican questioned Boff over his 'doctrinal deviations' and he was
removed from the editorial board of Vozes, Brazil's Catholic magazine and
publishing house, and stopped from lecturing for one year. In April a German
was appointed as Boff's censor and in August, when he was due to resume
teaching, he was informed that for 'the good of the Church' he would be
stopped.
This was the last straw: 'They have immobilised me. This is exactly what
military regimes did and the Church always opposed.'
According to Boff's brother Clodoviz, a priest in Rio, what made the Vatican
turn on Boff was the popular roots of his theory: 'Rome is scared of Boff
because his theory has one foot in theology and one foot in the people who
ask 'why should Rome nominate our bishops, why shouldn't women be priests?'
It's not advanced or brilliant but behind liberation theology are people,
whereas behind European theology is a library.'
'Church and religion are important,' says Boff, 'in that they have the
capacity to provide hope, resistance and meaning of life but in Brazil
people are crying out and no-one listens.'
He believes that the Church should be decentralised and should be more
attentive to local cultures. 'Religion is not made in the clouds but on the
ground so what matters is what ground your feet are on. Faith is very
different for someone living amid abundance and development in the first
world than in a poor African nation.'
Boff says he did not leave the Church before because 'I felt I could fight
from within. But like frying hot cakes in a closed room you eventually reach
a point where the steam all around is suffocating'. He stresses, 'leaving
the Church does not mean giving up faith. It's just a matter of changing
hierarchical positions.'
Nor is his departure an admission of defeat: 'We've achieved a lot. Usually
it takes two or three generations before a new theology is heard in the
centre of the Church. Ours took just 15 years to oblige the highest levels
to take a position and for the Pope to pronounce on it.'
He estimates that 120,000-150,000 CEBs are still operating in Brazil with an
average 50-60 members. A recent study showed these are responsible for 80
per cent of Sunday services.
Moreover, the agenda of the Church in Brazil is very much that of liberation
theology with its focus on social issues such as land reform, defence of
Indians and human rights. Boff believes that most of the 360 Brazilian
bishops lean towards liberation theology, although senior positions are
still held by a core of conservative bishops.
Boff says he wants to spend his time reading everything from world affairs
to quantum mechanics, but his first act on leaving the Church has been to
publish Latin America: From Conquest to New Evangelism. The book sold 5,000
copies in the first week and accuses the Church of ethnocentrism, 'claiming
a monopoly on truth and salvation'.
He writes: 'The Church was part of an immense colonial project - its role
like a fox trying to spread the word to the chickens.'
For all his rhetoric, Boff undoubtedly revels in his notoriety and many
believe that his real motive for leaving the Church was to be free himself
to marry his secretary Marcia. It is a matter on which he refuses to
comment.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

921219

