FT922-4301

FT  06 JUN 92 / Citizens ponder aftermath of their No-vote: The vote against
ratifying the Maastricht treaty contained a strong element of protest
against the political establishment


   By HILARY BARNES


WHILE Danish politicians try to sort out the country's future relationship
with the rest of the European Community following Tuesday's rejection by
voters of the Maastricht treaty, ordinary Danes are astonished to find
themselves in the spotlight.
Denmark has probably not played such a prominent role in Europe since 1864,
when Bismark's armies trounced the Danes and took Schleswig-Holstein, or
possibly 1940, when Hitler's armies marched in.
'It suddenly felt important to be a Dane,' said a university student
yesterday, a Yes-voter who was appalled at the EC crisis which his fellow
voters have brought about.
The vote contained a strong element of protest against the political
establishment. Some of the No-voters are having regrets. A waitress said she
voted No out of general dislike of Denmark's powers-that-be, feeling
confident that Yes votes would prevail.
Enthusiastic opponents were convinced they were striking a blow for national
independence. 'Hurrah] We're free,' wrote the TV critic of a popular tabloid
immediately after Tuesday's vote.
But by yesterday jubilation had turned to indignation: 'The psychology of
power in Europe is clear: Denmark will be made to bow its head and stay
caged,' she wrote. Her conclusion seems to mesh well with the government's
campaign warnings, that a No-vote would lead to 'dependence Prime minister
Poul Schluter, who yesterday cancelled a trip to the final session of the
Earth Summit in Rio, and Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, foreign minister and
Liberal party leader, are being advised by a 'crisis' group of leaders from
all eight parties in the Folketing, the Danish parliament.
Ironically, these include two which recommended a No vote, the Socialist
People's party and the populist right-wing Progress party. So far, no
prominent politician who voted No has been heard to express doubts now that
the consequences are becoming apparent.
But Mr Arne Melchior, a former minister and leading figure in the small
pro-Maastricht Centre Democratic party, yesterday said that he was prepared
to wager that in a couple of years Denmark would be knocking on the door of
the European Union.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

