FT924-11983

FT  23 OCT 92 / Search for security: Last-ditch efforts to reach an
agreement on capital adequacy in the securities markets


   By RICHARD WATERS


The lurches in financial markets in recent weeks should give pause for
thought to anyone who has deposited money in a bank.
True, most banks have made a small killing trading in the foreign exchange
markets, at the expense of central banks (and taxpayers) across Europe. But
how well protected are they against the shocks that can buffet currency or
equity markets?
Not well enough, according to many banking and securities regulators. It is
timely, therefore, that this weekend will witness the latest attempt to
forge an international agreement on the minimum levels of capital needed by
all banks, as well as securities houses, which operate in securities
markets.
At its annual meeting in London, Iosco - the International Organisation of
Securities Commissions, a grouping of securities regulators from more than
50 countries - will try to reach agreement on a capital adequacy regime
which has already been under discussion for more than three years.
Banking regulators, under the umbrella of their own international club, the
Basle committee on banking supervision, have virtually concluded their own
deliberations in parallel talks. But given the way the issue has been
stalled for much of this year, a final resolution may still be some way off.
The planned international agreement is not the first of its type. Banks'
credit risks will be subjected to common capital adequacy rules from the
start of next year, when the so-called 'Basle accord' comes into force. This
requires banks to hold capital equal to 8 per cent of their assets.
That, however, only catches part of each bank's exposures, Apart from the
risk of loans going bad, banks also face possible losses from movements in
interest rates, currencies and equity markets - the sort of market movements
that can wipe out the value of a securities portfolio or leave foreign
exchange traders nursing big losses.
Also, underwriting or trading in shares creates risks which are very
different to those on loans. This is because the value of equities rises and
falls on expectations of a company's future profits, movements which usually
have no bearing on whether a company is going to repay a loan when it falls
due.
These risks have risen sharply as banks have moved more aggressively into
the securities business - in part, ironically, prompted by the higher
capital costs imposed by the Basle accord on traditional banking business.
Many bank regulators already have their own rules governing these exposures,
but there is no internationally agreed approach to such capital
requirements.
One man has been largely responsible for holding up agreement this year. Mr
Richard Breeden, chairman of the US's Securities and Exchange Commission, is
also chairman of Iosco's important technical committee. According to several
people who have been involved in the discussions, it is his concerns which
account for the delay.
Mr Breeden's objection concerns the amount of capital that securities
companies must set aside to cover their risks on equities. At the start of
this year, banking and securities regulators - Mr Breeden among them -
agreed broadly on a 2 per cent requirement to cover the 'specific' risk in
shares (as distinct from the general risk of markets as a whole falling).
Since then, though, the SEC has vacillated, pushing earlier this summer for
a 4 per cent minimum capital level.
Securities companies claim such levels are unnecessary, given the
sophistication of modern hedging techniques that limit the risks of holding
securities. They would make the cost of doing business in the securities
markets more expensive.
Any compromise that left the US with a 4 per cent rule and the rest of the
world with 2 per cent would damage the US's position as a centre for
international securities business, and could even drive trading in US
securities off-shore.
If Iosco can't reach agreement, then it may have wrecked its chances of
becoming a credible international regulatory body for good. The Basle
committee has made it clear that it will release its own proposals for
consultation soon, with or without the agreement of Iosco.
The organisation, created in the 1970s by the SEC to act initially as a
pan-American agency, has never achieved the same international credibility
as the Basle committee. Securities regulators in Anglo-Saxon countries such
as the US and UK spend much of their time looking nervously over their
shoulders at their banking counterparts, concerned that the gradual
domination of the securities industry by banks will make their job
redundant.
Taking the lead in the development of international capital adequacy rules
has been Iosco's main chance of establishing itself on the financial map. If
it fails to grasp this opportunity, then its hopes of acting as a leading
force in the development of financial regulation around the world will come
to nothing.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921023

