FT921-11971

FT  29 JAN 92 / Bundesbank to attack Emu


   By DAVID MARSH, Europe Editor


   LONDON


THE Bundesbank is to publish a special declaration next month to bring into
the open its misgivings about last month's Maastricht deal on European
Monetary Union (Emu).
The statement by the German central bank is expected to point to the need
for the European Community to decide further steps towards political union
to provide the right framework for a move to a single currency.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's failure at Maastricht to persuade other EC members
to make a full commitment to political union has been widely criticised by
members of the 16-strong Bundesbank council.
The council agreed the statement at its regular fortnightly meeting last
Thursday as a way of influencing the debate on parliamentary ratification of
the Maastricht deal.
News of the council's deliberations coincided yesterday with indications
that the Bundesbank may continue its high interest rate policy for several
more months.
Mr Otmar Issing, the Bundesbank directorate member responsible for
economics, said the current 4 per cent inflation rate was 'worryingly high'
and was unlikely to decline in the short term.
In its statement next month, the Bundesbank is likely to state the need for
properly co-ordinated EC fiscal policies to deal with economic strains
arising from the move to European monetary union. It may also indicate
doubts about features of the Maastricht agreement on economic policy which
appear to counter free-market trade principles.
The council statement will appear together with an article on Emu from the
bank's economics department, to be published in February's Bundesbank
monthly report. The council has chosen cautious language to avoid being
accused of a direct attack on the government over its European policies.
The decision to publish a formal statement next month represents a
compromise, reached after several weeks of internal wrangling, about the
best way to make the central bank's views known. Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the
Bundesbank president, is sceptical about fixing a firm timetable for moving
to Emu, but has made only innocuous remarks in public over the issue to
avoid acrimony with Bonn.
A number of regional central bank governors on the council have, on the
other hand, been pressing for a more active Bundesbank stance. Publication
of the Bundesbank document has been delayed until next month to allow the
central bank to take account of the final version of the Maastricht
treaties.
Under the Maastricht accord, EC countries would move to a single currency by
1999 at the latest, provided they fulfilled strict economic convergence
criteria. The Bundesbank will state it has no quarrel with these criteria,
nor with plans to set up a European central bank geared to price stability.
Pay compromise call, Page 2
Family quarrel, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920129

