FT921-539

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: Tories or Labour, what the dealers
think - A look at the mood of the City in the run-up to the April 9 general
election


   By PHILIP COGGAN, JOHN AUTHERS and SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


CONSERVATIVES
STOCKBROKERS always look forward to Conservative governments and the
performance of share prices has usually, although not always, borne out
their confidence.
As the graphs show, the two periods of 13-year Tory rule both saw
substantial real and nominal gains for the FT-30 index. But the Heath
government of 1970-74 - which presided over the Barber boom, the secondary
banking crisis, the three-day week and the quadrupling of oil prices -
resulted in a fall in the index in inflation-adjusted terms.
The graphs flatter the Conservatives slightly since they have had much
longer periods than Labour in which to display gains. There were big bull
runs, in nominal terms, under the Labour government of 1974-79.
Whatever the historical record, though, there is little doubt that the
markets would like to see a Conservative victory in this election.
Bob Semple, equity strategist at County NatWest, says a Tory triumph would
restore the missing factor of confidence to the UK economy, with GDP growth
in the second quarter. Meanwhile economic growth in the US, the prospect of
lower interest rates in Europe and low inflation in the UK would form a good
background for share prices.
Semple sees the FT-SE 100 index reaching 3,000 by the end of the year should
the Tories win. He says base rates should fall to 9.5 per cent and long gilt
yields to 8.5 per cent.
Bill Smith, an equity analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, also sees the
release of pent-up consumer demand as an important consequence of a Tory
victory. That would be good for housing-related stocks. He also feels
utility shares, which have been depressed by fears of Labour re-regulation,
would benefit swiftly from John Major's return to office. He expects that
Footsie would be around 2,900 by end-1992 under the Conservatives.
Smith says a re-elected government probably would move sterling into the
narrow band of the Exchange Rate Mechanism; that should reduce the 'risk
premium' attached to sterling in the minds of international investors. As a
consequence, base rates should fall to 9-9.5 per cent by the year-end.
HUNG PARLIAMENT
WE ARE already seeing how the City would react to a hung parliament.
Analysts, fund managers and dealers believe this to be the most likely
election outcome, and so they are trying to build this into the market.
Share prices have accordingly gone down.
A hung parliament is easily the City's least favoured option, mainly because
it would bring destabilising uncertainty in its wake.
However not all the 'bad news' is yet in the price. Dealers are taking up
defensive positions - which generally means giving themselves as much
exposure to the US and other international markets as possible.
Economists now believe that America should come out of recession first, and
it also provides a good place to shelter from the sterling crisis which is
expected if the Tories do not win. Base rates may be forced up as the
minority government seeks to defend the pound.
Opinions vary on the precise permutation of a hung parliament. Some think
that a Labour coalition with the Liberal Democrats would emerge following
the minimum of horse-trading. This would be worse for equities than a Labour
government.
Mark Walton, equity strategist with James Capel, says that this could lead
to the market 'tracking sideways' between 2200 and 2400 for a year or more.
This compares with a Capel forecast of 2750 by the end of 1992 under a solid
Labour government.
This is not particularly due to uncertainty. Walton points out that the Lib
Dems have pledged to put a penny on income tax. He said: 'The Lib Dems would
want some form of say on the first budget of the Labour government, so you
might expect to see a couple of changes made to the shadow budget.'
It is the other concessions the Lib Dems might extract which really worry
the City. If a form of proportional representation were adopted, and the
Conservatives maintained their attitude to making deals, then there might
never be another Tory government, according to Walton. This would be
sufficient to depress sentiment.
Another popular version is that there would be no clear outcome, followed by
another election by the end of the year. This is the nightmare scenario.
Investment decisions would be postponed, and with them any recovery.
International stocks would have a great time, but no others would.
Andrew Gregory, investment director of Kleinwort Benson private bank, sees
this as the worst possible case, which would probably limit the FT-SE to
around 2400 (compared to 2850 by the end of the year under Labour, and 3200
under the the Conservatives).
Mark Brown, of UBS Phillips & Drew, sees a level of 2350 as being defensible
for the FT-SE in any situation. Unlike Walton, he prefers a minority Labour
government with Lib Dem support to a Labour majority because the immediate
economic impact on confidence should be much muted.
Brown counsels caution in buying, even though on most standard fundamental
measures the market seems generously valued. Walton disagrees, suggesting
that the average yield of 5.6 per cent which would be available if the
market disliked the election result is excellent value.
LABOUR
THIRTEEN years of Tory rule, and the sweeping changes in the former Eastern
bloc, have led the Labour party to tone down its commitment to socialism.
Thus, City houses such as James Capel and Warburgs now agree that the
macroeconomic differences between Labour and the Conservatives are so narrow
that the longer-term effect on the markets of a Kinnock government would not
be as great as many investors might think.
For one thing, Labour has said it is committed to the ERM, which would act
as a brake on inflation. Warburg says residual fears of increased inflation
due to the introduction of a minimum wage have receded because Labour has
indicated this would not be introduced until 1993.
Kevin Gardiner, UK economist at Warburg, says of a Labour victory: 'The
downside for the market would be modest.' He predicts the FT-SE 100 index
would fall to about 2,400 initially, but would rally later in the year to
around 2,900. Capel also predicts an initial fall in the Footsie, to
2,200-2,300, and a recovery by the end of the year, to 2,750. Both emphasise
that these predictions depend on Labour honouring its commitment to the ERM,
and to the economic recovery being under way.
Gardiner thinks a Labour victory would see interest rates increasing by a
point to calm the fears of the foreign exchange markets, but dropping below
present levels by the end of the year as confidence in sterling rises. As
for gilts, he thinks yields would fall slowly to about 9 1/4 per cent by the
end of the year, compared with 8 3/4 per cent under a Conservative
government. Both he and Capel expect inflation to be higher under Labour,
but not substantially so. Indeed, Gardiner puts it at only a maximum of  1/2
percentage point higher than under the Conservatives. The graphs show it is
possible for stock markets to perform well under Labour. They fell heavily
when Labour was returned in 1974 but recovered by the time the Conservatives
took over in 1979. However, the effect of inflation meant that returns were
down in real terms, as they were during the Wilson Labour government.

The Financial Times


London Page III

920328

