FT921-1167

FT  25 MAR 92 / Election 1992: A third of electorate remains undecided


   By RALPH ATKINS


THE 1992 general election is being fought amid a level of indecision by
voters not seen since at least the 1970s, according to opinion poll data
collected during the first two weeks of the campaign.
A third of voters are 'floating', according to figures compiled by the Mori
opinion polling organisation for The Sunday Times. That is a significantly
higher proportion than at the same period in either the 1983 or 1987
elections.
There are also exceptionally large numbers of 'switchers' in this campaign;
7m voters are thought to have changed allegiance during the first week of
the campaign; twice as many as during the same part of the 1987 campaign.
The size of the floating vote and the number of switchers are factors which
help to explain the volatility of headline opinion polls.
The figures underline how open the election contest remains, but there are
signs that the 'floating voters' offer better territory for Labour or for
the Liberal Democrats than for the Conservatives.
Mori polling for BBC TV's On the Record shows that the three issues chosen
by floating voters as most important are unemployment, health, and
education. All three are seen as safer territory for Labour.
The Tories' focus on taxation in the first week of the campaign appears to
have made little headway on floating voters.
A third said that Labour's Budget was the best for Britain, compared with 29
per cent who favoured the government's March 10 Budget.
'The Tories are being judged on their record, rather than their promises,'
said Mr Brian Gosschalk, director of political research at Mori.
The high number of floating voters reflects the long-running decline in the
numbers of voters with fixed loyalties; a trend which explains ever-larger
swings in by-election results since the 1970s.
There is no one definition of a floating voter. Mori uses those saying they
may change their minds plus the numbers of undecideds.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920325

