FT921-11736

FT  30 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Leisure stake sold


   By PETER JOHN, JOEL KIBAZO, COLIN MILLHAM, CHRIS PRICE and STEVE THOMPSON


NEARLY 10 per cent of the equity of First Leisure, the biggest pure UK
leisure group, was sold into the market yesterday by London Merchant
Securities, a move which left the ten-pin bowling and disco operator down 8
at 296p. The line of 15.5m shares was placed at 293p by Cazenove.
The placing was seen in the market as an attempt by Lord Rayne, chairman of
London Merchant, to introduce some liquidity into the stock of First
Leisure, where he is a director and due to take the chair in November from
Lord Delfont. London Merchant's stake in First Leisure has now been reduced
to 15.3 per cent.
Last night, First Leisure chief executive Mr John Conlan said: 'We
understand that London Merchant wanted to reduce its stake in First Leisure
to below 50 per cent of Merchant's own market capitalisation.'
Fisons active
Fisons advanced 13 to 382p in heavy turnover of 8.3m shares on further
consideration of a product relicensing and renewed bid speculation. There
was also busy trading in Fisons in the options market.
The pharmaceuticals company has announced that it will restart manufacture
of its eye preparation Opticrom in the UK, following regulatory approval.
Opticrom is currently banned in the US and the move was seen as the first
stage of its reinstatement. Also, market talk continued to see the company
as vulnerable to predators. Analysts felt that news of the Hanson decision
against bidding for ICI has left the market casting around for
possibilities.
Kleinwort Benson continued to be active in the stock yesterday. It has been
a buyer since the new year, when it singled Fisons out for recommendation in
what it otherwise sees as a neutral sector, arguing that it looks very cheap
in the light of 1993 earnings. Many of the 1993 hopes are pinned on US
approval for the company's anti-asthma drug Tilade.
Commenting on the recent speculation, Ms Barbara Arzymanow of Kleinwort's
pharmaceuticals team said: 'Companies specialising in asthma products must
be noticing that Fisons' problems only relate to manufacturing
difficulties.'
SmithKline Beecham, down 5 at 918p, saw good two-way business as selling was
encouraged by a forecast profits cut by County NatWest and buyers moved in
on weakness in the stock.
Dollar weakness and good results from Merck, of the US, the world's largest
drug company, adversely affected Glaxo, which fell nearly 20 at one stage
before recovering to close 7 off at 848p. Merck pointed to the very healthy
performance of the anti-ulcer drug Losec, which is a direct competitor to
Glaxo's principal earner Zantac. Further, Nomura was advising clients to
take profits in Glaxo.
Food and detergents group Unilever gained 8 to 921p against the market as
investors took heart from a solid rise in second-quarter earnings from
Procter & Gamble.
International trading group Lonrho, already hit after reporting a lowered
dividend and sharply reduced profits, suffered a further blow yesterday on a
report that it would lose its UK import and distribution contract with
German carmakers Volkswagen and Audi which expires at the end of 1993. The
shares fell 8 to 115 1/2 p in spite of a claim by Lonrho that it hopes to
extend the contract.
Caution ahead of a television documentary last night left Hanson 5 off at
203p with 12m shares traded.
British Gas was among the best performers among the Footsie constituents,
the stock advancing 5 1/2 to 248p on good turnover of 5.1m shares.
Specialists said Gas shares were stimulated by an aggressive institutional
buyer responding to Gas's yield attractions, strong demand in the options
market and some brokers reaffirmining their buy recommendations.
Oil majors diverged, with BP outperforming the market and Shell
substantially underperforming. US funds were said to have switched from the
latter to the former. Much of the switching was said to have been carried
out overnight and in the US, with the remainder transacted in London early
in the session.
BP eased a fraction to 289p on heavy turnover of 9.6m shares, while Shell
declined 8 to 484p on 3m. County NatWest issued a note detailing a cut in
oil demand growth in 1992 and mentioned 'very poor Q4 earnings from the US
oil majors'. The broker said it expected a dull pattern in the oil stocks to
continue over the Q4 results and the forthcoming February Opec meeting, but
said it looked for Shell to prove more robust than BP.
There have been ominous rumblings of exceptionally poor Q4 figures from BP,
expected on February 13, with the market bracing itself for a sharply higher
tax charge.
Turnover in Lucas Industries soared to a five-year high as 11m shares
changed hands after UBS Phillips & Drew weighed in with a hefty profits
downgrading.
The securities house reduced its current-year figure by Pounds 40m to Pounds
20m and the following year's forecast by 50 per cent to Pounds 45m. Mr Tony
Lancelot, at UBS, said: 'Competition is intensifying in many areas where
Lucas operates and recovery is becoming more distant.' The shares retreated
6 to 112p, although dealers noted a certain amount of 'bottom fishing'.
Dowty Group was another victim of a profits downgrading. The shares lost 7
1/2 to 135p after Smith New Court reduced its current-year profits estimate
by Pounds 3m to Pounds 19m and next year's by Pounds 6m to Pounds 27m.
BM Group continued to bask in the glow of its bid for Thomas Robinson
announced last week. The shares jumped 21 to 410p as dealers continued to
appreciate the deal. News of US defence cuts weakened Smiths Industries, a
military contractor in the US. The stock declined 6 to 280p.
The power generators, where investors have until February 4 to pay the next
70p a share instalment on the two stocks, moved sharply higher in the wake
of recent broker recommendations.
County NatWest was said to have given the stocks a strong push yesterday.
They were additionally boosted by recent opinion polls indicating a
Conservative lead over Labour. There were also suggestions that a poll
expected this morning would confirm a Tory lead. National Power moved up 6
to 224p and PowerGen added 7 at 237p. The Scottish generators, which have
underperformed the rest of the utilities since their flotations last summer,
managed minor gains.
Sedgwick, the insurance broker, tumbled 12 to 214p after some determined
selling by one of the big US investment banks.
Negative sentiment on hotel stocks continued following the news that one
leading broker had received reports of poor end-of-year occupancy figures in
London. Forte lost 4 to 231p, Savoy 'A' slipped 8 to 635p and Ladbroke eased
2 to 214p.
Profit-taking in Airtours left the holiday charter group off 7 at 231p.
Pickwick Group suffered similar treatment, following Tuesday's takeover bid
by Carlton Communications, losing 5 to 235p.
Nervousness ahead of today's Rank Organisation finals took 14 off the stock
to 595p as talk of rights issues and dividend cuts continued to circulate.
Buying on economic recovery hopes continued to spur Scottish Television. The
shares rose 15 to 755p, making a jump of 171p or nearly 30 per cent since
the start of the year.
WH Smith 'A' shares were unchanged at 459p in spite of profit figures above
most expectations and an increase to 4.3p from 4p in the interim dividend.
The shares touched 468p in initial response to news that half-year trading
profits had improved to Pounds 50.1m from Pounds 34.9m, but receded after
Sir Simon Hornby, the group chairman, said 'consumer confidence remains at a
low level and we see no prospect of a significant recovery in the economy
over the next few months'.
In a generally firm food retailing sector, J. Sainsbury gained 5 to 374p. In
contrast, Farepak lost 3 to 270p after an increased half-year loss but a
rise in the interim dividend.
BET picked up from the day's low after it was announced that chief executive
Mr John Clark and another BET director bought stock. The shares closed 7 off
at 152p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1991/92
NEW HIGHS (70).
BRITISH FUNDS (9) Tr. 3pc 1992, Fd. 6pc 1993, Cv. 10pc 1996, Tr. 8 3/4 pc
1997, Ex. 9 3/4 pc 1998, Tr. 6 3/4 pc '95-98, Tr. 9 1/2 pc 1999, Tr. 10pc
2001, Tr. 2pc IL 2006, BANKS (1) HSBC, BREWERS & DISTILLERS (1) Holt (J),
BUSINESS SERVICES (2) Barbour Index, RCO, CHEMICALS (4) BTP, Courtaulds,
Plysu, Yorkshire, ELECTRONICS (5) Elect. Data Procg., Eurotherm Intl.,
Hoskyns, MTL Instrs., Sage, ENGINEERING AEROSPACE (1) FR, ENGINEERING
GENERAL (6) Black & Decker, Fairey, TT, Victaulic, Weir, Whessoe, FOOD
MANUFACTURING (4) Salvesen (Ch), Unilever, Do. N/V, Wessanen, FOOD RETAILING
(2) Farepak, Morrison (Wm), HEALTH & HOUSEHOLD (2) Medeva, Seton Healthcare,
HOTELS & LEISURE (1) Airbreak, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (15) Abtrust Prfd. Zero
Prf., City of Oxford Zero Prf., Flmg. Intl. High Zero Prf., Gartmore Amer.
Secs. Zero Prf., Gartmore Value Zero Prf., General Cons. Stppd. Prf., I & S
Optium Inc. Zero Prf., Kleinwort High Inc. Zero Prf., Latin Amer. Inv., Do.
Wrrnts., River & Merc. Amer. Wrrnts., River Plate Zero Prf., Scot. Natl.
Zero Prf., Do. Stppd. Prf., TR Tech. Zero Prf., MEDIA (6) Central ITV,
Grampian TV A, Headline Book Publs., Radio Clyde, Scottish TV, Ulster TV,
MERCHANT BANKS (1) Warburg (SG) 6pc Prf., MOTORS (1) Central Car Aucts., OIL
& GAS (1) Sidlaw, OTHER FINANCIAL (1) Templeton Galbraith, PACKAGING, PAPER
& PRINTING (3) Bowater, Do. 7.75pc Prf., Boxmore Intl., STORES (2) Boots,
Next, TEXTILES (2) Leeds, Stoddard.
NEW LOWS (31).
CANADIANS (1) Abbot Energy, BUILDING MATERIALS (1) Roskel, BUSINESS SERVICES
(1) Gardiner, CHEMICALS (1) Anglo United, CONGLOMERATES (1) Reece,
CONTRACTING & CONSTRUCTION (2) Laing (J), Do. A, ELECTRONICS (1) Sema,
HEALTH & HOUSEHOLD (2) Hospital Corp., Nestor-BNA, INSURANCE BROKERS (1)
Archer (AJ), INSURANCE LIFE (1) Lon. & Manchester, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (5)
English Natl. Prfd., Gartmore Scotland Cap., Gartmore Value, M & G Inc.
Geared Units, North Amer. Gas, MISCELLANEOUS (1) Eurocopy, OIL & GAS (3) Bow
Valley, Brit. Borneo, Sceptre Res., OTHER FINANCIAL (3) First Pacific, Natl.
Home Loans 7 1/2 pc Prf., World Trust Fund., PROPERTY (4) Capital &
Counties, Chesterfield, Do. 5.25pc Prf., Derwent Valley, STORES (1) Cantors,
TRANSPORT (1) Jacobs (JI), MINES (1) Colby.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

920130

