FT921-523

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: A plum for foreign correspondents - As they
say in Europe


   By JAMES MORGAN


LONDON does not rank high on European quality-of-life lists, but for foreign
correspondents it is a plum. Some offer surprising reasons: 'In Paris you
can have a flat or a flat,' says Patrick de Jacquelot of Les Echos. He lives
in a house in Hammersmith. 'You can be in the Chilterns, in lovely
countryside, in 40 minutes - impossible in Paris.' Reiner Gatermann of Die
Welt says the cultural life is almost too much to cope with.
Alfonso Sole supplies Spanish papers and radio stations with items from all
over the world. He has been in London for 21 years: 'London is not like the
concrete cities of Europe, it is green, you can have a garden.'
Gardens mean a lot, especially to the Latins. 'Only the super-rich have
gardens in Milan,' says Alessandro Merli of Il-Sole-24 Ore.'
He lived here as a bachelor and is now married with a small daughter. 'It is
much better to be married in London; in Milan, Barcelona or Buenos Aires be
a bachelor.'
One reason is the difficulty of meeting Londoners. Merli lives in South
Kensington and says there are none there anyway, but even if you do come
across them, 'they aren't interested. They can't stereotype foreigners so
they don't want to talk to you. Maybe it's better than in America where they
pretend to be interested in you for 30 seconds. Here nobody pretends. But
people leave you alone which is nice.'
Sole concurs: 'You do not have to show off, you can be yourself in London.'
Gatermann has been in Fulham for seven years, but only last Christmas did he
think he could invite the neighbours in for gluhwein. He had come from
Scandinavia so found the housing a bit of a disappointment, whereas the
Latins like it.
'Bad and getting worse' is the verdict on the worst aspect of London -
public transport. 'Even the metro in Madrid is air-conditioned, cheap and
efficient,' says Sole.
Taxi drivers are a bone of contention, 'They know where they are going,
which is amazing,' says Merli, but he objects to what he calls the laid-back
attitude. 'Only here have I missed aeroplanes because of slow taxis. If you
tell them you're in a hurry, they say, 'You should have left earlier'.'
Merli adds that the British will always queue even if there is no queue - 'a
taxi driver will avoid an empty lane and land up behind five cars at traffic
lights.' But de Jacquelot says it is better than in Paris, because 'you can
always get a cab and be at any appointment in ten or 15 minutes.'
But what about the news? De Jacquelot: 'When I arrived and people asked me
what I was expected to write about, I said, 'Everything except royalty,
sport and crime.' But in fact I've been writing more about crime than
anything else. It's fascinating.'
'Crime' means Maxwell, BCCI and City scams. There is universal agreement
that no other news centre anywhere provides such grand and colourful
stories. Yvonne Esterhazy of Handelsblatt says: 'Everything is so dramatic,
presented as a revolution. The City is full of rumours.'
She says City people are great to work with but British industry can leave
much to be desired. She had to fight to get a ticket to the recent British
Aerospace meeting. 'They are all right on the gin and tonics but people call
back long after your deadline.'
Spaniards do not like business stories, but Sole has no trouble selling them
from London because of their louche quality.
In Germany, British stories rate high. In Die Welt last Saturday there were
three: the Yorks, Scottish devolution and Richard Branson's tussle with
British Airways. Gatermann sees his job as giving a steady diet of UK news
but says the exotic turns up often enough to dominate the output.
For Merli, London offers a high profile at home: 'Many Italian deals are
done through London so I hear about them before they know anything in
Milan.'
Access to politicians is awful: 'They naturally care about readers in their
constituencies,' says Gatermann.
There are signs of improvement: for the first time this year a few
foreigners attended the briefing by the Chancellor of the Exchequer on the
budget. Early in the election campaign, John Major gave an unprecedented
briefing for the foreign press - but it was declared off-the record and was,
therefore, useless.
The British addiction to secrecy grates on the foreign press corps.
Relations with officialdom resemble the old system in Eastern Europe rather
than a modern democracy: no access to civil servants, no individual
interviews with ministers - or even Glenda Jackson, the actress turned
Labour Party candidate.
And there are other disappointments: 'No indoor tennis courts,' says Merli.
But he learnt why quite quickly: he was playing in a park, the rain came
down but his was the only game to cease. 'Everybody else carried on; they
have endurance here. That's why they win wars.'
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920328

