FT921-11689

FT  30 JAN 92 / The Disarmament Race: Yeltsin flourishes good intentions -
Russian proposals


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin of Russia returned to the international arena with
typical flamboyance yesterday, after his mysterious disappearing act.
He unveiled a series of Russian disarmament proposals, which were seen as
the president wanting to 'nail down his position as the man in the driving
seat,' said Mr Andrei Kortunov, a researcher at the Moscow-based Institute
for USA and Canada Studies.
However, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, not all the foreign
policy and defence levers are in Mr Yeltsin's control. He recognised as much
when addressing western anxieties as to who would ratify the Start treaty on
long-range nuclear arsenals, originally concluded by the US and the then
Soviet Union.
Making a start at least, he said that the Russian parliament would ratify
the treaty, and he invited the parliaments of Kazakhstan, Belarus and
Ukraine to follow suit.
Mr Yeltsin's greatest room for manoeuvre lies in his promises to cut the
research into, and production of, missiles and other military hardware,
since Russia controls most of the purse strings in the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
Speaking for other republics, he also announced that Russia, with Kazakhstan
and Kirgizia, would reach agreement with China to cut forces on their common
borders.
Mr Yeltsin, who is to arrive in London today before departing for the US,
also sought to reassure western opinion about fears of a dispersal around
the globe of the former Soviet Union's nuclear scientists and materials. But
he was issuing a statement of Russian intent rather than an overall promise
on behalf of the former Soviet Union.
He said Russia would adopt domestic regulations to limit exports of
materials and equipment that could be used to build nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons. But that will not stop Tajikistan, for instance, from
selling nuclear materials.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920130

