FT923-11022

FT  27 JUL 92 / The Lex Column: The fear of failure


In the trough of the last recession, according to the corporate analysts
Syspas, 23 per cent of UK-quoted industrial companies were at risk of
failure. The figure now is 26 per cent. Among construction companies, it is
an unnerving 65 per cent. If the economy does not pick up materially in the
next two years, Syspas says, the resulting failures will cost the banks up
to Pounds 1.8bn in bad loans and creditors another Pounds 2bn on top.
Since Syspas privately described Maxwell Communication as 'beyond saving in
its present form' at a time when the equity market still valued it at over
Pounds 1bn, it perhaps deserves to be taken seriously. Its method is based
on the familiar US technique of Z-scores, which establishes common
characteristics for bankrupt companies and seeks to identify them elsewhere.
The system produced dire predictions about Lowndes Queensway, Turriff,
Graham Wood and Astra, all of which have since gone under. Syspas claims to
have scented the present recession as early as the start of 1989, on the
grounds that balance sheets had started to deteriorate despite the fact that
profits were still rising.
Since then, the number of companies at risk has increased faster than in the
recession of 1980-81. The rise continues, which suggests the economy is
still getting worse.
For the equity market, there is perhaps one ray of comfort in all this.
Experience suggests that companies with poor Z-scores - that is, at high
risk of failure - underperform the market in an economic decline and
outperform in a recovery. It should therefore follow that the worse mess the
corporate sector is in, the greater scope there is for a market bounce.
This may help to explain why the construction sector should be on a
seemingly ludicrous historic multiple of 42, three times the industrial
average. But the pressing question is not how sharp the bounce will be. It
is rather how far the market falls before it turns; and which companies will
still be around by then.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920727

