FT924-11250

FT  27 OCT 92 / Outlook for machine tools improves


   By ANDREW BAXTER


THE DOWNWARD trend in UK demand for machine tools will end next spring, but
recovery will be slow, according to a forecast for the Machine Tool
Technologies Association.
The forecast, prepared by Mr John Walker, chief economist of Oxford Economic
Forecasting, will bring some solace to the recession-hit machine tool
industry, which has seen employment fall by about 5,000 to between 17,000
and 18,000 jobs over the past three years.
Even so, demand in 1995 is still predicted to be below the 1990 level, and
meanwhile the industry's troubles are deepening. Industry leaders, who have
maintained a dialogue with the government throughout the recession, are
planning a more forthright campaigning strategy.
Demand for machine tools fell 21 per cent last year, and Mr Walker predicts
a further 12 per cent fall in consumption this year to Pounds 674m. That,
though, is distorted by imports worth between Pounds 50m and Pounds 60m for
fitting out the new Japanese car plants.
As those amounts are not expected to be repeated, demand is forecast to fall
another 1 per cent next year. That is in spite of an expected recovery in
the economy as a whole from early next year, and a pick-up in invest-ment in
certain key sectors.
Further ahead, total consumption of machine tools is expected to reach
Pounds 958m in 1995. That is up 42 per cent on the expected figure for this
year, but still well below the most recent peak of Pounds 1.03bn in 1989,
even without removing the effects of inflation.
Mr Walker's forecasts for this year, made a year ago, proved to be
over-optimistic, because the expected recovery in the second half of the
year did not happen. The main risk with the latest forecasts concerns
government economic policy, the association says.
The forecasts assume that interest rates will stay at 8 per cent through
next year to 1994, when the UK is expected to re-enter the European exchange
rate mechanism; that sterling will settle at about DM2.55 to DM2.65 over the
next two years; that fiscal policy will remain tight; and that economic
growth next year will be about 2 per cent.
Over the past 18 months, the association has been lobbying behind the scenes
for tax incentives to aid investment in manufacturing equipment. It has been
careful to avoid public forecasts of gloom that might become self-fulfilling
prophecies as customers become wary of placing orders. Now it feels it has
nothing to lose by portraying things as they are.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921027

