FT922-13313

FT  13 APR 92 / Election 1992: Union leaders will look to Brussels for
muscle


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


UNION leaders surveyed Labour's election defeat and concluded that the fight
for influence will have to continue through the European Community. 'We will
have to fight London from Brussels,' said Mr John Edmonds, leader of the GMB
general union.
Leaders such as Mr Edmonds believe that British employment law will be
increasingly influenced by EC regulations, in spite of the government's
'opt-out' from an extension of EC employment legislation.
Others, including Mr Bill Morris, head of the more leftwing TGWU general
union, said another attempt must be made to offer a 'consensus agenda' to
employers and the government. He said: 'The government must at least be
given a chance to show if it is interested in consensus.'
The acid test will be whether the government proceeds with plans to further
restrict union action and finances. Some union leaders believe the planned
legislation was a gambit to sustain the union bogey in the election
campaign, and will now be dropped.
The government proposals include ending the automatic 'check off' of dues. .
This could exacerbate the financial crisis facing many unions.
Financial pressure could lead to a review of the role of the Trades Union
Congress. Union mergers are creating 'super-unions', which believe they can
do most of the things that the TUC does and resent paying large affiliation
fees to it. The TUC's role may be reduced to European lobbying, health and
safety, and campaigning on a few themes such as women's equality.
Mergers will continue, and the Tory victory is likely to speed up the
much-rumoured one between the TGWU and the GMB general unions.
The unions will continue to play an important part in the Labour party,
providing much of its financial backing. But if it appears that Labour can
never win an election, the trend towards a loosening of the ties will gather
pace.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920413

