FT923-15691

FT  01 JUL 92 / The Lex Column: The confidence factor


The first quarter jump in the UK savings ratio to 11.5 per cent is such
apparently depressing news that the natural response is to scramble in
search of mitigating factors. One possibility is that election uncertainty
prompted consumers to save more. Another is that bonuses paid early to
escape Labour's punitive taxation plans were all tucked away in savings
accounts. On both counts one could expect the ratio to have dipped again in
the second quarter. Add in the fact that real earnings have continued to
grow, and the first quarter rise could be dismissed as a blip.
The nagging worry is that this is only part of the story. The available
evidence hardly suggests a sustained pick-up in consumer demand since the
election, even though interest rates have been cut once since then. Indeed,
this week's Mintel survey showed consumers still unwilling to increase
credit card debt even to take advantage of discount prices in sales.
In today's disinflationary environment it has become much harder to predict
when consumers will become less wary. Part of the problem may be a painful
adjustment to the sharp decline in nominal pay settlements. Next year's tiny
pay increases will do little to reduce the burden of this year's debt. Then
again, rising real disposable incomes should eventually leave consumers
comfortable with their existing borrowings. But confidence will hardly
return until house prices recover and unemployment peaks, or at least starts
rising more slowly. Both developments require cuts in interest rates on a
scale which looks out of the question until well into 1993.
Most economists who have cut their growth forecasts to around zero for this
year have worked into their assumptions a savings rate stuck at around 10
per cent. So yesterday's figures do not suggest immediate need for a further
lowering of expectations for 1992. Still, it is becoming harder to rule out
the possibility that the UK will succumb to a vicious cycle in which chronic
lack of confidence condemns the economy to chronic recession.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920701

