FT923-15631

FT  01 JUL 92 / Treasury warned on flagging industrial production


   By PETER MARSH and IVO DAWNAY


THE TREASURY has been told privately by senior economists from some of
Britain's largest companies that manufacturing output is flagging. It is one
of the starkest warnings yet that the recovery is failing to materialise.
The message was delivered last week at a meeting between Mr Alan Budd, the
Treasury's chief economic adviser, and a group of economists assembled by
the Treasury.
The gathering provided a sombre assessment of how weak world growth and high
UK interest rates are damaging prospects for the manufacturing sector. It
accounts for just over a fifth of UK gross domestic product and in the first
quarter of this year was one of the few bright spots in the economy.
In the three months to March 31, manufacturing output grew by 0.3 per cent -
compared with the previous three months - while the economy as a whole
contracted by 0.5 per cent.
According to the private sector economists, however, manufacturing growth in
the second and third quarters is likely to be flat, at best.
Amid increasing signs of restiveness by some Tory backbenchers about the
lagging pace of the expected upturn, the bleak views expressed will increase
the pressure on Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, to seek ways to stimulate
growth, possibly through a cut in borrowing rates.
Mr Lamont needs a relatively large increase in output this year and in 1993
to reduce the growing strains on government finances, which are being pushed
into large deficits by reduced tax revenues and higher social security
spending.
Last night, the chancellor again insisted that the government was adamant in
its rejection of proposals that the UK might either leave the exchange rate
mechanism or seek a realignment within it.
Speaking to a Commons' dinner of the rightwing Conservative '92 Group, he
repeated his earlier claims that any attempt to devalue sterling would
result in higher rather than lower interest.
In an effort to allay fears of a substantial increase in Britain's
contributions to the European Community budget, he pointed out that any such
move would be fiercely resisted. It was absurd that criteria for monetary
union required a squeeze on deficits and at the same time, the Commission
was seeking increased spending by member states, he said.
The Treasury's meeting with the industrial economists - from sectors
including chemicals, metals and engineering - is expected to be the first of
a series of such gatherings, repeated three times a year.
It is part of an effort by Mr Budd to build up stronger links with
industrialists, to help in economic forecasting.
It is intended that the meetings will take place on a regular basis and
provide objective assessments of industry trends.
For the moment, the Treasury is sticking to its forecast in March that
growth this year will be 1 per cent. But it is now revising this figure
downwards.
A further reminder of the weak state of demand came with news that the
savings ratio - personal savings as a percentage of disposable income - rose
to 11.5 per cent in the first quarter, its highest level for nearly 10
years.
Boost to savings ratio, Page 8
Parliament, Page 10
Editorial Comment, Page 20
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920701

