FT924-11411

FT  26 OCT 92 / Justinian bows out


   By LOUIS BLOM-COOPER QC


Justinian is today given his quietus. For more than 30 years this column -
wittily dubbed by Private Eye as 'Justinian for the Money' - has appeared
weekly (more recently, fortnightly) to convey to readers how the law works
in practice, as opposed to the law in the text books.
Its author feels that at this moment some reflective thoughts - even highly
personal ones - over three decades of legal journalism would not go amiss.
To write about the legal system and the legal profession in the early 1960s
in any daily national newspaper was almost a novelty. It was also slightly
hazardous for any journalist without a legal qualification, let alone for a
qualified lawyer.
The legal profession positively opposed the concept of openness on matters
outside the open courtroom. To write without the cover of anonymity, if the
author was simultaneously a practising barrister, was an imperative. Even
then the author was quickly unmasked. This author recalls sometime in the
early 1960s being summoned to appear before that benign and great Lord Chief
Justice, Lord Parker. Trembling for fear that some dreadful legal solecism
had been committed, the author duly appeared.
The mild, friendly rebuke was not for having perpetrated an error of fact or
for misunderstanding the law, but for the fact that it was regarded as
improper for a practising member of the Bar to be relating to the outside
world what went on in the monastic environs of the Temple.
That kind of judicial review of Justinian's writings could not seriously be
entertained today. There is now total acceptance that even such a
distinguished Queen's Counsel as Mr David Pannick can deploy, with almost
total impunity, his radical pen, fortnightly in The Times.
It is one of the notable features of a changing legal profession, now
proclaiming its openness to the scrutiny of the public it serves, that it
can contemplate, even encourage, self-criticism in the media.
Contrary to popular belief, the judges themselves have begun to pay
attention to the scribblings of the legal commentators. A cuttings service
has been available to the most senior judges.
On one occasion - it was the contempt case against the journalist who
declined to reveal his source - counsel, who was advancing an improbable,
not to say impossible argument before the Court of Appeal for the contemnor,
was told by the Master of the Rolls, Lord Donaldson, that the struggling
advocate might find a more valid argument from a recent article by
Justinian. Adoption of Justinian's views was, however, no less implausible;
it sunk without judicial trace. But the Court of Appeal was kind enough to
think that the article was worthy of note.
Justinian's most notable contribution was a decade ago, at the time of the
Falklands war. The FT, editorially, stood out from most of the nation
thirsting for military engagement with Argentina. The line was that war
might have to be countenanced, but that armed conflict should come about
only after all possible means of negotiation had been thoroughly canvassed
and failed.
Among the canvassed proposals was that the government should accept UN
trusteeship of the Falklands. Justinian simultaneously outlined in detail
the notion of trusteeship under UN auspices. Britain would continue to
administer the territory, but the trusteeship government would be written in
terms which acknowledged Argentina's interests. Justinian wrote: 'Implicit
in trusteeship is the idea at some stage the islands might, for strictly
geographical reasons, become part of the Republic of Argentina.'
If Justinian's contribution to the debate did not commend itself to the
government, the idea was fostered by a number of leading politicians. It was
the nearest Justinian ever came to influencing the authorities. Other
writings attracted no more than passing interest, gaining approval or
incurring displeasure. If it was the latter, few disgruntled readers
delivered a public or private rebuke. (Justinian acknowledges gratefully the
forebearance of his readers.)
Justinian's influence was more in the area of journalistic imitation. At the
beginning of the 1960s there was only the faintest recognition by Fleet
Street of the need of a legal correspondent. Indeed, Justinian was the nom
de plume for the emerging legal correspondent of The Guardian and The
Observer.
Today, all the broadsheet newspapers carry weekly law pages - no doubt
generated by the advertising world - and regular stories and feature
articles on the law and the legal profession. The recent reforms of the
profession, which were openly fought over between the judiciary and the Lord
Chancellor, provided newsworthy (even exciting) copy for serious readers.
Today, the law occupies a discrete segment of the daily fare for readers of
the serious organs of the media. As Justinian bows out, he can claim to have
been the precursor, but not the spawner of contemporary legal journalism.
Perhaps Justinian may indulge in one piece of immodesty. David Kynaston
wrote in his 1988 centenary history of the FT that for more than a quarter
of a century the paper had been provided 'with a legal commentary, not only
on matters of commercial law, of the very highest calibre'. If that was a
sound assessment, it would need some qualification in the light of today's
rival legal commentators, to whom Justinian is sensibly bidding farewell.
The competition is now too fierce for the comfort of a commentator with 30
years' experience on legal affairs.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921026

