FT923-6434

FT  25 AUG 92 / Saddam condemns 'profiteers' as sanctions bite hard


   By TONY WALKER


   CAIRO


A DEFIANT President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, under renewed pressure from the
west, has vowed to intensify a stringent campaign against those he describes
as profiteers, amid signs that United Nations economic sanctions are biting
deeper.
Mr Saddam pledged at an emergency cabinet session on Sunday that he would
continue his 'war on behalf of the poor', but recent visitors to Iraq report
that prices of scarce commodities have 'gone through the roof' and shortages
are becoming more widespread.
Further draconian measures to root out 'hoarders and monopolists' were
reported in the Iraqi press yesterday. They follow an emergency 'plan of
action' to cope with UN sanctions.
The 'war on behalf of the poor' campaign will now extend to employees of
Iraq's financial institutions who will be obliged to fill in special forms
'declaring their movable and immovable property'. Employees of Iraq's two
state banks will be required to disclose their bank balances and
possessions.
'The government should see to it that nobody accumulates a fortune without
the required national and moral right,' Mr Saddam told cabinet.
The execution last month of 42 traders accused of profiteering has brought
much private business activity to a halt, further adding to the shortages.
Belated action by Jordan to stop a steady trickle of trade into Iraq in
defiance of UN sanctions has also taken its toll.
Amman-based Iraqi merchants say that officials have been pressing them to
resume trading with assurances that they would come to no harm, but there
are few takers.
Members of Mr Saddam's immediate family are reported to have visited Amman
recently in an effort to regenerate cross-border trade.
Iraq's announcement last week that it was banning the import of 150 'luxury'
items ranging from tomatoes and bananas to whisky, beer, radios,
refrigerators and computers suggests that Baghdad is running very low on
cash.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920825

