FT921-635

FT  27 MAR 92 / Freedom for airlines to set own fares agreed


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


EC TRANSPORT ministers yesterday agreed in principle to grant airlines the
freedom to set fares from next year.
In a prelude to a new crackdown on state subsidies to airlines, the European
Commission gave ministers a detailed report on state aids to the industry,
which it said were inhibiting development of a genuine 'open skies'
environment. The freedom to set air tariffs will be limited by safeguards
against over-pricing and 'predatory pricing' by large carriers cutting fares
to force smaller competitors out of business.
The full effectiveness of this measure will not be realised unless the 12
agree to liberalise market access, and to common airline licencing rules
intended to facilitate new entrants to the industry. Ministers yesterday
made less progress on these aspects of the EC's so-called 'Third Aviation
Package', the vehicle of its drive for open skies.
Ministers and Commission officials said agreement was likely in June on most
of the package. 'Seventh freedom' rights - the right of, say, British
Airways to fly from Paris to Berlin - look likely to be agreed. On the
introduction of cabotage - the right, for example, of BA to offer services
between Paris and Marseilles - France, supported by the southern member
states, is holding out for a six-year transition.
Mr Paul Quiles, French transport minister, said the EC must 'avoid market
destabilisation through too rapid a liberalisation'. The UK argued that
partial liberalisation measures from 1987 and 1990, the first two open skies
packages, had already provided the transition. The Netherlands, the other EC
air transport liberal, called for a maximum one-year transition.
A likely compromise is about two years, with the introduction from next year
of 'consecutive cabotage'  - BA offering services between Paris and
Marseilles or Berlin and Frankfurt, provided the flight originates in the
UK.
It was largely agreed that exemptions could be made, to take account of the
environment, regional development, congestion, and promotion of railway
transport. But Mr Karel Van Miert, transport commissioner, warned that
Brussels would not accept any attempts to use such safeguards to circumvent
liberalisation. The Commission also warned it 'will not give any privileges
to state-owned carriers and that they will not have a guarantee for
survival'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920327

