FT922-4173

FT  06 JUN 92 / Collecting: High hopes for a fruitful fair - London's
dealers and auctioneers are putting on their bravest faces for the new
London Season. And, as Antony Thorncroft reports, they are hoping that the
big buyers will be flocking back . . .


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


THIS IS the month in which the hearts of London's antique dealers and
auctioneers beat that little bit faster. June: the start of the London
Season, the time when the world's richest traditionally flock to the capital
and spend, spend, spend. Now the trade lays on the grandest fairs, holds the
most enticing auctions, offers in the galleries the choicest stock.
Or that, at least, is the theory. The practice in the last two years has
been less happy. Rich American dealers and collectors, in particular, have
become rare birds of passage and the slump in the antiques market has
deterred sellers from offering treasures at auction and impaired the ability
of dealers to invest in fine new stock.
Yet this June there are signs of renewed confidence. Forget about the Lloyds
Names forced to sell off antiques to pay their debts; ignore the stagnation
in the property market which has badly hit demand for home furnishings. The
stock market is booming and trade has picked up slightly in the last two
months. Prices at auction are rising, albeit from much reduced levels, and
some Americans have been spotted in London's Mayfair.
The antiques trade desperately needs a good June. For most dealers it is the
busiest month of their year, and with rising bank debts they badly need to
sell well. This could be make or break month for many dealers.
Those at the top of the heap have been competing, as usual, to get into the
Grosvenor House Fair, in London's Park Lane, which signifies the start of
the Season and is the pinnacle of the British antiques year. Even if the
ultra-rich visitors fail to buy at the opening gala, at least they make
contact and remember the names on the stands. Purchases may arrive a year or
more later.
This year the theme is '1492-1992: 500 Years of American patronage', and one
or two American dealers, notably Newhouse and Peter Tillou, have been
allowed to join the 80 or so big names of the British trade. In price terms
there is nothing to compare with the Dollars 20m-plus Turner that Agnew's
offered last year - indeed, prices across the board will show no increase on
a year ago - but there are thousands of carefully vetted treasures on offer.
Tillou is displaying one of the most expensive, a portrait of Andrew Jackson
Ten Broeck as a baby by the famed American itinerant folk artist Ammi
Phillips. Its price is undisclosed but will be in seven (dollar) figures.
Many dealers will be offering works of art with an American theme. Nicholas
Harris, a new exhibitor, has the silver vase presented in 1905 to the
founder of the Camp Fire Club of America. David Messum has a display of
Anglo-American Impressionist paintings by the likes of Singer Sargent and
Merritt Chase. The O'Shea Gallery has a pair of lithographs depicting the
yachts 'America' and 'Alarm' which competed against each other in 1851.
All the big names - Agnew's, Norman Adams, Spink, Garrard, Apter-Fredericks,
Colnaghi, Ronald A. Lee, Asprey, Richard Green, etc - are at the fair and
many will be showing works held back for the event. Grosvenor House has a
luxurious image but items can be bought for less than Pounds 1,000 and, as a
spectacle it is unsurpassed.
Many more dealers are piling into the Fine Art and Antiques Fair at Olympia,
which continues until June 14. There will be approaching 400 dealers taking
part, making this the largest Olympia yet. Many will be sharing stands, so
keen are they to get the chance to offer stock to the expected 40,000
visitors.
The fair is on two levels, with the downstairs Silver Section containing the
fairly cheap and slightly cheerful end of the trade, while upstairs the Gold
Section features the specialist, upmarket dealers, selling more expensive
antiques. However, there are dealers who prefer to relegate themselves to
the ground floor because they feel, with some justification, that many
prospective punters, exhausted after browsing through over 200 'Silver'
stands, never have the energy to venture up the staircase.
Although every item is vetted for authenticity Olympia is a much more
relaxed event than grand and exclusive Grosvenor House, with which it
overlaps. There is a dazzling array of goods on offer, ranging from a pair
of mahogany library chairs with Egyptian motifs, probably made by Gillow
around 1805 (C. Fredericks); to a 1694 silver salt (Brian Beet); a rare full
length portrait of Mary Tudor (Richard Philip); a Cartier diamond flower
brooch of 1890 (Moira of Bond Street); a pre-Columbian feather head-dress
from Peru (Esther Fitzgerald); a Chinese export tankard of 1775 decorated
with Masonic symbols (Earle D. Vandekar); a range of art deco from new
exhibitor Rupert Cavendish; the Entrance Gates to Les Halles meat market,
built in Paris in the 1850s (Nellie Lenson and Roy Smith); a James I gold
pound used decades later by James II as the first recorded military medal
for Edward Clavering (Baldwins, the coin dealers, another first time
exhibitor).
And so it goes on . . .
The attraction of Olympia is that if you are interested in acquiring a
breakfront bookcase, or a Georgian silver tea pot, or a Derby porcelain
dinner service, or an oil painting depicting kittens, there will be dozens -
if not scores - of examples on offer at the fair.
Olympia is used by the comfortably-off to decorate their homes. Each June
they come with, say, Pounds 2,000 which they are determined to spend. One
year they will be looking for an oval table and chairs, the next year for a
long case clock, the next for an oriental rug. They know that as well as the
widest choice in chaotic accessibility the fair offers respectable dealers
who will often accept 10 per cent below the quoted price from a keen buyer.
Dealers try and hold on to good stock to unveil at the fair. This year, if
the hoped-for revival in buying fails to materialise, some could be offering
attractive discounts rather than face the prospect of carrying the goods for
many months.
Unfortunately, this being the UK, where the middle classes prefer to spend
their disposable wealth on educating their children rather than acquiring
antiques, there will never be enough native British buyers to keep the
dealers in champagne. Fortunately, the fair also attracts foreign,
particularly European, dealers and private collectors who, with luck, will
become loyal clients - and it also offers the exhibitors the chance to pick
over the best pieces from competitors' stands before the public is allowed
in.
But this is not goodbye to the fairs. There are two specialist jamborees
about to open, the International Ceramics fair at the Park Lane Hotel,
starting on June 12, and the London Antiquarian Book Fair, at the same
venue, from June 23. Both are shorter, more intensive, and appeal mainly to
enthusiasts.
Ceramics have been largely overlooked by the boom and bust that has affected
other sectors of the art market. Prices do nor change much over the years,
which is good for serious collectors. The exception has been the finest
pieces of Chinese porcelain which are fought over by Hong Kong, Taiwanese
and Singaporean buyers.
At this year's fair there are sure to be many pieces from the Vung Tau
cargo, the 17th century Chinese ship which sank off Vietnam with its
porcelain, originally destined for Amsterdam, and which re-surfaced at a
Christie's sale this spring. Helen Buxton and Heirloom and Howard will
certainly be offering items, priced as low as Pounds 50 for a blue and white
tea bowl, while AntiqueWest has a cabinet devoted to 'Cargo from the Sea'
with items from the Nanking, Gottenburg and Hatcher finds. Ceramics rescued
from the seabed should be bought by specialist collectors rather than
speculative investors: history suggests that they rarely rise in value, at
least not in the short term.
There are more than 40 exhibitors, offering oriental ceramics, continental
porcelain, works from the English factories, glass - the lot. A feature of
the fair, which this year is being copied by Olympia, is the series of
lectures by international experts on such subjects as 'Creamware: its
origins and development' and 'The Importance of Limehouse', a look at the
Limehouse factory, which only lasted from 1745-48. This is the kind of thing
that the ceramics buffs, who flock to the fair from all over the world,
love.
Top quality antiquarian books have held their price well in recent years,
and is a supremely international market. Over 100 booksellers have taken
space at Park Lane to offer 30,000 books for sale, ranging from a rare first
edition of The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, priced at Pounds 3,500, to a
first edition of Keats' Poems (Pounds 13,500), to a first edition of Adam
Smith's Wealth of Nations at Pounds 20,000. But many books will sell for
under Pounds 100.
The auction houses are quieter this month than in the past (the
Impressionist sales are very lacklustre), although Sotheby's has a genuine
Rembrandt to sell and Christie's a Richard Dadd fairy painting. But even the
dealers concentrating at the fairs will have wonderful back-up displays in
their galleries and there are still dealers who hold aloof from fairs and
prefer to tempt customers with their splashy June exhibitions.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920606

