FT921-3712

FT  13 MAR 92 / Catalan leader has sights set high: Madrid faces challenge
from the economic hub


   By TOM BURNS


   MADRID


MR JORDI PUJOL, the leader of Catalonia's autonomous government since 1980,
is poised to win comfortably his fourth successive mandate in Spain's
richest community and is likely to emerge as an arbiter of domestic politics
in the 1990s.
Opinion polls for Sunday's Catalan elections indicate that Mr Pujol's
moderate nationalist coalition Convergencia i Unio (CiU) will increase its
existing overall majority in the Barcelona-based 135-member parliament,
taking up to 48 per cent of the vote, from 45 per cent in the 1988 election,
and opening a 20-point gap over the second-placed Socialist party.
The expected result will reward Mr Pujol for consolidating both the wealth
and the nationalist identity of Spain's north-east corner, an area that is
larger than Belgium and whose 6m inhabitants represent 15 per cent of the
Spanish population.
Styling itself as the economic hub of the western Mediterranean and fuelled
by foreign, particularly Japanese, investment, Catalonia accounts for 27 per
cent of Spain's industrial GDP. Its per capita income is 25 per cent higher
than the national average and is only slightly below that of the European
Community.
During his 12 years in power Mr Pujol, 62, has ably extracted growing
administrative powers from the central government in Madrid and has
single-mindedly promoted the widespread use of the Catalan language.
Catalonia's government, the Generalitat, has some 100,000 employees on its
payroll and runs one of the most efficient health services in the country.
Sunday's poll will also reinforce the position that Mr Pujol, who leads the
CiU nationally and is the country's longest serving elected leader, holds as
a potential powerbroker in national politics. Spain's general elections, due
next year, are likely to return a hung parliament.
The bloc of 18-20 members of Mr Pujol's CiU coalition in Madrid's national
parliament is courted by both the ruling Socialist party of the prime
minister, Mr Felipe Gonzalez, and by the Partido Popular, the opposition
conservative party.
Mr Pujol, an essentially pragmatic politician, is highly motivated by deeply
held nationalist convictions that earned him a spell in prison in the 1950s
during General Franco's dictatorship. He will undoubtably seek greater
devolution in Catalonia.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920313

