FT923-15707

FT  01 JUL 92 / FT Law Report: Mareva extension for fresh claim


   By RACHEL DAVIES, Barrister


AIGLON LTD AND ANOTHER v GAU SHAN & CO LTD
GAU SHAN & CO LTD v AIGLON LTD AND OTHERS
Queen's Bench Division (Commercial Court): Mr Justice Hirst: June 23 1992
A MAREVA injunction which would have been discharged as against one of two
associated companies on grounds of non-arguability of the claim on which it
was based may be extended as a result of a post-argument amendment to the
claim of the party in whose favour it was made, if the amendment raises a
fresh claim which is arguable, and which is so inextricably interlinked with
the original case against the other company that in the interests of justice
it should be heard.
Mr Justice Hirst so held when granting an application by Gau Shan Ltd to
extend a Mareva injunction and ancillary order obtained by it against
L'Aiglon SA ('SA') in respect of an arbitration award against SA and its
associated company, Aiglon Ltd ('Ltd').
HIS LORDSHIP said the litigation comprised two actions arising out of an
award by the Technical Appeal Committee of the Liverpool Cotton Association
in favour of Gau Shan against Ltd and SA, a Swiss company.
On May 1 1992 Mr Justice Gatehouse granted applications against Ltd and SA
for worldwide Mareva injunctions and orders for disclosure of worldwide
assets.
At that stage the sole substantive claim on which the injunction against SA
was based was Gau Shan's counterclaim for leave under section 26 of the
Arbitration Act 1950 to enforce the award in the same manner as a judgment.
On a previous application to the present court SA applied to set aside the
Mareva and disclosure orders as against it.
Judgment was given on June 10 (FT, June 26 1992). The conclusion was that
Gau Shan had no good arguable case against SA for an order under section 26.
On that footing the court was prepared to discharge the Mareva and ancillary
orders against SA.
One of the grounds on which that conclusion was based was that the evidence
then before the court failed to substantiate a good arguable case that SA
was party to the contract of sale on which the arbitrators' jurisdiction was
founded.
Gau Shan now applied to extend the Mareva and ancillary order on entirely
fresh grounds, including a claim against SA under section 423 of the
Insolvency Act 1986 first put forward in an amendment to the counterclaim on
June 1, and a possible claim under section 238 by liquidators of Ltd.
Mr Colman for SA made it clear that he was not able, at present, to dispute
that there was a good arguable case on the merits of those two contentions.
However, he counter-applied to strike out the amendment.
Section 423(2) of the 1986 Act provided that where a person entered into a
transaction at an undervalue, the court might make an order 'restoring the
position to what it would have been if the transaction had not been entered
into'.
By 423(3) the court should only make such an order if satisfied that the
transaction was entered into for the purpose '(a) of putting assets beyond
the reach of a person who is making, or may at some time make, a claim
against him'.
Evidence sworn on behalf of SA was directed to showing that as part of an
allegedly legitimate tax avoidance scheme, Ltd had stripped itself of its
assets, partly by transfers to an Irish company of the same name, and partly
by payments of management fees and commission to SA.
Mr Falconer for Gau Shan submitted that the evidence demonstrated a strong
case showing Ltd had entered into a transaction with SA offending against
section 423, in that assets were put out of Gau Shan's reach, apparently at
an undervalue, by transfers to SA at a time when the arbitration award had
been made. He said that ground alone substantiated continuation of the
Mareva and the order, there being no contest from SA to Gau Shan's case on
the risk of dissipation of assets.
Those submissions were accepted. Even if SA's explanation of the
asset-stripping exercise was sound, it by no means followed that the purpose
of the transaction was not the section 423 purpose.
Section 238 of the Act provided that the liquidator of a company might apply
to the court to restore the position where the company had entered into a
transaction at an undervalue.
Mr Falconer submitted that since Ltd was now a shell company, it would be
insolvent if Gau Shan were entitled to enforce the award against it. As a
result a liquidator could apply for an order under section 238. He submitted
the court had jurisdiction to grant a Mareva injunction against a third
party such as SA, as ancillary to the relief sought against Ltd under
section 238 (TSB v Chabra (1992) 1 WLR 231, 242).
A good arguable case was established, on the footing that there was credible
evidence that SA's assets might in part be the assets of Ltd which had, as a
result of the asset-stripping operation, put it out of its power to meet the
arbitration award - so that an injunction against Ltd alone was likely to be
inadequate to protect Gau Shan.
Those conclusions provided a firm basis for continuing the Mareva, subject
to the court's overriding discretion - and subject to Mr Colman's striking
out application.
Mr Colman submitted first that the amendment was an abuse of process in that
it was made between time of argument in May, and time of judgment; and that
it fundamentally altered the position to the unfair detriment of SA, since
it had no relationship to SA's attack on the award as having been made
without jurisdiction.
The flaw in that argument was that it ignored the original case against Ltd,
which included a section 423 claim. Irrespective of the failure of the
original section 26 application, Gau Shan would have had a cast iron case
for joining SA as an additional defendant under RSC Order 11 rule 1(1)(c),
on the ground that it was a necessary and proper party. The court would
inevitably have had regard to the fact that the section 423 claims against
Ltd and SA were inextricably interlinked and in the interests of justice
should be heard together.
The amendment did not involve abuse of process.
Second, Mr Colman submitted that the amendment should be struck out under
Order 28 rule 7, in that 'the subject matter of a counterclaim ought to be
disposed of by separate action'.
There was a significant connection between the amendment and SA's original
claim, seeing that Gau Shan's subsequent efforts to enforce the award were
directly connected with the arbitration. The amendment ought not to be
disposed of by separate action.
Third, Mr Colman submitted that having regard to the Lugano Convention 1988
the proceedings against SA on the amended counterclaim should be brought in
the Swiss courts as the forum conveniens.
Switzerland and the UK were contracting states to the Convention, which was
implemented by the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1991. Article 6(1)
provided that a person domiciled in a contracting state might be sued '(1)
where he is one of a number of defendants, in the courts for the place where
any one of them is domiciled'.
Article 6(1) gave the plaintiff an unfettered right of choice.
It followed it was not open to Mr Colman to invoke the forum non conveniens
doctrine. Even if the court had reached a contrary conclusion on principle,
it would not have accepted his submission as to appropriate forum.
There were no grounds for striking out the amendment.
The worldwide injunction against SA was fully justified. Part of the
asset-stripping operation was the allegedly improper payment of excessive
management fees and commissions to SA in Geneva. The case for a worldwide
Mareva against SA was every bit as strong as that against Ltd.
The worldwide Mareva injunction and associated order would be continued
against SA.
For SA: Anthony Colman QC and Graham Dunning (Weightman Rutherfords,
Liverpool).
For Gau Shan: Charles Falconer QC and Alastair MacGregor (Middleton Potts).

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920701

