FT921-433

FT  28 MAR 92 / International Company News: O&Y asks its lenders for freeze
on debt repayments


   By BERNARD SIMON and ALAN FRIEDMAN


   TORONTO, NEW YORK


OLYMPIA & YORK, the financially-pressed property developer, has asked its
lenders to freeze its debt repayments pending the presentation of an interim
restructuring plan on April 6.
The Toronto-based company also announced at the end of a meeting with about
20 of its largest creditors yesterday that it is forming a Bank Advisory
Committee, led by Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Citibank and Hongkong
and Shanghai Banking Corporation.
An O&Y official was unable yesterday to estimate the amount of maturing debt
obligations which lenders are being asked to roll over. They include a
significant portion of two commercial paper programmes which the company was
in the process of winding up before it was hit by a liquidity crisis earlier
this month.
About CDollars 380m (USDollars 319.3m) of commercial paper is still
outstanding. The company's total debts are estimated at over CDollars 20bn,
and the restructuring process is expected to last at least two years. O&Y's
banks earlier this month provided Pounds 50m (USDollars 86.5m) emergency
facilities to enable work to continue on the Canary Wharf project in
London's docklands.
The official said yesterday's meeting, held at the company's head office in
Toronto's Exchange Tower, lasted 'a few hours.' Extra security precautions
were evident at the building yesterday.
The bankers were addressed by Mr Paul Reichmann, senior member of the family
which owns O&Y, as well as by Mr Thomas Johnson, the US banker who was
appointed president of the company earlier this week. O&Y said the two men,
as well their recently-appointed financial advisers, described the company's
financial situation in general terms 'and the process by which management is
addressing it'.
The O&Y official said a European bank is also expected to join the steering
group, and that other institutions will be invited to join the committee.
Besides banks, O&Y's creditors include a large number of pension funds,
insurance companies and other institutional investors, mostly in North
America.
Olympia & York failed two weeks ago to make a payment of more than USDollars
30m due to Merrill Lynch, the New York securities house, adds Alan Friedman
in New York.
The payment was part of O&Y's plan to retire its CDollars 380m (USDollars
319.3m) of outstanding commercial paper.
Merrill Lynch, according to bankers involved in O&Y's debt talks, was
supposed to take receipt of the funds in its role as agent to investors who
hold O&Y commercial paper.
It emerged yesterday that Merrill Lynch considered calling in its lawyers to
place O&Y in technical default, but in the end recommended to investors that
the commercial paper be rolled over.
One adviser to O&Y sought to play down the episode yesterday, saying: 'That
was an example of their liquidity crisis.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920328

