FT924-6130

FT  23 NOV 92 / International Bonds: Flood of Eurosterling debt fails to
reach market


   By RICHARD WATERS


A CASUAL glance at the international bond market at the end of last week
would have left the impression that sterling corporate debt was all the
rage.
The UK government had just sold more than Pounds 1.3bn of the stuff, and
British Gas had raised Pounds 300m through a 25-year bond issue. Surely the
bond markets were not that hungry for Eurosterling - and from corporates in
particular?
In reality, very little of this wave of debt actually found its way - or is
likely to find its way - on to the market. In fact, just Pounds 229m of it
is thought to have been put up for offer straight away.
Nearly Pounds 500m more was reportedly being restructured by investment
banks before onward sale. The remaining Pounds 728m was bought back for
cancellation by the companies which had issued it - though at least some of
this could have an effect on the market eventually if the issuers seek to
refinance.
The government's sale was instantly declared a success by the market, and a
significant coup for Baring Brothers, which had masterminded the process.
The bank organised a single auction in which different tranches of debt with
different maturities and coupon rates were put up for sale - a bit like
trying to weigh bids for apples and oranges against each other.
Also, it wanted to harness market competition for the auction, even though
only BT's debt could be bid for by outsiders. Covenants prevented the debt
of the 12 electricity companies which was being sold, from being offered to
anyone other than the companies themselves.
Baring's answer was a baseline for each tranche against which bids could be
compared.
For each slice on offer, this was taken to be the yield that the issuer
would have to pay to refinance the amount in the bond market, with a premium
added to reflect the fact that the debt being sold off carried high interest
rates - the debt eventually sold had paid interest of between 11.5 and 12.25
per cent.
The baseline was then reduced to make the whole exercise tax-neutral for the
issuers. Otherwise, they would have suffered an extra tax charge when buying
and cancelling debt at a premium.
Of the Pounds 1.3bn eventually sold, only the Pounds 229m slice of BT debt
bought by UBS Phillips & Drew - the largest single allocation and, at 2006,
the one with the longest maturity - was reoffered for immediate sale. UBS
confirmed that the debt, which carried a coupon of 12.25 per cent, was being
offered at a yield of 48 to 50 basis points over gilts. It refused to
comment on market rumours that it had acquired the debt at a yield spread of
55 basis points.
Given the rarity of longer-dated BT paper - in fact, the rarity of any
long-dated Eurosterling recently - it was not surprising that good demand
was reported.
P&D's slice may have been the largest, but all of the debt sold in the
auction was at maturities stretching to the year 2000 or beyond.
Bids had been more aggressive at that end of the yield curve, reflecting
demand for higher-yielding paper as the sterling yield curve has become
steeper. It is no surprise that the next gilt auction, due shortly, is
expected to be of bonds maturing in 2003.
Goldman Sachs, the only other bank to bid successfully, was said by rivals
to be stripping the coupons from its Pounds 180m of BT debt with a coupon of
12.25 per cent, to be sold separately as a series of zero-coupon issues.
This is a technique in which Goldman is the acknowledged leader in London.
According to one rival, this structure could squeeze up to 20 basis points
more in yield terms out of the bonds.
Outside competition from these and other banks - and bidding from seven of
the companies whose debt was up for sale - helped ensure what Baring and
others said was a good price for the UK taxpayer. The average yield on the
debt sold was a substantial 17 basis points lower than Baring's baseline -
though no actual sale prices were published to enable the market to make up
its own mind about the outcome.
Goldman was not the only bank rumoured to be preparing a stripped
Eurosterling issue on Friday. BZW announced a 25-year private placement for
British Gas which was seen by the market as a carbon copy of an issue for
Boots earlier this year.
Neither BZW nor the issuer would disclose how the bonds were structured.
However, rivals said both the Boots and British Gas deals had involved early
coupons being stripped and sold separately.
Payments to meet these coupons, though treated for tax purposes as interest,
would effectively be equivalent to capital repayments.
The announcement of the British Gas deal, though not of its terms, prompted
other banks which claim to have created similar structures to warn of
possible retaliation from the taxman. 'If we were doing it, we would keep it
extraordinarily quiet - the Inland Revenue has screens too,' one bank said.
British Gas itself - in common with other sterling issuers - has no plans at
the moment to borrow long-term money.
The company expects short-term rates to continue to fall, with another half
a point off five-year yields, said Mr Arthur Burgess, treasurer.
He expects longer-dated yields, on the other hand, to rise. British Gas,
which is just entering its peak borrowing period of the year, plans to meet
all its extra requirements through short-term credit lines and commercial
paper.
Another structured deal did not even get out of the blocks last week:
Kingfisher, the retailing group, had retained UBS to raise money in the
Eurosterling market. However, problems with timing have now led to the issue
being postponed until after Christmas, according to one source close to the
deal.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921123

