FT924-8139

FT  12 NOV 92 / Brazil remains mystified by its 'ordinary' man: Christina
Lamb looks at the problems facing Itamar Franco's presidency


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


FIVE weeks into its new government, Brazil is still mystified by President
Itamar Franco. Faxes continue to fly between investors trying to decipher
the direction of the administration and to pick their way through the
contradictory statements from ministers which have left the stock market
reeling.
Unlike his dynamic predecessor, Mr Franco is untroubled by any great
mission, and does not feel the need to give nationwide addresses. Alarming
security staff by entering the presidential palace through the public door,
he says he wants to be thought of as 'an ordinary man' and publicly rebukes
ministers when they do 'sneaky' things like putting up fuel prices at night.
Mr Franco's nonchalant attitude contrasts with the dire straits of Latin
America's largest economy. The country is in its third year of recession,
annualised inflation is around 1,500 per cent, an accord with the
International Monetary Fund has collapsed, and falling tax receipts have
left a Dollars 20bn hole in the budget. There are also increasing signs of
social unrest such as armed raids on the beaches of Rio.
Despite the gravity of the problems, it is enough for many Brazilians -
still shocked after the traumatic process of Mr Fernando Collor's
impeachment and volatile presidency - that Mr Franco is offering no
surprises. And while the rhetoric and background of some of his ministers
may be nationalistic, in practice Mr Collor's strict monetary policy and
modernisation programme has not been tampered with.
Moreover, Mr Franco has managed to cobble together the most remarkable
coalition in recent Brazilian history. His cabinet contains members of all
leading political parties from left to right and his impressive
Congressional majority of 441 out of 503 is led by the former head of the
Communist party.
Last Friday, the government announced a Dollars 16bn fiscal reform package,
based largely on a tax on cheques. Mr Paulo Haddad, the Planning Minister
and the President's right-hand man, says: 'In five weeks we've done
something Collor didn't dare in two years.' The reform is, he says, part of
a plan to scrap all indirect taxes by 1994, and should allow reduced
interest rates by next April.
However, the package involves constitutional amendments needing
Congressional approval and few believe it can pass this year as it must in
order to come into effect next.
Aware of the urgency, Congress does not have a good record on approving
legislation - a crucial port reform project has lingered almost a year  -
and Mr Franco's theoretical majority is yet to be tested. Mr Benito Gama who
heads the fiscal reform commission in Congress, says: 'I think it will be
very difficult'.
Moreover, businessmen warn that increasing tax revenues is not easy when 46
per cent of the top 300 public listed companies are in the red and retail
sales are 12 per cent down.
But Mr Franco also wants them to increase salaries from the current Dollars
60 a month minimum to which most Brazilian wages are pegged. According to Mr
Haddad, the President's main preoccupation is the country's 50m living in
absolute poverty and his slogan is 'tudo pelo social' - anything to improve
welfare.
To this end Mr Franco has refused to sanction a 23 per cent increase in
medicine prices, even though pharmaceutical companies point out that
inflation is 26 per cent a month and that it is impossible to produce drugs
cheap enough for families living on Dollars 60 a month.
He has also seized on public sector tariffs as way of supressing inflation.
Telephone charges are to be frozen until next March and Mr Franco wants a
similar deal with fuel prices although Petrobras, the state oil monopoly, is
warning that it is already losing Dollars 10m a day.
Such populist moves are unlikely to go down well with the IMF when Mr Haddad
presents his case next month for a new agreement. They are also provoking
fears that the next step might be a price freeze.
The other major uncertainty is the fate of the privatisation programme. Mr
Franco is a past critic of privatisation and many ministers adhere to the
nationalist line. Although Mr Haddad says that by next March he wants to
start tackling the energy and infrastructure sectors, it seems likely that
future sales beyond those already scheduled by Mr Collor will be left to
Congress.
Next Wednesday Mr Franco will address Congress to outline his policies.
There seems little reason for optimism on the economic front but Mr Franco
should have a breathing space over the next few months. The media focus is
still on the impeachment trial of Mr Collor and the politicians are busy
planning for next April's referendum on the political system. Businessmen
are holding their fire, at least until they know more.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921112

