FT924-6499

FT  20 NOV 92 / World Stock Markets: High interest rates depress Istanbul -
After a miserable year, Turkish equities are looking cheap


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


Dashed hopes on inflation and high real interest rates have given Turkish
equities a miserable year, but if one thing can be said with confidence it
is that they have probably never been cheaper.
According to data provided by the IFC, part of the World Bank, Turkish
equities have been the worst performers in its emerging markets table,
falling by 58.8 per cent in dollar terms from the start of the year to the
end of October, and showing no improvement by mid-November.
As many as 35 stocks of the 145 traded are now below their nominal value,
market capitalisation has fallen to Dollars 9.5bn from Dollars 15bn in
November last year, and daily turnover has dropped to around Dollars 11m
from Dollars 80m a year ago.
The stock market has been driven lower by high interest rates, and with
little let-up in inflation, the pressure looks set to continue.
The state-owned Ziraat, the country's largest bank, is now offering 73 per
cent on yearly deposits.
This reflects a resurgence in inflation, after a slowdown over the summer.
Consumer prices jumped in September and October, pushing the annual
inflation rate to 69.2 per cent, way above the government's 1992 target of
42 per cent.
The market, which lacks large institutional investors to provide much-needed
liquidity, has been deserted by local retail investors who have provided
much of the impetus in the past. They are putting their money elsewhere,
into time deposits or into gold.
Institutional reform has been slow. The government has still to approve
legislation to provide tax breaks for mutual funds to encourage them to
invest in equities.
'There is still little concept of fund management in Turkey. You're either
in one thing or the other. There is no idea of diversifying a portfolio,'
says Ms Radhika Ajmera director of Abtrust, which manages the Turkey Trust -
one of the few country funds investing in Turkish stocks.
The government has taken some measures to encourage investment in the stock
market. For example, it has made insider trading illegal. 'We've passed 17
regulations since May,' says Mr Yaman Asikoglu, head of the Capital Markets
Board, the government watchdog authority. 'Even if nothing else is done, the
mere fact that it's now law is sufficient to bring offenders to court.'
While investors are not falling over themselves to return, there is
nonetheless a growing feeling that the market may finally be approaching the
bottom.
Some blue-chip companies are reporting good earnings growth, beating the
government's own target of 5-6 per cent for the economy in 1992. The
favoured sectors are those with strong cash flow and low debt, a major
problem in view of the country's high real interest rates, and companies
which have a well-established franchise in the domestic market.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

921120

