FT924-8092

FT  13 NOV 92 / Sweden erects banking defences: A look at a package of
support measures


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   STOCKHOLM


SWEDEN has reacted to its banking crisis in a similar fashion to September's
currency crisis. Last week's package of support measures for its ailing
financial sector indicate that it will defend the banking system whatever
the size of the bill.
Two months ago, in a similar display of resolution, Sweden made it clear
that it would defend the krona against currency speculators at any cost -
even 500 per cent overnight interest rates.
The promise of unlimited assistance is meant to send a clear signal to the
international banking community that Sweden will do whatever it takes to
ensure the obligations of its financial sector are met. It has not
quantified the amounts, but the cost will certainly run to billions of
kronor.
Credit losses across the financial sector have already reached SKr100bn for
1990-1992 and could well total as much again over the next few years.
The assistance package will inevitably worsen the budget deficit, increasing
the likelihood of further government austerity measures, in addition to the
two crisis packages announced in September.
It is, of course, something of an embarrassment for the country's
centre-right coalition, which has espoused free-market principles, to have
to mount such a bail-out. Sweden, with its broadly-based economy and
conservatively managed banking sector, had expected to avoid the sort of
bank rescue packages that the governments in both Norway and Finland have
been forced to undertake.
Events this year have proved otherwise. Sweden has already had to come to
the aid of three of its beleagured financial institutions, including
Nordbanken and Gota Bank, two of the country's largest banks.
Such developments have clearly shaken confidence in the system, prompting
the government to make its support more explicit. Hence, the hurried fashion
in which it has put together its support programme over the last two months.
The result is that from early next year a special authority, directly
answerable to the government, will be set up to administer assistance to
both banks and state-affiliated credit institutions.
Generally, the support will be in the form of loans and guarantees, but a
key aim is to have flexibility and the government does not rule out taking
over bad debts and making direct equity injections in specific instances.
Essentially, the authority's role will be to nurse back to health
institutions capable of survival and to arrange an orderly liquidation of
those too weak to make it in the longer term.
The authority can thus be expected to play an important part in the
near-term restructuring of the Swedish financial sector, by forcibly
linking, for example, parts of one bank with those of another as part of a
rescue package.
Critics say the scheme may result in good money being thrown after bad, and
that it may stimulate bad lending practices. It may also place a strong bank
like Handelsbanken at a competitive disadvantage if some of its rivals are
able to gain assistance on favourable terms.
The only safeguard here is the provision that viable banks which obtain
state loans will be compelled to repay them on commercial terms, once they
are in a financially strong enough position.
Handelsbanken acknowledges that it may be disadvantaged, but says there was
no alternative to the plan as a whole.
The key consideration was to soothe the fears of the international financial
community about the solidity of the Swedish banking system - and in that at
least, the unveiling of the scheme appears to have been successful.
That is the positive aspect. The negative aspect is that, as yet, there is
still no sign that the worst of the problems in the banking sector are
over.'1993 will be another very difficult year for the banking system,' says
Mr Christer Bergquist, who will be the new authority's director general.
There may be an improvement in some areas, such as real estate next year,
but as the economy will still be mired in recession, bankruptcies and
problems in the household sector mean credit losses will continue at high
levels.
It is as well that the government has put no time limit on its assistance
package for the signs are that it will need to be in place for quite a few
years to come. The Swedish economy should start picking up in the middle of
next year, although the recovery will be slow and sluggish, according to a
new analysis from Gota Bank, writes Christopher Brown-Humes in Stockholm.
The bank says the turnaround will be lead by exports, spreading to other
parts of the economy during 1994. The pace of recovery will not be enough to
prevent a third successive year of falling GNP and Gota Bank warns that GNP
will fall by 2.1 per cent next year, compared with a decline of just 0.8 per
cent this year. There will also be a sharp increase in unemployment in the
next two years, according to the bank. It believes the unemployment level
next year will increase to 7 per cent from 5 per cent in 1992, before
increasing further to 7.5 per cent in 1994.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

921113

