FT922-13436

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: Can the battered Tokyo market recover?
 -The risks of investing in Japan


   By PHILIP COGGAN


BRITISH PRIVATE investors should confine any Japanese equity purchases to
the 'risk' element of their portfolios.
It may well be that the bullish arguments advanced by some fund managers in
Emiko Terazano's piece (left) prove to be correct, although many experts
were also arguing that Japanese shares were cheap when the Nikkei index was
at the 22,000 level.
But with price-earnings ratios in the high 30s, Japanese shares are
effectively valued at three times the ratings of British shares.
Before the crash of 1987, it was frequently argued that p/e ratios were
irrelevant to valuing Japanese shares. The British investor, however, has a
right to be cautious about such arguments. The rewards of backing Japanese
shares at current levels could be high, but so are the risks.
Anyone prepared to take the plunge should opt for a collective fund which
can provide the diversification and investment expertise necessary for an
overseas market. There is a wide range of Japanese unit and investment
trusts to chose from. There are 87 specialist Japanese unit trusts and a
further 51 Far Eastern funds which include a Japanese element.
Of the Japanese-only funds, a number have managed to produce consistently
above average performance. The following are in the top half of the sector
over one, two, three, five and seven years: Baillie Gifford Japan; Baillie
Gifford Japan fund; EFM Smaller Japanese Companies; James Capel Japan
Growth; Schroder Tokyo; and Stewart Ivory Japan. Schroder Tokyo is the top
performing fund over 10 years; and its Smaller Companies fund is top over
three, five and seven years (although it has slipped in the past year).
The strength of smaller companies shares has told against the indexed funds
but some investors might be tempted by the tracking funds from the likes of
James Capel and Morgan Grenfell.
There are six specialist Japanese investment trusts of which Baillie
Gifford's Shin Nippon has done best over three and five years; GT Japan is
the top performer over seven years.
All the collective funds have suffered in tune with the Tokyo market in the
1990s. No Japanese unit or investment trust showed a gain over one or two
years; only six funds managed a profit over three years. The average unit
trust in the area is down 28.5 per cent over three years, even with income
reinvested.
Only over 10 years can the real benefits of Japanese investment be seen,
with the average unit trust showing a gain of 321 per cent (offer-to-bid
with income reinvested). That compares with a 301.7 per cent rise from the
average UK Growth fund.
Most Japanese trusts are not really suitable for Personal Equity Plans.
First, the rules limit such non-EC PEPs to Pounds 1,500 per tax year.
Secondly, yields tend to be low in this area (the average for the investment
trusts is just 0.8 per cent). The income tax savings are therefore likely to
be low and those who can only invest Pounds 1,500 in a tax year would not
expect to face capital gains tax difficulties.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920411

