FT922-4038

FT  08 JUN 92 / Monday Interview: Advocate of evolving intervention -
Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the French industry minister, talks to William
Dawkins, Andrew Gowers and Ian Davidson


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS, ANDREW GOWERS and IAN DAVIDSON


Mr Dominique Strauss-Kahn, France's forceful young industry minister, has
little time for free-marketeers who lambast the French government for
propping up state-owned industries.
'My personal conviction is that we are living in the last part of the
ultra-liberal phase which began in California in the mid-1970s,' says Mr
Strauss-Kahn, 43, who emerged from relative obscurity a year ago to become
French industry and foreign trade minister and one of Europe's most
articulate advocates of an active industry policy.
'If the 1980s were dominated by financial questions and financial
regulations, the 1990s will be the time for states to intervene in industry
in the same way as they do in finance, as regulators - but not just as
regulators, as co-ordinators as well,' he says.
Whether you agree with Mr Strauss-Kahn or not - and plenty of private sector
financiers and industrialists in France do not - his views are worth
listening to. If the Maastricht Treaty on monetary and political union were
implemented by EC member states, the European Community would have the legal
power, for the first time, to seek to improve industry's competitiveness.
Even if last week's Danish vote has thrown the process into turmoil, Mr
Strauss-Kahn will be pushing industrial policy hard, both at home and in the
EC, in the years ahead.
Mr Strauss-Kahn is a typical member of the highly educated elite that runs
France, both in and beyond government. Trained as a lawyer, the former
university economics professor was chairman of the parliament's economics
commission before becoming industry minister. Fond of good food and skiing,
he is married to Ms Anne Sinclair, one of France's best-known female
television interviewers.
Since his appointment in spring 1991 by the former prime minister, the
industrially interventionist Mrs Edith Cresson, Mr Strauss-Kahn has been
unusually prominent for a French industry minister - traditionally a
low-profile job. In the past, industry strategy tended to be set by the
prime minister and finance minster: Mr Roger Fauroux, his predecessor, once
said he saw his job as being like the chief executive of a diversified
holding company. By contrast, Mr Strauss-Kahn is one of the thinkers behind
the controversial plan to reorganise the French state electronics industry
to create an electronics-to-nuclear-energy group, an example of what he
means by 'co-ordination'.
That plan, for a merger of Thomson Consumer Electronics (TCE), the
loss-making manufacturer of audiovisual equipment and home appliances, and
CEA-Industry, a nuclear fuel and reactor group, sparked off a debate in
France over how far interventionism should be allowed to go. The project has
since been scaled down by Mrs Cresson's successor, Mr Pierre Beregovoy. Now
the nuclear energy group is expected to take a minority stake in TCE.
Yet the fact that Mr Strauss-Kahn kept his job at all under the new prime
minister in the April government reshuffle underlines how important
industrial strategy remains in France, even after the relative retreat of
state interventionism. 'Why should the state be more passive than a private
shareholder? It can manage well or badly, but it is not being
interventionist in itself to try to manage one's assets as efficiently as
possible,' says Mr Strauss-Kahn.
The minister has no patience with criticisms of the logic behind the
proposed link between a maker of washing machines and a nuclear research
body. Mr Strauss-Kahn, highlighting two controversial private sector
link-ups, says: 'Look at Siemens and Nixdorf, or the alliance between Volvo
and Procordia. They might be good choices or bad ones, but nobody questions
that they are legitimate.'
At the same time, he is pragmatic over how far the state should wield
influence. He openly admits that state ownership is a second-best solution
for companies unable to flourish under private ownership. 'I say 'yes' to
state ownership not as a matter of principle, but because it is appropriate
for a country like France with its history, culture and state of
development. Once you have said 'yes' to this question, the behaviour of the
state must be that of a shareholder who is as wise as possible, acting in
the interests of those who have accorded it power, in this case the whole of
the French people,' he explains.
State funding, by contrast, is vital for projects that are too long term or
risky for private companies to handle on their own, such as making the next
generation of semiconductors, he argues. In this respect, he believes that
the EC gives too much power to its competition authorities, with their
repeated attacks on state aid, and has an inadequately developed industrial
policy.
Sir Leon Brittan, the EC competition commissioner, who has frequent run-ins
over state aid and merger policy with the French government, 'is right in
theory', says Mr Strauss-Kahn, with barely disguised condescension. 'But
real life is far from the theoretical world in which we would like to live,'
he says. In real life, he adds, market forces are imperfect: today's
sophisticated industrial products tend to emerge more as a result of costly
research and development, than in response to consumer demand.
'We cannot take our cue from the markets alone for very long-term or risky
decisions.' Governments that have lent a helping hand to emerging industries
have gained a competitive edge over governments that have left technology
development to the mercy of market forces, he argues.
Certainly, it is harder to decide just where governments have a duty to
intervene. 'There are no absolute rules to determine what is a strategic
industry . . . What is strategic or not, or what requires intervention or
not, does evolve,' says Mr Strauss-Kahn.
Of course, it is up to the government to decide what is strategic. Broadly,
he sees three kinds of business in which governments can legitimately act as
guardians of national interests: defence; sectors where technological
independence should be guaranteed; and vital supplies such as oil and
nuclear energy.
On oil, Mr Strauss-Kahn sees no ideological difference between the French
state's desire to wield some control over its oil companies and the way in
which the US or Saudi governments defend the interest of their own oil
producers. This explains why, for example, the French government is happy to
reduce its direct stake in Total, the oil group, to a mere 5 per cent, but
will still keep the right to nominate the chairman and vet its international
agreements.
There is no doubt that the frontiers of strategic industry are on the move,
as shown by the government's programme of partial privatisations, in which
it is prepared to sell up to 49 per cent of state-controlled companies.
Revealingly, Mr Strauss-Kahn's thumbnail definition of today's strategic
sectors does not apply to huge chunks of current French state industry such
as cars, steel, insurance and banking. But he is not naive enough to
broadcast in advance which privatisations will follow the partial sales that
have already been made at Elf, Total's larger state-controlled rival, and at
Credit Local de France, a local authority bank.
Yet the case of Renault, the symbol of French industrial policy, does
illustrate his general strategy. Here Mr Strauss-Kahn favours the
state-owned carmaker's alliance with Volvo, the Swedish car group, because
the basic business of carmaking can no longer be said to be strategic. But
that does not mean that the government has completely lost interest.
Instead, its interest has become more selective, shifting from basic
manufacturing to electronic components, for example, he says.
The overall impression is of a pragmatic, sometimes opportunistic approach
to industrial issues. Successful or not, the image of French industry policy
embodied by the eloquent Mr Strauss-Kahn is very different from that of 10
years ago. The aim used to be to keep inefficient manufacturers alive;
today, Mr Strauss-Kahn sees his job as nudging the public sector into a
high-technology world, in competitive shape.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1949 Born Neuilly-sur-Seine. Educated Lycee de Monaco and Lycee Carnot,
Paris. University of Paris X-Nanterre, bachelor of law; diploma from
Ecole des Hautes Etude Commerciales.
1981 Professor at University of Paris X-Nanterre.
1984 Deputy planning commissioner. 1986Socialist member of parliament,
Haute-Savoie.
1988 Member of parliament, Val d'Oise. President of parliamentary
finance commission. 1991Minister of industry and foreign trade.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920608

