FT921-3687

FT  13 MAR 92 / Cardboard box recycling scheme launched


   By JOHN THORNHILL


FOUR packaging associations yesterday launched a scheme to recycle more of
the 5bn cardboard boxes used in the UK every year.
A company, Repak, has been formed to run the UK Fibreboard Transit Packaging
Recycling System. Repak will issue a recycling symbol to companies
registering with the scheme, which will signify that products are made of
recyclable material and can be collected for reprocessing through existing
recycling facilities.
Mr Bernard Stonestreet, Repak chief executive, said: 'The packaging sector
will pay on a tonnage basis for the licensing of the logo. We are looking at
a cost of about 10p per tonne.'
The money raised will cover the administration of the scheme and pay for
further research and development. Almost half the 2m tonnes of fibreboard
packaging used in the UK is already recycled.
The scheme aims to encourage an even greater proportion of recycling through
co-operation in manufacturing, retailing and waste collection.
Many retailers welcomed the scheme, but some feared it might cut across
profitable recycling agreements that they had established individually.
The development of the Repak system mirrors environmental initiatives in
many other European Community countries and its backers believe that
exported products marked with the triangular symbol will be accepted for
recycling in other countries at no extra cost.
The sponsoring associations fear, however, that dumping of excess packaging
on UK markets by other European countries, in particular Germany, may wreck
the economics of recycling schemes in the UK.
The government has complained to the European Commission about the threat,
but its representations are believed to have been met with a cool response.
The commission is drawing up a packaging waste directive, due to be released
later this year.
The Repak scheme will initially cover only transport packaging, but the aim
is to extend it to sales packaging.
The four associations setting up the scheme are the British Fibreboard
Packaging Association, the British Paper and Board Industry Federation, the
British Waste Paper Association and the Independent Waste Paper Processors'
Association.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920313

