FT921-11956

FT  29 JAN 92 / E Europeans pessimistic about effect of reform


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   BRUSSELS


MOST east Europeans are dissatisfied with democratic and living standards in
their countries, according to a poll conducted last autumn and published
yesterday on behalf of the European Community. It also shows that a
significant minority want to move to western Europe.
Only in Lithuania did a majority pronounce themselves satisfied with their
democracy. In all, 10,000 people in 10 states or regions - Albania, Romania,
Bulgaria, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland and
European Russia - were canvassed in the joint poll by Eurobarometer, the
Commission's opinion research division, and Gallup of the UK. Publication
has been delayed by the need to check methods in Albania and Romania.
Such negative opinions in these fledgling democracies - compounded by
general pessimism about the chances of rapid economic improvement in 1992 -
are hardly surprising. But the most sensitive aspect of this poll for
western Europe, where right-wing groups are exploiting fears of widespread
immigration, is the possible knock-on effect on potential emigration.
Three out of 10 (30 per cent) east Europeans interviewed said they had
considered going to work in western Europe, while only one in four (23 per
cent) European Russians said they had had similar thoughts. But when people
were asked to consider 'the likelihood of such a decision (to emigrate)
becoming a reality', the proportion of those who said they 'intend
definitely' to move west dropped to 3 per cent in eastern Europe, and less
than 1 per cent in European Russia.
EC officials say the combined figure for those 'definitely' or 'probably'
intending to move west was 8 per cent of the region's population, or 13m
people. But an official strongly cautioned that this was 'only a measure of
the psychological potential for migration, not an indication of the number
of people with suitcases packed'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920129

