FT921-592

FT  28 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Last bank signs terms of Brent Walker
restructure


   By MAGGIE URRY


BRENT WALKER's financial restructuring was all but completed yesterday when
the last bank to agree to the terms signed the documents. 'It would take an
act of God to stop it now,' an official close to the negotiations said.
A meeting has been scheduled for Monday at Standard Chartered, the bank
leading the negotiations, to put final signatures to the deal.
A way has been found round the condition to the refinancing that an
agreement should be reached with Grand Metropolitan, the leisure group,
concerning the Pounds 50m Brent Walker owes it.
The restructuring plan, the UK's largest, involves the conversion of Pounds
250m of debt into shares, giving the banks more than half the company's
equity.
It has involved, bankers say, some unprecedented moves, such as the
inclusion of a bank which is in administration, British & Commonwealth
Merchant Bank is one of the lenders in the syndicate which lent for the
purchase of the William Hill betting shop chain.
The conclusion of the refinancing will end more than 18 months of
negotiations between Brent Walker, which runs a large public house estate as
well as owning William Hill, and its 60 main banks. During the period, when
Brent Walker frequently seemed to be on the point of receivership, the
amount of debt involved has risen as interest has been rolled up into the
capital amount and now totals Pounds 1.65bn.
The 47 banks which lent directly to Brent Walker are understood to have
signed by Thursday, while the 30 banks in the William Hill syndicate, of
which 17 are also in the group of 47, completed signing yesterday. One bank
had apparently raised last minute objections but signed yesterday afternoon.
It is expected that supplementary listing particulars for the new shares
will be posted today. The new shares should be issued on Monday, when the
company will also be entitled to draw down the bank facilities.
Trading in the new shares is planned to start on Tuesday. Brent Walker
shares, which have been traded throughout the negotiations, were down 1p to
10 1/2 p yesterday.
The refinancing had to be completed by Tuesday, the day when shareholder
approval for the restructuring plan, gained at a special meeting last
December, ran out.
The group started negotiations with its banks in autumn 1990 when it
launched a convertible bond issue and the extent of its difficulties were
realised. A standstill agreement with its banks was signed in November 1990
with the aim of refinancing the debt by February last year. However, the
talks dragged on far longer than expected as a series of problems arose.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920328

