FT923-11023

FT  27 JUL 92 / Letter: Rail privatisation so complex, performance will not
be improved


   From Mr DAVID SAWERS


Sir, Sir Bob Reid was understandably non-committal about the government's
proposals for the reorganisation of British Rail (Personal View: 'A
challenge to us all', July 17). But the proposals must represent the most
extraordinary gamble that a government has taken with the organisation of
transport in Britain: an untried division of financial responsibility and
operation is to be combined with an untried form of ownership, and the
decision to adopt this structure has been taken before an analysis of its
feasibility has been undertaken. Now the white paper has been published,
consultants are to start studying the problems of allocating paths on the
railway tracks to competing services and of charging for the use of the
track. If there were no practicable solutions to these problems, government
policy would be unworkable.
Ministers appear to have picked on franchising as a means of getting private
sector involvement in running the railways without surrendering ownership -
because they could not agree how the railways should be sold. They do not
seem to have understood that a franchise requires a long-term commitment,
because entrepreneurs want some security for their efforts: so franchising
is not a preliminary to privatisation but an alternative. They will have to
make up their minds which they want to adopt.
The results of this gamble will not become clear for several years, until
the work that should have preceded the white paper has been completed and
until the demand for franchises has been established. Uncertainty about the
feasibility of the white paper policies implies that radical changes in
policies may have to be made; the white paper may be yet another consigned
to the dustbin.
The tragedy of the government's policies is that an opportunity to move
British Rail wholly into the private sector has been lost; and BR's
management will be devoting most of its efforts to making a complex new
organisation work, rather than to improving the performance of the railways.
The traveller is liable to lose on the deal, and there is some danger that
the taxpayer will also lose, because the government may have to buy the
services of the franchisees with subsidies.
David Sawers,
'Crosby',
10 Seaview Avenue,
Angmering-on-Sea,
Littlehampton,
West Sussex BN16 1PP

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920727

