FT922-4339

FT  05 JUN 92 / A ticket on the road to European growth: Why a German
venture has bought Thomas Cook


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER and CHRISTOPHER PARKES


THOMAS COOK was a man of firm convictions who knew an opportunity when he
saw one.
A firm teetotaller - who began his career in 1841 by running one-shilling
temperance tours around the UK - he had no difficulty in turning a blind eye
to clients under the influence of drink, believing their loutish behaviour
would convert other passengers to more sober habits.
Such pragmatism would surely lead him to acknowledge the logic behind the
Pounds 200m sale of Thomas Cook Group to LTU, Germany's largest charter
airline carrier and the third biggest package tour group.
It is no secret that Thomas Cook has not fulfilled its potential under the
20-year stewardship of Midland Bank. Saddled with more pressing problems
during the past decade - such as the disaster following the purchase of
Crocker Bank in the US and Third World debt - Midland has had little time or
money to devote to expanding the UK's best-known travel agent.
That friendly neglect is about to change and industry analysts suggest that,
lodged in a happier home, Thomas Cook is set for expansion in Europe, where
profit margins are substantially higher than in the UK. Cook's, even with
its 1,600 outlets in 120 countries - 340 of them in Britain - has 'barely
scratched the surface' of the growing travel market in continental Europe,
said one analyst.
Mr Peter Middleton, the chief executive brought in by Midland in 1987 to
revive the company, agrees that expansion is the way forward. 'The
management has a very clear idea of where it wants to go,' he says. Happily,
his plans will now be possible, since LTU is seeking to develop its business
out of Germany. Even more happily for Mr Middleton, he and other senior
management will stay on to direct the expansion. Nor are any group
redundancies planned.
Other suggestions are that Thomas Cook could return to the ranks of larger
tour operators. Cook's refuses to confirm such speculation 'but we cannot
rule something like that out if you look at our ownership,' said a company
spokesman.
The deal could also open the way to Thomas Cook regaining its US businesses
which, under a law forbidding banks to own travel agents, it was forced to
sell when Midland bought Crocker in 1980. Thomas Cook in the US is a
completely separate company, however, and no approaches have been made.
Indeed, Mr David Paresky, chairman of Thomas Cook Travel US, was anxious
yesterday to stress that the sale in no way affected his company.
For LTU, the deal is an important move in its strategy to develop a
full-range, internationally based travel organisation.
The 47 Thomas Cook outlets in Germany will add another five percentage
points to LTU's 16 per cent share of tour operation. Cook's will bring 11
per cent of the Pounds 10bn (Dollars 18bn) UK leisure market and 14 per cent
of the Pounds 3bn UK business travel market.
Thomas Cook's international network of foreign exchange bureaux and the
travellers' cheques business - about 50 per cent of profits - will also
bring a new dimension to LTU's offering and sit nicely with Westdeutsche
Landesbank. Germany's third-largest bank, which owns 34 per cent of LTU,
will hold 10 per cent of Thomas Cook after the sale.
LTU, a private Dusseldorf-based company, is run by former carnival prince Mr
Hans-Joachim Driessen. With 28 aircraft, 18 less than four years old, the
group runs Germany's second-biggest airline after the state carrier
Lufthansa. Half its passengers come from the group, 25 per cent from other
travel agents and the rest from flight-only bookings.
LTU's existing travel agencies, including Jahn, Tjaereborg and Meiers, span
all market sectors. So-called 'incoming agencies' in the US, Caribbean and
Asia complete the chain. The company's Nile cruisers carry customers to see
the Egyptian pyramids and its collection of resort hotels stretch from Sri
Lanka to the Dominican Republic.
Progress has been rapid since the arrival of Mr Driessen. His early ambition
to get into the holiday clubs market was achieved last September when LTU
announced a 50-50 joint venture with France's Club Mediterranee.
Other projects include services such as golfing tours or educational trips
which are showing annual growth of 10 per cent or more in the German market.
According to Dresdner Bank, tourism is set to overtake motor manufacturing
as the world's second-biggest industry. Although it is still a long way
short of this level inside Germany, there are no signs of slackening demand
for aircraft tickets.
Longer term, LTU will come to market. According to the WestLB, the group is
to be converted to a joint stock company later this year in preparation for
flotation in the late 1990s.
Meanwhile, LTU insists that Thomas Cook will be run as a completely separate
entity. 'We like it as it is,' a spokesman said yesterday. Such sentiments
would appeal to the original Mr Cook, whose hard-won success with the
travelling classes eventually brought him the title 'Grand Courier
Extraordinary to the Human Race'.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920605

