FT922-4552

FT  05 JUN 92 / World Trade News: Regulation crossroads for US vehicle
makers - Environment and safety laws are set to lead to higher costs, but
also new opportunities for parts suppliers


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT


US environmental and safety legislation could cost the country's motor
industry an extra Dollars 40bn annually in parts, materials and services by
the late 1990s, aspirant equipment suppliers to the North American market
heard yesterday. The aggregate figure works out at Dollars 5,000 for each
vehicle.
The effect of the changes will spread down to the 'aftermarket', the market
for spare parts, accessories and chemicals supplied to vehicles on the road.
Aftermarket requirements could provide business worth at least another
Dollars 40bn.
'We are living in a world of regulatory activity that is frightening,' Mr
Bob Miller, president of the US Motor Equipment Manufacturers Association,
complained to UK motor component executives at a meeting in Birmingham.
Yet Mr Miller's complaint has its silver lining for actual and potential
suppliers to the US original equipment market and its aftermarket. This was
made clear by Knibb Gormezano and Partners, consultants, in a report* on the
North American motor market, commissioned by the UK Department of Trade and
Industry and presented to the Birmingham meeting.
The report noted that environmental and safety considerations were one of
five background factors affecting both future vehicle production in North
America and 'the aspirations of potential off-shore suppliers'.
As part of the realigning relations between the motor manufacturers and the
component suppliers, much of the work on meeting higher environmental
standards would not be undertaken by the motor manufacturers. 'A large
proportion of the research and development into more
environmentally-friendly vehicles is sub-contracted to outside companies,'
said Knibb Gormezano.
facturers want urgent solutions to the environmental demands, 'any British
manufacturer which has, or could have, products which help meet the demands
will find a multitude of ready ears'.
But this does not suggest that the North American market is suddenly free
and easy. Manufacturers at the Birmingham meeting observed that the US
market takes just as long to penetrate as the Japanese motor market. The
leading British component manufacturers - GKN, Lucas, T&N for example - have
been active in the market for years and have local manufacturing capacity.
Indeed, over the last two years, partly reflecting the relative strength of
the EC and the US motor markets and emphasising the growing globalisation of
the vehicle industry, British motor industry exports to the US declined in
value. In 1990 they were worth Pounds 1.18bn; in 1991 Pounds 772m. By
comparison, exports to the German, French, Belgian and Spanish markets rose.
While the US motor manufacturers may need need new equipment, the recession
has ensured that they will not be producing vast new numbers of vehicles.
Knibb Gormezano observed that the recession had caused an 18 per cent
decline in volume since 1988 and that lost volume was not likely to be fully
recovered until 1995.
The effect of the recession is the second of the factors affecting the
aspirations of potential suppliers. But the mere recital of numbers hides
changes which have been taking place in the US industry, most notably the
loss of share by the Big Three manufacturers - GM, Ford and Chrysler - to
the Japanese car makers. However, the Japanese manufacturers will use the
US, just as they are starting to use the UK, as a springboard for exports.
The third factor affecting new entrants to the market is exchange rate
volatility, not a new phenomenon. But currency shifts such as the 10 per
cent decline in the value of sterling against the dollar in February-March
1992 can skew margin and profit calculations.
A new surge of protectionist sentiment is the fourth factor. Knibb Gormezano
has noticed no shift in commercial purchasing practices because of it and
commented that 'Japan is very much at the centre of the debate'. But
problems could emerge for European companies if US restraint actions
designed to fit one problem are couched in multilateral terms.
Negotiations for a North American Free Trade Agreement between the US,
Canada and Mexico are the fifth factor. This may have the effect of shifting
more labour-intensive production to Mexico, but the main victim of this
process is likely to be the Canadian component sector rather than the
European.
*Opportunities in the North American Automotive Original Equipment and
Aftermarket by Knibb Gormezano and Partners for the Department of Trade and
Industry; May 1992; Department of Trade and Industry, Kingsgate House, 66-74
Victoria Street, London SW1E 6SW; Pounds 375
 ------------------------------------------------------
NORTH AMERICAN CARS AND LIGHT TRUCKS ORIGINAL EQUIPMENT
PURCHASES FROM INDEPENDENT SOURCES
 ------------------------------------------------------
                                   1991    1995*
 ------------------------------------------------------
Value in current dollars bn        29.7    49.8
Of which (per cent)
 Body                                43      42
 Electrical/electronic               21      22
 Engine and cooling                   9      10
 Powertrain and chassis              18      18
 Other                                9       8
 ------------------------------------------------------
Source: Knibb, Gormezano & Partners.
*Estimate
 ------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920605

