FT924-11524

FT  26 OCT 92 / Bundesbank 'aiming for lower rates'


   By QUENTIN PEEL and DAVID WALLER


   BONN, FRANKFURT


THE GERMAN Bundesbank is deliberately manoeuvring interest rates down
because their high level no longer corresponds to the deteriorating economy,
according to a member of its governing council.
Dr Wilhelm Nolling, a Social Democrat who is also president of the Hamburg
state central bank, said 'all the figures show that Germany is moving into a
recession. . . . On this occasion it could be very long-lasting and very
deep'.
The interest rate moves amounted to a clear turning point in German monetary
policy, but the Bundesbank had to move carefully, he said.
In an interview in today's Hamburger Abendblatt newspaper, Dr Nolling said
there were still significant risks for monetary stability. They included
excessive money supply growth, wage negotiations, and a possible sharp
increase in consumer spending before next January's 1 percentage point
increase in VAT.
'Because of this, the Bundesbank must act very carefully, consistently and
credibly in the pace of its interest rate cuts,' he said.
Meanwhile, Mr Otmar Issing, a leading member of the Bundesbank council and
head of research, said at the weekend that western Germany was not in
recession and its economy would grow by 1.5 per cent this year.
However, he acknowledged there had been a 'perceptible slowdown' of economic
growth, mainly because of a lack of demand for German products abroad. This
was leaving an ever-clearer mark on the west German economy.
His comments, made during a lecture in Edinburgh, come as evidence mounts of
stagnation in the whole economy. Retail sales and industrial orders have
fallen for the sixth consecutive month and several large companies have
announced job cuts.
Mr Issing made no comment on the future orientation of monetary policy.
However, a report in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, a leading German
newspaper, on Friday suggested the Bundesbank had given the impression at a
meeting between senior Bundesbank officials and economists of Germany's
larger banks last week that it was committed to further cuts in short-term
interest rates.
In his address in Edinburgh, Mr Issing said that although recent figures
showed real GDP in western Germany in the second quarter dropped by 0.5 per
cent compared with the first quarter, it exceeded GDP for the second quarter
of last year by 'a good 1 per cent'.
Survey, Section III

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921026

