FT922-3943

FT  09 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: DTI probe to centre on offer for
sale of MGN


   By MAGGIE URRY


THE HYPE surrounding the flotation of Mirror Group Newspapers included a
tabloid-style prospectus and a television advertising campaign featuring
Andy Capp, the paper's famous cartoon character.
Yet there was much suspicion about the issue - which valued MGN at Pounds
500m - even at the time. The UK part of the offer was only just subscribed.
The share price was set at 125p, but after closing a bare  1/2 p above that
on the first day of dealings, the shares never regained their sale price
until Robert Maxwell's death. On the day he died, MGN shares stood at 77 1/2
p. Ironically, when they were suspended in December they had just returned
to 125p.
Now Department of Trade and Industry inspectors are to examine the affairs
of MGN, with the offers for sale in May last year the particular subject of
their scrutiny.
The float involved a public offer for sale in the UK of 114m shares, handled
by merchant bank Samuel Montagu and broker Smith New Court. A further 78.5m
shares were offered to investors outside the UK by Salomon Brothers
International. Another 3.9m shares were set aside for an employee share
ownership scheme.
UK public offers are tightly regulated. They involve the publication of
large documents with much small print, closely scrutinised by lawyers and
accountants. Issuing a 'false prospectus' is a serious offence. The DTI
inspectors will have to decide whether investors were misled.
Even before the prospectus was written, there was concern in the City about
the influence Mr Maxwell might exert over the company. He was retaining a 51
per cent stake, and his style had always been to swap assets among his
companies.
To counter such fears, Mr Maxwell promised to appoint independent
non-executives to the MGN board months before the issue. When the prospectus
was published, it described an elaborate 'ring fence' intended to prevent
MGN's cash being siphoned off to private Maxwell companies.
Samuel Montagu, the merchant bank that advised on the UK offer, has said in
the past that it 'went to some lengths in the MGN flotation prospectus to
make sure MGN was an independent entity'. The bank said last night that it
intended to co-operate fully with the DTI inspectors.
Not long after Mr Maxwell's death in November it was discovered that Pounds
45m of MGN cash had been paid to Maxwell private companies. It was to be
invested in gilt-edged stock, but the stock has not been found. The
transaction was not, it seems, approved by the MGN board.
The prospectus assured investors that the MGN pension scheme was in good
shape. In the small print, it said the Mirror scheme had a surplus of Pounds
149.3m. After Mr Maxwell's death it emerged that there was a deficit of more
than twice that.
Further, it has emerged that Mr Maxwell was secretly buying MGN shares
within weeks of the flotation in an attempt to keep the market price up. He
had pledged MGN shares as well as shares in his other quoted company,
Maxwell Communications Corporation, as collateral against loans. As the
share price fell, the collateral was worth less and less.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920609

