FT923-9586

FT  04 AUG 92 / Outrage over Serb 'death camps': President Tudjman
re-elected in Croatia


   By Our Foreign Staff


INTERNATIONAL outrage is growing over allegations of Serb-run death camps in
the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The French government demanded yesterday that humanitarian organisations be
allowed immediate access to camps in northern Bosnia to investigate
allegations of atrocities, following claims at the weekend that thousands of
civilians have been slaughtered, starved or imprisoned.
The US yesterday confirmed such reports when a government spokesman said:
'We know from our own reports that Serbian forces are maintaining what they
call detention centres for Croatians and Moslems. There have been abuses,
torturing and killings taking place in those centres.'
International human rights agencies have feared a systematic slaughter of
Moslems and Croats but no international agency has gained access to the two
camps.
The disclosures came as President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia won 55 per cent
of the votes in the country's first presidential election since gaining
independence from Yugoslavia.
In the parliamentary poll on Sunday, his ruling Croatian Democratic Union
party (HDZ) looked set to gain a majority in the 124-seat parliament, after
winning 41 per cent of the votes.
The public confidence in Mr Tudjman stems from his success at realising the
widespread ambition for gaining international recognition for an independent
Croatian state.
Moreover, after a year of bloodshed and destruction, Croats voted for a
former communist army general who says he won the war and promises to lead
Croatia to prosperity.
Mr Tudjman's critics said the result cast a shadow over the development of
democracy in Croatia. Mr Zarko Puhovski, a professor of political philosophy
at Zagreb University, said he was concerned the vote would be seen as a
mandate for Mr Tudjman and HDZ to rule single-handedly.
'If they have been elected in both presidential and parliamentary elections,
then they will understand the results as the legitimisation of their
authoritarian rule,' said Mr Puhovski. 'This is the worst possible outcome
in terms of democracy. Tudjman has ruled from some kind of court for years.'
The vote for Mr Tudjman and the HDZ also appears unlikely to bring Croatia
closer to a resolution of the Serbian question. Ethnic Serbs, who make up 12
per cent of the 4.5m population, generally abstained from voting - with the
exception of urban Serbs. The 200,000 Serbs living in the UN-patrolled zones
and 200,000 Serbs who fled the war to Serbia did not vote.
They will now remain outside the political process and parliament. In
addition, Mr Tudjman's victory is likely to radicalise further Croatia's
rural Serbs, who waged a nationalist war against Croatian independence after
the HDZ came to power in 1990.
The weak opposition in Croatia has accused Mr Tudjman for losing control of
about one-third of its territory to the Serb militia, or to the UN.
But unlike his political challengers, Mr Tudjman has backed the UN peace
plan. His support means the UN peacekeepers will be allowed to continue
their attempts to demilitarise Serb militia, try to establish local polices
forces which represent the pre-war national make-up, and eventually restore
Croatian control over its borders.
In London, Mr John Major, UK prime minister, ruled out any immediate
prospect of a militarily-imposed solution in the former Yugoslavia, saying
the international community could not be united behind such a policy.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920804

