FT923-15718

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Highly protected market
opened up - The City and the Single Market / Insurance


   By RICHARD LAPPER


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
THE European Commission is poised to complete a liberalisation of the
insurance market more comprehensive than anyone could have imagined when the
single market was first laid out in 1985.
EC finance ministers on Monday agreed the Third Life Assurance Directive
which will largely complete the single insurance market.
The Third Non-Life Insurance Directive was adopted ten days ago. A third
plank, the Insurance Accounts Directive was adopted last year.
The legislation, which governments must implement from 1994 onwards, will
open Europe's most protected markets to more competition and represents a
victory for advocates of a more liberal market, headed by Sir Leon Brittan,
the responsible commissioner.
Under the 'single licence', insurers from any member state will be free to
trade in any other member state, under home country rules.
Advocates of greater deregulation argue that the single licence should
benefit insurers from countries with more liberal rules and encourage a more
liberal framework across Europe as a whole.
Other changes include: Governments cannot demand prior approval of policy
conditions or premium rates or require companies to invest in a particular
category of assets.
This will lead to big changes in Germany and Italy, where private motor
insurance is highly regulated. Under the insurance accounts directive, which
introduces a greater degree of disclosure than hitherto, insurers are
obliged to state the value of their assets at both historic and market cost.
Companies from countries such as Germany, which have traditionally only
stated the value of their assets at historic cost, are most affected by
this.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920701

