FT924-12127

FT  22 OCT 92 / Money Markets: Shortages continue


   By JAMES BLITZ


PERIOD rates in the sterling cash market softened markedly yesterday morning
after the UK prime minister said that there would be a new emphasis on
'going for growth' in economic policy, writes James Blitz.
As the day progressed, however, shorter-dated maturities and 3-month money
firmed because of serious liquidity problems in the discount market.
On Tuesday night, Mr John Major said that a strategy for growth was what the
UK now needed. Dealers interpreted this as a sign that more base rate cuts
are likely: three month money fell to a low of 7 1/2 per cent on the offered
side, while the December short sterling contract rose 41 basis points to a
high of 93.47. At this level, the contract assumes that 3 month money will
be at around 6 1/2 per cent by the end of the year.
However, in the afternoon, continuing shortages in the sterling money market
forced shorter dated rates up again.
The Bank of England's forecast of a Pounds 2.05bn shortage was the latest
example of liquidity problems in the London market. A tax collection period
has started, creating shortages among the commercial banks.
The problem is compounded by the reluctance of dealers to sell bills because
they believe there could be another imminent cut in UK base rates. That
reluctance was characterised by a large figure of Pounds 665m for late
assistance yesterday.
One-month money yesterday closed a full percentage point higher than base
rate on the offered side. One-week money closed at 11 5/8 per cent offered,
while the 'overnight' rate peaked at 25 per cent during the day. One
clearing bank dealer said these market rates make the cost of funding
expensive for the clearers. His bank had met with Bank of England officials
to discuss the problem.
A second bearish influence on rates yesterday was disappointment that the
Bundesbank had conducted a net draining of funds in the German money market
after signalling on Tuesday that there would be a variable rate repurchase
agreement. The Bundesbank accepted all 'repo' bids made at the lowest rate
of 8.75 per cent, 15 basis points below than the previous one.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

921022

