FT924-6461

FT  20 NOV 92 / Plant exploits power of the 'battery hen'


   By ANDREW BAXTER


BRITAIN switched on to poultry power yesterday with the official opening of
what is claimed to be the world's first commercial power station fuelled by
chicken droppings, giving new meaning to the term 'battery hen'.
The Pounds 25m powerplant at Eye in Suffolk generates 12.5MW of electricity
 -enough for 12,500 homes - from poultry litter: a mixture of wood shavings,
straw and poultry droppings that can be burnt at very high temperatures to
produce steam.
The plant will use 130,000 tonnes of poultry litter a year - nearly 9 per
cent of the 1.5m tons produced every year in the UK or enough to fill 25
football fields two metres deep.
According to Fibropower, the London-based company that has built the plant
and developed the technology, chicken power is generating worldwide
interest. Mr Rupert Fraser, finance director, said it could be used wherever
there was sufficient density of poultry droppings.
The fuel used at Eye represents the 'output' of 70m chickens. As the birds
are harvested every few months, that is equivalent to a population of 12.5m
birds at any one time - so the plant's output is produced at the rate of one
watt per chicken.
Mr Fraser emphasised that the plant used poultry litter only from broiler
poultry farms, where the birds live on a bed of deep litter. This provides a
regular fuel source as the chicken farmers have to clear their sheds
frequently, and a consistent fuel because of supermarkets' need for uniform
quality chickens.
Although the process is no more efficient than a similar-sized coal-fired
power station, Fibropower says that replacing a coal power station with
chicken power, along with the associated handling in poultry litter, will
reduce carbon dioxide emissions by two thirds.
The only significant by-product is ash, which will be sold as an
environmentally friendly, nitrogen-free fertiliser.
The Suffolk plant was one of 75 renewable-energy projects approved in 1990
and is the largest to start operating under the non-fossil-fuel obligation
of the 1989 Electricity Act. That obliges the 12 regional electricity
companies to take fixed proportions of the electricity available from
renewable-energy projects.
Eastern Electricity has taken a minority stake in Fibropower, and has
invested Pounds 2m at Eye and a slightly larger 13.5MW chicken powerplant
being built at Glanford, south Humberside, by Fibrogen, a Fibropower sister
company.
The duopoly of National Power and PowerGen must be destroyed if there is to
be a future for independent generators, Dr James Smith, chairman of Eastern
Electricity, the biggest of the regional distribution companies, said
yesterday.
Dr Smith, officially opening the power station fuelled by poultry litter,
said more, similar renewable-energy projects were needed in the future.
Independent generators needed a more competitive market, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921120

