FT923-9661

FT  04 AUG 92 / International Company News: Playmates buys stake in French
toymaker


   By SIMON HOLBERTON and ALICE RAWSTHORN


   HONG KONG, PARIS


PLAYMATES, the Hong Kong manufacturer of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles toys,
will pay HKDollars 235m (USDollars 30m) for a 35.31 per cent stake in Ideal
Loisirs, the leading French toymaker which owns licensing rights to Babar
the Elephant.
The deal marks a big push by Playmates, which makes most of its products in
China, into the European market. Last year, Europe accounted for 12 per cent
of its HKDollars 3bn sales, compared with 84 per cent in the US.
Playmates saw sales fall last year and earnings tumbled from HKDollars
1.22bn in 1990 to HKDollars 882m in 1991. However, thanks to the Turtles, it
still had a war chest of HKDollars 1.5bn to invest in new, more lucrative
concepts.
Mr Thomas Chan, managing director, said the investment in Ideal Loisirs was
part of the group's expansion plans. The deal is expected to be signed in
November.
'Working with Ideal Loisirs will increase our involvement and insight
through to the retail level of the European toy market,' he said.
The acquisition allows Playmates to recoup some of the 25 per cent of the
profits which accrue to French vendors of its Ninja Turtles toys, but it is
also seen as a defensive move.
Playmates is highly dependent on the US market. It is therefore vulnerable
to US policy towards China - in particular the withdrawal of Beijing's 'most
favoured nation' status - as it manufactures most of its products in China.
Ninja Turtles have been one of the world's most successful toy ranges since
the late 1980s. Their success turned Playmates into the world's most
profitable toy group. But the Turtles have fallen victim to the fickle
buying habits of their young consumers. Sales are now falling, and Playmates
has been searching for new toy concepts to replace them.
Babar the Elephant, invented in 1937 by cartoonist Mr Jean de Brunhoff, has
been discreetly updated for the 1990s by his son, Laurent. The Babar revival
has helped Ideal to become France's biggest toy company with profits of
FFr38m (Dollars 7.5m) on sales of FFr850m last year. But Ideal's finances
have come under strain because of its expansion. The group has for some
months been searching for new capital.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920804

