FT923-15701

FT  01 JUL 92 / Arts: The Berlin Ballet's 'Giselle' - Dance


   By CLEMENT CRISP


The Berlin Ballet opened its first London season on Monday night with
Giselle. This is the staging - by Peter Schaufuss, director of the company -
on which I reported during the company's visit last summer to the Edinburgh
Festival. It is a view of this gem of the 1840s which dots every dramatic
'i' and crosses every Romantic 't', and, having quite a few dots and crosses
left over, lavishes them on various other matters in the action. Nothing in
drama or character is unexplained: this is a Giselle for neurotics (or the
very literal-minded) who must know the why and wherefore of every least
moment. The peasantry in Act 1 have all acquired names - though I'd go to
the stake before I could tell Gundolf from Bernward - and behave with the
sort of vivacity and 'Gosh, here I am, on stage in a ballet' romping that I
thought was the province of the rankest amateurs.
It is excessive, and a pity, since Schaufuss has sensible ideas about the
dramatic logic needed to make the old repertory vivid for a new audience.
Lightly sedated, and rid of its puppyish enthusiasms, the production would
make greater sense, though nothing can rival the blessed simplicity, the
let-the-dance-do-its-job clarity, of the Kirov production, which is the
ideal Giselle. Of course, the Kirov version is the fruit of 150 years
uninterrupted life in the theatre. Schaufuss's compensatory procedures - a
Pelion on Ossa of detail - are a means of supporting and sustaining his
novice casts. It is production as substitute for interpretation, and on
these terms it worked helpfully on Monday night when Lisa Cullum and Bart de
Block were the central figures.
Miss Cullum is a young dancer, and her Giselle is a tender, very immature
portrayal. She has a slender physique, and a touchingly vulnerable profile
for the peasant girl, but as yet her reading is a matter of lessons repeated
rather than a masterpiece illuminated. The dance is innocent in style as in
means; the interpretation touches by its gentleness, but it must learn to
explore both the mystery and the steely technical demands that lie at the
heart of the role. (The staging might come in to focus with a great Giselle
at its heart). Bart de Block makes Albrecht altogether too lightweight a
figure; able as a dancer, he is overcome by the drama.
Christine Camillo was a fine and brilliant Queen of the Wilis, and in
subsidiary roles, I salute the bold clarity of the men in the first act
solos - strong,vital dancing - and shall long treasure the assembled
peasantry bent double when the Courland hunting party arrives, avoiding
looking above the gentry's knees as if Princess Bathilde were a visiting
Gorgon. The decision to show Giselle's hands smeared with blood as she stabs
herself is lamentable. Desmond Heeley's designs of trees and misty vistas
are ravishing, and his costuming is uniformly attractive. The cover for
programme and souvenir book - a naked soft-focus lady with arum lilies
burgeoning on her strategic bits - is hilariously inapt except as an
advertisement for a deodorant.
The Berlin Ballet is at the Coliseum until July 4. Programming varies.
Support for the season comes from Montblanc (UK).

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920701

