FT924-6036

FT  24 NOV 92 / Turks offer force to aid Moslems: UK visit by Turkish PM
concentrates on Balkans and Cyprus


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER, Diplomatic Editor


TURKEY is prepared to participate in any military action subject to
international agreement to stop the dismemberment of Bosnia and the
slaughter of hundreds of thousands of Moslems, Mr Suleyman Demirel, the
Turkish prime minister, said in London yesterday.
However, his government would only act in the context of an international
operation decided by the United Nations or the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe.
Mr Demirel, in London for talks with Mr John Major, the British prime
minister, and to address the Confederation of British Industry, said the
Balkan countries would discuss possible joint action to deal with the
Bosnian crisis at talks in Turkey starting tomorrow.
He warned of the risk of the Bosnian conflict spreading to other countries.
If Kosovo, where the majority population is Moslem, but which Belgrade
considers to be an integral part of Serbia, and Macedonia became involved in
the fighting, the risk of still greater bloodshed would be great.
In his speech to the CBI, he urged European business leaders to use Turkey
as a gateway to the newly emerging former Soviet Asian republics and
highlighted the possibility of exploiting natural gas fields in the area,
with plans already under discussion for a possible pipeline to the west.
Mr Demirel refused to be drawn on whether Turkey would extend its agreement,
which expires at the end of the year, allowing US, British and French
aircraft to use Turkish bases for the protection of Kurdish 'safe havens' in
northern Iraq.
Though he gave no indication that the authorisation would not be extended,
he emphasised that Turkey was particularly concerned about the declared
intention of some Kurdish factions to set up an independent Kurdish state.
'Turkey cannot accept such an idea. Iraq should not be divided,' he said,
indicating that it had to be made very clear that any renewal of the
agreement should not be seen as an encouragement of Kurdish separatist
aspirations.
Turning to the Cyprus problem, Mr Demirel refused to distance himself from
Mr Rauf Denktash, the leader of the self-styled Turkish republic of northern
Cyprus, increasingly seen by UN officials as one of the most serious
obstacles to an agreement on a reunification of the island as a federated
state. 'We are giving all the encouragement necessary for a successful
conclusion of the negotiations. But we cannot tell Mr Denktash to surrender.
He definitely represents his people. His elimination from the situation
would create very great problems.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921124

