FT921-496

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London (Private View): A life on Thames' cleansing
tides


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


RON BARNES, freeman of the Company of Watermen and Lightermen of the River
Thames, is a refuse collector. Five times a fortnight he comes upriver from
Erith on the tide to collect the City's rubbish - shredded memos, sandwich
wrappers, champagne bottles, old copies of the FT - from a dock beside
Southwark Bridge.
He is a river dustman who goes to work in a white shirt and tie and polished
black shoes. He feels undressed without them, he said - and I detected the
signs of a strict upbringing.
Crows were scavenging from the decks of the empty barges, Marie, Ursula and
Muriel, that we picked up from the Rainham Marshes dumping depot. There was
a pleasant whiff of decay in the breeze.
This is one of London's cleanest jobs. The tug we were aboard today, the Jim
Higgs, was immaculate. A plastic owl was perched above the wheelhouse to
stop the seagulls messing on the deck. Inside, the brasswork glistened and
there was pile carpet on the floor.
The engineer, a shy young man with a pale face and long blond hair, went
below to start the engine, a six-cylinder, 1,000 hp affair capable of
handling twice the permitted limit of six laden barges of some 350 tonnes
each.
Ron Barnes is first mate. He has worked on the river since the age of 15 and
has seen the number of Thames lightermen (meaning 'unloaders') dwindle from
4,500 to around 200. 'Where I grew up, in Greenwich, everybody derived their
living from the river. But the river is dead compared with when I came on
the water.'
He is looking forward to the freedom of retirement so he can spend more time
on his vegetables, flowers and bees.
'Actually, I should have been a farmer,' he said with a laugh. 'I'm free
enough here. But getting off the boat to go ashore is a pleasure, an immense
pleasure. In fact, in the mornings I have been known to come down that
causeway backwards] No, really it's not that bad.'
I said many office workers would envy his job of driving a boat up and down
the Thames.
'Yeah, but you've come today.' Ron pointed to the patchy blue sky and the
river as flat as glass. 'How would you feel walking down that causeway at
quarter to six in the morning and there's an easterly wind blowing? I don't
want you to burst into tears but it isn't always as pleasant as today.
'Having said that it's better now than it was. I mean, when I was
journey-lightering there were times I'd leave home at 5.20 in the morning
and get home at eight, nine at night, soaking wet. Now we've got radio
telephone, flush toilets. Oh yeah, this is Utopia what we're doing now.'
Our convoy had passed through the Thames Barrier and was reaching the
fringes of the metropolis. The river was deserted but for the occasional
police launch, an orange tender which pulled alongside to pay a social call
and, incongruously, a trawler from Lowestoft netting fish for a survey.
'Eels, flounder and two soles,' the trawler skipper reported over the radio.
It was early afternoon now and I scanned the mish-mash of buildings on
either bank in vain for signs of life. A banner on a warehouse at Wapping
advertised space at Pounds 2.50 a square foot - 'Beat that for value]' it
said. The radio reported a man in the water off Greenwich pier; but it
turned out to be a false alarm.
A few Lowry-like figures appeared far above us as we shot Tower Bridge.
Above Southwark bridge the Jim Higgs turned into the current, his three
maids-of-honour swinging dutifully behind, and moored beside a driftwood
barge containing beer kegs, a black sofa, a mangled domestic freezer and
some dead Christmas trees.
While we waited for high tide, I asked Ron about river families.
'The river may seem vast to you but it's a small area to work. Everybody
knows everybody else. I've been here 43 years and there's nowhere from
Teddington round to the Medway that I haven't been. Even for National
Service you all went in as a group.'
Do you meet socially?
'Lots of 'em do. I don't. If work is your whole life you might want to
socialise with people at work. You won't believe it, but we've got people
here go for their holidays on a narrow boat. Depends what turns you on, I
suppose.'
Ron sets high standards for himself and others. Though scarcely a fervent
trade unionist, he will have no truck with those he regards as blacklegs and
he regrets the loss of solidarity among the watermen.
He cheerfully admitted to 'Victorian standards', inherited from a strict
father, a maker of surgical boots who turned docker. 'Maybe you think I'm
cranky, just old fashioned. But I think I've had a happy life despite my
high standards.'
He makes no secret about how much he depends on his wife, Rita, whom he met
when they were at infant school. He likes her to stay at home, and they do
everything together.
'I don't care how long my life is so long as I go before my wife.'
What does she say to that?
'She says I'm selfish', he laughed.
Their son Mark went to Southampton University (Ron was not sure about
Oxford) and is a research chemist in Vancouver. Debra, their daughter, is an
assistant manager for the National Westminster Bank.
I asked about the hazards of his job.
'I'm not being blase, but I personally don't feel there's any dangerous part
to the job provided you know what you're doing and provided you're
observant.
'There are Do's and Don'ts. All the ropes are made fast the same way so you
can untie in the dark, you can undo them quickly if need be.'
What about falling in?
'We had a chap three weeks ago fell in; it was dark and raining but he had a
lifejacket on. It was a bit of a trauma, but other than that . . .'
If you fall in without a jacket?
'The tide goes at fair lick, so within minutes you're yards away. You can
get trapped under the barges.'
His worst experience was falling into a dock at Tilbury while loading tea.
It was January, between shifts, nobody was about and he had no lifejacket
on.
'The sheet snagged on a tea chest and I went into the water. As I came up I
just missed the barge to grab hold of it, and there I was floundering
around. I was in the water for half an hour. I was very, very lucky to get
out. In fact I didn't think I was going to get out. But it's surprising
where you get the energy from when you have to.'
The tide was nearly full now, the office workers were starting to go home,
and the Jim Higgs moved across the river to the rubbish dock. Her crew
jumped aboard the barges to begin the complicated series of ropetricks
needed to shuffle these 85ft-long monsters, one by one, into a narrow
opening at right-angles to their path. It was like herding stubborn cows on
slippery feet into a milking shed, only more difficult.
We picked up three new barges, Jayne, Susan Anne and Lynda, heavy with
rubbish under their modest deck-covers. Dusk settled, the lights came on and
the river turned a dark Mediterranean blue. A group of bond dealers stared
from The Banker wine bar under Southwark bridge and, on the other shore,
shadows moved behind the tinted windows of the Financial Times head office.
The river dustmen were sailing home in a night painting by Whistler. I found
the skipper, Bill Smith, humming at the wheel; we stared at the office
lights and the distant beacon of Canary Wharf, its ugliness made invisible.
'The river can be quite enchanting at times,' he said.
As we passed under Tower Bridge again, the radio re-opened. Someone had
jumped from London Bridge, it said, and there were two witnesses. It seemed
pointless to look for a body in that black water. 'Jumpers', as the police
call these suicides, occur all year round but are more common at Christmas.
Bill said a body had been found the day before, strangled but not dead.
Jumpers like Westminster Bridge best, apparently, because it is the lowest.
Starving by now, I went below. Ron cooked up a high tea of crumpets,
mushroom soup and Spam sandwiches. The crew explained how, after 450 years,
the Company of Watermen and Lightermen, unusually among the London guilds,
still organised apprenticeships and issued licences.
Many watermen are still involved in rowing, as fundraisers for charity,
organisers of the annual wooden boats regatta, or as coaches for sculls and
racing eights.
We had been afloat for more than seven hours when the depot at Rainham
Marshes loomed. Ron had taken the wheel. He swung the barges round to face
the tide, running fast down to the sea, spurred the Jim Higgs into the gap
between the jetty and the shore and, at a crucial moment, ordered the three
barges to be let go.
Jayne, Susan Anne and Lynda seemed to shoot ahead but then suddenly lost
momentum and glided noiselessly to a halt as if they had nosed out their own
berths. The tug slid backwards, gave Lynda a final shove to straighten her
up, and made off for the south shore. The crew parted with a few words and
hurried away into the night.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920328

