FT924-11271

FT  27 OCT 92 / HK nervous as Chinese stick to tough line


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


HONG KONG'S influential financial community has reacted nervously to the war
of words between China's rulers and Mr Chris Patten, the colony's governor,
about his plans for Hong Kong's political development.
Share prices on the Hong Kong stock exchange ended sharply lower yesterday,
with the Hang Seng Index closing 200.07 points, or 3.19 per cent, down at
6,062.47. The fall reversed much of the gains made during the past two
weeks.
Prices regained some ground in initial trading early today, however, as
bargain hunting helped lifted the index 73.97 points to 6,136.44 in the
first 20 minutes of trade.
Mr Patten's plans for greater democracy, which were unveiled on October 7,
have so far gained widespread public support. But there was evidence
yesterday that the financial community was either opposed to his plans or
felt they had little chance of success in the face of concerted opposition
from Beijing.
One senior merchant banker said: 'He has not been here long enough to
understand the nuances in Hong Kong. I think the governor has painted
himself into a corner and is overestimating public opinion.'
China has said it will reverse any changes Mr Patten makes to Hong Kong's
political structure if he fails to agree them first with Beijing.
It has also put an effective halt to the colony's plans to build a
multi-billion dollar airport and related projects by threatening to renege
on loans raised which span 1997 and to dishonour contracts.
Mr Anthony Belligan, of Peregrine Securities, said: 'Mr Patten has to make
up his mind whether he wants to go for more democracy at the expense of the
airport. I think the financial community would rather see bricks and mortar
rather than promises about political development which might be changed in
the future.'
Investor confidence is one of the most fragile qualities in Hong Kong and
has, in the past, been temporarily shattered by rows between London and
Beijing.
Maintenance of confidence is crucial to the success of Mr Patten's plans.
Many analysts also doubted whether Mr Patten could retain public support if
the economic outlook became clouded. Analysts said that if Hong Kong's
people faced the choice of more democracy and an uncertain future, or less
democracy but the ability to make money they would chose the latter.
'This is definitely the end game being played out now,' said one head of
research at a local brokerage.
'China wants to emasculate Mr Patten. In a way, it is a compliment to the
amount of public support he has been able to amass.'
China's hardline position was reinforced yesterday by Premier Li Peng, who
repeated Beijing's opposition to Mr Patten's plans. Li, in a meeting with a
British trade delegation, threw his own political weight behind the Chinese
threats.
During Mr Patten's visit last week, no meeting was arranged with Li,
effectively a sharp diplomatic snub.
An aide to the governor said last night that Mr Patten intended to push
ahead with his proposals. In the absence of any credible alternatives from
China the proposals would be put to the local legislature in the New Year.
Editorial comment, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921027

