FT921-15246

FT  11 JAN 92 / Appointments: The arts in Scotland


Five years ago the then secretary and head of information at BBC Scotland
was in the thick of it. Fellow Scot Alasdair Milne had just been fired as
BBC director general and the police had raided BBC Glasgow to take away
tapes of the Secret Society television series. Now John McCormick (above
left) is about to take over as Controller of BBC Scotland. He has
demonstrated his sure political touch; but he still faces considerable
challenges.
The general election campaign could be particularly bitter in Scotland,
especially in the wake of British Steel's decision to close Ravenscraig;
McCormick will also somehow have to reconcile the growing swell in favour of
devolution with the needs of the rather centralised BBC bureaucracy.
Another challenge is to increase the audience for Radio Scotland, the local
equivalent of Radio 4, which gets between 10 and 13 per cent of the Scottish
audience. 'I am looking forward to leading BBC Scotland through this
challenging period,' is how he puts it.
At least in the battle for his share of the Corporation's scarce resources,
the Ayrshire-born executive starts with an enormous advantage. As the
secretary of the BBC in London for the past four years, he has an intimate
knowledge of all the Corporation's secrets.
Bill Brown, chairman of Scottish Television, is to become chairman of the
Scottish Arts Council from April 1. He succeeds Professor Sir Alan Peacock,
the economist, in the unpaid, part-time post.
Brown, 62, was managing director of Scottish Television for 24 years to 1990
where he was considered an astute businessman. He then handed over to Gus
Macdonald who achieved a coup last year by winning renewal of the franchise
with a bid to the Independent Television Commission of only Pounds 2,000.
The Scottish Arts Council is an offshoot of the Arts Council of Great
Britain but has considerable autonomy, with most decisions being taken in
Scotland by the council - which Brown will chair. He will benefit from an
unusually generous 13.7 per cent boost in next year's Arts Council spending,
taking the budget to Pounds 22m. But he will have to wrestle with the
financial problems of institutions such as Scottish Opera and the Royal
Scottish National Orchestra.
Brown, who lives in Glasgow, has been on the boards of Scottish Opera and of
the orchestra and is a trustee of the National Museums of Scotland. He is
chairman of Scottish Amicable Life Assurance and a director of Sunrise
Television.

The Financial Times


London Page 13 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted).

920111

