FT922-7234

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (14): 'A job to make anyone mature'
 -Managing bad debts


   By DAVID BARCHARD


TIMES MAY be hard for British companies, but one banker, Mr Bernard
Bradford, deputy head of advances at National Westminster, the second
largest UK bank, has never had so much work to do.
'This is my third recession and it is the worst in living memory. I don't
plan to see a fourth recession myself,' says Mr Bradford, at the offices in
the King's Cross district of London where he and a staff of around 200,
handle cases of customers who have become insolvent.
Mr Bradford will not give any numbers, but he concedes that there has been a
massive increase in the last three years in the number of cases in his
charge. Last year, NatWest chalked up Pounds 1.4bn of bad debts on its
commercial and personal lending in the UK, up from Pounds 655m in 1990.
Tottering corporate giants are handled by a small team in the 32-storey
NatWest Tower headquarters in the City of London, headed till last month by
Mr Derek Plummer. Other cases go on to be handled by Mr Bradford and the
teams under him at King's Cross and in other parts of the country.
'My portfolio is not 100 per cent provided for,' he explains, 'because we
have quite a lot of cases in which there is security against the lending.'
There are usually two things which need to be done immediately: first, find
out more about the company concerned and how it got into trouble and
secondly build up a better relationship between bank and manager.
'The chances are that relations between a branch manager and the company are
not at their best by the time a company comes our way, so we do try to
create a new relationship.'
Creating a good working relationship is very important. Mr Bradford's staff
are told that they must be sympathetic and humane at all times, and that
they must never forget that they are dealing with people in trouble. Some
staff handling troubled companies are still in their twenties,but: 'A spell
working with us makes anyone mature fast.'
Credit-watch staff must be trained to cope with all sorts of emotional
situations, ranging from aggression and abuse to heart-rending tears. There
is emphasis on finding innovative solutions. NatWest does not want staff to
emerge from credit-watch work too scared by what they have seen ever to lend
another penny.
On the other hand, it does not strive to keep companies alive which are not
truly viable. 'We do not intend to defer the collapse of a company if it is
inevitable,' says Mr Bradford.
The success rate is fairly high. Only about one third of the companies in
trouble end up in liquidation. Identifying the ones with a reasonable
prospect of recovery depends on understanding why they have gone wrong.
'You tend to find that companies about to get into difficulties have little
understanding of how serious their position is,' says Mr Plummer.
'They always believe that, with just a little more help with their cash
flow, they will get through their troubles.'
Signs of impending trouble which may trigger a branch manager or regional
director to take action and put a company on credit watch include: pressure
on a company's overdraft; a sudden fall in its turnover; a flood of status
enquiries about the customer; and repeated customer requests to stop payment
on cheques. Any of these will get a company's account watched closely from
an early stage in its troubles.
The average company will have debts of around Pounds 500,000. Finding out
just how it came to be unable to meet its commitments is then NatWest's
second main task.
When the accountants go in to a company in trouble, they almost always find
that its records are in a mess. 'It is a pretty harsh view to take, but at
the root of every company's troubles is management failure,' says Mr
Bradford.
At this point the bank assesses its options, ranging from immediate closure
to a debt into equity conversion. A support and monitoring operation, which
may last for up to two or three years, will get under way in hopeful cases.
'We think very carefully about what the bank is doing. We don't want to
increase its exposure, but it is in our mutual interest for our customers'
businesses to prosper,' says Mr Bradford.
Is the UK recession, and the flood of insolvent companies created by it,
ending? 'There have been some straws in the wind in the last two months. The
receivership figures for the first quarter of the year were down. Perhaps we
are at last starting to turn the corner.'

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920520

