FT922-13497

FT  11 APR 92 / Letter: Short-term corporate planning that leaves a lot to
be desired


   From Mr ALAN MACDOUGALL


Sir, The FT/Mori survey ('Smith's budget fails to impress industry chiefs',
April 8) was a profoundly depressing example of short-termism by companies.
If a third of the survey's respondents had been considering cutting back on
investment plans if Labour had won the election, then their corporate
planning leaves a lot to be desired.
Companies constantly bemoan the City and financial institutions for their
short-termism. What are these companies doing if not the same?
Was not the British public told by Conservative governments of the 1980s
that industrialists were striving to be competitive and build up their
businesses over the long-term so as to increase profits and rewards to
shareholders?
Our pension fund clients would be seriously concerned about the companies in
your survey having intended to commit collective suicide by abandoning
attempts to be competitive with other businesses. That is what cut-ting
capital expenditure implies.
Our pension fund clients would be further astounded to realise that
corporate strategy is completely abandoned in the face of short-term
political expediency rather than responsive to the opportunities of
long-term sustainable growth in their markets.
Companies desperate to cut their workforces, dividends and capital
expenditure in the event of a Labour government having been elected, cannot
have been paying attention to the manifestos of either of the three main
parties, or to that other determinant of democracy in Britain - the
electorate.
This is perhaps not surprising if one recalls that the attitude of company
boards to their own shareholders is not one of vibrant account-ability.
Let us hope that this short-termism does not prevail.
Alan MacDougall,
joint managing director,
Pensions & Investment
Research Consultants,
Challoner House,
19-21 Clerkenwell Close,
London EC1R 0AA

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920411

