FT923-6553

FT  24 AUG 92 / S Korea and China agree new link


   By YVONNE PRESTON and REUTER


   TAIPEI


SOUTH KOREA and China established diplomatic ties early this morning after
more than four decades of cold war hostility. The agreement was signed by
South Korean Foreign Minister Lee Sang-ock and his Chinese counterpart, Qian
Qichen, in Beijing.
The ceremony was broadcast on Chinese state television, which announced that
South Korean President Roh Tae-woo would make an official visit to China
soon. South Korea had agreed to recognise Beijing as the only government of
China, severing its close ties with Taiwan, it added.
Normalisation between the two former enemies has been on the cards for some
time, with the rapid expansion of economic ties. Total trade volume reached
Dollars 5.8bn (Pounds 3bn) last year and is forecast to exceed Dollars 10bn
for 1992, making South Korea China's fourth biggest trading partner after
Hong Kong, the US and Japan.
Last year both countries signed an agreement giving each other
'most-favoured-nation' status for investment and business ventures. South
Korean investment topped Dollars 130m in 1991, quadrupling that of 1990.
This year the two countries agreed to exchange Bank of China and Korean
Exchange Bank offices in each other's capitals.
North Korea is certain to be unhappy at the diplomatic link-up between its
northerly neighbour and China. China has backed the North since partition of
the peninsula after the second world war, while the US was patron to the
South during the cold war.
Mr Lee made no comment on arrival at Beijing but last May he told a seminar
in Seoul that relations between China and South Korea would act as a
'catalyst for change'. Diplomatic normalisation would bring North Korea out
of its isolation, he said.
'Lingering of the cold war on the Korean peninsula and North Korea's
continued isolation certainly are not desirable for South Korea, North Korea
and China,' Mr Lee said. China's interest in normalisation lies in South
Korean investment and trade.
Taiwan, shrugging off its worst diplomatic setback in a decade, said its
foreign policy would not change following South Korea's switch of diplomatic
recognition from Taipei to Beijing, Reuter adds from Taipei.
Government leaders said the island would retain its claim of sovereignty
over China and continue seeking to build unofficial ties with countries that
recognise Beijing.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920824

