FT922-4520

FT  05 JUN 92 / Only one way forward


   By JOE ROGALY


Europe may test Mr John Major as it did Mrs Margaret Thatcher before him. It
tested her to destruction. He has so far demonstrated that he is made of
more supple material. Now, suddenly, he is seen to be potentially
vulnerable, the leader of a divided party, a prime minister whose authority
rests on a slender parliamentary majority, a head of government who is
waiting for events to come to his rescue.
The awkward moment may pass. Mr Major's European fellow-politicians are
doing their best to arrange a neat fix to circumvent Wednesday's negative
vote by the obstinate Danes. They made a start in Oslo yesterday, when the
assembled EC foreign ministers started to talk about an arrangement whereby
the other 11 members go ahead on their own, in the hope that the Danish
electorate will eventually reverse its vote. 'Europe has always proceeded by
a series of hiccups and this is one of them,' said the UK foreign secretary,
Mr Douglas Hurd. His would have been the voice of the soothing optimist
during the Great Plague.
The prime minister could find himself choking on this particular hiccup. Any
fix, however neat, is likely to involve some juridical sleight-of-hand, to
get around the unanimity provisions of the Treaty of Rome. The result would
rightly be regarded as a stitch-up, a dubious deal. That would further
trouble Conservative backbenchers. It would certainly confirm the popular
suspicion that EC matters are arranged in back rooms. Article A of the
Maastricht Treaty refers to decisions being taken 'as closely as possible to
the citizen'. This would be exposed as a sham.
There is only one honest way forward. Maastricht must be reviewed, in spite
of the Danish government's abandonment of its request for a renegotiation.
The revised treaty's terms should be put to a popular vote. This would be
tricky. A new inter-governmental conference would be unpredictable. There
would be strong pressure to increase the powers of the European Commission,
at the expense of the Europe des patries structure so skilfully bargained
for by Mr Major. That would blow the Tory party wide open.
Alternatively, the UK opposition parties could nearly unite it by assaulting
the prime minister's entire European strategy. All they have to do is demand
a referendum.
As it happens, the Labour party is ill-placed to do this. Mr Neil Kinnock is
a lame-duck leader who has rejected a referendum. On July 18 he will be
replaced by Mr John Smith, a dedicated pro-European and a man not easily
persuaded to make grandstand plays. Yet the case in favour of a British
consultation is stronger than it was before the Danish voters indicated by a
slender majority that their opinion is different from the one urged upon
them by their politicians and their media. In April it did not seem to
matter that there was no popular debate about the Maastricht treaty during
the British election campaign, since all parties supported it. Now there is
to be a referendum in France. The Irish are going ahead with their ballot.
Such pan-European polling evidence as exists shows no widespread popular
enthusiasm for the treaty.
We who have argued that Maastricht represents a defeat for the proponents of
a centralised government of a United States of Europe are mere politicians
and commentators. Wider electorates, as the Danes have shown, may see
matters differently. The treaty itself repeatedly refers to this or that new
or extended power of the appointed commission; the weasel words which,
largely at Britain's insistence, trim these back have to be sought for in
the small print. A referendum would oblige the government to produce a clear
exposition of what the various clauses mean, something not yet vouchsafed to
MPs, let alone the country.
Those who dream of a single Europe, placed in counterpoise to the United
States, fear a referendum. This is not democratic thinking, nor would an
imposed solution constitute a sound foundation for a step towards a
superstate. You can never be sure, but the chances are that the Irish and
the French will vote yes, and that the British, given the chance, would
follow suit. That would legitimise the European union in a way that can
never be achieved by meetings of heads of government, however democratically
elected they may be.
All this could come to dominate the second half of 1992, when Britain has
the EC presidency. Mr Major has only had a couple of days in which to
reflect upon this. So far he has stonewalled, with some success. His present
strategy is to carry on with talks about enlargement of the EC, completion
of the single market, bargaining over the Community budget and all the rest
of it, in the hope that time will untie the Danish knot. Perhaps it will.
But the prime minister knows that he cannot bank on it.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920605

