FT922-4143

FT  06 JUN 92 / Pressure put on ministers over London's hospitals


   By ALAN PIKE


   THE FUTURE of London's hospitals


one of the most sensitive post-election health issues to face the government
 -began exerting political strain on ministers yesterday.
Demands by Labour MPs for a ministerial statement on financial difficiulties
in London's health service were ignored in the Commons but are likely to be
renewed next week.
There is broad acceptance that central London is over-provided with hospital
beds, and a government inquiry under Sir Bernard Tomlinson is examining
health provision in the capital.
The four London health regions received relatively generous financial
settlements this year - Pounds 417m more than their precise entitlement - in
the hope of buying stability during the Tomlinson inquiry. Nevertheless,
some hospitals and health authorities face serious financial pressures.
Bloomsbury and Islington district health authority is seeking to contain a
projected Pounds 19m overspend and 200 jobs may be at risk. The Middlesex
and University College teaching hospitals may be affected, while the
Elizabeth Garrett Anderson women's hospital is threatened with closure.
The financial difficulties of central London teaching hospitals are
intensified by the new contract-based system of funding health care. Health
authorities in the home counties are treating more patients locally rather
than sending them to London hospitals, which are relatively expensive.
Sir Bernard is giving Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, regular
briefings but he is unlikely to report before the autumn. The health
department has denied reports that Mrs Bottomley had asked Sir Bernard to
report by August.
Later this month, the influential King's Fund health policy think tank will
publish the results of its own investigation into health provision in
London, and ministers intend to take that into account.
Mrs Bottomley said yesterday it would be 'for ministers to take the
difficult decisions'. They would be made in the best interests of the health
service and patients in London and the rest of the country.
The decisions are likely to prove extremely difficult. There is considerable
agreement in the NHS that London has excessive teaching hospital provision
and relatively poor local services in some parts of the city, but a decision
to close world-famous institutions would meet strong resistance.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920606

