FT921-395

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (24):
Heavyweights in the ring - The brokers seek wider horizons


   By DAVID BARCHARD


ON a typical morning at Lloyd's, underwriters sit on their clusters of
benches, quaintly known as boxes, waiting for brokers to arrive with new
business or details of claims.
An outside observer might be forgiven for thinking that most of the work of
keeping the market going rests in the hands of its 220 brokers. This
perception is not quite right. Brokers are still the main distribution
outlet at Lloyd's, closely bound up with the fortunes of the market, but
they are by no means all-important as they once were.
Lloyd's offers face-to-face contacts and the chance to spread risk, and
occasionally the opportunity for brokers to get together against a client
who is trying to play the field. In general, however, brokers describe their
business as savagely competitive, even though they see themselves as
offering their clients a distinctive service in much the same way that
company lawyers or accountants do.
'The selection of the right broker is very important for a client. A good
broker can get a better rate on the same risk than a bad broker would get,'
says Mr Alan Colls of brokers Nicholson Colls. Brokering at Lloyd's in the
1990s, however, is very different from what it was a decade or two ago when
brokers would queue for hours for small amounts of business.
One change is that the two biggest brokers - Sedgwick and Willis Faber  -
have somewhat outgrown Lloyd's. Both Sedgwick and Willis Faber are among the
biggest brokers in the world, along with others such as Alexander Howden and
CT Bowring, which are now offshoots of big international brokers, Alexander
& Alexander and Marsh McLennan.
Most recently, Willis Faber, long regarded as the most blue-blooded and
traditionalist broker on the exchange, followed suit by merging its
operations with Corroon & Black, so forming Willis Corroon.
Since the early 1980s, these bigger brokers have become less dependent on
the Lloyd's market. After the 1982 Lloyd's Act, they were forced to divest
control of the managing agencies which administer underwriting syndicates,
on the grounds that there was a conflict of interest as long as they held
the roles of both insurer and broker, since brokers act for the client being
assured.
That said, the links of the large brokers with Lloyd's remain extremely
intimate, and their top executives are usually to be found in prominent
places in the governance of the Lloyd's market.
For example, Mr Philip Wroughton, the chairman of CT Bowring, is still a
member of the Lloyd's Council, while Mr David Rowland, the chairman of
Sedgwick, was given the job of heading the Task Force which last year
conducted a searching examination of the market's business structure.
'Lloyd's is still at the centre of the wheel in much of the international
insurance market,' says Mr Sax Riley, managing director of Sedgwicks. 'We
have never yet found suitable alternatives.'
In some sectors, however, London business is dwarfed by the American market.
The biggest four brokers earn less than 15 per cent of their total
commission income from business placed at Lloyd's. They get over 50 per cent
from retail operations in the US.
They are also vital to Lloyd's. The 20 largest brokers' firms produce about
70 per cent of the Dollars 25bn premiums placed in London each year.
'Lloyd's is very important to us, but it is far from the only place in the
world where we do business,' says Mr Peter Tritton of Alexander & Howden.
'Where Lloyd's is important is that it is a leader. About two thirds of the
London market is led by Lloyd's and respect for Lloyd's is very high. If
Lloyd's is willing to underwrite something, others will follow in Paris and
Zurich.' At the other end of the market, there are other changes. Though new
broker firms are regularly set up, often by brokers working with the larger
houses who want to strike out on their own, the number of firms seems to be
contracting as a result of mergers. There are about 60 fewer brokers at
Lloyds today than there were in the late 1980s.
Many of these are established with the intention of becoming niche-players
in their chosen sector. The stronger smaller brokers are beginning to
diversify. Steel Burrill Jones started life as a specialist marine
reinsurance broker in the late 1970s, for example, but it has latterly
expanded into UK retail and wholesale business. This now makes up about two
thirds of its total business.
'The cost of doing business is absolutely critical in London these days and
as a result you are getting new groupings of brokers and alliances in an
attempt to get sales and business in larger units,' says Mr Tritton.
He points out that brokers do all the preparatory work on the risk for a
particular deal and then present it ready-made to underwriters.
As the interests of brokers have changed, Lloyd's agents have shown concern
about their lack of control over distribution. In the late 1980s, when the
volume of business being brought to the market was declining, several
leading agencies began launching initiatives to win business for themselves,
especially in personal lines business where direct marketing is becoming
steadily more widespread in the rest of the insurance industry.
At the same time, the rules for service companies are being relaxed. These
are owned by the Lloyd's agencies but have their offices outside the Lloyd's
building, generally but not always close to the market.
In the UK, the Octavian group has now set up companies in Leeds and the
Merrett Group has a Birmingham office. At least three agencies, AJ Archer,
Sturge, and Cater Allen, have set up European operations, though they seem
so far to be underwriting relatively small quantities of business.
The most radical step so far has been taken by Hayter Brockbank, one of the
fastest growing agencies, which announced that it would set up a direct
motor insurer to sell motor insurance over the telephone to the general
public.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920330

