FT923-9805

FT  03 AUG 92 / German Bonds: Selling again lifts average yields


   By DAVID WALLER


IT COULD be that now is a very good time to buy German bunds.
After all, it may be that the Bundesbank's move to increase the discount
rate just over a fortnight ago - by 0.75 of a percentage point to 8.75 per
cent - represented the high point in the Bundesbank's battle against
inflation.
Following good inflation data last week, which should mean that July's
annual figure falls to 3.3 per cent, the question is: are the effects of the
Bundesbank's policies now being felt?
All that is needed, if this is the case, is a couple of months of declining
growth in M3 money supply. Then the bank will be free to start cutting rates
again . . . and bund yields will tumble.
Unfortunately for the optimists, M3 grew at an annualised 8.7 per cent in
June and a revised 8.8 per cent in May - inconveniently far from the
Bundesbank's target of 3.5 per cent to 5.5 per cent. Money supply growth was
cited as the main reason for the interest rate rise on July 16, and the
target seems unlikely to be dropped in spite of attempts to discredit the
bank's logic in relying on such an indicator.
When rates were increased investors sold decisively, and they sold again
last week when Mr Helmut Schlesinger, Bundesbank president commented that
there was no imminent prospect of an interest rate cut.
Since July 16, average bund yields have climbed from 8.32 per cent to just
short of 8.4 per cent. The yield on the 10-year-benchmark bund has climbed
to 8.15 per cent, up from about 8 per over the last month.
This contrasts markedly with investors' attitudes to the Bundesbank's
December rate increase. This prompted heavy buying, with average yields
tumbling to 7.97 per cent by the third week of January, compared with 8.6
per cent at the end of November.
Then, investors believed interest rates had peaked. In the event, they had
not - at least not in the case of the discount rate. Now, investors seem
less willing to take risks unsupported by evidence of a change in policy.
This is perhaps not surprising, given the attractions of the shorter end of
the yield curve: why suffer the opportunity cost of investing in
10-year-bunds when the return on bunds with one-year maturity is 9.19 per
cent?
Moreover, the 3.3 per cent annual inflation figure expected for July is
attributable less to a fall in underlying inflationary pressures than to
'one-off' factors: the impact of the higher D-Mark on fuel prices; the
removal of the effect of last year's energy tax from the comparable figures,
and sharply lower prices for fruit and vegetables as a result of a bumper
crop this year.
Thus this figure alone is not going to induce a relaxation of policy,
especially if the money supply figures do not show a dramatic improvement.
The best many investors are hoping for this year is no change in monetary
policy. It remains possible that the Lombard rate will also have to be
increased during the course of the next few months.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920803

