FT922-7289

FT  19 MAY 92 / Partners pull back from the brink: Germany's social contract
is intact despite a bruising pay round and unification costs


   By QUENTIN PEEL and CHRISTOPHER PARKES


The gasp of relief that reverberated across Germany yesterday morning was
almost audible. Against all the odds, and literally at a few minutes to
midnight, trade union leaders and employers in the mighty engineering
industry stepped back from the brink of outright conflict and agreed a new
pay deal.
Two days of painstaking, snail's pace negotiations, much of it behind closed
doors between just two key negotiators, and for most of the time looking
condemned to failure, brought an agreement for Germany's 4m engineering
workers which both sides can present as a sensible compromise.
It is below 6 per cent, close enough to the 5.4 per cent awarded to public
sector workers 10 days ago. It is also a 21-month deal, buying the employers
sorely needed breathing space at a time of growing cost pressures and
economic uncertainty.
Just when everything looked gloomy, after a bruising 11-day public sector
strike, public squabbling within the ranks of the government, the economy
slowing and the budget deficit bloated, and a worrying growth in support for
the extreme right in the polls, Germany's famed social contract held intact
and a deal was done. The Frankfurt stock exchange took the cue with a leap
of 34.36 points (almost 2 per cent) in the DAX index.
The first good news for the German political and economic establishments in
months coincided with a second apparent victory for good sense: the
confidently predicted recommendation by the Ministry of Defence to pull out
of the multi-national European Fighter Aircraft (EFA) project with Britain,
Italy and Spain. Although the decision has yet to be finalised, it is taken
for granted in a wave of virtual euphoria in the German press and much of
the political establishment.
With the notable exception of Die Welt, the conservative daily newspaper,
editorials across the country congratulated Mr Volker Ruhe, the new defence
minister, for cancelling the government's most glaring prestige project.
They praised him for reaping a tangible 'peace dividend' from the end of the
Cold War, and giving an example on how to save money for the far more urgent
reconstruction of east Germany.
The trouble with this double dose of good sense is that things may not be
quite so simple. For German industry, at least, the events of the past two
days contain both good and bad elements.
In the short term, the pay deal and the EFA decision may be good news: on
the one hand a bloody strike has been avoided, and a relatively modest pay
deal agreed. On the other, a headline-grabbing gesture has been made to
prune government spending, and show prudence to the rest of the economy.
In the longer term, both developments are more worrying. The engineers' deal
is still expensive, and it confirms an agreed cut in working hours next year
from 37 to 36 hours a week - in a country where the working week is already
the world's shortest. A decision to pull out of EFA will leave German
industry on the sidelines in a crucial area of high technology, and
seriously damage the country's reputation as a reliable international
partner.
As far as the engineers' pay deal is concerned, the clear majority of
commentators clearly believes it is good news. Gesamtmetall, the engineering
employers' association, welcomed above all the duration of the deal. Mr
Hans-Joachim Gottschol, the president, said it was 'an important step away
from the false wage moves of the current year', indicating a gradual return
to stability.
The one dissenting voice was that of Mr Hans-Peter Stihl, president of the
German chamber of commerce and industry. He said that this particular wage
award was still far too high. 'This agreement will lead to further
rationalisation, and the scrapping of yet more jobs.' He was distressed that
the two sides had not agreed to postpone the cut in working hours.
Economists had mixed, but generally positive feelings. 'The German economy
has come out of this with one black eye,' said Mr Willi Leibfritz, head of
the macroeconomics department at the Ifo economic institute in Munich. He
agreed that if IG Metall, the engineering workers' union, had hung on and
gone on strike for 6 per cent or more, the combination of upward pressure on
parallel pay negotiations (for printers, building and textile workers, for
example) and the loss of production from the strikes would have left the
economy with two black eyes and a bloody nose to boot.
Instead, the economy has emerged bruised but unbowed. In any case, most
economic forecasts allowed for wage increases of between 5.5 and 6 per cent
this year - compared with an average of 7 per cent last year - and still
expect at least 1 per cent growth in gross national product (in west
Germany) this year, or 1.5 per cent in gross domestic product.
But why were the engineering workers prepared to settle for so much less
than their original demand of 9.5 per cent? 'One political strike is
enough,' Mr Leibfritz said, reflecting a widely held view that after the
public sector stoppage they would have attracted little public sympathy.
On the positive side, too, is the conviction that the IG Metall deal is the
key to the current annual wage round: 'No trade union will dare call an
extended strike now,' says Mr Jurgen Pfister, chief economist at Commerzbank
in Frankfurt.
'The wage round is as good as over,' said a trade union researcher. 'The one
person who must be really relieved is Mrs Monika Wulf-Mathies (leader of the
OTV public sector workers' union). She is facing a revolt from the grass
roots over her 5.4 per cent deal, and now she can say that the mighty IG
Metall has scarcely done better.'
The worry is nevertheless that the rate of pay rises is well above the 4 per
cent target recommended by the five wise men (the government's independent
economic advisers) in their last report - a target seen as essential to cope
with the greatest challenge of all, the reconstruction of the east German
economy.
'German wage rounds, by and large, used to be not too far distant from the
macroeconomic needs of the country,' Mr Leibfritz said. 'We are also used to
relatively high increases in productivity. But for the coming years we need
to avoid inflation, or the financing of the east will become very
difficult.'
That is certainly a view shared by the German Bundesbank, whose president,
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, also cautioned yesterday against excessive euphoria.
'The Bundesbank doesn't have any new room for manoeuvre,' Mr Pfister of
Commerzbank said. 'But in the second half of the year, if the money supply
comes down towards the target zone (3.5 to 5.5 per cent growth), there is a
better chance of an interest rate cut.' At least it removes the pressure for
another increase in interest rates, Mr Leibfritz believes. Mr Schlesinger
simply says that the monetary brakes will remain on until money supply is
under control.
One of the Bundesbank's abiding complaints is that the government in Bonn,
and those in the 16 Lander, have failed to make adequate budget savings
since unification, to make room for spending in the east. The public sector
borrowing requirement is a crucial factor behind excessive credit expansion,
in turn a key element in the current 8 per cent-plus growth in broadly
defined money supply.
In the light of that argument, the decision to pull out of the EFA project -
or the Jager 90 as it is known in Germany - should be seen as a good move in
Frankfurt. The long-range budget to 2005 has DM12bn set aside for the
fighter. It is also seen as a very shrewd political move by Mr Ruhe, former
secretary-general of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union
(CDU). Press response suggests it will be overwhelmingly popular with the
voters, except in Bavaria where most of the jobs will be lost.
The most immediate political problem is that it will alienate the
Bavarian-based Christian Social Union (CSU), whose leader Mr Theo Waigel,
the finance minister, yesterday demanded a top-level meeting with Mr Kohl on
the issue. Mr Waigel is already feeling uncomfortable in the coalition, with
the right-wing Republicans breathing down his neck in Bavaria, and the snub
to his party over Jager 90 can only make matters worse.
The debate over the aircraft has been thus far one-sided and ill-informed.
It has become a byword for government extravagance on a Cold War project.
Yet there is no serious alternative aircraft available for what the
Luftwaffe wants - air-to-air defence - beyond 2000, and the savings gained
by opting out will be very largely concentrated at the end of the century,
when the current budget crisis should be past.
More than that, Germany will almost certainly have to pay substantial
compensation to its erstwhile partners, while at the same time sacrificing
possibly as many as 20,000 jobs in its aerospace industry.
Die Welt put its doubts in a front-page editorial yesterday. 'So the Bonn
coalition will say 'no' in a few weeks' time to buying (the aircraft). It is
already perfectly obvious how great will be the jubilation in the land. But
the ruling parties will simply be demonstrating just how worn out they are,
unable to do the very things which they know are right. And what then?'
The probable cancellation of the EFA in Germany is a political move far more
than a financial one. But it does show just how great are the pressures on
the government, above all the need to be seen to be coming to terms with the
soaring costs of unification. Mr Ruhe knows the depth of that public concern
and is responding to it.
None of the long-term problems have gone away, despite the temporary relief
at the settlement in the engineering workers' dispute. The east German
economy is still in a state of collapse, if not in free fall, and
unemployment in the east often reaches a real 50 per cent (disguised by job
creation schemes, short-time working and early retirement) in key areas.
Transfers from public funds this year from west to east Germany are expected
to reach DM180bn (Pounds 61.2bn), and many suspect that Mr Waigel is wildly
optimistic to believe he can almost halve his budget deficit from DM45bn to
DM25bn by 1995.
On the other hand the strike settlement may have proved two things. First,
it suggests that Germany's trade unions are beginning to realise the
inevitable belt-tightening which unification means for everyone. And second,
it indicates that the social contract in the west is still alive and well,
even when the desire to fight for a shrinking cake is almost overwhelming.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920519

