FT924-8290

FT  12 NOV 92 / London Stock Exchange: Interest rate nerves unsettle
equities


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


CONFIDENCE in prospects for an encouraging autumn economic statement today
from Mr Norman Lamont, the UK chancellor of the exchequer, suddenly receded
in the UK stock market yesterday afternoon. Share prices, which had been
effectively treading water while awaiting today's statement, turned down
smartly towards the close of business, driving the FT-SE Index below the
2,700 mark at which the market has been struggling to hold.
Investors' doubts appeared to focus on the cut in base rates which the stock
market has virtually built into its previews of the chancellor's statement.
Suggestions that the base rate reduction would be only half a point, in
sharp contrast with the two-point reduction called for this week by the
Confederation of British Industry, circulated in the City's financial
markets.
With Wall Street at only half speed in the new session because of a public
holiday, London marketmakers reduced share quotations smartly. By the close,
the FT-SE Index had increased its earlier loss of around 7 points to 17.8
for a final reading of 2,696.8.
While there seemed little substance behind the sudden rumours of base rate
cuts of only  1/2 percentage point, equity strategists sounded more cautious
than earlier in the week.
At Strauss Turnbull, Mr Ian Harnett commented that it could prove difficult
for the autumn economic statement 'to deliver both what the equity market
wants - growth prospects - and what the gilt-edged market wants - tight
fiscal policy'. He expects the stock market to concentrate on the estimate
for the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement for 1993-1994.
The strategy team at Goldman Sachs believes that the Autumn Statement will
have short-term impact on relative sector performance, but for the medium
term throws the emphasis back on to the utility sectors, underpinned by
their yield attractions.
Mr Robin Aspinall at Panmure Gordon was another to warn that investors might
face 'some disappointment or confusion' today. The base rate reduction may
not arrive until Monday and the economic stimulus may turn out to be of
modest proportions, he commented.
The session opened brightly, with the Footsie adding six points within the
first hour of Seaq trading. But an easier trend in the US dollar and the
closure of some European markets took the strength out of the international
blue chips, and domestic stocks soon followed suit. However, trading volume
was light and shares drifted down without seeing selling pressure until the
setback at the very end of the day.
Seaq volume fell to 555.7m shares from the 615.8m of the previous session;
Tuesday's retail business remained satisfactory from the traders' point of
view, recording a money value of Pounds 1.1bn.
Among the firmer sectors, the UK water industry stocks responded favourably
to the regulatory statement on dividend policies. Shares in Cable and
Wireless rose strongly after announcing an important link-up with BCE, of
Canada.
But retail and consumer stocks, the immediate beneficiaries from cuts in
interest rates, hung fire as investors settled down to wait for today's
economic statement.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

921112

