FT924-6300

FT  21 NOV 92 / Books: Ultimate flight of fancy - FT Children's book of the
month


   By MICHAEL GLOVER


JM BARRIE'S PETER PAN presented by Eleanor Graham and Edward Ardizzone
Hodder & Stoughton Pounds 12.99, 172 pages
THE way in which a book or a play (or a character from a book or a play) can
procreate or transmutate, begetting other books or other characters, is,
thanks to the ingenuity of authors, publishers and illustrators, some
talented and others merely unscrupulous, a weird and wonderful process - and
it is made all the more weird and wonderful, of course, if the subject of
the book or the character in the play happens to possess magical properties
of its own.
Take Peter Pan, for example, that strange hybrid, part boy, part fairy, who
could fly like a bird, but was not a bird; and could swim like a fish - but
was not, of course, a water creature of any kind.
Sir James Barrie's Peter Pan was first published by Hodder and Stoughton in
1911, but the text of what can arguably be described as the most famous and
abidingly popular play for children of all time was by no means the first
attempt that Barrie, the son of a poor hand loom weaver from Kirriemuir, had
made to capture his flights of childish fancy between hard covers. In 1906
he had written a story entitled Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens. This
edition became famous as much for its illustrations by Arthur Rackham as for
the text itself. Rackham, one of the most fashionable illustrators of the
Edwardian age (his Rip Van Winkle of 1905 had made him so) embellished the
story with his own curious blend of Nordic fantasy, all twisting tendrils
and misshapen humanoid trees.
Barrie's story had developed from tales he had made up for the five sons of
close friends, Arthur and Sylvia Llewelyn Davies. When the parents died,
Barrie gave these children a home. The play itself, first performed in 1904,
had been a great success from the start; but no one in Edwardian England
would have conceived that, 90 years on, it would have eclipsed in popularity
even The Admirable Crichton, his runaway success of 1902.
But the story of the story of the play does not end there. Other editions of
Peter Pan, books that might now be described just as well as examples of
'merchandising' or even 'novelisations' and the like, proliferated with the
passage of time and the increasing fame of Peter Pan himself.
Mabel Lucie Atwell, in producing her 'nursery version' of 1921 of the story,
added her own inimitable touch of saccharine and Good Housekeeping gave her
its seal of approval: 'The editing has been done with a keen sensitivity,'
wrote the reviewer. 'Nothing is spoiled or altered . . . real
little-children illustrations, safe, warm and comforting, even when they are
full of pirates.'
And 40 years later, in 1962, came a prose version for readers of
approximately six and above that is republished this month, a collaboration
between the artist Edward Ardizzone (best known in the world of children's
literature for his Little Tim books) who somehow managed to domesticate the
story without robbing it of any of its ethereal charm, and Eleanor Graham.
Interestingly, it was one of the wards of the Llewelyn Davies', Peter
Davies, the London publisher, who first commissioned book illustrations from
the young Edward Ardizzone in 1928, thereby encouraging a career that was
ultimately to establish him as one of the greatest and most distinctive
illustrators of his era, popular in both England and America.
And who was Eleanor Graham? She was the first editor of Puffin Books, the
imprint that in the 1940s pioneered the sale of children's books in
paperback format, and at prices that even children and their hard-pressed
parents could afford. She also published one of the first excellent
anthologies of paper back poetry for children, A Puffin Quartet of Poets
(1958), which introduced the work of such poets as James Reeves and Ian
Serraillier to new audiences.
There have been other versions of Peter Pan too, with other illustrators,
and he has managed, somehow, to withstand - and even to rise above - them
all, the recent film of Hook included. And, for once, the story of the book
of the play scarcely needs to be repeated here because it is as comfortingly
familiar as the hat that hangs in the hall.
All versions of the story form a part of the Peter Pan bequest by which
royalties of the books go straight to the Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Sick Children, to which Barrie had bequeathed the copyright. Although the
legal term of copyright expired at the end of 1987, the hospital continues
to benefit from sales of all Hodder and Stoughton editions.

The Financial Times


London Page X

921121

