FT924-6310

FT  21 NOV 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Rocked by the recession - A
couple fighting through bad times with a heavy load of debt


   By CLIVE FEWINS


THE YEAR 1992 has been a bad one for many small businesses. But for David
and Noreen Kiss who run The Rocking Horse Workshop from a Victorian
farmhouse near the small town of Wem in rural Shropshire it has been little
short of disastrous.
As Christmas approaches there will be ample presents for the couple's three
young sons. But just as those will be bought with borrowed money, so the
Kisses are increasingly wondering whether they are running their business on
borrowed time. Something drastic has to be done if they are to rescue their
business from the ravages of recession.
'When we moved here from Kent and set up the business five years ago we
didn't expect to make much of a profit for the first two or three years. We
bought this house and 12 acres plus the large outbuildings for Pounds 90.000
and had ample loans from the bank to tide us over.' said David, 38 and
worked in the motor trade before the move to Wem.
'By 1990 however we were turning over Pounds 31,000 and were poised to go
into profit. We had taken on our first employee - although only on a casual
basis - and people were beginning to discover us in our rather remote rural
surroundings and bring us work.'
Then came the disaster of 1991.
'I daren't think what sort of a loss we made. I'll know when we pay the
accountant,' Kiss said.
The order book for the 15 styles of traditional wooden rocking horse made by
the Kisses just dried up. Restoration work - usually a good fallback - also
took a nose dive.
Fortunately Paul Hamblet, the jack-of-all-trades employee, was able to turn
his hand to agricultural work when not working for the Kisses.
The only thing that kept them afloat last year was the nursery school they
had opened in late 1990 at the end of the long brick built building at the
rear of their house that also houses the rocking horse business.
'We were lucky,' said Noreen. 'The word had got around, and we managed to
fill all 20 places quite fast. But even then by the time we had paid the
full-time qualified supervisor our turnover in 1991 of Pounds 24,500 still
registered a loss of Pounds 4,000.' To meet all the health and safety
requirements the Kisses had been obliged to find Pounds 15,000 to convert
the end of the building into the school. They did this by extending their
mortgage a second time to a total of Pounds 130,000.
In spite of selling five acres for Pounds 13,000 last year they are still
running an overdraft and struggling to keep up with their mortgage payments.
'The beginning of 1992 was more promising, with a lot of restoration work,'
David said. 'But by mid-summer I had nothing to do that would earn me money.
In a deep recession people tend to leave the old family rocking horse that
they have intended to have restored in the roof until times get better.'
With Christmas fast approaching there has been a definite upturn.
David has been able to get back to hand carving of some of the top range
English oak rocking horses that sell at Pounds 2,225 and upwards. Paul has
been rehired and Noreen has got back to painting the horses, as well as
overseeing the nursery.
However with the bank continually asking awkward questions the Kisses reckon
business will have to remain at the present level continuously for at least
two years if their enterprise is to survive.
All this is set against the background of a splendid range of products that
includes some cheaper wooden rocking horses named after the three Kiss boys
and priced at Pounds 500 to Pounds 900, and a high degree of skill and
determination.
David is an excellent craftsman. His designer wife takes a pattern off every
historic rocking horse that comes into the workshop. They now have 29
patterns that they could make, in addition to their standard range.
They do nearly all the work in-house to save money, and this includes some
quite advanced leatherwork for the high quality bridles and tack. They also
trade in and restore period toys and take individual commissions for wooden
toys. They have a first class workshop, an excellently presented showroom,
and literature to match.
All the qualities of a successful business are there. But in a recession as
deep as the present one it seems these are just not enough.
'It's hard to see where we've gone wrong,' David said. 'Why blame the bank
for lending us money freely when we asked for it in the first place? But I
really do think they let us have a large overdraft too easily.
'We spent too freely - particularly on restoring the property - as the money
was there and we allowed ourselves to be sidetracked into doing that rather
than concentrating on getting the business established.
'However there was a lot to do, and five years ago we were both energetic 33
year-olds, with two young sons and another on the way.
'I have to admit that I am better at creating things than running a
business.' The property is currently on the market at Pounds 200,000,
together with the nursery school, which is for sale as a going concern. The
Kisses are hoping they will be able to stay, but if a suitable buyer is
found they have alternative smaller premises in mind in a neighbouring
village. There they would aim to concentrate on their first love - the
rocking horses.
Noreen said: 'Something has got to happen. We are at the stage where the
bank could foreclose at any moment. It's not a nice thought, with Christmas
just round the corner and all those lovely unfinished wooden beasts with
their flowing manes and rolling eyes waiting to be completed in order to
bring happiness to children.
'Like David, I'd love the opportunity to create a dozen horses from scratch
between now and Christmas. I'd welcome the pressure and we'd work round the
clock to finish them.'
The Rocking Horse Workshop, Ashfield House, The Foxholes, Wem, Shropshire
SY4 5UJ. Tel. 0939- 232335.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

921121

