FT921-429

FT  28 MAR 92 / Boost planned for Japan's economy


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


   TOKYO


JAPAN is to introduce a package of measures next week in an effort to boost
the economy and revive flagging business sentiment.
The package, due to be announced by ministers on Tuesday, is expected to
bring forward planned public works spending.
Speculation in Tokyo intensified yesterday that the package would be
followed by a further cut in the official discount rate from the current 4.5
per cent.
The public works plans would bring forward to the first half of the 1992-93
financial year - which starts in April - 75 per cent of the capital spending
planned for the whole 12 months.
Government officials acknowledge that bringing forward such a large part of
the programme would create a hole in the budget later in the year which
could only be filled by a supplementary budget.
Economists said the government's immediate proposals would make a modest
contribution to boosting growth, though the effects would not be apparent
until later this year.
However, the measures would have little impact on business confidence unless
they were accompanied by an unexpectedly large reduction of 1 percentage
point or more in the official discount rate.
This seems unlikely - investors in the stock market have resigned themselves
to a cut of only 0.5 points, the same as the Bank of Japan's previous three
reductions. The Nikkei index yesterday fell 248 points to 19,636.99 - a new
five-year low.
Mr Susumu Taketomi, the chief economist at the Industrial Bank of Japan,
said: 'The government's package will be helpful but it will not be
all-powerful. The cumulative effect of interest rate cuts will create room
for future recovery but will take time.'
Apart from the government, big public and semi-public institutions also plan
to advance part of their investment programme. They include Nippon Telegraph
and Telephone, which is Japan's biggest company, and electric power
generating groups.
Other measures in the package could include proposals for the Japan
Development Bank, a state-owned bank which makes low-cost loans, to increase
its funding and special measures for the hard-pressed house-building
industry.
Further evidence of the economic slowdown came yesterday with the
publication of figures showing that industrial production fell in February
by 4.2 per cent compared with the same month last year.
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry forecast that industrial
output for the financial year ending in March would be down by 0.6 per cent
 -the first decline since 1986.
However, production cuts are beginning to result in reductions in
inventories - a sign that companies are getting to grips with the slowdown.
Inventories rose by 10 per cent year-on-year, down from a 12.2 per cent rise
in January and 13.1 per cent in December, the peak month.
Mr Paul Summerville, an economist at Jardine Fleming, the securities
company, said: 'Full-scale inventory adjustment is under way but the economy
is not crashing.'

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920328

