FT922-401

FT  27 JUN 92 / Ministers hasten pension change: Employers to restore fund
deficiencies


   By RALPH ATKINS and ALISON SMITH


THE GOVERNMENT has responded to pressure over the Maxwell affair by bringing
forward to next week the introduction of greater legal powers for pensioners
whose pension funds are wound up.
Social security ministers are expected to announce on Monday the
implementation of provisions in the 1990 Social Security Act to make any
deficiencies in pension funds a debt upon the employers.
Implementation had been delayed partly because of fears that, in a
recession, the extra burden on companies might push some into bankruptcy.
The move has been demanded by Tory and Labour MPs campaigning on behalf of
Maxwell pensioners and was hinted at in the Commons by Mr Peter Lilley,
social security secretary, earlier this month.
Ministers are expected to announce next week the membership of the
independent commission to review pension law, led by Professor Roy Goode.
An early announcement is also expected on the members of the trust, headed
by Sir John Cuckney, set up to solicit contributions on behalf of Maxwell
pensioners. The social security department is hoping soon to announce
further donations from institutions that benefited financially from dealings
with Robert Maxwell.
The greater legal powers for pensioners would help former Maxwell employees
only if the pension funds affected went into administration, but they might
be of wider significance for other vulnerable pension schemes. Pensioners
will have rights as official creditors to funds that are wound up.
The government hopes the Maxwell pension funds can remain solvent and
earlier this month announced Pounds 2.5m to 'drip feed' the worst affected.
Mr Lilley said then that the implemention of the 1990 provisions 'may be of
marginal benefit to some Maxwell pension schemes'. He appears to have
rejected opposition MPs' calls for pensioners to become preferential, rather
than unsecured, creditors.
Meanwhile, Mr Michael Meacher, shadow social security secretary, is
maintaining pressure on the government over its plans for a special unit to
recover pension fund assets. He has asked Mr Lilley to set out the unit's
objectives in terms of the amount of the assets it expects to recover within
a certain time.
He has demanded an assurance that the strategy will be reviewed if those
targets are not met.
Mr Meacher also believes the government should use its powers under the
Financial Services Act to bring the regulatory regime back under its direct
control.
Letters, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920627

