FT922-3947

FT  09 JUN 92 / World Trade News: ABB-led group wins Dollars 1.8bn Abu Dhabi
deal


   By IAN RODGER and HAIG SIMONIAN


   ZURICH, MILAN


A CONSORTIUM led by Asea Brown Boveri (ABB), the Swedish-Swiss engineering
group, has won a Dollars 1.8bn (Pounds 980m) order to build an oil and
gas-fired power station and the world's biggest water desalination plant in
Abu Dhabi.
The Al Taweelah-B power station will consist of six steam turbine units of
125MW each. The desalination plant will produce 75m gallons of drinking
water a year.
Completion of the power plant, raising Abu Dhabi's generating capacity by
about a third, is scheduled for 1994. ABB's part of the deal is worth
Dollars 975m, with work to be carried out mainly by its subsidiaries in
Germany and Italy.
The Dollars 550m desalination plant will be built by the Iritecna subsidiary
of Italy's state-owned IRI holding group; Six Construct of Belgium will do
the civil engineering.
Mr Goran Lundberg, ABB executive vice-president in charge of power plants,
said: 'In the past six months, we have taken in Dollars 5bn in orders,
against Dollars 6.4bn in the whole of last year'.
Mr Fulvio Tornich, managing director of Iritecna, formed this year from a
merger of IRI's Italimpianti and Italstat subsidiaries, said the deal was
one of the biggest for an Italian company for desalination equipment in the
Middle East.
European Marine Contractors, a joint venture between Italy's Saipem group
and Brown & Root of the US, has won a L650bn (Pounds 294.9m) contract to lay
900km of pipeline for a consortium led by Statoil, the Norwegian state oil
group.
The order, believed to be one of the biggest of its kind in the North Sea,
is for part of the Zeepipe project, to link gas finds from the Troll and
other Norwegian fields to the coast via a 40in-wide pipeline laid at depths
of 350 metres.
Work on the contract, including options for other pipelaying, starts next
year and should finish in 1995.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920609

