FT921-1300

FT  25 MAR 92 / Letter: Not much of a stimulus


   From Mr DAN BUNTING


Sir, I have noticed recently that governments in the English-speaking
economies, when increasing their borrowing requirements, are apt to refer to
the process as providing 'a net fiscal stimulus'.
There are three ways of running a public sector borrowing requirement and
during my career I have seen all of these in operation. Under the most
liberal regime, part or all is financed by borrowing from banks, or indeed
from the central bank, this process being referred to colloquially as
'printing it'.
I am able to recall long strategy meetings during the 1970s when gilt-edged
specialists engaged in heated debate regarding the exact extent to which the
government would fund its deficit or simply print the difference.
I think it is uncontroversial that financing by such means expands money
supply and hence economic activity or the price level. Indeed, if the US
economy should fail to respond to successive reductions in interest rates
('pushing on a piece of string') then it must surely be by this means that
the Federal Reserve will avert serious depression.
Now for the sake of clarity let us move to the opposite process. Under this
mode, the government runs a deficit; finances it more conservatively, by
means of bond issues; and in fact does more than this, and 'over-funds' the
deficit, by issuing more bonds than necessary.
I seem to recall this in operation during one of those phases when a
socialist government, in reaction to early excesses, embarked upon
exaggerated fiscal rectitude. I think it is uncontroversial that this
process, like any process of asset sale for the liquidation or avoidance of
borrowing, mops up liquidity and therefore reduces money supply and economic
activity or the price level.
We now turn to the present. It seems that the present vogue is for
governments neither to 'print' nor to over-fund, but to fund exactly, by
means of bond issues. This process neither stimulates nor depresses the
economy; the effect on credit creation is neutral. The only effect is to
transfer resources into government spending - in order to buy votes - at the
expense of other activities such as private sector investment or exports.
In short, we eat the seed corn at the expense of our children.
Dan Bunting,
investment strategist,
Matheson Securities,
16 St Helen's Place,
London EC3A 6DE

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920325

