FT921-650

FT  27 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Silent Tiny faces erosion of small holder
support


   By ROLAND RUDD


ALMOST TWO hours into Lonrho's annual meeting, a small shareholder demanded
that Mr Roland 'Tiny' Rowland break his silence.
'Could Mr Rowland please stand up and tell us who are the six other
directors on the board who could also do the deals, in order to dispel the
tycoon factor,' he asked.
As Mr Rowland sat impassively, Mr Rene Leclezio, chairman, replied: 'Mr
Rowland does not talk, he acts.'
While the answer received polite applause, it did little to calm the mood of
agitated shareholders demanding to know why the price of their shares had
collapsed.
Mr Rowland still had his supporters however.
One shareholder described him as 'the jewel in Lonrho's crown' and urged her
fellow shareholders to 'trust Tiny'.
Yet support from many of Lonrho's small shareholders was never really in
doubt.
What yesterday's annual meeting suggested was that about half of Mr
Rowland's once loyal band of small shareholders are no longer willing to
simply 'trust' their chief executive.
At the beginning of the meeting, a half-hour film was shown about Lonrho's
great successes in Africa. The film concluded that on Lonrho's estates it
had been a year worth celebrating.
While many shareholders agreed with those sentiments a significant number
yesterday made it clear that there was not much to celebrate in London.
As one shareholder put it: 'What a difference a year makes.' He pointed out
that Mr Rowland, in the 1990 Lonrho annual report, said the international
trading group had a sound financial base.
A year later many of the British companies were making a loss.
'Are the Lonrho directors spending too much time on litigation instead of
keeping their eye on their own ball?' asked the shareholder.
Another demanded to know why Lonrho's share price had been decimated. 'After
all,' he added, 'the City is not an ass, there must be an answer.'
Mr Leclezio explained that all UK companies were having a difficult time;
profits from Africa were not too high and the remittance of Lonrho's African
profits was proving easier than in the past.
Another shareholder wanted to know whether the board would consider the
appointment of independent non-executive shareholders.
Mr Leclezio said the group was not against the appointment of non-executive
directors, but they would have to be the 'right ones' who would 'fit into
the company'.
In response to the mood of the AGM, Lonrho's shares, after originally rising
on news of the sale of 33 per cent of Metropole Hotels to the Libyan Arab
Foreign Investment company for Pounds 177m, down 8p to close at 95p.
At the end of the meeting, nearly all the shareholders present voted in
favour of accepting the report and accounts.
But Mr Rowland was served notice by many of his shareholders, that if he
wants to remain silent at next year's meeting, Lonrho will need an
outstanding second half to give them better news when the year-end results
are published in January 1993.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920327

