FT924-781

FT  22 DEC 92 / Media group faces life beyond the cult of personality: The
prospects for Time Warner after Steve Ross


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


THERE was something unseemly about the way the board shake-up at Time Warner
was announced just hours after the death on Sunday of Mr Steve Ross, the
65-year-old chairman and founder of the world's biggest media and
entertainment group.
Yesterday, as the company mourned the loss of Mr Ross, reports filtered out
of Time Warner of an internal clash that had led to the removal of some of
Mr Ross's closest friends.
Among those said by executives to have been distressed by the developments
were Mr Martin Payson, the Time Warner vice-chairman who resigned from the
company as well as from the board; Mr William vanden Heuvel, who hung on to
his board seat but is expected to lose it next spring; and Mr Arthur Liman,
the lawyer who was not a board member, but was a close friend and adviser to
Mr Ross, handling a large volume of legal work for Time Warner.
Mr Gerald Levin, the president and chief executive of Time Warner who is
expected to eventually succeed Mr Ross as chairman, tried to put a brave
face on the board changes, which will reduce the number of directors from 21
to 12 and are aimed at recruiting more outside members.
The board reduction was the last step in a lengthy review process that he,
Mr Ross and outside directors began last September, Mr Levin declared.
But Mr Geoffrey Holmes, a senior vice-president of Time Warner who was privy
to the decisions, admitted the timing of the announcement was 'extremely
unfortunate' and noted 'it was just a question of should we do it now or
wait a couple of days'.
The board changes appear to favour the Time side of the group and they have
re-ignited speculation about the disparate corporate cultures of the staid
Time and the free-wheeling Warner - the two sides that came together three
years ago in a controversial Dollars 14bn (Pounds 9.2bn) merger. The company
claims talk of such cultural divisions is exaggerated.
Whatever the case, it is clear that Time Warner faces a number of more
material challenges as it begins a new era without its charismatic founder.
Chief among these is the need for Time Warner to become more corporate in
its top-level management and decision making and less a cult of personality.
On the financial side, Wall Street has been promised that Time Warner will
come to terms with its Dollars 9bn debt burden, a residue of the 1989
merger, and reduce it by selling off assets.
In strategic terms the company is still searching for more international
partners to buy into its Time Warner Entertainment (TWE) subsidiary, which
last year obtained only Dollars 1bn for a 12.5 per cent stake from Toshiba
and C. Itoh of Japan - half the level desired by Mr Ross.
Finally, it has yet to be shown at Time Warner - as at other companies such
as the Sony group - that the various components can produce synergies that
go beyond rhetoric and make solid contributions to the bottom line.
Mr Ross's goal was to build a media and entertainment giant with global
clout and prime market positions in the Hollywood film industry, recorded
music and publishing (including the Time magazine flagship) as one of the
biggest US cable television operators and as a successful programmer for
cable through the Home Box Office (HBO) division. This he did, and the
company is expected to close 1992 with Dollars 14bn of revenues and profits
in all divisions.
The film division is likely to make Dollars 400m of operating profits,
before depreciation and amortisation, up from Dollars 390m last year; the
music business should produce Dollars 580m of operating income, against
Dollars 560m; HBO should achieve Dollars 215m, up from Dollars 195m; the
cable operations could earn nearly Dollars 1bn in 1992, against Dollars 872m
last year; and publishing should yield Dollars 330m, compared to Dollars
246m in 1991.( The graph gives a divisional breakdown of 1991 operating
profit after depreciation and amortisation.)
Mr Alan Grubman, a leading US entertainment lawyer who knew Mr Ross well,
yesterday called the late Time Warner chairman 'one of the great pioneers of
the modern entertainment industry, along with people like William Paley'.
Yet Mr Ross - a silver-haired extrovert with an affinity for glitz - was an
entrepreneur who suffered from the same problems as many company founders.
As one of his friends put it: 'Steve ran the company as a family. So no
matter how screwed up it was he would never sell off one or two of his
children. I think he had a terribly difficult time trying to deal with
selling assets. Founders of companies usually don't want to let go.'
The need to reduce the debt has been apparent for the past two years,
especially as merger-related special dividend payments have consistently
resulted in net losses despite strong operating profits.
Mr Levin and the new managers of Time Warner are likely to be able to
dispose of assets in a way Mr Ross could not because he was so emotionally
tied to Time Warner holdings. The Levin team has promised to seek to reduce
the debt by Dollars 3bn by selling off non-strategic assets over the next
three years.
Mr Holmes yesterday said debt reduction was a top priority for the
management team and acknowledged that in announcing planned asset sales
recently, he was also seeking to reassure investors dissatisfied with the
price of Time Warner's stock. 'We're not happy with the stock performance
either,' he said.
Mr Holmes also said more international partners are being lined up, and
could be announced during 1993. While alliances are useful for the
distribution of entertainment products and to generate more non-US revenues,
they are also sorely needed to bring in cash to lower the company's debt.
There is no easy answer to the question of achieving strategic synergies;
regardless of how sceptical outside observers may be, companies as diverse
as Time Warner, Sony, Matsushita and Bertelsmann all believe that pooling
different entertainment businesses will yield economies of scale and profits
in the future.
As for a new style of management, Time Warner insiders claim Mr Levin is
firmly in control and they point out that the company's decision-making
process has become much less personality-driven since Mr Ross was sidelined
a year ago by treatments for prostate cancer.
The 52-year-old Mr Levin hails from the Time side, was a prime architect of
the 1989 merger accord and yet is described by insiders as a man who is
committed to Mr Ross's vision of the group as a global force in
entertainment.
Mr Liman stressed yesterday that 'Steve hand-picked Gerry Levin as his
successor'.
The most lasting legacy of the passing of Mr Ross may be that it enables the
company he founded to make difficult decisions without regard to sentiment
or emotion. This was acknowledged yesterday by a Time Warner executive, who
none the less noted that 'things will still never be quite the same'.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921222

