FT923-9497

FT  05 AUG 92 / FT Law Report: Digest of Trinity term


   By AVIVA GOLDEN


In re a company No. 0013734 of 1991
(FT, June 3)
THE REINSURED was in liquidation, having been ordered to be wound up by the
Supreme Court of Bermuda, which also approved the manner whereby the
valuation of the insurance claims against it had been carried out. The
claims had not been settled but were calculated following an actuarial
valuation of the underlying contingent claims against the reinsured.
In the present proceedings, the reinsured claimed Dollars 122,244 against
the reinsurer company which argued that no liability to pay had arisen and
that the petition against it should be struck out because the debt on which
it was based was disputed in good faith and on substantial grounds.
Were it a simple matter of construction and the only issue was whether
settled (albeit not actually paid) claims fell within the terms of the
reinsurance contracts, the present court would have refused to strike out
the petition. However, in granting the petition, Mr Roger Kaye QC (sitting
as a deputy judge of the division) stated that it was not the only issue in
the case.
There were other factors which might have a bearing on the construction of
the reinsurance contracts. Those factors raised serious and complex issues
which were not appropriate to resolve on an interlocutory motion or on the
hearing of a winding-up petition.
The Mercers Co v New Hampshire Insurance Co
(FT, June 4)
MERCERS CLAIMED against New Hampshire for monies allegedly due under an
advance payment bond of Pounds 4.5m to Rush & Tompkins Ltd in respect of a
building contract. Rush & Tompkins had commenced the works although Mercers
had given possession of the site four weeks late. Thereafter Rush and
Tompkins had gone into receivership and the contract automatically
terminated.
At first instance, Mr Justice Phillips held that New Hampshire was under no
liability under the bond; dismissed Mercers' claim; and ordered repayment of
New Hampshire's interim payment of Pounds 1m. Mercers contended that the
bond was simply a promise to pay a specific sum on a contingency which had
happened and that the document could not be construed as a performance
guarantee.
Accepting that argument, the Court of Appeal stated that the plain purpose
of the document was to ensure that if Rush & Tompkins did not earn the
amount of the advance payment, both Rush & Tompkins and New Hampshire should
be jointly and severally liable to Mercers for the balance. Moreover,
postponement of the date on which possession of the site had been given by
Mercers did not affect New Hampshire's liability.
Regina v Kansal
(FT, June 5)
THE COURT of Appeal, in dismissing Mr Kansal's appeal against convictions
under the Theft Act 1968 and the Insolvency Act 1986, stated that privilege
from self-incrimination was abrogated in bankruptcy proceedings by Rule
6.175 of the Insolvency Rules. That rule provided that '(1) The bankrupt
shall . . . answer all such questions as the court may put . . . (5) The
written record may in any proceedings (whether under the Act or otherwise)
be used as evidence against the bankrupt . . .'.
Mr Kansal made a statement under the Insolvency Rules which was ruled
admissible in his Crown court trial on the theft charges. Under the Theft
Act, section 31, a person was not excused on the ground of
self-incrimination from answering questions in proceedings for the recovery
of property but that no statement made was then admissible evidence against
him. Section 433 of the Insolvency Act, on the other hand, made evidence
given under the Insolvency Rules admissible in any proceedings.
The appeal court accepted the contention of the Crown that section 433 was
concerned with admissibility of a special class of document derived from an
insolvency in 'any proceedings' - whether or not under the Insolvency or the
Theft acts. Its terms were clear, unambiguous and unequivocal, and were not
subject to any exceptions, so that section 31 of the Theft Act was not
capable of protecting the defendant in such a case.
TOSG Trust Fund Ltd v Girozentrale und Bank der Oesterreichischen Sparkassen
Aktiengesellschaft and others
(FT, June 10)
THE PLAINTIFF sought a declaration that it was not liable to repay to the
defendant banks a bonded sum which had been applied by TOSG in accordance
with its powers.
TOSG was a company set up by the Tour Operators Study Group (an association
of UK travel and tour operators), the primary purpose of which was to
administer bonding arrangements made for the protection of customers in the
event of failure. A bond for Pounds 63.2m had been issued by the banks in
favour of TOSG, the subject matter of which was the potential failure of ILG
Travel Ltd, a TOSG member.
The bonded sum, Mr Justice Hobhouse stated, was not a fund in which the
banks had reserved any proprietary right or which was impressed with any
trust. On the facts before the court, TOSG was in a position to show that,
subject to a small margin, the sum it spent on intra vires functions would
fully absorb the sum paid by the banks together with accrued interest.
Although TOSG had also spent money ultra vires there was no automatic
liability accrued to make an equivalent payment to the banks. That argument
would depend on an earmarked fund which was not applicable in the present
case.
Barclays Bank plc v O'Brien
(FT, June 11)
THE ISSUE in the instant case had arisen when a married woman pledged the
matrimonial home as a second charge to the bank for her husband's debts,
after having failed to take independent advice and not having the
transaction fully explained to her.
Allowing an appeal against an order that the bank could enforce the mortgage
document, the Court of Appeal stated that in certain cases, equity would
hold the security given by the surety to be unenforceable by the creditor
if: (1) the relationship between the debtor and the surety and the
consequent likelihood of influence and reliance was known to the creditor;
(2) the surety's consent to the transaction was procured by undue influence
or material misrepresentation on the debtor's part, and the surety lacked
adequate understanding of the nature and effect of the transaction; or (3)
the creditor failed to take reasonable steps to try and ensure that the
surety entered into the transaction with adequate understanding of its
nature and effect and that the surety's consent was true and informed. In
particular, equity was still concerned to protect the position of married
women and to treat them differently from other third parties who provided
security for the debts of others.
MS Fashions Ltd and others v Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA
(FT, June 12)
SINCE 1980 the two companies had been customers of BCCI and had borrowing
and overdraft facilities. Each company had given a debenture to BCCI, and
cross-guaranteed the other's debt. In addition, security for the companies'
debts was given by S and his brother by a charge of property, so that the
effect was to render each of the four parties as included within the
relationship of 'the principal debtor' so that all were jointly liable.
On its winding-up BCCI claimed a comprehensive demand of Pounds 600,000
against each of the potential debtors for the total indebtedness owed by the
two companies. There was no defence available save under rule 4.90 of the
Insolvency Rules 1986 which provided that where, before a company went into
liquidation, there had been mutual debts between it and a creditor claiming
to prove in the liquidation, 'the sums due from one party shall be set off
against the sums due from the other'. S had some Pounds 300,000 on deposit
with BCCI.
The Court of Appeal stated that rule 4.90 could not properly operate unless
it operated in reduction of the debt owing to BCCI at date of liquidation.
All that was left for BCCI, therefore, whether against the principal debtors
or the sureties, was the balance of the original debt, viz. a sum of Pounds
300,000.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920805

