FT921-3942

FT  12 MAR 92 / Japan asked to shoulder third of Cambodia costs


   By REUTER


   TOKYO


THE head of a United Nations operation to bring peace to Cambodia yesterday
asked Japan to shoulder a third of the costs of his mission, Reuter reports
from Tokyo.
Mr Yasushi Akashi, head of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)
and a Japanese, made the request in a meeting with Mr Michio Watanabe,
Japan's foreign minister, officials said.
They said Mr Akashi told Mr Watanabe: 'It seems the international community
including the United States wants Japan to shoulder about one-third of the
budget.'
Mr Watanabe replied: 'We cannot give a concrete figure at present but would
like to study various factors.'
Mr Akashi later made the same request to a Lower House committee on
international co-operation, according to press reports.
The officials were unable to say how much Tokyo's proposed share would be.
But media reports put it at between Dollars 900m and Dollars 1bn out of an
unofficial estimated total of Dollars 2.8bn (Pounds 1.59bn).
The total is made up of Dollars 1.9bn for UNTAC operations, Dollars 100m to
repatriate refugees and Dollars 800m to rehabilitate Cambodia, the reports
said.
Mr Watanabe told Mr Akashi that Japan was prepared to provide 12.45 per cent
of the Dollars 200m start-up cost for UNTAC, the same proportion as Tokyo's
contribution to the overall UN budget.
Mr Akashi is on his way to Cambodia to take up the UNTAC post in mid-March.
He also told Watanabe Japan should build a storage depot on its soil for
supplies for UN peace-keeping operations and establish a training centre for
peace-keepers, ministry officials said.
In a meeting with Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister, on Tuesday, Mr
Akashi said UNTAC planned to finish deploying its troops in Cambodia by May
and to disarm 470,000 regular and militia troops of Cambodia's four factions
and repatriate 370,000 refugees from Thailand by October, ministry officials
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920312

