FT924-11905

FT  23 OCT 92 / Money Markets: Improved liquidity


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE LIQUIDITY problem that dogged the sterling cash market in the early part
of this week eased yesterday after most of the shortage forecast by the Bank
of England was removed in the early round, writes James Blitz.
For most of this week, the sterling market has been very illiquid. This is
partly because of the reluctance of dealers to offer bills to the Bank at
current dealing rates, fearing that there will be another base rate cut to
follow last Friday's.
Last week, for example, the Bank issued a 26-day repurchase agreement at the
9 per cent structure of base rates, only to signal a cut in base rates two
days later. Dealers would not want to be caught out by such a move again.
There are also big shortages in the market. This is partly due to the tax
collection period which begins around now, leaving banks short of funds.
But one discount house dealer said that the market continues to be hampered
by the absence of a broad base of liquidity. Discount houses, he said, do
not have many bills to offer the Bank, because commercial banks are no
longer obliged to deposit a minimum proportion of funds with the London
discount market.
As a result of the shortage, the overnight rate opened yesterday at 18 per
cent, with 1 month money offered 1 3/8 per cent above base rate.
The Bank of England forecast a shortage of Pounds 1.8bn in the morning. But,
to the surprise of some players, Pounds 1.3bn of bills were sold to the Bank
in the early round.
One commercial bank dealer suggested that the bills had been offered by a UK
clearing bank which wanted to get the short-dated rates down to manage its
book. The bank could have 'locked itself in' to lending money at 9 7/8 per
cent in the morning, later borrowing money on the interbank market as the
rate dropped to 8 3/4 per cent.
The move helped to push short-dated rates down. Three-month money closed at
7 3/4 per cent offered, down  1/4 per cent on the day. The December short
sterling contract, which hit a low of 93.25 before the early round in the
cash market, rose to a close of 93.36 at the end of trading. Strictly
speaking, this assumes that 3-month money will be trading at 6 1/2 per cent
by Christmas.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921023

