FT923-9501

FT  05 AUG 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: Mods versus Skinheads - Peter Berlin
watches a consummate team sport in a rough part of town


   By PETER BERLIN


THE MODS took on the Skinheads the other night in Barcelona. It was quite a
rumble.
This wasn't some polite Olympic contest in one of the air-conditioned,
hill-top sports palaces built for the Games. This was a street affair fought
in a sweaty old gym near one of the rougher parts of town.
The US men's volleyball team, winners of gold at the last two Olympics, took
on the younger, bigger Italians, who are the reigning world champions.
The Italians had already won their qualifying group and the US was sure of
second place, so this was a battle for pride and a psychological edge should
the two meet again in the gold medal game. The battle lasted three hours.
First came finger-pointing and stares. Then the hitting started: violent and
unrelenting. Volleyball may not be a contact sport, but it is not short of
aggression.
In a game where the two teams are separated by a net, looks, including
stares, are important.
The US team, half of whom give as their home towns beaches in southern
California, shaved their heads last week to express solidarity with their
bald team-mate, Bob Samuelson, following a yellow-card dispute which cost
them an earlier match.
It was a brave thing to do, especially as Samuelson, who has no facial hair
and therefore no experience of razors, did most of the shaving. Even with
five days' growth (Samuelson excepted) the team look highly menacing - and
thoroughly stupid.
The Italians, all star players with the big professional clubs in the
Italian league, also pay close attention to their hair: short but not staid
with a little something to hold it in place even when they are diving around
the floor and leaping in the air and sweating like flying pigs.
Their oldest player, Andrea 'Lucky' Lucchetta, 29, sports a particularly
impressive topiary which builds to a delicate coxcomb along his parting.
The basic strategy of volleyball is simple. If your opponents manage to get
the ball past the blockers at the net, you have three touches to create a
killing attack of your own. The first will usually be a defensive scoop or
'dig' which guides the ball to the team's setter.
He pushes the ball up in the air, usually to a pre-arranged spot, where one
of the big men should be flying in to windmill it down on the other side.
The best attackers have such powerful vertical jumps that they seem to hang
in the air, assessing the defence, before battering the ball.
Most teams have two or three reliable hit men. The Italians can put six men
on court at once who can deliver the knock-out blow. On some plays five men
can be flying towards the net at once as part of a choreographed attack.
This is the Raging Bull school of volleyball.
The joy of volleyball is that it is not a contact sport, said Sylvie Bigras,
the assistant Canadian chef de mission at the Olympics and a former junior
international, as she watched her countrymen pounded into the plastic
matting by the big-hitting Italians 15-11 8-15 15-12 15-7.
It is also 'the consummate team sport. A player can't control the ball as it
rebounds off his body, and run with it.'
Against the US, Italy came out punching, Andrea Zorzi, 2 metres tall and
designer-stubbled, circling far off the court to get the best angle of
attack for his roundhouse rights. The Italians' other 2-metre man, Andrea
Gardini, smashed imperious attacks from centre of the court.
'They're a very physical team. Big strong, good jumpers, hittting the snot
out of the ball,' said Bob Ctvrtlik, one of four US team members who play in
the Italian league. 'Everything is a power game.'
By the start of the second set, the Americans were punchy. But in
volleyball, where the six men on court must defend as one, move as one and
think as one, sudden shifts of mood are common.
'Momentum is everything in volleyball - more than any other sport,' said
Ctvrtlik. 'It comes in waves.'
Simply by hanging on, the US broke what Italian coach Jose Velasco called
'the rhythm of our concentration'. Somehow the tide had turned. The US
fought back to win 9-15 16-14 15-11 15-11 on their sixth match point.
'We rely on defence and slowing the ball rather than stuffing it,' said
Ctvrtlik. 'The Italians are not used to having the ball come back. The US
tactic is to wear them down.'
Velasco agreed: 'If an opposing defence plays well, we lose our rhythm of
concentration. For Italy to win, we had to defend and block as well as
attack.'
In the quarter-finals today the US play the Unified Team, about whom they
are superstitious and suspicious. Italy play the Netherlands.
Each teams will keep a wary eye on the other's progress.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920805

