FT922-4102

FT  08 JUN 92 / G7 summit set to streamline supply of expertise to eastern
Europe


   By PETER NORMAN and QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


THIS year's Group of Seven economic summit in Munich will be asked to
approve the creation of special co-ordination groups to improve the supply
of western expertise to the former communist countries of eastern Europe and
the former Soviet Union, write Peter Norman and Quentin Peel in Bonn.
Mr Horst Kohler, the German government sherpa, or official, preparing next
month's summit, said the states could no longer cope with the different
advice and technical assistance supplied by western states.
He told the Financial Times that the G7 sherpas, representing the US, Japan,
Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada, had already reached broad
agreement for the summit to give the go-ahead to so-called country
co-ordination groups to aid each of the emerging market economies.
These would link the efforts of the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank and possibly the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development with
those of interested western countries to ensure that macro- and
micro-economic advice is better co-ordinated, and to eliminate some of the
overlap and competition among western countries providing assistance. This
would also give the G7 something to offer Russian President Boris Yeltsin,
who will join the G7 leaders for talks after the summit.
The main goal of the summit, which runs from July 6 to 8, will be to boost
the confidence of western businesses and consumers and foster economic
recovery. Mr Kohler said Germany, as the host country, was keen developing
countries should not be left out of this process.
He said the summit would not institutionalise a new north-south dialogue.
But there were many areas of shared interest between the industrial and
developing countries, ranging from the environment, through economic growth,
to combating the drugs trade and controlling immigration and epidemics. The
prospects for more fruitful contacts had increased since the collapse of
communism and the increased adoption of market economics and ideas of good
governance in the developing world.
The proposed focus on north-south relationships would give leaders a break
from issues which could make the summit one of the more acrimonious G7
gatherings.
The still-faltering state of world growth, Germany's high interest rates and
the problems it is facing in absorbing the new eastern Lander, the
possibility that the Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation talks will stay
stalled until after November's US presidential election and the difficulties
surrounding the former Soviet Union's emergence from communist dictatorship
have set the scene for a meeting where there will be no easy answers.
The sherpas have so far failed to reach agreement on one important summit
issue: how best to make safe the nuclear power stations of the former east
bloc. 'We are not going to solve all the problems of the world at a stroke.
It could be a failure,' Mr Kohler admits.
However, Germany is doing its utmost to make the summit a success. For
example, Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, has brought forward by two
weeks the deadline for finalising next year's federal budget, to show that
Germany is earnest about cutting the fiscal deficits caused by unification.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920608

