FT923-10905

FT  28 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Ghana points the way along
Africa's golden road - Growing interest in the mining potential of the
continent's sub-Saharan region


   By KENNETH GOODING


A USDollars 165m syndicated loan is at present being finalised that should
enable Ashanti Goldfields Corporation of Ghana to expand production and join
the relatively exclusive band of companies that each produce more than 1m
troy ounces of gold a year.
Ashanti's production boost is part of a gold mining renaissance in Ghana
since a new Minerals Code was enacted in 1986, together with incentives and
tax arrangements that the mining industry considers very reasonable.
Ghana's gold production has jumped from an annual eight tonnes in the early
1980s to 18 tonnes last year.
'Given the outstanding geology and well-organised institutional environment,
it is quite conceivable that by 1996 Ghana could be producing between 45 and
50 tonnes of gold a year,' suggests Mr Mark Keatley, senior investment
officer at the International Finance Corporation, an affiliate of the World
Bank.
Not only that, he says, sub-Saharan Africa (which excludes the Arab
countries of North Africa as well as South Africa) has the potential to
produce about 165 tonnes of gold a year - nearly double last year's 84
tonnes and almost as large as Canada's present output.
Past production figures are bound to be distorted, however, because nearly
40 per cent of sub-Saharan African gold production is by small-scale miners,
highly entrepreneurial people known variously as artisans, galampsey or
pailleurs.
Mr Keatley points out that 'they are estimated to produce almost as much
gold as the entire country of Chile and quite possibly much more that is not
reflected in the official statistics'.
At least ten African countries produce gold but about two-thirds of total
output is from three countries: Ghana, Zimbabwe and Zaire.
Ashanti Goldfields, which is 45 per cent owned by Lonrho, the UK-based
conglomerate, with the rest in government hands, is Ghana's gold standard
bearer. It produced 569,475 ounces last year and expects to move up to
670,000 in 1992 and to sustain 1m ounces a year from 1996.
The IFC has also been asked by the government to organise the return of
Ashanti to the international stock markets and this will be done 'when
suitable equity market conditions obtain', says Mr Keatley.
Drawing on the IFC's investment activities in the area and research by the
African Mining Unit of the World Bank, Mr Keatley prepared a paper for the
recent Financial Times World Gold Conference outlining sub-Saharan Africa's
gold potential. He pointed out that much of Africa had the right type of
geology for successful gold mining but not every one of its 44 countries had
the right 'enabling environment', by which he meant infrastructure, legal
systems, official policies and institutional development.
Ghana was an example of what was possible with the right enabling
environment, Mr Keatley suggested. Since 1986 it had yielded three new
world-class gold mines in the Tarkwa basin: Billiton's Bogosu mine producing
three tonnes a year; the Terebie mine a similar amount; and the Iduapriem
mine, majority owned by Golden Shamrock Mines of Australia, three to four
tonnes a year.
Elsewhere in western Africa, Mali had recently introduced a Mining Code
based to some extent on that of Ghana. In Mali Broken Hill Proprietary of
Australia brought a new gold mine into operation in 1990 which is producing
an annual 3 tonnes. This would be expanded to 6 tonnes by 1994 under an
expansion project in which the IFC is involved, said Mr Keatley.
A serious effort was being made to promote another western African country,
Burkina, to international mining companies. 'That country should be regarded
as a priority exploration target,' he said.
Southern Africa's biggest gold producing country is Zimbabwe, which produced
almost 18 tonnes of gold last year. Mr Keatley said the country had an
exceptionally well-developed infrastructure for the mining industry and it
had more than 100 mines.
At one end of the scale were mines such as that operated by Lonrho, with
output of more than five tonnes of gold a year, and Cluff Resources, Falcon
Gold and RTZ, each producing two or three tonnes annually. In contrast many
small mines were producing just over 100 kg each a year.
Zimbabwe was the only country in sub-Saharan Africa that offered gold mining
companies a realistic chance of financing growth through a local stock
market. During the past two years Cluff and Falcon had raised the equivalent
of Dollars 15m by share offerings to finance mine developments.
Other gold-producing countries in southern Africa are Namibia, where the
first gold mine opened in 1989, and Madagascar. But the country estimated to
have the highest potential was Mozambique. In the Manica area of Mozambique
alone there were more than 40 abandoned gold mines with a resource base
estimated at more than 50 tonnes.
Zaire, in east-central Africa, had two gold-bearing provinces. One in its
north east corner has been worked for its gold for two millennia. It might
have been a source of gold for Egypt in ancient times. 'It is not
implausible that the gold of the Pharaohs was brought down the Nile from
this source,' Mr Keatley pointed out.
In more recent times this gold area had been neglected. Most of it was
leased by the Zaire state gold miner, Okimo, which had not invested much in
exploration or development. However, last year the government agreed to
sub-lease part of the concession to a South African/Belgian consortium. This
joint venture - in which the IFC is a founding shareholder - would
eventually produced 2.5 tonnes of gold a year and estimated that sustainable
annual output of 14 tonnes could be achieved in five years.
The other Zaire gold region, containing the deposits of Twangiza and Namoya,
was very difficult to operate in, Mr Keatley pointed out. 'Supplies have to
be trucked for two to six weeks through East Africa to reach the mining
areas. Hydro-electric power stations have been installed in the mountains
but in general the infrastructure is poor.
'On top of these physical constraints, Zaire is presently in the throes of a
political and economic crisis unparalleled in its history. All central
institutions have practically collapsed. So investors interested in these
vast resources need to be well-organised and patient.'
Elsewhere in east-central Africa, while countries such as Burundi, Tanzania,
Kenya and Ethiopia have known geological potential, very little
commercial-scale gold mining is going on.
Mr Keatley suggested that the end of the Cold War, which had devided many
African nations into two ideological camps and lead to distortions in
economic policies, was very positive. Also, the more relaxed international
scene enabled South African mining houses to export their expertise to other
parts of Africa.
However, there was much catching up to be done because during the 1980s
total exploration expenditure in sub-Saharan Africa was only about Dollars
100m a year - 'a major under-investment by all yardsticks'.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920728

