FT923-15519

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, State of the Union: British aim to run a tight ship
 -If there's one thing that the new presidency prides itself on it is the
ability to organise a proper meeting


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   BRUSSELS


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
TAKING OVER the presidency is far more than just becoming the Community's
titular panjandrum for six months. For Britain, it will involve a lot of
work - chairing an enormous number of discussions at a time when the EC has
a crowded international agenda and a civil war to try to settle in
Yugoslavia.
The kudos of pirouetting on the world's stage as EC president may mean less
to Britain, a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and of
the G7 economic elite, than it does to smaller states. But 'governments do
themselves a favour with their own citizens in managing a well-run
presidency', says a senior member of the Council of Ministers secretariat in
Brussels.
And, if there's one thing on which British ministers and civil servants
pride themselves, it is being better than most of their continental
counterparts at preparing EC meetings, making sure they start (and stop) on
time, and ensuring that ministers know what they have (and have not)
decided.
Barring mishaps - most likely to come in the process of ratifying the
Maastricht treaty - the odds are that the next six months will see a rise in
pro-EC opinion in Britain. The natural, geographic feeling that Britons have
of being peripheral to the Community will be temporarily allayed by nightly
television pictures of UK ministers chairing Brussels meetings of the
Twelve, as well as hosting important informal gatherings in London, Kent,
Northamptonshire, Cambridge, Perthshire, with a grand finale in December at
Edinburgh.
More important will be the fact that the UK government itself will have to
temper its own strongly-felt views on the Community. By chairing all
ministerial councils, all meetings of EC ambassadors, all sessions of
official working groups (at least 10 on any Brussels working day), the
presidency might seem to have an enormous opportunity to push its own
national policies. Not so. At the end of the day, EC presidencies need to
find compromises, even at the expense of their national interest.
Germany provided a classic example of this in 1987-88. Having almost
single-handedly wrecked the Danish presidency's attempt to get an EC budget
deal in Copenhagen in December 1987, Chancellor Helmut Kohl secured a deal
two months later under his own presidency, at great expense to Germany in
terms of increased aid to southern EC states. He thus paid, quite literally,
for chalking up a budget deal to his EC presidency.
The same may happen to Britain. In recent weeks it appears to have stepped
up its opposition to the plan by Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission
president, to increase EC spending by a third over 1993-97, partly in the
knowledge that it will have to be more malleable once in the presidency.
During the next six months, the UK can still put forward its national
viewpoint. This will be done by junior ministers while their seniors take
the chair.
More than in the past, recent EC presidencies have been swept along by the
broad tide of mega-events, such as the attempt by the western half of Europe
to cement itself into a political and monetary union in the face of
disintegration in the eastern half.
The UK presidency will lay out its programme, at this month's European
parliament session. Little of its substance may be very British, except its
tone. Nor will much of it necessarily come to pass. Such programmes are not
like the Queen's Speech, with a parliamentary majority to enact it into law.
A presidency does, however, have a power of procrastination, of putting off
Council discussion of things it does not like. The last British presidency
in 1986 was criticised by some EC officials for doing little on the budget,
except to try to stabilise farm spending. This criticism is a bit unfair,
since it was only the following year that the Commission put its 1988-92
financing plan on the table. Nonetheless, it leads one official to hope that
'this time we will get a good, conscientious Community presidency rather
than a good, conscientious British presidency'.
UK presidencies tend to rely less than those of smaller states on the
Commission and the Council secretariat for help, even though the second
institution is acquiring more diplomats to help run the Maastricht-mandated
'common foreign and security policy'. But, in international business, a
presidency can ask its predecessor and successor to join it in the so-called
troika to represent the Community. Britain's troika partners will be
Portugal and Denmark (on the assumption it is still in the EC next spring).

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920701

