FT924-8115

FT  12 NOV 92 / New EC-US trade talks spark optimism on Gatt


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


THE European Community and US plan to resume talks early next week on their
oilseeds dispute and the Uruguay Round farm chapter, in conditions both
sides say could yield a deal.
Mr Ray MacSharry, the EC agriculture commissioner who has resumed his trade
negotiations role after resigning last week amid a bitter Commission row
over the line to pursue, was yesterday confident agreement could be reached.
'We are very, very close to finding a deal and the Commission and the
Council (of EC member states) have given it much more pronounced support,'
Mr MacSharry said last night.
The US is also optimistic that progress can be made from the point
negotiations were left last week after three days of abortive negotiations
in Chicago, according to senior American officials.
Mr MacSharry is returning to the talks after a showdown meeting on Tuesday
night with European Commission president Jacques Delors, whom he had accused
of undermining his efforts. US officials and farm groups welcomed the news
of Mr MacSharry's reinstatement.
After discussions with farm lobbyists, Mr Ed Madigan, the US agriculture
secretary, concluded that Mr MacSharry had obtained the negotiating
authority needed to get a deal done.
There was strong backing inside the Commission yesterday for Mr MacSharry,
as well as relief that the internal confrontation - which some senior
officials feel could have led to Mr Delors' resignation - had ended.
Sir Leon Brittan, EC competition commissioner, summed up the mood by saying
that 'when they come back with a deal, that deal will get our support'.
Mr Frans Andriessen, chief European Community negotiator, said he was
confident the EC and the US would strike a broad deal to clear the way for a
worldwide agreement under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Mr John Major, prime minister, and German chancellor Helmut Kohl issued a
joint public welcome to the resumption of talks, insisting that a rapid
conclusion to the Gatt would help ward off an international recession. At a
news conference concluding the annual Anglo-German summit, in Oxfordshire,
Mr Major said 'calm discussion, not sabre-rattling' was the way to reach an
accord to finalise the Uruguay Round. 'I have no doubt that a Gatt
settlement is within our grasp.'
In a similarly conciliatory mood, Mr Kohl dismissed as 'ridiculous'
suggestions that he had been urged by Mr Major to press France to agree to a
resumption of the EC-US talks.
Mr Arthur Dunkel, director general of Gatt, was due in Brussels for talks
with Mr Andriessen and Mr MacSharry today. He is set to travel to Washington
this weekend to hold discussions with Mr Madigan and Ms Carla Hills, US
trade representative.
France, meanwhile, will be waiting to pounce on evidence that of any deal
being is incompatible with reform of the Common Agriculture Policy.
Since this is a matter of judgment about future farm output and prices,
there is still plenty of scope for confrontation.
A week of manoeuvres, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921112

