FT923-9691

FT  04 AUG 92 / Letter: Single measures cannot rescue British industry


   From SIRIPURAPU K RAO


Sir, Edward Balls ('Too lean for a long life', July 27) puts his finger on
the most worrying aspect of the current economic situation in Britain when
he says that, even in the depths of the recession, current account is in
deficit by nearly 2 per cent of the GDP.
The intention to continue within the ERM at the present exchange rate is
damaging to industry. Edward Balls clearly sees devaluation as the answer.
I agree that devaluation is necessary. I do not believe, however, that there
is any one simple measure that will be sufficient.
What is needed instead is a package of policy. I see three elements to it:
a devaluation by, say, 15-20 per cent within the ERM framework;
a sharper reduction in public spending as a proportion of GDP than is
currently intended;
and increased public spending and improved incentives, within the diminished
total public expenditure, in support of investment in manufacturing, and
training.
While a devaluation would be inflationary, a realistic adjustment of the
exchange rate, coupled with a commitment to stay within the ERM, should help
to improve confidence which is fast evaporating.
Such action may accordingly prove less damaging to interest rate prospects
than might have been feared.
At the same time, a declared intention to reduce public spending in the
medium term (as the government has done, but needs to go further) would help
to undermine inflationary pressures, and improve prospects for cuts in
interest rates.
Finally, a reordering of priorities in public spending, within a diminished
total in favour of manufacturing and training, need not be at the expense of
health, education or the necessary welfare expenditures.
In the wake of reduced east-west tensions, there is an obvious opportunity
for it through even more aggressive cutbacks in defence expenditure than the
government has been prepared for so far.
Siripurapu K Rao,
Flat 4,
7 Maresfield Gardens,
London NW3 5SJ

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920804

