FT924-12042

FT  22 OCT 92 / World Stock Markets: China trade hopes drive Hong Kong to
new peak - The colony's outstanding success against other international
equity markets in 1992


   By SIMON DAVIES


After a summer lull, Hong Kong has reasserted itself as the best performing
major stock market in the world this year. Investors have reacted with
enthusiasm as the colony has slid off the hook of another US/China trade
dispute, and the upsurge looks set to continue.
The Hang Seng index finished May at 6,080.15, up 41 per cent over the first
five months of 1992. After that it was volatile, peaking at 6,162.53 in July
but retreating to 5,291.49 by August 25.
The index has recovered this month, anticipating, then celebrating a Sino/US
trade agreement which has smoothed China's path towards membership of GATT.
This should ensure enormous trade flows through Hong Kong, and has more than
made up for any perceived China-baiting by the colony's new governor.
After a 6.9 per cent rise last week, the market has continued to climb. Late
buying yesterday drove turnover up from HKDollars 3.45bn to HKDollars 4.19bn
(Dollars 544m), and took the Hang Seng up another 112.34 to a new record
high of 6,200.85 amid rumours that mainland Chinese money was coming in to
support the action.
It has been a case of economics getting the better of politics. On the
political front, there is uncertainty in Mr Chris Patten's aggressively open
policy on the airport talks with China and his push for further democracy
within the Basic Law, Hong Kong's mini-constitution after 1997. These will
result in a tense few days during his first visit to Beijing.
Further afield, the US elections will inevitably cast their shadow on Hong
Kong, both because of the impact they could have on interest rates and on
the local currency (the Hong Kong dollar is pegged to the US dollar), and
because of their potential impact on trade relations between China and the
US.
But last week, international institutions decided that with China becoming a
more positive theme and the colony's economic growth trend appearing
assured, they had had enough of waiting.
Even by Hong Kong standards, a 388-point climb in the Hang Seng Index in
just one week is a major vote of confidence; and the outlook remains
extremely positive.
Uncertainty about the performance of Mr Patten in Beijing has encouraged
some profit-taking, but if one ultimately believes that Hong Kong's airport
will be built (and few realistically dispute this), then the stock market
looks to be winding up for its Chinese New Year bull run.
Most analysts are anticipating more than 20 per cent corporate earnings
growth in the current year, followed up by a similar level in 1993. If the
market were to rise to an internationally modest 1993 price-earnings ratio
of 13 from its current 1993 p/e of around 10.9, this would leave the Hang
Seng Index at more than 7,500.
At present there is a wave of foreign capital which is supporting this
upward push, aided by a shortage of alternatives amongst the lacklustre
global stock markets.
SG Warburg Securities estimates that the Hong Kong market will raise
HKDollars 57bn from new equity in 1992, up 60 per cent from 1991. But with
HKDollars 48bn in dividend income and an estimated HKDollars 54bn inflow of
foreign institutional capital, the stock market is riding on a wave of
liquidity.
In addition, Hong Kong investors are still faced with negative interest
rates (inflation has fallen to 9 per cent, but the prime rate is 6.5 per
cent) and a soft residential property market, which leave few alternative
havens for capital.
Many analysts argue that Hong Kong should return to a p/e rating compatible
with other Asian markets now that the force of China's economic
transformation is clear and Deng Xiaoping's great reform programme is
finally written in stone, after last week's 14th Party Congress.
'We are now seeing a continuation of the structural re-rating that began
earlier this year, now that several concerns have been lifted. This market
has a long way to go,' says Mr Sheldon Kasowitz, research manager at Jardine
Fleming Securities.
The longer-term concerns are a US-induced reversal of the interest rate
trend and a heavy-handed reaction to the red-hot Chinese economy; but in the
meantime, the bulls are definitely back.

The Financial Times


London Page 41

921022

