FT923-15630

FT  01 JUL 92 / Bonn fails to back the EFA: Coalition calls for cheaper,
slimline version of proposed Eurofighter


   By QUENTIN PEEL and PAUL BETTS


   BONN, LONDON


GERMANY'S ruling coalition partners yesterday refused to give the green
light for production of the European Fighter Aircraft developed with
Britain, Italy and Spain, but stopped short of pulling out of the programme.
In Bonn, the coalition partners indicated their preferred course of action
was to build a cheaper, slimline fighter developed on the same basis and
with the same partners, to be called the Eurofighter 2000. They suggested
that other European partners, meaning France, might be brought back into the
programme.
The apparent ambivalence in the German position has left the UK government
still not wholly convinced that the original project has collapsed, putting
thousands of aerospace jobs at risk. Urgent talks will now be held between
London, Rome and Madrid on how to interpret Bonn's position.
Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, will also face discreet
questioning when he comes to London on a long-scheduled visit next Monday.
Hopes remain that Germany's official retreat from the EFA project is chiefly
aimed at heading off domestic political criticism.
The compromise was seized on by both supporters and opponents of the EFA as
a victory. Britain, Italy and Spain will have to decide if they are ready to
negotiate with Germany on a cheaper and lighter aircraft, still modelled on
the EFA.
Mr Ruhe claimed the decision meant the end of the 'Jager-90', as the EFA is
called in Germany, but admitted that the new aircraft would be developed on
the same basis.
Members of the Christian Social Union, the Bavarian-based coalition partner
which has fought furiously to save the project, said the decision meant
little more than 'a change of labels'. The fighter programme would continue
'at a lower level', one official said.
The UK, which like Germany has a 33 per cent stake in the programme,
indicated it was prepared to discuss with Germany and the other two partners
the future of the EFA. Government officials insisted that while 'no one
wants Germany to leave the programme' conversion of the project to build a
less sophisticated aircraft was not a viable option.
UK officials also said they were encouraged that Germany had decided to stay
in the development stage of the programme, which would allow all partners to
review the situation again.
British Aerospace, however, said it continued to believe, 'as every
consortium study has shown, that EFA remains the most cost effective means
of meeting the common operational requirements of the four air forces'.
It also added that it did not believe a lighter version of EFA would fill
air force requirements and that other options would be more expensive than
the original programme.
One possibility mooted last night was for Germany to acquire the EFA
airframe but to equip the aircraft with its own avionics and radar systems
to reduce its overall cost.
Mr John Major, the British prime minister, also stressed in the House of
Commons that the UK still considered EFA to be the best solution for the
four countries.
BAe claimed last night that EFA could still be completed by the three other
partners within the prescribed costs of about Pounds 20bn for the
four-nation programme without Germany.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, UK defence secretary, said the cost implications of a
German withdrawal could be minimised by rationalising production plans.
The decision was also greeted with some relief by Deutsche Aerospace, the
aerospace arm of Daimler-Benz.
'It is positive that they say the co-operation should be continued, and that
a new fighter aircraft is needed by the Luftwaffe around the year 2000,' the
company said.
'We will now have to consider the decision in detail, and investigate how
the failure to go ahead with production preparations will affect our
operations.'
The compromise resolution agreed by the joint parliamentary group of the
Christian Democrats and CSU said the 'Jager-90 in its present form is too
expensive. The total system price . . . must be substantially reduced'.
After declaring that a new fighter is 'absolutely necessary' for the
Luftwaffe 'around the year 2000', the decision states that 'the European
co-operation of the four EFA partners should be continued and if possible
extended to bring in further partners'.
Casa, the Spanish partner in the programme, said it was committed to EFA.
'It is not true that Spain would leave the consortium if Germany withdraws,'
said Mr Jose Alvarez Vara, Casa's chairman.
But a decision on an increase in Spain's 13 per cent participation in the
project would be delayed.
Additional reporting by Tom Burns

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920701

