FT921-14216

FT  17 JAN 92 / Stoltenberg urges wider role for army


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


MR Gerhard Stoltenberg, the German defence minister, yesterday called for
the German armed forces to be given the green light to take part in
peace-keeping and peace-making exercises across the globe.
The debate over the future role of the Bundeswehr, and its involvement in
operations outside the area of the Nato alliance, has blown up once again,
at the same time as a parliamentary committee starts work on an overhaul of
the German constitution.
The Gulf war, the need for international peacekeeping forces in Yugoslavia,
and the possibility of other conflicts in the former Soviet Union, have
focused public attention on the constitutional restrictions on Germany
taking part in such exercises.
In spite of a degree of political consensus over participation in United
Nations peacekeeping exercises, government and opposition are divided over
the limits to be put on it.
Thus the opposition Social Democrats (SPD), whose support is needed for any
constitutional amendment, are adamant that German troops should only be used
for peace-keeping, not for peace-making or intervention.
Mr Stoltenberg presented to parliament the report of an independent
commission into the future role of the Bundeswehr, recommending its use in
'international actions to secure peace and maintain international law'. He
said the Bundeswehr should also be involved in the building of a defence arm
to the future European political union, and that German armed forces 'should
be able to take part in the whole spectrum of international actions in the
framework of the United Nations charter'.
The defence minister said that the defence budget for the coming years had
been reduced to DM9bn (Pounds 3.1bn) a year, a real cut of almost half in
the level of spending of the mid-1980s. Any further cuts were unacceptable.
Mr Walter Kolbow, a defence spokesman for the SPD, said the demand of the
government for such a sweeping 'out of area' role for the Bundeswehr
remained unacceptable to the opposition. He also insisted that further
budget cuts were feasible, including abandonment of the European Fighter
Aircraft (EFA).

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920117

