FT924-918

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (3):  Key factor to
success - Market trends


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


IT has been a bad year for Japanese companies. The interim profit season
during the past weeks has reflected the sharp downturn in the Japanese
economy as companies have turned in the steepest earnings declines in 17
years.
Amidst the gloom, however, some companies have posted strong growth in sales
and earnings. The key factor to success has been the 'back to basics' trend,
as consumers shunned the luxury market to turn to cheaper products offering
good quality.
Japanese consumers are tightening their belts and have started to embrace
frugality. Such changes have bolstered business at Yoshinoya, the 'beef
bowl' fast food chain, which saw a 34.4 per cent rise in interim pre-tax
profits on an 18.6 per cent increase in sales.
Yoshinoya, helped by the liberalisation of beef imports, offers customers a
'gyudon' - a bowl of rice topped with stewed beef - at Y400. Many companies
targeted the higher end of the market by raising prices in the eighties as
some consumers equated higher prices with higher quality. But Yoshinoya has
maintained the same prices on its menu for the past eight years.
Other food outlets are seeing a sharp fall in clientele but Yoshinoya has
managed to increase business by keeping prices low and constantly looking
for ways to cut costs.
During the boom years of the late eighties, when stock and land prices
surged, the average Japanese felt rich, bought expensive cars, jewellery and
art. However, the bubble economy's demise has prompted consumers to tighten
their belts. Department stores' sales are declining along with sales of
luxury items.
For the year ended last February, Japanese department stores saw the first
decline in sales of foreign brand products for eight years. Sales of foreign
goods declined 11.3 per cent, following an 11 per cent rise the previous
year. Direct imports by department stores fell 38.4 per cent, including a
69.2 per cent plunge in sales of arts, crafts and paintings.
The age when consumers were willing to pay high prices for almost any
product is over. Now some top retailers are losing business to discounters.
Aoyama Trading, a retailer of cheap blue suits for office workers, recently
opened a store in the Ginza, the ritzy shopping area in central Tokyo.
Japanese men have forsaken expensive Italian designer suits - a fad in the
late eighties - for jackets at Y2,500, an eighth of department store prices,
and Y30,000 suits, a third of the usual price.
Aoyama, listed on the first section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange, posted a 34
per cent rise in sales for the six months to September, while pre-tax
profits rose 3.7 per cent. Aoki International, also a roadside bulk retailer
of men's clothing, saw firm increases in sales and profits.
Meanwhile, high-technology toy makers also proved to be winners. Sega
Enterprises saw pre-tax profits surging 83 per cent while Nintendo improved
its earnings by 5.5 per cent. An increase in sales of lucrative software
supported profits.
As companies try to adjust to slow growth, most are finding the need to
resume streamlining efforts by Japanese companies in the eighties - which
were cut off by the economic bubble when companies rushed to increase
capacity in order to fulfil the surge in demand.
Kao, the toiletries maker, enjoyed brisk sales of its household detergents,
cosmetics and sanitary products. It says cost reduction efforts during the
eighties, and in-house campaigns to enhance consumer awareness by offering
easier-to-use containers for its shampoos and detergents, are now paying
off. 'We're not benefiting from the economic downturn, we just weren't
bloated like other companies,' says Kao.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921221

