FT922-13440

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: Now cheaper mortgages are in sight


   By DAVID BARCHARD


THE TORY victory has brought a huge sigh of relief in the world of mortgages
and savings products. Bank and building society mortgage customers can look
forward to slightly lower interest rates in the next few months than they
would done had Labour won, and further falls over the next 18 months.
'I think the result means that the housing market will pick up reasonably
briskly. I am not expecting a boom, but there will be a much more positive
environment than there has been for the past few months,' says Duncan Grant,
chief executive of the Household Mortgage Corporation.
John Wriglesworth, housing analyst at City stockbroker UBS Phillips & Drew,
also says he expects a recovery in the housing market in the second half of
this year and a further fall of about 1 per cent in base rates by the
year-end. And he forecasts a rise in house prices next year of up to 6 per
cent.
More generally, banks warned that the rise in the markets after Thursday's
Conservative triumph might not be sustained for long. 'I think it will fall
back in due course,' says Peregrine Banbury, head of investments at Coutts,
the private banking arm of the NatWest group.
It is the savings side of their business which worries the building
societies. During the past few months, they have been vulnerable on several
fronts. Rates have come down and they are now facing competition from gilts.
Before the election, some funds were going offshore. Worst of all, they face
a serious challenge from National Savings.
'There have got to be level playing fields. If the return on National
Savings is dictated by things which are nothing to do with the markets, but
reflect the government's need for cash, we are going to face a very
difficult time,' says one society.
Because a Conservative government probably will need to borrow less than
Labour would have done, and because there will be some more privatisations,
the threat from National Savings might not be as great as it could have been
under Labour.
Even so, the building societies are looking forward anxiously to July when
the Guaranteed Bond is to be introduced. They believe the bond - which has
an advantage of about half a percentage point - will be marketed strongly by
the government. To bridge that gap, several top societies were muttering
before the election about a rise in rates on their savings products.
Alastair Begg, joint managing director at Kleinwort Benson Private Banking,
said he thought the election result would not make much difference for many
people. But the prospect of relative certainty in the markets, and a gradual
revival in the housing sector, should be good news for most homeowners.
Savers may not see such high interest rates - but they could be safer from
inflation than they would have been under Labour.
And yet, as one senior banker said on Friday: 'I still worry that in a few
weeks all the euphoria will have disappeared but all the problems of the
economy will still be with us.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920411

