FT922-7159

FT  20 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Leeds Group jumps by 34% as diversification
pays off


   By PETER PEARSE


LEEDS Group, textile dyer, printer and finisher, yesterday announced a 34
per cent jump in pre-tax profits from Pounds 1.87m to Pounds 2.51m for the
six months ended March 31 1991. The shares rose 14p to 406p.
The company had benefited from diversification - started before the
recession - away from its traditional apparel business, and moves from long
to short fabric runs.
Mr Robert Wade, chairman and managing director, said Leeds' 'steady growth
in an unattractive sector' could in part be ascribed to a much more 'normal'
pattern of trading - last time a satisfactory first quarter was spoiled by a
poor second; this time the performance was more 'solid' throughout.
Decreasing the reliance on apparel with moves into furnishing fabrics, which
had shown growth, and military camouflage, where Leeds has secured seven
contracts with non-UK defence ministries, had broadened the base of the
company, Mr Wade said, offsetting the 50 to 60 per cent downturn in its
conventional apparel business.
He pointed to the contribution of Strines Textiles, the high-tech printer
acquired last April which caters to the top end of the market, in particular
making dress prints for Liberty, the fabrics retailer. Strines added Pounds
400,000 to group profits after acquisition costs.
The fall in demand for volume production, prompted both by clothing
manufacturers' reluctance to commit themselves to long print runs, and the
flighty demands of the fashion industry, was more than compensated by Leeds'
concentration on short-run contracts.
On these, some efficiency is lost, but delivery times are greatly shortened.
The ability to leave dyeing or printing as late as possible in the
production process - producer colourisation - also helps speed up response
to demand.
Group turnover rose 48 per cent to Pounds 20.4m. The interim dividend is
lifted 17 per cent to 3.5p (3p), payable from earnings per share - diluted
by the 1m shares issued in the acquisition of Strines - up from 11.5p to
14.2p.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920520

