FT921-12075

FT  29 JAN 92 / Health care fracas leaves Darman bruised: The budget
director's embarrassing row


   By LIONEL BARBER


MR Richard Darman, the most talented, original and mistrusted member of
President George Bush's cabinet, has long been riding for a fall.
This week Mr Bush's budget director finally stumbled, the victim of a
congressional Republican revolt over health care proposals included in the
president's fiscal 1993 budget.
Mr Darman personally penned the proposals, which included taxes on the
richest Americans whose employers pay for their health insurance. On Monday,
just as the printing presses were rolling, Mr Samuel Skinner, the new White
House chief of staff, ordered deletions from offending passages.
The embarrassing last-minute changes amount to more than a power struggle
between Mr Darman and Mr Skinner, who wants to curb the budget director's
influence on domestic policy.
The order to 'stop the presses' goes to the heart of the Bush
administration's dilemma ahead of the November 1992 election: how to
reconcile the short-term political requirements of ensuring the president's
re-election with the need to tackle the country's long-term problems, such
as health care.
About 37m Americans have no health insurance. Yet federal spending on health
care entitlements is growing at an explosive rate, undermining efforts to
reduce the budget deficit, likely to reach Dollars 360bn (Pounds 198.8bn)
this year. At the same time, Democrat presidential candidates have made
health care reform one of their campaign centre-pieces.
Under Mr Darman's original plan, the government would have taxed as income a
portion of the employer-provided health benefits for Americans earning
between Dollars 100,000 and Dollars 125,000, and charged the wealthy higher
premiums for Medicare, the public-sector scheme for the elderly. This would
have helped to fund tax credits for poor and middle-income Americans to buy
insurance or offset insurance costs which employers failed to cover.
Mr Darman, who prides himself as one of the few long-term thinkers in the
administration, argued that his proposals would preserve the pay-as-you-go
principle set down in the 1990 budget reduction agreement with Congress. But
congressional Republicans, angry at the lack of consultation, called the
plan nave.
In part, these suspicions are a legacy of the 1990 budget accord which
included tax increases supported by Mr Bush. Conservatives accuse Mr Darman
and Mr John Sununu, then White House chief of staff, the two architects of
the accord, of betrayal. Many congressional Republicans believe that
forfeiting the 'no new taxes' pledge cost them their best re-election card.
Another factor fuelling resentment is that Mr Darman - in the words of one
White House colleague - 'has controlled virtually every single comma on the
domestic agenda'. His skill at the bureaucratic game helped ensure huge
influence in an administration where the president's mind has often been
focused on foreign affairs.
Since moving in as chief of staff, Mr Skinner has made clear his
determination to broaden the circle of advisers to the president and beef up
the White House domestic policy unit. Inevitably this means cutting Mr
Darman down to size; the health care fracas looks like the first of several
bruising clashes.

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Photograph Richard Darman, prides himself on long-term
thinking (Omitted).

920129

