FT924-12156

FT  22 OCT 92 / IoM pays Pounds 4.5m over failed bank


   By SUE STUART


THE MANX government is to make ex-gratia payments totalling Pounds 4.5m to
depositors with the Savings and Investment Bank, which crashed in the Isle
of Man in 1982.
The island's parliament voted overwhelmingly yesterday in favour of making
the payments in an effort to put the whole saga to rest.
The bank failed with debts of Pounds 42m and about 3,000 creditors. Many had
deposits of Pounds 20,000 or less in the bank and some lost their life
savings.
The ex-gratia payment scheme was proposed by Mr Miles Walker, the island's
chief minister, and is designed particularly to help smaller depositors. The
payment will be 50 per cent of the amount on deposit, subject to a maximum
payment of Pounds 5,000.
Mr Walker told the parliament that the scheme was based on a compensation
scheme available in mainland UK in 1982. That scheme allowed 75 per cent
compensation but retained the right to take assignments that depositors
received from other sources. Because the Manx scheme will not take
depositors' other assignments, the amount has been set at 50 per cent. The
bank's creditors have only received 27p in the Pounds 1 from the liquidation
and are unlikely to recover more.
Mr Walker reminded members of parliament that the two main reports into the
bank's failure had condemned the banking supervision of the Manx government
of the day.
However, the depositors' case alleging negligence against Manx government
officers and politicians was lost when it went before the UK Privy Council
in April 1990.
Mr Walker said: 'We have no legal responsibility to make any payment to any
depositor.' The Manx government views the scheme as a gesture of goodwill.
For many depositors, however, those payments are too little, too late. Mr
Ken Potts, a depositor on the committee of inspection, said he and a group
of other depositors intended to return to the courts after they had received
the ex-gratia payment. The Chadwick report into the bank's failure,
published last month, has furnished them with previously withheld
information that they feel will give them a sound case against the Manx
government or its officers for full compensation.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921022

