FT922-7341

FT  19 MAY 92 / Thai army fires on protesters


   By VICTOR MALLET


   BANGKOK


THAI TROOPS struggling to regain control of Bangkok fired on anti-government
demonstrators in the city centre with machine guns and rifles last night,
killing at least seven people and wounding more than 100.
Witnesses said the soldiers fired volley after volley at thousands of
protesters outside the Royal Hotel. The building became a focal point on the
second night of mass protests aimed at forcing the resignation of General
Suchinda Kraprayoon, the prime minister.
Doctors inside the hotel, where dozens of injured people took refuge, said
there were six dead there.
Early today, renewed gunfire drove protesters away from an area they had
occupied on a central boulevard and the military said it had set up squads
to hunt down rioters.
The violence, which has been concentrated in a large area of the city near
the Democracy Monument, has aroused concern among foreign investors and
Thailand's trading partners.
In Tokyo, Japan's government spokesman Mr Koichi Kato said he hoped order
would be restored quickly. 'Political stability in Thailand is extremely
important for the stability of south-east Asia, and therefore we are
concerned,' he said.
The Foreign Office in London advised Britons to delay any travel to Bangkok
and in Washington the US State Department said joint military exercises with
Thailand were under review.
Last night, a Thai military spokesman, in a television announcement, accused
motorcycle gangs of inciting violence among demonstrators.
During yesterday's protests Thai troops fired over the heads of a group of
demonstrators and surrounded them, arresting the opposition leader Mr
Chamlong Srimuang and taking him away in handcuffs. Later, official
announcements said the arrested leaders had been treated well and 'invited
to discuss how to restore peace and order'.
Gen Suchinda imposed a state of emergency in an attempt to restore order,
but the crackdown only served to inflame the now leaderless demonstrators.
Officials said troops had killed at least five people since the start of the
unrest on Sunday.
Tourism, one of Thailand's main foreign exchange earners, is likely to be
seriously affected. Government offices and schools are closed until
Thursday, although banks and the stock market are supposed to reopen today
after a Monday holiday.
Mr Chamlong, a devout Buddhist and anti-corruption campaigner who was once
himself a general in the army, served two terms as governor of Bangkok. Just
before he was arrested, he told reporters that the demonstrators would make
'no compromise at all'.
Gen Suchinda, the former armed forces chief, said the government had no
choice but to use force during this latest round of protests because the
demonstrators were marching on government buildings.
He arranged a coup d'etat last year to overthrow the elected government of
General Chatichai Choonhavan, accusing it of excessive corruption. The
demonstrators want the post of prime minister kept for an elected member of
parliament and to amend the constitution to curb the political influence of
the military.
Opposition leader wins heart of Bangkok, Page 6 Editorial Comment, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920519

