FT924-6437

FT  21 NOV 92 / 40,000 Civil Service jobs to be put out to tender


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


MORE THAN 40,000 Civil Service jobs are to be put out to tender over the
next year under plans to be announced next week by Mr William Waldegrave,
minister for the public services.
In a white paper to be published on Wednesday, Mr Waldegrave will set out
ambitious plans to increase the scale of 'market testing' government
services from Pounds 25m this year to Pounds 1.5bn in the next. Tendering is
expected to be completed by September, with the new contracts operating in
1994.
Staff already doing the work will be encouraged to bid for the contracts,
either as an in-house team, or through a management buy-out. If the staff
bid wins, the team will be required to sign a binding contract giving
details of the standard of work, methods of monitoring and enforcement of
the agreement. The government expects to make savings from market testing of
25 per cent of the value of the services, even when services stay in-house.
Since pay accounts for more than half of Civil Service costs, there are
likely to be significant job losses as a result of the process.
However, Mr Waldegrave will emphasise that improving the quality of service
is as important to market-testing as cost savings.
The range of services to be put out to tender is far greater than in
previous contracting out, which has been largely confined to support
services such as catering, cleaning and security.
Core Civil Service functions such as the collection of statistics and
running the Treasury's economic model are to be included. So, too, will key
defence work such as helicopter maintenance and ship repairs for the armed
services.
The largest part of the programme will be in information technology
services, including the running of the 12 large computers which hold Inland
Revenue data.
Payroll, legal services, audit, accountancy, typing and secretarial services
are also to be contracted out.
The lists of targets for contracting out have been drawn up by departments
with the assistance of consultants. Among their responsibilities has been
ensuring that there will be more than one company interested in bidding for
each contract in order to ensure that there will be competition.
Consultancy advice will be available to advise staff on structuring bids and
reorganising work to become more competitive.
In local government, such restructuring has enabled existing staff to beat
outside contractors for about 80 per cent of the work put out to tender.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921121

