FT923-9612

FT  04 AUG 92 / TWA creditors and unions discuss deal on ownership


   By KAREN ZAGOR


   NEW YORK


TRANS WORLD Airlines, the debt-laden US carrier operating under Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection, yesterday confirmed it was discussing a plan with its
creditors and unions which centres on TWA's owner, Mr Carl Icahn, ceding
control to employees and creditors.
Creditors are expected to forgive about Dollars 1bn (Pounds 520m) of TWA's
roughly Dollars 1.6bn of debt in exchange for a 55 per cent stake in the
airline. They would also receive debt securities and preferred stock. The
remaining 45 per cent of the equity would be held by employees.
Although some labour groups, including the International Association of
Machinists which represents 15,000 TWA employees, are believed to have
agreed to the plan in principle, Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp, which
insures TWA's pension fund, has not yet agreed to the plan and several
unions are still negotiating.
The Air Line Pilots Association, which represents about 2,800 TWA pilots,
said it was participating in negotiations, 'but it's not a done deal yet'.
The pilots want assurances that they are participating in a viable airline.
'We don't want the airline to be sold out from under us if we reach an
agreement,' said Mr Marc Spiegel, ALPA communications chairman.
Another source of concern is TWA's pension plan, which is believed to be
underfunded by about Dollars 1bn. PBGC would oppose any proposal 'that would
break up the controlled group unless it provides adequate protection for the
pension plans', it said.
'We want to make sure that the current controlled group, including Carl
Icahn's controlled entities, stay liable for the Dollars 1bn under-funding
in TWA's pension plans. We will take what action we must to protect the
pension plans including termination, if necessary, as a last resort.'
When TWA announced its 'pre-planned' Chapter 11 filing in February, it said
Mr Icahn would give up his majority equity stake. The latest plan calls for
Mr Icahn to inject about Dollars 150m into the airline to keep it aloft
until it receives bankruptcy court approval. Mr Icahn would then become an
ordinary bond holder in the company.
TWA, the seventh-largest US carrier, has been almost crippled by debt
acquired in 1988, when Mr Icahn borrowed heavily to take the business
private.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920804

