FT921-11937

FT  29 JAN 92 / Regions pay the price of blocked grants row: Depressed rural
and industrial areas will suffer if the Brussels cash is stopped


   By STEWART DALBY, IAN HAMILTON FAZEY and JAMES BUXTON


The long-running dispute between the government and Brussels over EC aid for
Britain's depressed regions has suddenly escalated. Prime minister John
Major yesterday said the money should be released 'speedily' to help fund
regeneration. But if Bruce Millan, European commissioner for the regions,
makes good his threat to block the funds because of the argument over the
way the money is disbursed, it means Pounds 1bn of grants for roads, ports
and other infrastructure could be lost over the next 12 months. FT regional
correspondents look at schemes under threat.
MR Bruce Millan's threat to block grants to depressed British regions
represents an escalation in his campaign to force the government to agree
that the sums should be additional to existing funding.
So far Ecu160m (Pounds 114.7m) - for coal mining areas - has been stopped.
The Ecu1.26bn (Pounds 904m) in funds now being considered covers virtually
all of Britain's depressed industrial and rural areas.
Local authorities of different political persuasions have supported Mr
Millan in his stance against the government. The irony is that partly
because of this support they face the prospect that agreed grants will be
cut off - and they have little chance of gaining additional funds.
Mr Geoffrey Burgess, chief executive of Cornwall County Council - a hung
authority - has backed Mr Millan's stance.
As an example he points out that Cornwall wanted to build 2.5 miles of road
between Falmouth and Penryn at a cost of Pounds 10m. It was to receive a
grant of Pounds 2.78m from an EC structural fund, but the government said
this meant the county would therefore have to find just Pounds 7m to build
the road, so it cut the council's capital spending allowance.
'In other words,' says Mr Burgess, 'the government is using the EC grant to
reduce its capital outlay in the county.
'We feel that the EC grants should be extra to our capital programme. We
have 25 per cent unemployment in places here and we are the one of the
poorest counties in England.'
Cornwall qualifies for grants as an Objective 5b, or rural, area. Strictly
speaking it should benefit from the EC's agricultural guidance and guarantee
fund. This is the smallest of the structural fund pots.
In practice, money from the two large structural funds - the European
Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund - can be used. Even
so, the sums for Cornwall are small.
Most of the other areas affected by the row are designated Objective 2 -
areas of industrial decline. These are where the most of the Pounds 904m
would be spent.
In Scotland, which hopes to get Pounds 96m of the Pounds 904m that Mr Millan
is threatening to hold up, Pounds 12.9m has already been blocked from the
European Regional Development Fund under Rechar, the European Commission's
programme for former coal-mining areas. This has affected the regions of
Strathclyde, Lothian, Fife and Central
Strathclyde, which with 2.2m people includes nearly half the population of
Scotland, fears that it may not be able to relaunch its EC-funded integrated
development operation - due to end in December - because of the row over
additionality.
The regional council is hoping for about Pounds 50m from Brussels next year
to relaunch the series of infrastructure and business generation projects.
The question marks over aid are also worrying councils in north-west England
 -for instance St Helens, which has most of Lancashire's abandoned
collieries and wants to carry out Pounds 10m of work at disused pitheads
using Pounds 5m from Brussels.
Mr Dave Watts, deputy leader of Labour-controlled St Helens Borough Council,
says: 'It ought to be straightforward really, but the government has
complicated things beyond belief. We have no way of putting in our share of
the redevelopment costs unless we take it from other spending . . . Even if
we persuade the private sector to put up the money, government rules say it
has to count against our capital spending.'
He says that there is growing concern about the European Regional
Development Fund. This is worth Pounds 49m to the five Merseyside local
authorities, including St Helens, over the next four years. He adds: 'We are
all on tight budgets and will not be able to find our share of the spending
as things stand.'
Over the Pennines at Bradford in West Yorkshire, the city council needs the
Brussels money for flood-prevention work.
Bradford Beck bursts its banks on average once every 10 years and this
threat could be removed with nearly Pounds 20m of engineering works.
Brussels is willing to pay Pounds 6.5m - but the council fears that under
the government's additionality rules it would have to cut capital from
elsewhere.
Mr David Moss, the city's operations officer for integrated development
says: 'The recession means we have missed the boat.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8 Photograph The Ecu1.4bn in dispute 'could all be in jeopardy',
Bruce Millan (Omitted).

920129

