FT921-594

FT  28 MAR 92 / UK Company News: PW to interview MCC board


   By RAYMOND SNODDY and NORMA COHEN


THE DIRECTORS of Maxwell Communication Corporation have all been been
invited for formal interviews by Price Waterhouse, the administrators of the
publicly quoted Maxwell interests.
The interviews - likely to be held in May - represent a further stage in
Price Waterhouse's process of evaluating every aspect of MCC's activities in
the two years before the company went into administration. It is believed
that the interviews will be conducted by Price Waterhouse investigators with
lawyers present.
It is considered unlikely that either Mr Kevin or Mr Ian Maxwell will be
willing to give voluntary interviews. Both will be interviewed in a private
court hearing under insolvency legislation.
Meanwhile investigative work continues on 2,000 crates of MCC documents. Two
significant strands of work are being simultaneously pursued.
Teams are still trying to reconcile the mass of transactions made by MCC,
many of them between MCC and the Maxwell private interests. About Pounds
6bn-worth of transactions into MCC and Pounds 6bn out have been identified
but it is believed large gaps and transactions are still unaccounted for.
In a presentation to banks in December, Price Waterhouse also made clear
that it was interested in looking in detail at the accounts of MCC to see if
there was any artificial inflation of profits and, if so, who was involved.
That process is now under way.
The Serious Fraud Office, which has seized more than three tons of documents
since November, will soon start looking in detail at the affairs of MCC.
All the signs are however that early prosecutions are unlikely and that the
process of sifting the vast bulk of material by administrators and fraud
investigators alike could continue throughout 1992. Another small bit of the
Maxwell empire has changed hands, having been sold to Mr Brian Gilbert, a
former main board director of MCC.
Mr Gilbert completed the purchase of MBC Data Service, a company
specialising in the publication of annuals and yearbooks particularly for
the legal profession.
Mr Gilbert paid Pounds 3.65m for the small deal which follows hard on the
heels of his purchase of the main industrial magazines of Maxwell Business
Communications for Pounds 5.5m.
Mirror Group Newspapers Pension Scheme has appointed Fleming Investment
Management as its sole investment manager, adds Norma Cohen.
Mr Patrick Johns, marketing director, declined to disclose the value of
assets under management, citing instructions of the pension fund trustees.
However, MGN is believed to have accounted for roughly half of the estimated
Pounds 700m of Maxwell company pension funds, of which Pounds 400m is
believed to have been siphoned off by the late Mr Robert Maxwell.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920328

