FT923-15364

FT  02 JUL 92 / BT pilot scheme allows operators to work at home


   By DIANE SUMMERS, Labour Staff


A PILOT scheme allowing some BT directory inquiries operators to work from
home was launched yesterday in Inverness, Scotland. The scheme is unique,
according to BT, because operators will be able to keep in touch with each
other and their supervisors via videophones.
The year-long experiment is intended to demonstrate to other businesses the
potential of 'teleworking' - working from home using modern
telecommunication systems, including computers and modems. BT itself has no
plans to introduce wide-scale home working for its staff.
Most teleworkers have so far tended to be professionals and those such as
management consultants who for much of the time do not need to be based in
an office. Now BT hopes to demonstrate that other groups of workers,
particularly those doing highly structured and easily monitored tasks, are
also suitable candidates for teleworking. Mail order, ticket agency and
credit checking businesses, for example, could benefit, BT said.
The 10 operators who are working from home are being equipped at a cost of
Pounds 17,000 for each prototype home workstation. Videophones give them
direct contact with supervisors and also allows them to communicate
informally with each other and their colleagues in the main BT centre in
Inverness during breaks. At the end of the working day, the equipment folds
down to the size of a small dining table and is locked.
The experiment is being run by BT's laboratories at Martlesham, near
Ipswich. Mr Mike Gray, head of the laboratories, said BT estimated that more
than 2m Britons could be working from home for at least three days a week by
1995.
'We want to develop the support systems to ease the change in lifestyles.
This experiment is unique. Nowhere in the world has anyone ever used
electronic mail and videophones in this way,' he said.
The effects of working from home, including any feelings of isolation, will
be monitored by Aberdeen University's psychology department.
The Union of Communication Workers, which represents BT operators, said it
had been fully involved and the volunteers would suffer no loss in pay or
conditions.
Mrs Shona McGougan, one of the 10, said working from home would save her a
25-mile round trip to work each day.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920702

