FT921-501

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: User friendly galleries - Open the door and
find yourself welcome


   By WILLIAM PACKER


   THE world of the London art dealer


more village than world - may seem to the outsider closed and private, the
preserve of the initiate, forbidden ground. Trespassers will be humiliated,
says the unwritten notice on the door. Well, only up to a point.
Art in galleries is there to be sold, and therefore there to be seen. Every
dealer in the world knows that appearances can be horribly deceptive. That
man in the shabby mac, admiring the Boucher, may well be the Duke up from
the country, a property millionaire, or a pop star, for all he knows. The
serious point is that the individual with a genuine interest in the work, of
whatever kind, is welcome. To change the image for a moment, the London art
world is a sort of club, unusual only in being one you join by joining, by
turning up, by electing yourself. Push through the door and the invitation
follows.
But back to the village. There are several wards within the parish that
overlap somewhat: St James's and Old Bond Street for the old master trade;
Cork Street and Mayfair for the established contemporary and international;
and the modern British and smaller contemporary galleries scattered at large
where space and rent allow. These are notional territories, with the Lisson
Gallery, for example, the perfect stereotype of the high-flying Mayfair
Modern, tucked away in a back street between Marylebone Station and the
Edgware Road.
Whereas plush and pile characterise the conventional old master gallery,
clear white walls and bright lights are the rule for the contemporary - and
it is a personal bone I would pick with most, that they are grossly
over-lit. Even so, they include many of the most handsome showing-spaces in
London, custom-built and perfectly adapted to the business, neither to large
nor, as is the commonplace of Rome or Paris, cramped and small. These are
public spaces and ample enough for the largest works, yet intimate enough to
preserve the personal scale.
The best of this type was the sadly-missed Rowan Gallery in Bruton Place,
but the Lisson Gallery at 67 Lisson Street NW1, the Grob Gallery, Annely
Juda and Anthony d'Offay, all cheek by jowl high above Dering Street W1, and
the several Waddington spaces in Cork Street, are all remarkable.
But even better are the galleries that positively retain their domestic
scale and feeling. They embrace the entire range of work, from the oldest to
the newest, with most of them comfortably in between. Gillian Jason, at 42
Inverness Street in Camden Town, NW1, is the perfect example, still quite
literally the private Georgian terrace house, where a knock at the front
door is still necessary to gain admission to a choice range of Modern
British and occasional contemporary shows.
In the West End, The Fine Art Society, at 148 New Bond Street (Victorian to
contemporary) and Agnew's, at 43 Old Bond Street (old masters to
contemporary) preserve something more of the preoccupied bustle of the
country-house than the quieter town. Around the corner in Clifford Street,
Jeremy Maas has the tiniest gallery stuffed full of Victorian, occasionally
contemporary, art. In Cork Street, the Mercury, Stoppenbach & Delestre and
Piccadilly Galleries all cover the same ground, from early modern to
contemporary, are all domestic spaces still, despite the public front.
The same is true of JPL Fine Art, in Davies Street W1, (impressionism and
the School of Paris), of Michael Parkin (modern British), Christopher Wood
(Victorian) and Christopher Hull (contemporary) virtually side by side in
Motcomb Street SW1, and of the Fine Art Centre in Sloane Street (modern
British and St Ives), and Crane Kalman in the Brompton Road (modern British)
 -the list is endless.
In Westbourne Grove, at 255 Portobello Road W11, there is Anderson O'Day,
and Sue Williams at 320. There is Vanessa Devereux round the corner at 11
Blenheim Crescent, the Todd Gallery in Needham Road and Sue Rankin at 40
Ledbury Road (all of them contemporary British). In Lexington Street in Soho
there is Jill George, and in Windmill Street, off Charlotte Street, Rebecca
Hossack, the New Academy and the Curwen Galleries (all modern British)
and,in Charlotte Street itself, Karsten Schubert (contemporary
international). Austin/Desmond is in Pied Bull Yard off Great Russell Street
(modern British), Francis Graham-Dixon in Great Sutton Street in
Clerkenwell, Pomeroy Purdy at Jacob Studios, Mill Street SE1, Flowers East
in Richmond Road in Hackney, the Eagle gallery at 159 Farringdon Road EC1,
The Pike Gallery, St John's Hill at Clapham Junction, Cadogan Contemporary
in Draycott Avenue (all contemporary British).
This list must stop. There must be many I have forgotten, more I should
mention. The range of work is enormous, the quality inevitably variable. But
in none of these galleries would the visitor find himself unwelcome or
abashed, or in any sense under any pressure to buy.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920328

