FT923-10891

FT  28 JUL 92 / Money launderers cash in on upheaval in east: New patterns
and old problems for those on the track of drug profits


   By IAN RODGER


ESTONIA'S central bank governor made a somewhat unusual statement when the
republic set up its own currency last month. He used the opportunity to
express his determination to combat drug money laundering.
This was not just a dutiful bow to the western powers who have been cracking
down hard on money laundering in recent years. The fact was, Mr Siim Kallas
said, that 'enormous amounts of cash have been deposited in our banks in the
last few days'.
Mr Kallas ruled that savings account balances exceeding Rbs50,000 and
corporate accounts worth more than Rbs1bn would be frozen until their origin
had been checked.
Among other things, this reveals that when it comes to taking advantage of a
new opportunity, the world's drug money launderers are hard to beat. And the
struggling countries of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union are
usually easy targets for their operations.
Those were also the messages from Lugano - itself a centre notorious for
dubious financial transactions - during this month's annual meeting of
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on money laundering, set up by the 1989
economic summit of the seven largest industrialised countries.
'Virtually no financial institutions are immune as money launderers become
increasingly sophisticated in their techniques,' the FATF stated in its
report.
Mr Alexis Lautenberg, a senior official in the Swiss foreign ministry who
presides over FATF, revealed that the main focus of the organisation's
efforts in the new few months would be on eastern Europe and the Far East.
It is difficult to guess just how significant drug money laundering activity
in eastern Europe has become. FATF, being an outgrowth of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), is coy about naming names
and amounts.
In its report, it says only that 'at present, the central and eastern
European region is not one of the most significant centres of money
laundering'.
The most significant centres of a trade, valued two years ago at Dollars
85bn, are still the US and western European countries. But there is little
doubt that the combination of tougher surveillance in the west and
institutional upheaval in eastern Europe has sent a considerable amount of
activity eastward.
Not for nothing did Sir Leon Brittan, the EC competition commissioner, make
money laundering the theme of a speech he made in Budapest at the end of
May. 'If money laundering is effectively driven out of the European
Community and Efta (European Free Trade Association) countries, they don't
want it coming here,' he said after meeting Hungarian leaders.
In March, Mr Jacques Attali, president of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, also touched on the subject. 'I think it is
obviously in the interests of the world that central and eastern Europe and
what I call far eastern Europe do not become a huge loophole in the cause of
fighting money laundering,' Mr Attali said.
Actual proven cases, however, are few in number. In April, the deputy head
of Finland's criminal police claimed to have information on the transfer of
several million marks to international markets through Finnish banks.
The money was said to originate from sales of stolen property in Russia, but
the managing director of the Finnish Bank Association denied the allegation.
Late last year, there were suggestions that money launderers would take
advantage of the privatisation process in Czechoslovakia, which involved the
issue of small value vouchers to citizens.
The FATF report points out the eastern European countries will inevitably
become more attractive to money launderers, especially as their currencies
move to convertibility.
However, the countries closest to convertibility, such as Czechoslovakia and
Hungary, also tend to be the ones that are drawing up new banking laws. The
FATF believes this is a good time to impress the importance of stamping out
laundering from the start.
FATF held a seminar for senior financial officials of the Czechoslovak,
Polish and Hungarian governments in Paris in February and had what Mr
Lautenberg described as 'very constructive discussions'.
The less developed eastern European countries and most former Soviet
republics present greater challenges. Mr Lautenberg said that FATF intended
to take stock over the next few months and then get in touch with the
authorities in these countries. But a FATF official admitted that it was
very difficult to make progress in countries where the people in charge were
changed frequently and the need for hard currency was desperate.
Meanwhile, the task force still has plenty to do in its own backyard. Many
of its members, which are the 24 OECD countries plus the Gulf Co-operation
Council, Hong Kong and Singapore, have yet to implement FATF's
recommendations for curbing money laundering.
According to the report, only 10 of them have ratified the 1988 Vienna
convention which would oblige them to make drug money laundering a criminal
offence. And many still do not oblige banks to verify the identity of those
making big transactions.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920728

