FT923-10794

FT  29 JUL 92 / Germans hit at interest rates policy


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   BONN


GERMAN engineers, retailers and economists warned yesterday that recovery
would be delayed - and placed most of the blame on the Bundesbank's high
interest rates policy.
Domestic orders for plant and machinery in June were 22 per cent lower than
a year earlier, according to the VDMA engineering industry association.
Revising a forecast made in March from real growth this year of up to 1 per
cent, to a fall of 2 per cent, it said 'the worldwide recovery simply has
not happened'.
The long spell of high interest rates had worsened the domestic situation,
it added. Total order intake in the first six months had fallen 2 per cent.
Foreign business was up 1 per cent and domestic trade down 6 per cent.
Retailers also reported a 5.6 per cent slump in sales during May and raised
doubts about the expected recovery in the second half of the year.
The RWI economics institute in Essen said it expected German economic growth
next year of only 2 per cent, trailing average west European growth of 2.7
per cent and the 3.75 per cent expected in the US. While US interest rate
cuts had stimulated US economic activity, the institute said, the
Bundesbank's strict policy had reduced the room for manouevre in Germany and
elsewhere in Europe.
Waning consumer confidence and the public services strike at the start of
the month reduced west German retail sales in May by DM1.3bn (Pounds 440m)
or 2 per cent, according to the HDE retailers' association. Adjusted to take
account of 3.3 per cent inflation in retail goods prices, this translated
into a 5.6 per cent real decline.
Turnover in the first five months had fallen by 2.6 per cent, and hopes for
an upturn in the second half were retreating further into the future.
The consumer confidence index during May was 12 points lower than a year
earlier. 'The public's frustration seems to stem more from unhappiness with
politics than the economic situation,' it said. The association complained
that shoppers were unsettled by almost weekly reports of new charges
threatening their disposable income.
The only sectors showing a real improvement in May were textiles and
clothing and drug stores. Car and parts retailers reported a 9.8 per cent
real drop, while turnover in TV and audio fell 14.6 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920729

