FT924-11382

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (9): Market is still
untapped - European fund managers lag behind the US in the use of
derivatives


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE benefits of derivative products are being aggressively marketed to
international fund managers by banks and futures and options exchanges keen
to corner a potentially vast, and still largely untapped, market.
There is a growing interest in the applications of derivatives for hedging
exposure (protecting one position by taking the opposite position in a
derivatives market) and for asset allocation (shifting exposure from one
market to another, without changing cash holdings).
A future obliges the holder to buy or sell at a set price at a future date,
while an option gives the holder the right, but not the obligation, to buy
or sell. Futures are of particular use in asset allocation, while options
can be used for stock selection.
Not surprisingly, given the growth of index-tracking and the increasing
emphasis on asset-allocation, the largest single growth area has been index
products.
Volume in the FT-SE 100 future, traded on the London International Financial
Futures & Options Exchange (Liffe) has exceeded 2bn contracts so far this
year, up 67 per cent on the same period last year, while FT-SE options
volume has increased 46 per cent.
Many fund managers are still resistant to over-the-counter products offered
by banks, partly because of the credit implications, and also because they
fear such products will lack liquidity. In addition, some of the exotic
options developed by banks are considered too complex.
'The banks are often too far ahead of their customers,' one investment
banker admitted.
But European fund managers still lag behind their US counterparts in the use
of derivatives.
For example, the equity swaps market, which has now gained a foothold in the
US, has yet to catch on in Europe, in spite of being widely marketed by
banks.
Possibly, certain aspects of the concept hold particular appeal for US fund
managers. An equity swap allows fund managers to invest in a foreign market
without assuming currency risk, which is often separated from other
investment decisions.
Further, the ability to transfer expertise in one class of asset to another
is often seen as a positive factor by US investment managers.
But the most important difference is that US investors are now geared to
indexation, and the equity swap, which simulates the performance of a stock
index, is most attractive to fund managers whose target is to outperform an
index.
In an equity swap, one counterparty receives a stream of payments which
replicate the return of a direct investment in an equity index, and in
exchange makes a stream of payments to the other counterparty based on,
usually, the London interbank offered rate.
In France, the spread of equity derivatives may have received something of a
setback. French institutional investors have in recent years been active
buyers of bonds with embedded put and call options.
The use of bonds with embedded options allows some investors to circumvent
regulations on derivatives. But some of the index-linked bonds were priced
expensively and have performed poorly.
In the UK, the spread of derivatives has reached a new stage, as the early
barriers, in particular resistance from trustees, have largely been
surmounted. The clarification of fund managers' tax position in the 1990
budget proved a turning point, and, more recently, guidelines on performance
measurement have boosted confidence in fund managers' ability to manage
derivative positions.
Although there have been some negative experiences, the availability of
liquid futures and options contracts during recent periods of extreme market
volatility has won some hearts. The availability of such products 'has made
life a lot easier for fund managers,' said Mr Tony Whalley, investment
director at Scottish Widows Fund and Life Assurance. 'When fund managers
felt the (stock) market had gone too far (down), they were able to buy
futures, rather than having to worry about stock selection,' he said.
Liquidity has become increasingly concentrated in the exchange-traded
futures and options markets, and has become a crucial incentive for using
exchange-traded products.
'Futures enable you to do what you would have done anyway more cost
effectively and more quickly, without disturbing the underlying portfolio,'
according to Mr Tim Breedon, associate director, investments, at Legal &
General, the UK insurance company.
The UK is expected to be the largest growth area for derivative products
within Europe. Partly, this is because the use of derivative products based
on fixed-interest bonds is already quite well established. The more recent
expansion of the equity derivatives market will have the greatest impact on
UK fund managers, because of their concentration on stock rather than bond
markets.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921026

