FT923-6623

FT  22 AUG 92 / As They Say in Europe: A taste of law and ordures


   By JAMES MORGAN


'TO GO on holiday is to be cheated' is not one of the world-weary, cynical
maxims of the Duc de la Rochefoucauld but one of mine. Only in France,
however, has it been given force.
The state secretariat for consumer affairs has set up Operation Vacances 92,
which is sweeping across the land. Attacking beachside shacks which fry
their frites in the same oil many times over is merely one of its tasks.
There are more glamorous malefactors who have been highlighted in
Liberation. 'You could be the manager of a renowned palace on the Cote
d'Azur, welcoming well-off clients with large smiles while providing
contaminated food in luxury dining rooms.'
Apparently this hotel - the identity of which the authorities refuse to
reveal - used products past their sell-by date. 'And worse,' said
Liberation, 'behind the alluring descriptions there hid pre-packed meals
re-heated in an ordinary micro-wave.'
The scope of anti-contamination operations is impressive. Pizza sold at a
'concert' by the pop group Genesis was thrown into dustbins full of chlorine
and bleach to ensure that even music-crazed customers would not touch it.
Hundreds of kilos of charcuterie have been burnt in Ariege, a ton of dirty
meat at a wholesaler in the Dordogne, and thousands of re-frozen ice creams
were destroyed near Marseilles. Liberation even described a haul of holed
snorkel tubes.
International developments reinforced this disturbing picture of France on
holiday: the above revelations coincided with news of illicit imports of
hospital waste from Germany on a colossal scale.
Paris-Normandie put it all in the context of next month's Euro-referendum:
'Whether it is organised by German firms or whether it benefits from the
complicity of French importers, this traffic is all the more revolting
because it gives a supplementary argument to the anti-Maastricht faction.'
For this faction, the communist daily, Humanite replied with the headline:
'Ordures sans frontieres.'
It is perhaps necessary to add that, from my own recent experience, anybody
contemplating a French holiday should not be put off. There is more to
France than rotting meat, contaminated cooking oil, ammonia pizza and
suppurating hospital swabs.
A Swiss holiday will pose no such dangers. But the visitor should understand
the nature of the close-knit society, as revealed in a legal action last
week.
The Neue Zurcher Zeitung reported a case in Neuchatel where a man had built
a spyhole behind a one-way mirror so he could observe the young couple in
the bedsit next door. When the device was discovered, the couple complained
to the police, who took no action.
So, the couple sued, at which point the defendant died but the court awarded
total damages of nearly SFr6,000. The NZZ headline summed up the result:
'Voyeur's widow must pay compensation.'
Keeping an eye on the neighbours is a popular hobby in this part of Europe,
so it is not surprising that it could be backed by law in Bavaria.
Reporting from Munich for the Frankfurter Rundschau, Peter Fahrenholz wrote
of the plans of the state's interior minister, Edmund Stoiber, to establish
'security counsellors, contacts and linkmen' to act as intermediaries
between the population and the police. The idea is to be tested in
Nuremberg.
The socialist opposition sees such officials as successors to Nazi block
wardens Stoiber's spokesman, Gunter Schuster, denies this. He said the aim
was to move from a 'culture of looking away to a culture of looking in.'

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920822

