FT921-11719

FT  30 JAN 92 / Bush budget seeks to stimulate US recovery


   By MICHAEL PROWSE and LIONEL BARBER


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT George Bush yesterday offered a mild fiscal stimulus to the
stagnant US economy and held out the prospect of an economic recovery by
spring.
In his Dollars 1,520bn (Pounds 839.7bn) fiscal 1993 budget, Mr Bush proposed
a welter of tax incentives and challenged the Democrat majority in Congress
to pass the measures within 60 days.
The White House strategy relies heavily on a turnround in consumer
confidence over the next few months before the presidential election in
November, with the option of laying the blame on Congress if growth fails to
resume.
Leading Democrats criticised both the budget package and Tuesday evening's
State of the Union address. They vowed to 'stand their ground' and attacked
Mr Bush for failing to provide details of his proposed health care reforms
and showing lack of vision in his approach to longer-term social and
economic problems.
The administration's hopes for an early recovery received cautious support
from Mr Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman.
Testifying before Congress, he pointed to 'very subtle signs' of improvement
and urged lawmakers not to cut taxes to spur growth.
On Wall Street, his remarks were seen as reducing the chance of a further
cut in interest rates. Bond and share prices fell sharply with the Dow Jones
Industrial Average closing 47.18 down at 3224.96. Bond investors were also
unsettled by the prospect of higher budget deficits.
The budget projects an increase in this year's federal deficit to a record
Dollars 400bn, the result of the recession and changes in tax withholding
rules which will inject some Dollars 25bn of purchasing power into the
economy this year.
The administration expects economic growth to resume in the spring and
accelerate through the year. Gross domestic product is expected to rise 2.2
per cent between the fourth quarters of last year and this, rising to about
3 per cent in subsequent years.
Figures from the Commerce Department yesterday, however, showed that the
economy was stagnant in the fourth quarter, with GDP growing at an annual
rate of a meagre 0.3 per cent, despite a stronger housing and exports.
Mr Bush's growth package includes a temporary tax allowance worth Dollars
6bn this year to boost business investment, a temporary Dollars 5,000 tax
credit for first-time home-buyers as well as a cut in the maximum capital
gains tax to 15.4 per cent.
In the longer term, the most costly measure is a Dollars 500 per child
increase in personal tax exemptions, to take effect from October.
The order to lower individual tax withholding rates this year does not
require Congressional approval. It provides only a temporary stimulus since
the relief would be clawed back next year.
Mr Bush's proposals for Dollars 50bn cuts in defence spending go beyond the
reductions already planned over the next five years, and involve cuts in
major weapons systems such as the B-2 bomber and the Seawolf submarine.
Mr Richard Darman, budget director, forecast that the defi cit would not
fall significantly below Dollars 200bn over the next five years. The main
reason was uncontrolled growth of federal entitlement programmes such as
pensions and health care for the elderly. He proposed a new cap on
entitlement spending similar to the controls on discretionary spending
introduced in 1990 under the budget enforcement act.
Mr Bush's budget sticks to the provisions of the act, which imposes separate
caps on defence and domestic programmes, but the president signalled that he
would be ready to use modest defence savings to offset the cost of the child
tax credit.
Page 6
Background and analysis
Commander lacking fire-power against recession
White House approach signals break with Republican past
Page 18
Editorial Comment, The president sits it out

The Financial Times


London Page 1I

920130

