FT921-13988

FT  18 JAN 92 / No cheer for Spain or UK in Gibraltar poll: Bossano's
re-election is a mandate to seek constitutional change


   By TOM BURNS


THE complexities of the Gibraltar dispute, which bedevils diplomatic
relations between London and Madrid, have been thrown into sharp relief by
the landslide re-election of Mr Joe Bossano as chief minister this week.
The results of Thursday's elections to the House of Assembly in the tiny
British crown colony on Spain's southern tip were announced yesterday. They
gave Mr Bossano's Gibraltar Socialist Labour party (GSLP) 73 per cent of the
votes cast by the 14,000 voters in a four-way contest, up from 58 per cent
in 1988.
Mr Bossano, 52, a former union official, now has a mandate to push for
constitutional changes viewed with trepidation by London and with outright
hostility by Madrid.
These include an end to Gibraltar's colonial status, which would reflect
Britain's shrinking military presence on the rock, and the transfer of
responsibility for the rock's foreign affairs from the UK to the European
Community.
Gibraltar joined the EC in 1973 as a dependent British territory but it
remains outside the Community's Common Customs Tariff.
Mr Bossano plans to bypass the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht - under which Spain
ceded Gibraltar to the British crown in perpetuity, with the stipulation
that should the UK relinquish the colony it would revert to the Spanish
crown. 'The treaty of Utrecht is completely out of date. It doesn't envisage
anything existing other than monarchies,' the chief minister said.
The British government has nevertheless made it plain that the independence
planned by Mr Bossano is not an option: either Gibraltar is British or it is
Spanish. The Madrid government is meanwhile adamant that, while all forms of
safeguards can be arranged to accommodate Gibraltar's way of life, the
territory has to revert to Spanish sovereignty.
Desultory annual talks between Britain and Spain on Gibraltar's future have
been fiercely criticised, and boycotted, by Mr Bossano. He has concentrated
instead on creating the basic infrastructure required to assure Gibraltar a
prosperous niche in the off-shore finance industry and has built impressive
modern office facilities on land reclaimed from the harbour where a dockyard
once stood.
Gibraltar's off-shore potential has certainly been recognised by four
Spanish banks operating on the rock. One of them, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya,
recently used Gibraltar's high-profile lawyers and financial experts to
place a Dollars 300m (Pounds 167.5m) preferential share issue on the New
York stock market.
But Gibraltar's long-term viability as a finance centre depends on Spain's
acquiescence. At present, Spain does everything in its power - from ensuring
endless queues at the customs post on the frontier to branding Gibraltar as
a money-laundering centre - to hinder the off-shore activities.
Spain's latest obstructionist weapon is its determination to exclude
Gibraltar from the Community's External Frontiers Convention unless there is
progress in the sovereignty negotiations with the UK. Spain's veto prevented
agreement on the Convention, which will govern free movement of people
within the Community next year, at last month's Maastricht summit.
Spain is, in particular, pressing for the dual use of Gibraltar airport, on
the isthmus linking the Rock to Spain, a no-man's land under the Treaty of
Utrecht.
London and Madrid agreed to dual use more than four years ago but
implementation of the agreement has been blocked by Mr Bossano.
Gibraltar's offshore plans would be dealt a possibly mortal blow if the
intransigence of Mr Bossano and the Spanish government meant the rock was
excluded from the Convention.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920118

