FT924-892

FT  22 DEC 92 / Serbian hardliners call the tune


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


PROSPECTS for peace in Bosnia-Hercegovina and stability in the Balkans
darkened yesterday as Serbian nationalists under President Slobodan
Milosevic led presidential and parliamentary elections.
Despite scanty and conflicting reports of election returns, opposition
leaders privately conceded that Serbian President Milosevic appeared to have
a commanding lead in his bid for re-election. He looked set to surpass the
50.01 per cent required to avoid a run-off against Yugoslav Prime Minister
Milan Panic, the wealthy Belgrade-born Californian.
The massive surge of electoral support for ultranationalism threatens
Serbia's ethnic minorities, who make up one-third of the population of 9.8m.
Ethnic Albanians, Hungarians and Moslems face even greater risk that 'ethnic
cleasing' will spread to Serbia.
If the trend of the preliminary and unofficial results continues, the
Socialists (renamed Communists) with their ultranationalist allies, the
Serbian Radical Party, will have a comfortable majority in the Serbian
parliament. 'Their lead makes remote the possibility of Milosevic leaving
office without violence,' said a diplomat.
Chosen by Mr Milosevic as his favourite 'opposition politician', Mr Vojislav
Seselj, president of the Radicals, also commands a party militia.
He has called for ethnic minorities and politically suspect Serbs to be
expelled from Serbia. International human rights organisations have cited Mr
Seselj for brutal crimes committed by his paramilitaries in Croatia and
Bosnia. Early results project his party will gain 25-30 per cent of the 250
seats.
He is almost certain to be joined in parliament by Mr Zeljko Raznatovic,
alias Arkan, a notorious Belgrade crime boss who commands a fierce
paramilitary unit known as the Tigers. He was standing in the Serbian
province of Kosovo, where Albanians who make up 93 per cent of the 2.1m
population boycotted the poll. Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, US secretary of
state, recently said that Mr Raznatovic and Mr Seselj should be tried before
a proposed war crimes tribunal.
The apparent edge of the nationalists came amid mounting charges of election
fraud and manipulation.
Mr Panic's office yesterday said it would demand a fresh election. Foreign
observers have lambasted the campaign as grossly unfair, citing the role
played by Television Serbia, which Mr Milosevic controls and Mr Seselj
reportedly visits every day.
Mr Milosevic has whipped up fears that the west is conspiring against
Serbia. His message of defiance, in conservative and increasingly isolated
Serbia, has found fertile ground.
Independent observers met yesterday to decide if complaints of election
irregularities constituted systematic fraud at the hands of Mr Milosevic's
minions in local electoral commissions.
If the international community deems the election results legitimate, it has
warned it will step up pressure on Serbia. US President George Bush and
Britain's Prime Minister John Major agreed in Washington at the weekend to
press for tougher sanctions to stop the war in Bosnia. But the mechanisms
are limited.
In Belgrade, the Serbian and federal capital seen as an opposition
stronghold, many feared their future in a Serbia controlled by nationalists,
certain to provoke a tougher response from the west.
This is likely to heighten xenophobia in Serbia, even among Serbs who oppose
the Socialists.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921222

