FT923-15477

FT  02 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tories face rebellion on stamp duty


   By ALISON SMITH and DAVID OWEN


THE government is facing a possible backbench rebellion when the Labour
party uses next week's finance bill debate to propose an extension of the
eight-month 'holiday' on stamp duty.
A phalanx of senior Tory MPs, including some former ministers, have put
their names to a Commons motions calling for a temporary continuation of the
scheme or the abolition of the tax.
In total, the two motions have so far been signed by 62 MPs, and the number
of Tory signatories is well above the government's majority of 21.
Labour frontbench spokesmen said yesterday that the opposition would propose
keeping the concession in place for a further six months beyond the present
deadline of August 19.
Labour argues that although the scheme has not really worked in reviving the
housing market or construction industry so far, ending the concession would
still have a negative effect.
The move will hearten Labour MPs disappointed that they have so far caused
the government few tactical difficulties at Westminster, in spite of the
Tories' reduced majority.
Even if some Tories stop short of defying the whips on the vote, the debate
is expected to embarrass the government by highlighting the absence of
economic recovery in this area.
The government's decision to lift the point at which the 1 per cent levy
becomes payable, from Pounds 30,000 to Pounds 250,000, was announced in
December as part of the government's measures to help home buyers.
One government whip admitted that Labour's decision might cause some
difficulty, although he thought the whips had managed to persuade some of
the Tories who had signed the motions.
Sir Malcolm Thornton, Tory MP for Crosby, has made clear that he will press
for a statement of intent from the government before the Commons disperses
for the summer in a fortnight's time.
Discussion of the finance bill in committee finished yesterday, and it is
due to be debated by the Commons as a whole early next week.
Ministers say that in the present public-spending round, extending the
concession and forgoing that revenue might ultimately make it more difficult
to cut interest rates. MPs who argue for a continuation of the scheme point
out that as it has not worked yet, the cost to the Treasury has been less
than the Pounds 420m estimated when the concession was announced.
Some senior ministers would like eventually to abolish the duty, but have no
plans to do so immediately because it is too valuable.
A Labour MP yesterday claimed the backing of prime minister John Major for
the principal of obliging the holders of public office to declare membership
of secret societies such as masonic lodges, David Owen writes.
Tabling a bill requiring such disclosure, Mr Chris Mullin, MP for Sunderland
South, said Mr Major had revealed his support for the idea in a 1986
questionnaire on freemasonry that was sent to all MPs.
Mr Mullin said he had a signed copy of the prime minister's answers
testifying to his belief that MPs, judges, local government officers and
others should be obliged to disclose their membership of masonic bodies.
Mr Mullin said the proposed measure - which would include a clause outlawing
discrimination against anyone on the basis of their declaration - was
'consistent with the government's stated ambition to create a classless
society.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920702

