FT924-861

FT  22 DEC 92 / EC flight of fancy over reindeer aid


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


REFLECTING the spirit of 'openness' and subsidiarity at the Edinburgh summit
of EC leaders earlier this month, the European Commission is expected this
week to turn a blind eye to illegal Danish state aid to a Scandinavian
co-operative supplying reindeer.
At the Commission meeting this week, its last before a new Brussels
executive takes office in January, the regional aid scheme, known by the
acronym Yule, is almost certain to get through, even though it has never
been notified to the Commission as required under EC law.
The aid is an annual grant to S. Claus Ltd, headquartered in Lapland,
Finland, and is worth DKr167 (Pounds 17.7) per reindeer, subject to a limit
of 25 animals per individual producer. The Commission was concerned that the
aid reinforced the company's downstream activities, bolstering a potentially
dominant position in the Christmas gift market.
According to documents on the case, prepared by staff of the controversial
outgoing farm commissioner Ray MacSharry, the reindeer aid has sparked the
now familiar dispute between the Brussels competition and industry
directorates about what constitutes the relevant market in which to judge a
dominant position.
The free marketeers, headed by Sir Leon Brittan, UK competition
commissioner, say S. Claus has 64.7 per cent of the EC gift market.
The interventionists, led by Mr Martin Bangemann, German industry
commissioner, say, in a replay of their arguments over the De Havilland
case, that 'the relevant market should be defined in terms which include
also the birthday gift market, as well as the Father's Day, Mother's Day,
secretary's day, Easter egg and tooth fairy segments of the market.'
The salient points in opinion to be laid before the Commission, however,
suggest most commissioners will endorse the aid. This is because:
'Operators throughout the Community are among (S. Claus Ltd's) downstream
beneficiaries';
The European Court of Justice ruling 72/79 (Commission vs the Gift Horse)
found that 'in assessing the real value of non-repayable aid it is the
thought that counts';
The court 'endorsed the application of the private-market investor principle
to cases of non-repayable handouts in its judgment in Case 140/1867 (Scrooge
vs Tiny Tim)';
The Commission has taken note of assurances from the Danish authorities that
there is no intra-Community trade in reindeer, and that 'the downstream
effect of the aid will be available on a non-discriminatory basis throughout
the Community'.
But a satisfactory outcome may yet fall foul of the Brussels legal service,
whose submission raises doubts about the status of S. Claus Ltd. Their
opinion submits that there may be 'no precedent for opening the Article
93(2) procedure in respect of a company which is no more than a figment of
people's imagination. They consider, however, that this point can be
overcome by careful drafting of the letter to the Danish authorities'.
A further problem is grudging and conditional support from the external
affairs directorate, where Sir Leon wants to establish a dominant position
for himself in the next Commission. In a separate memo, they say: 'The
proposal should be made by Sir Leon Brittan, whose impartiality is beyond
any doubt. . . and who is known not to give free gifts'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921222

