FT924-12146

FT  22 OCT 92 / Technology: Consultant's critique


   By KEVIN GRUMBALL


Training often takes the part of Cinderella - languishing in the kitchen
while other, more fashionable, departments go to the high-tech ball. The
fairy godmother arrived in the 1980s, as managers finally saw staff as an
asset to be developed.
Training centres were much in vogue, although cynical observers saw them
more a means to acquire impressive country properties.
Recession sounded the stroke of midnight and pressure is now on to justify
continuing budgets and to
maximise existing resources.
At the TSB, investment in video technology has led to interesting spin-offs.
John Hodges, head of training, design and delivery at TSB Retail Banking and
Insurance, was approached by a number of school head teachers. As schools
were increasingly driven to develop a business-like approach, heads
recognised that they had no commercial training.
There are a number of parallels between the operations of a school and a
pharmacy - premises,
purchasing, stock and so on. Using the video system, Hodges produced a
course for head teachers.
TSB has used the video to evaluate the business sense of potential graduate
recruits.
Far too much money is spent by companies re-writing from scratch what they
already have. Programmers not only want to re-invent wheels but the concept
of transport itself. Hodges has ably demonstrated the cost savings of
adapting rather than originating.
The portability of the system has allowed it to be taken out beyond the
cloisters of the residential college. The goal is to keep learning as close
to the individuals as possible.
Hodges refers to the multimedia centre as a 'peripatetic learning centre'.
Effective monitoring also allows users to follow up with further training.
The TSB has blended leading-edge technology with a climate for learning. The
old sits happily alongside the new.
The author is a consultant at Software Design and Construction, of Milton
Keynes

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921022

