FT924-919

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (1):  Screeching halt
to expansion - Japanese companies are gasping for breath, searching for
direction, and looking fruitlessly for signs of recovery. But this time the
roots of recession are far more complex, and the solution that much more
elusive


   By STEVE BUTLER


JAPANESE industry is in recession. The long expansion of the late 1980s,
fueled by a passion among Japanese consumers for lavish spending, has come
to a screeching halt.
Inventories have risen high, capital spending is being cut. Production in
factories has slowed to a crawl. Overtime has been slashed and disposable
income is dropping. Corporate profits fell by an average of about 30 per
cent in the half year to September. Profits will be down for the second year
in a row this year, and could easily fall again next year.
The speed and extent of the turn-about has hit Japanese companies like a
powerful electric shock. They are gasping for breath, searching for
direction, and looking fruitlessly for signs of recovery.
The downturn is certainly the worst since the first oil shock in 1973, when
the sudden increase in oil prices sent industry into a tailspin. Yet, in
many ways, the experience this time around is far more frightening. In
earlier economic downturns it was at least possible to identify a clear
external cause, such as higher fuel costs or a sudden rise in the yen in
1985, and therefore easier to devise a well-focused solution.
This time the roots of recession are far more complex, and the solution that
much more elusive. Most fundamentally, the industrial recession is the
result of cyclical swings in investment and inventories. Yet, prospects for
recovery have been deeply clouded by the unknown, and unknowable, impact of
the precipitous decline in share and property prices that have undermined
consumer confidence and eroded the capital of Japan's banks. The banks are
unlikely to be able to support a vigorous recovery, even when recovery
eventually gets underway.
It is hard to imagine a more drastic shift of mood from the late 1980s. When
the Japanese government lowered interest rates in 1985 as part of a policy
co-ordinating effort with other industrial countries, a powerful economic
expansion was kindled. The stock market boom that was touched off made
millionaires overnight and reduced to nearly zero the real cost of raising
capital for many companies. With interest rates low and property and
financial assets soaring in value, Japanese consumers began to spend money
on everything from French impressionist paintings to Lexus luxury cars.
Yet, the result was a massive deception of most corporate planning
officials. Japanese companies were fooled by the cheap cost of capital in
the late 1980s and by the buoyancy of consumer demand. They assumed that the
good times would continue, and they put their cheap funds into building new
production capacity, some of which is only coming onstream today.
It was a year ago that inventories began to build up to dangerous levels,
yet - in part fooled by confident government predictions of a short, shallow
slowdown, based on assumptions that Japanese consumers with job security
would keep on spending money - companies failed to respond quickly enough by
cutting production.
Today, the results of accumulated mistakes in both the government and
private sector have come home to roost. Industrial production in October was
off 6 per cent compared to a year ago, roughly the average rate of decline
in the second and third quarters of the year. Yet shipments from producers
have fallen by less: 4.5 per cent in October and about 5 per cent in most
months. As a result, inventories have continued to rise from the elevated
levels of last year, delaying the day when production can be brought back to
normal levels and, in effect, prolonging the industrial recession.
The impact on industry has been severe. Many of Japan's most successful
companies are geared to a high growth strategy, in which expanding market
share and economies of scale achieved through rising production volumes were
the foundation of profitability. Now companies are paying high depreciation
charges after a surge of capital investment, and they are forced to maintain
idle workers because of permanent employment policies. By August, average
productivity in manufacturing had declined by 8 per cent since the start of
the year, according to the Japan Productivity Centre. In consumer
electronics the decline was 11.6 per cent, while productivity in the car
industry was off by 10.5 per cent.
Some companies have been badly hit. Nissan Motor, Japan's second-largest
vehicle maker, has fallen into the red, as has Fujitsu, the world's
second-largest computer company. NEC, Japan's biggest semiconductor maker
which dominates the domestic personal computer market, expects to post a
consolidated loss for the year. Throughout the key industrial sectors of
electronics and cars - the pillars of Japan's post-war growth miracle -
profits are typically down by between 50 and 80 per cent.
The response to this decline has on occasions been sharp. In one of the most
extreme cases, Shintom, a mid-sized electronics company, permanently halted
production at its Kofu plant west of Tokyo, with the loss of 94 jobs.
Shintom's main business has been manufacturing video recorders that are sold
under other brand names overseas. However, with the video equipment market
in decline, and with the yen rising in value, Shintom found itself squeezed
out of the market and unable to continue. The company has shed 242 jobs in
the past year, bringing employment down to 540, and it is looking to shed
150 more job jobs through 'voluntary' retirement.
Shintom's actions stand out, however, precisely because they are so
exceptional. Mainstream Japanese companies under severe pressure have so far
stuck firmly to the most fundamental maxim of Japanese management: no
lay-offs. Permanent employment, promotion by seniority, relative equality of
income, little lateral job-hopping between companies - these are part of an
integrated set of employment practices now widely labelled as Japanese-style
management. For the most part, the response of Japanese companies has stayed
within this framework.
One common response has been to cut directors' pay and the pay of ordinary
employees will be next. Mr James Abegglan, chairman of Gemini Consulting and
a widely-recognised expert on Japanese management, says: 'If you want to ask
employees to take a cut in pay, you ask top management first.'
Mr Abegglan argues that because of the lack of hostile takeovers in Japan,
and the relative weakness of shareholders, Japanese companies can withstand
many years of low or no profits while they make a painful adaptation to
changing market conditions.
Mr Abegglan also dismisses widely-discussed suggestions that Japanese
companies have switched their focus away from growth and towards
profitability.
'This is nothing more than a reflection of a downturn. People forget that
the economy has gone through a crisis every four or five years for about as
long as anyone can remember.'
Over the years, Japan has proved adept at reshaping industry - at remaking
itself, rather than hanging on and subsidising outmoded and inefficient
businesses.
This is not to argue that Japanese industry will just sail through the
recession. Japan simply has too much capacity in electronics and cars, to
name but two industries. The inevitable cuts in capacity that lie ahead will
be neither pretty nor painless for the companies involved, as they slowly
shrink or seek new businesses.
Even this, however, must be regarded as the optimist's view of Japan's
near-term future. The pessimist's view is that sources of growth for Japan
have been deeply undermined. No one yet knows how far land prices will
continue to fall, or what the ultimate impact on the financial system will
be. Why should Japanese consumers return to the stores when their garages
already shelter relatively new cars, and they have two or three televisions
in the house?
Increased government spending will help, but only so far. And with
manufacturing capacity already in excess, there is little reason for
Japanese companies to go on a spending spree for new equipment any time
soon. Exports, particularly to other Asian countries, will help keep demand
steady but are unlikely to provide a strong enough stimulus to turn the
economy around.
Eventually, Japan's strengths - its well educated and highly motivated
workforce, its high savings rate - will emerge to support a strong
industrial economy again. The question is how long Japanese industry will
have to wait until it can perform up to potential.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

921221

