FT923-6391

FT  25 AUG 92 / IoD calls for abolition of 'archaic' business licences


   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent


THE INSTITUTE of Directors is calling on the government to abolish or reform
more than 80 licences which it claims can stifle the creation and growth of
new businesses.
In response to a request from the Department of Trade and Industry, the IoD
has identified a range of licences which it says either impede market entry
for small businesses or entail prohibitive costs.
A list submitted to Baroness Denton, the minister for small businesses, has
earmarked 50 licences for abolition and a further 29 which the IoD says
should be reviewed.
According to the IoD more than 200 types of business require licences, many
of which it believes are 'archaic and irrelevant'. Among the licences it
suggests should be abolished are those for late-night cafes, driving
instructors and private car-hire businesses. Others include licences for
selling alcohol for off-premises consumption, for employment agencies and
for keeping a bull as a semen donor.
The IoD says the common justification for licences is the protection of
health and safety, crime prevention and the protection of economic
interests.
Mr Ian Smedley, the IoD's small business research executive, said: 'Health
and safety must be safeguarded, but in most cases general statutes and the
operation of the market provide better protection than licences.
'Small businesses are more severely affected by licensing than larger ones.
They must cope with the same onerous requirements as big companies but with
fewer management resources.'
He added: 'The cost of management time appearing in person in court to
present a licence application is a heavy burden.'
Earlier this year the DTI said that it was stepping up its drive to cut the
red tape entangling many of Britain's smaller businesses. It indicated that
regulations on businesses such as betting shops, employment agencies and
some professional partnerships could be revised or abandoned.
The government says it is committed to reducing the 'irksome burdens' on
companies and is examining regulations governing them. Further deregulatory
initiatives are expected following the review.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920825

