FT922-601

FT  26 JUN 92 / Maxwell trusts hold 10m MGN shares


   By ANDREW JACK


MORE THAN 10m shares in Mirror Group Newspapers are among the assets held by
six secretive Liechtenstein trusts created by the late Robert Maxwell, a
lawyer representing the trusts said yesterday.
The shares appear to have been bought by the trusts as part of an alleged
share support operation to sustain the MGN price last summer.
Rival claims on ownership mean that Maxwell pensioners are unlikely to
benefit from the shares, which at the currently suspended price of 125p
would be worth at least Pounds 12.5m.
Mr Kamil Braxator, a lawyer with the General Trust Company in Vaduz,
Liechtenstein, told the BBC yesterday that six trusts created by Robert
Maxwell held MGN shares. The trusts - or Stiftungen - which he named at a
press conference in Liechtenstein last week, are Alandra, Baccano, Kiara,
Jungo, Corry and Akim.
Mr Braxator is drawing up an inventory of trust assets, and said there might
be other assets although they were not believed to contain any cash. He said
the trustees he represented were keen to return any assets to Maxwell
pensioners.
Separately, it has emerged that the MGN shares were ultimately bought by
Robert Maxwell Group - parent of the private Maxwell empire - and are likely
to be claimed by accountants Arthur Andersen, administrator to the Maxwell
private companies.
According to the MGN accounts released on Tuesday, Akim, one of the trusts,
has a beneficial interest in 20m MGN shares. These were lent back to the
private Maxwell empire and pledged to several banks as collateral for loans.
Andersen said in March that it had discovered the purchases of 10m MGN
shares funded through the private companies in late May last year, and a
further 10m in June. That lifted the total proportion of MGN's share capital
claimed by the administrators from 51 per cent to 54.8 per cent. It is
believed that money for the share purchases was provided through a Swiss
trust called Servex and a US company called TIB, and the transactions were
carried out by Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank.
The MGN purchases are in addition to separate alleged share-support
operations concerning Maxwell Communication Corporation, into which the
Serious Fraud Office announced an inquiry in December.
Daily Mirror journalists yesterday passed a motion of no confidence in the
MGN board and called on the directors to resign. They condemned pay rises
for Mr Vic Horwood, MGN chief executive, and Mr Ernest Burrington, who last
week resigned as chairman.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920626

