FT921-15244

FT  11 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Profit-taking as the account closes


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


Currency uncertainties continued to unsettle the UK equity market in a
volatile session yesterday. The continued firmness in the US dollar failed
to protect blue chip internationals from profit-taking as the equity market
trading account came to its end.
Share prices were marked sharply higher at first but the early gain of 20
points on the Footsie had been converted into a 20 point loss by the close,
when the downturn was intensified by selling in the stock index futures
market.
The final reading showed the FT-SE Index at 2,477.9, a shade above the low
of the day. The Index retained a gain of around 2.4 per cent over the two
week account which has seen UK equities encouraged by Wall Street but
concerned by the pound's slide to its lowest permitted level in the ERM
range. Yesterday, the UK Foreign Secretary firmly reiterated the
government's rejection of any sterling devaluation intentions.
Equities opened strongly yesterday morning, with marketmakers taking the
view that the internationally-orientated stocks would continue to respond tp
the dollar's overnight strength. General optimism, as well as the FT-SE
Index itself, received a further boost from hints from other European
markets that Allied-Lyons, the brewery and food group, was about to attract
the long-predicted bid from North America.
Headed by a substantial gain in Allied, shares opened higher across the
broad range of the market. But, as so often in current trading, it was when
the stock index futures opened that the real boost was delivered to
equities. A premium of more than 50 points, later more than 60, on the March
contract on the Footsie, was quickly reflected in a 20.4 advance on the
underlying Index.
These gains were too attractive to leave alone, and sellers soon appeared
both in the futures and the underlying stocks. By mid-session, the stock
market was edging below overnight levels and selling increased after the US
bond market fell following the announcement of the latest US employment
figures.
Somewhat mixed views on the US jobs data brought an uncertain tone opening
on Wall Street which was 17 points down in UK trading hours. Profit-taking
increased in London and in the absence of buyers for the new account, the
stock market ended flat.
Equities were not helped by a gloomy day in the government bond market,
where prices quickly extended early losses as first reports from the US
fixed interest market appeared on the dealing screens. Long-dated British
bonds ended with losses ranging to  3/4 of a point.
Retail, or customer, business in equities, having fallen to very low levels
over Christmas, has shown some improvement this week.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920111

