FT923-9849

FT  03 AUG 92 / Leading Article: The task for George Bush


PRESIDENT GEORGE Bush will have to run hard if he is to win a second
presidential term on November 3. The national opinion polls give his
Democratic party challenger, Governor Bill Clinton, an overwhelming lead.
More to the point, local polls suggest that, had the contest taken place
last week, Mr Bush would have lost California and New York, not to mention
smaller but nevertheless important 'swing' states like North Carolina,
Missouri, and Washington. The magnitude of Mr Clinton's popular advantage
has led some Republicans to speculate aloud that perhaps the president
should stand down in favour of someone likely to win. US conservatives,
still unhappy about Mr Bush's failure to stick to the letter of President
Reagan's agenda, have taken to musing that a Clinton presidency might be
preferable to another four years of Mr Bush.
There is still time for the president to turn this adverse current round. He
started from well behind Governor Michael Dukakis in 1988 and ended up
convincingly ahead. A large part of Mr Clinton's lead is the product of the
'bounce' in popularity that a candidate usually enjoys in the weeks
following his party's convention. The effect is more marked this year than
in most recent presidential elections, but that may be due to the switch to
the Democratic candidate of support formerly pledged to Mr Ross Perot. The
Republican convention which ends on August 20 should in the normal course of
events produce bounce in favour of Mr Bush. That could still be of
sufficient magnitude to ensure victory - if he manages to convey the
impression that he has a serious programme of action to put forward.
Aimless policy
The question is, 'does he?' His fall in popularity is mainly explained by
the prolonged recession and Mr Bush's seemingly aimless policy of
laissez-faire. The president, hamstrung by a Democratic Congress, has in
consequence appeared to be immobilised. He has not put forward any positive
domestic programme for action, either to reduce the budget deficit or to
promote the return to a better rate of growth. America's poorly-performing
educational system, its lack of housing for the poor, and its costly but
inefficient welfare provisions are all running sores to which Mr Bush has
paid little visible attention.
This is not to say that Mr Clinton's proposals, which involve high spending
and a certain lack of clarity about how they are to be financed, are without
flaw. The Democratic platform has been subjected to insufficient national
scrutiny. For the moment, however, that is a secondary matter. What is being
questioned by Americans is the president's purpose in seeking a second term.
Mr Bush has so little to say about his country's economic and social malaise
that he is starting to look like a man who may not deserve re-election. That
allows his opponent to present himself as a man who will both propose and
execute positive programmes, the right person if voters want change.
Quayle factor
It is conceivable that Mr James Baker, who was in strategic command of Mr
Bush's campaign against Mr Dukakis, may rescue his old friend once more. The
secretary of state is thought likely to return to the White House soon,
either as controller of domestic policy, or, some surmise, as a replacement
for Mr Dan Quayle as Mr Bush's running-mate. In 1988 Mr Baker guided Mr Bush
through a wholly negative strategy. Mr Clinton and his running-mate, Mr Al
Gore, can see that coming and prepare their defences.
What Mr Bush needs this time is something better - a set of serious domestic
policies and a campaigning style that persuades his own people that he knows
what has to be done and understands how to do it. This is a matter of moment
well beyond the shores of the United States, since the Bush administration
has until recently been remarkably adept at foreign policy.
If Mr Baker, who knows from personal experience how much the world at large
has benefitted from American policies over the past four years, cannot
enliven the president's domestic programme, he should ask himself about how
best to provide the electorate with a proper choice in November.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920803

