FT923-9598

FT  04 AUG 92 / House sales boost urged as prices fall further


   By DAVID BARCHARD and DAVID OWEN


THE GOVERNMENT came under mounting pressure last night to revive the deeply
depressed UK housing market as prices showed a further fall.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, was 'considering carefully' proposals by
Abbey National aimed at stimulating house sales while senior Conservative
backbenchers stepped up their calls for action.
Abbey National, the bank which is Britain's second largest mortgage lender,
urged the government to offer a once-only tax credit of up to Pounds 10,000
to people selling their homes to cover any loss of value. The proposals were
contained in a letter to Mr Lamont from Sir Christopher Tugendhat, the
bank's chairman.
Unveiling the group's half-yearly results, which showed a 12 per cent fall
in pre-tax profits to Pounds 270m, Sir Christopher said a way was needed to
enable existing owner-occupiers to sell their houses and move up in the
market without being deterred by the prospect of making a loss.
The restoration of a healthy housing market was required to lead the way for
a general recovery in the UK economy by boosting consumer confidence and
expenditure, he said.
Abbey National said its proposed credit would be made on condition that the
cash was reinvested in another property.
News of the initiative coincided with the publication of Nationwide Building
Society's monthly house price index which showed that house prices fell on
average by a further 0.6 per cent during July. The average UK house price is
now Pounds 55,414, a 6 per cent drop from Pounds 58,928 a year ago.
The government continued to insist that no contingency measures to bolster
the troubled market were under preparation but some of its senior
backbenchers argued that urgent action was required. Mr John Townend,
chairman of the Conservative backbench finance committee, said the
government had 'got to now look at' alternative measures to revive the
housing market.
'If the housing market went down by another 10 per cent, that could push us
into a severe recession,' he said.
He said the Abbey National proposals were 'a non-starter', adding that
viable measures could include a government-backed mortgage guarantee scheme
and a limited-period increase in tax allowances. He advocated paying for
this through a 'semi-freeze' on public-sector pay increases and by cutting
Britain's overseas aid budget by some 25 per cent.
Sir George Gardiner, Conservative MP for Reigate and leader of the
Thatcherite 92 group of MPs, said he would consider favourably any proposals
to revive the housing market that was financed by cutting other government
programmes.
It was of paramount importance, however, that no fresh measures that would
cost additional public money should be introduced, he said.
For Labour, Mr Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, said the
best measure the Treasury could take was 'to let councils build some
houses'.
In the City, there was scepticism about the viability of the Abbey National
proposals. Mr John Wriglesworth, a leading housing finance specialist, said
the cost would be much larger than the Pounds 250m forecast by the bank. He
said the cost to the Treasury would probably be nearer Pounds 1.5bn to
Pounds 2bn.
Cost queries, Page 6
House prices decline, Page 6
Lex, Page 16
Abbey National reports 12% fall in profits, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920804

