FT921-410

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (6): A
blizzard of litigation - Lawyers in US and Europe have a field-day


   By JOHN AUTHERS


WELL OVER 1,000 Names are currently involved in legal battles with their
agents and with Lloyd's corporation.
It all seems a long way from the friendly spirit which permeated the Lloyd's
insurance market when it began. How did it happen?
Few of the litigant Names would deny that they entered the market with their
eyes open. But the risks they thought they were taking on involved
industrial disasters like the Piper Alpha oil rig explosion, or the wreck of
the Exxon Valdez, or natural disasters such as Hurricane Hugo, or the storms
which ravaged Europe in October 1987, and again in January 1990.
The fact that all of these events happened in quick succession made things
very difficult for the market.
But Names seem to have been enraged more by the way in which the market
protected itself against these risks, which many saw as inadequate, and more
particularly by their exposure to risks which they barely knew existed.
Asbestosis claims in the US provide arguably the most dramatic example of a
risk which Names felt they never understood - exploding oil rigs were one
thing, but the personal damages suffered by US employees who caught
asbestosis were another.
The field of US liability insurance also produced losses from
government-ordered pollution clean-ups for which Names had not been
prepared. These led to losses on 'long-tail' liability business in which
claims emerge sometimes many years after the business was written. Few Names
had understood that this kind of loss was even technically possible, and
they were certainly not prepared for them.
Bemused reactions were typical: one Name commented that he did not mind
going to the races and losing money on a horse, but he did mind losing the
money if the horse had been doped.
This probably explains why the first serious litigation involved a syndicate
which had reinsured a series of US liability contracts and come seriously
unstuck - Outhwaite.
Many of these Names certainly felt that their 'horse' had been 'doped'
following insurance losses of Pounds 200m on just 32 reinsurance contracts
underwritten in 1982 by the one-time star underwriter of Lloyd's syndicate
317/661, Richard Outhwaite. All of these contracts reinsured the liabilities
of other insurers, mostly Lloyd's syndicates.
Overall losses for the 1,614 Names on the syndicate amount to more than
Pounds 200m and are rising. A group of 987 Names exposed to these losses
resorted to litigation alleging negligence and breach of contract. They were
represented by Richards Butler. It culminated, this February, in an
out-of-court settlement.
The Names shared Pounds 116m, including Pounds 2m for legal costs, between
them in a result which Mr Peter Nutting, the leader of the Outhwaite 1982
Names Association, described as a 'thoroughly satisfactory outcome to a long
and difficult road'.
Most of the Names - including the former prime minister Mr Edward Heath and
golfer Mr Tony Jacklin - were 'outsiders'. Members of the syndicate who had
not joined in the litigation - mostly working Names or market 'insiders' -
failed to join the action or benefit from the pay-out.
In another case to have reached a settlement, some 500 Names on the Warrilow
553 syndicate, represented by the solicitors Elborne Mitchell, won a Pounds
4m out-of-court settlement including legal costs on But there are many other
actions still under way. A group of 33 Names is suing Lloyd's alleging it
negligently failed to close the Oakeley Vaughan agency before the syndicates
it managed ran up heavy losses. They are represented by the solicitor
Michael Freeman.
About 175 Names, represented by Macfarlanes, from Aragorn syndicate 384's
1985 year have also decided to embark on legal action in a bid to recover
insurance losses.
Writs have been issued and served in three other cases. More than 400 Names
on Pulbrook syndicate 90's 1982 year, more than 320 of the 570 Names on
Pulbrook 334 in 1985 and more than 400 of the 800 Names on Poland syndicates
105 (1985 year) and 108 (1986 year) are all taking action. All three groups
are advised by solicitors DJ Freeman and are alleging breach of contract and
misrepresentation by members' agents and negligence by managing agents.
More than 790 Names on Feltrim, Devonshire, Gooda Walker and Rose Thomson
Young syndicates, represented by Michael Freeman, are issuing motions to
seek an injunction preventing Lloyd's from drawing down their deposits. This
added a dramatic new legal development to the problem, as it effectively
adds up to a refusal to pay for their losses.
Following the decision by Lloyd's to contest the action, injunctions are
against the agents, who have agreed to freeze their deposits until the cases
come to court. All of these hearings are imminent.
In the US, litigious Names have relied on a slightly different set of legal
arguments. They claim that they were systematically misled by the agents who
persuaded them to join Lloyd's, and are therefore not liable to pay their
losses.
Three Names brought a case in a Chicago district court alleging that
agreements signed with Lloyd's and the agents who handle their affairs
should not be enforced because Names' rights to the protection of US laws
took precedence.
But the Chicago court upheld Lloyd's contention that under these agreements
any disputes must be heard in English courts. A motion by Lloyd's to dismiss
the entire case is still pending before the same judge. Last autumn, a
federal judge in Denver also found that the US courts had no jurisdiction
over similar plaintiffs' claims, and an appeal has been lodged against that
ruling.
However, a third case brought against Lloyd's and a group of agents by 91 US
Names is still awaiting a hearing in the US.
At least 91 US Names allege Lloyd's breached US securities laws when they
were recruited. They are represented by Proskauer Rose, the New York firm.
In Canada, about 70 Names - represented by the Toronto law firm McCarthy
Tetrault - are in the midst of a case against Lloyd's.
They are appealing against a verdict in Lloyd's favour on a preliminary
issue, but have so far successfully prevented banks from drawing down their
deposits.
The sums involved in all these litigations are massive, and in many cases
the Names have their livelihoods at stake. There is a lack of much precedent
in case law for many of the arguments currently being presented, so legal
wrangling is set to last for years.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920330

