FT921-1386

FT  24 MAR 92 / US and Japan tussle over gentle giant from Hawaii


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


A 41-STONE sumo wrestler called Konishiki is looming as a large source of
friction between Japan and the US.
The 28-year-old Hawaiian, also known as the Dump Truck, is in line for
promotion to the top rank, yokozuna, of the Japanese sport - never before
held by a foreigner.
But there are suggestions that Konishiki, who has just won his third sumo
tournament, lacks the 'spirit' for such an elevated position. Last night,
Konishiki was told he must wait until 'the next tournament or the tournament
after that'. Some suspect he may remain forever a second-ranking ozeki.
There are no specific standards for promotion to yokozuna, but the sumo
promotion committee in Japan generally decides after assessing performance,
health and spirit - qualities that are open to flexible interpretation.
President George Bush has followed Konishiki's progress with interest.
Prominent US coverage of the wrestler's latest win and a congratulatory
message from Mr Bush and 'the American people' have prompted Japanese
officials to fear US Congress will soon enter the dohyo, the sumo ring, with
allegations that the Hawaiian is another US victim of 'structural
impediments' - trade jargon for cultural barriers.
His tournament victory on Sunday marked the 39th win of his past 45 bouts.
One cause of concern is his winning technique - the wrapping of massive arms
around an opponent and the use of his bulk to manoeuvre them slowly but
inevitably out of the ring.
This style irritates the purists, who believe that a yokozuna should have a
repertoire of throws and thrusts. Other critics argue that Konishiki, as a
foreigner, cannot fully appreciate the spiritual connotations of the sport,
an argument implicit in a magazine headline last week: 'Foreign yokozuna not
needed.'
Konishiki has blurred the lines by recently marrying a Japanese model, and
he is a skilled speaker of the language. Yet he must still overcome the
likes of Mr Noboru Kojima, a member of the promotion committee, who lamented
last week that sumo will soon be flooded with oversized and underskilled
foreigners out to make a quick yen.
The question of Konishiki's promotion to grand champion and a sudden
increase in foreigners in the sport's lower ranks are putting Japan's
self-proclaimed 'internationalisation' to the test. About 40 foreigners are
trying to make it as sumoists, including six Mongolians and a Sri Lankan,
and three Hawaiian wrestlers have been dominant in the two tournaments so
far this year.
While sumo officials huddle in debate over Konishiki, ordinary Japanese are
generally charmed by his out-of-ring gentleness and humour. Before leaving
Japan yesterday for a Hawaiian holiday and another celebration of his
wedding, he said humbly that the promotion decision is not his to make.
'I did my best on the dohyo. What people think off the dohyo is up to them.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920324

