FT922-3983

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (2): Thatcher v. unions - a
small revolution / Economics


   By GEOFFREY OWEN


MARKETS, FIRMS, AND THE MANAGEMENT OF LABOUR IN MODERN BRITAIN by Howard
Gospel Cambridge Pounds 30, 256 pages
THERE IS a widely-held view that the Thatcher governments, by reducing the
power of trade unions, removed an important source of industrial
inefficiency and paved the way for a new approach to labour relations,
better suited to the needs of international competition. Like many judgments
about the 1980s, this is at best an over-simplification. One of the merits
of Howard Gospel's admirably clear and well-argued account of the management
of labour in Britain is that it places recent developments in industrial
relations in a historical perspective. He argues that both the malign
influence of trade unions in the pre-Thatcher period and the extent of the
changes in the 1980s have been much exaggerated.
Two central themes in the book are, first, that the character of labour
relations is shaped largely by employers and, second, that employers respond
rationally to the market conditions which face them. British employers in
the 19th century adopted a labour relations strategy which fitted the needs
of the time - relying on the external market for labour, recruiting and
laying off as demand changed, avoiding long-term commitments to employees.
The institutions and attitudes arising from this strategy were reinforced
during the inter-war period. Faced with fluctuating product markets and an
abundant supply of workers, employers saw labour 'as a commodity to be
purchased at the going rate in the market place, with only minimal rights
and benefits within the workplace'. The apprenticeship system, for example,
was regarded by most employers more as a source of cheap labour than as a
way of providing the skilled human resources of the future.
Gospel contrasts this 'externalising' approach to the management of labour
with the 'internalising' strategy. The latter involves systematically
screening, recruiting and training workers and making every effort to
convert them into permanent employees. Some large companies in
capital-intensive industries did pursue such a strategy in the 19th and
early 20th centuries, but they were exceptions. Most companies were too
small to afford the necessary investment in managerial hierarchies; when
they did come together in mergers, they were generally run as loose holding
companies.
In the inter-war period larger companies in the US and Germany modernised
their industrial relations by developing internal labour markets. Britain's
lag was not a serious disadvantage in the protected and cartelised markets
of the 1930s. But after World War Two circumstances changed in two important
respects.
First, a prolonged period of full employment greatly strengthened the trade
unions and put collective bargaining arrangements under strain. Second,
competition in product markets began to increase from the 1960s as
price-fixing agreements were abandoned and import penetration rose.
Yet the response of British employers was slow. There was no concerted
attempt to remove inefficiencies in the workplace, reflecting management
acquiescence in over-manning and restrictive practices. Employers lacked the
organisational capacity at both national and company level to confront the
unions. Moreover, the will to launch such an attack was weakened by strong
demand, sheltered markets and a political climate of consensus.
As these easy conditions faded, it became clear that industrial relations
constituted a serious competitive problem for British industry. A growing
number of firms saw the disadvantages of employer associations which did
little to regulate conflict in the workplace. The trend towards more formal
single-employer bargaining was led by large companies in chemicals, oil
refining and parts of engineering; foreign multinationals played a
significant role. Such firms had both the motivation and the capability to
establish and administer internal labour systems.
Gospel rightly stresses that the reform of industrial relations started in
the mid-1960s. More controversially, he thinks that in the 1980s British
employers have built on the developments of the previous two decades; he
sees the changes as incremental rather than discontinuous.
This judgment would be challenged by many business people, for whom the
1980s marked a decisive change in labour-management relations. Gospel
accepts that a reduction in union power contributed to productivity growth
in the 1980s. But he argues that, in general, outside industries such as
coal mining in the first half of the 20th century and motor vehicles after
World War Two, the effect of unions on efficiency has been uneven and
probably exaggerated. 'Employers had initiatory power, while union power was
largely reactive and negative'.
Even if Gospel may under-estimate the independent influence of trade unions
in the earlier post-war period, no one would deny that employers today are
firmly in the driving seat. Under the pressure of competition, the
institutional inertia which held back the modernisation of British
industrial relations has been largely dissipated. Employers now have to take
the process further by developing more positive industrial relations
policies and investing in the skills, capabilities and commitment of their
workforce.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920609

