FT924-12038

FT  22 OCT 92 / Heseltine shores up Tory ranks


   By IVOR OWEN and DAVID OWEN


THE threatened rebellion by Tory backbenchers over the government's
pit-closure proposals was largely defused by Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary, in the Commons last night.
He said the promised wide-ranging review of the issue would ensure that
British Coal was not being deprived of its fair share of the energy market
through preferential treatment accorded to nuclear power and the privatised
electricity companies.
Mr Heseltine rounded off a skilful mix of placatory words and gestures for
the doubters on the Tory benches with the assurance that there would be a
genuine review with 'no pre-ordained outcome'.
Tension on the government front bench eased as the rowdy and disorderly
barracking to which Mr Heseltine was subjected by Labour MPs brought him an
unexpected political dividend. To cheers from many Tories, Mr Michael
Carttiss, MP for Great Yarmouth, and one of the Tory waverers, declared:
'Labour MPs have ensured that Mr Heseltine has my total support.'
The extent of the further gyrations undertaken by the cabinet to head off
the possibility of an embarrassing defeat at the end of the debate was
underlined when Mr Heseltine made clear that the fate of the 10 worst
loss-making pits, previously scheduled for closure, had not been finally
sealed.
Mr Nicholas Winterton (C Macclesfield), who had earlier said he would vote
against the government, pressed for an undertaking that the review would
cover the privatised electricity companies and result in legislation to
remedy any 'flaws'. Mr Heseltine replied that there would be no point in the
review 'if I was not prepared to consider that option'.
The genuineness of the review was strongly challenged by Mr Robin Cook,
shadow trade and industry secretary, and other opposition MPs. To a roar of
approval from the Labour benches, he called for the threat of the axe to be
removed from all 31 pits, and a frank admission from Mr Heseltine that in
making his original proposal he had got it wrong.
Mr Cook declared: 'We will mobilise the deep public anger you have aroused
until you do admit you were wrong, and until you do admit that the British
economy needs the British coals industry.'
Mr Cook claimed that the government had been forced to climb down over its
pit closure programme by a nation united in anger at the proposed
destruction of mining communities. While earlier pit closures had reflected
the decline in demand for coal in homes, the government had caused the
present crisis by proposing that there should be a reduction in the amount
of coal burnt to produce electricity.
Mr Cook protested that at a time when the country was looking for action to
expand the economy, the government had initiated a closure policy that would
result in 30,000 miners being added to the dole queue. He calculated that
the impact on other industries would result in the total addition to the
number unemployed being around 100,000.
Mr Cook contrasted Britain's position five years ago when it was
self-sufficient in energy with a forecast that by 2020 it would be importing
75 per cent of its primary energy needs. He asked: 'What other country in
Europe would be daft enough to make itself dependent on imported energy when
it is sitting on hundreds of years of coal reserves?'
Mr Patrick Cormack, Conservative MP for Staffordshire South, emphasised the
significance of the the expanded review by telling Mr Heseltine 'it is for
that reason and that reason alone' that many Tory backbenchers would vote in
the government lobby at the end of the debate. In an ominous rider, he noted
that if the review proved to be of a different character the Tory critics
would have an opportunity to vote against the government on a subsequent
occasion.
Mr Heseltine replied: 'I can only say that that thought had occurred to me.'
Mr Michael Clark, former Tory chairman of the energy select committee, said
he could not vote for the government amendment 'as things stand at the
moment' and asserted that the government had 'misread the mood of the people
in this country'.
If the government wanted his support, he said, it must commit itself to 'an
open, public and published' review, explain its energy policy and 'keep all
31 pits alive'.
He concluded: 'I shall be voting tonight not against my own government . . .
but for the coal industry.'
Later Mr Heseltine pledged that no miner would be 'disadvantaged' with
regard to redundancy payments as a result of the policy changes announced in
recent days.
Officials interpreted that to mean that redundancy payments at affected pits
would be based on income over the 12 weeks to October 13.
Mr Malcolm Bruce, Liberal Democrat trade and industry spokesman, demanded
that the government implement a moratorium on new gas-fired power stations
until the coal review was completed.
Coal faced a squeeze in the market because it had been put at 'the end of
the queue' in the government's privatisation programme, he suggested.
Mr Kevin Barron, Labour MP for Rother Valley, alleged that the government
review 'has more to do with trying to get (Mr Heseltine) off the hook' than
examining the country's long-term energy needs. 'We can look forward to
eight pits by the end of this decade,' he said.
Mr Michael Alison, Tory MP for Selby, said that with foreign coal costing
Pounds 32 a tonne 'a high-productivity British Coal really could beat all
players'.
Sir Rhodes Boyson, a former minister, demanded that the government should
consider every decision in the light of its impact on employment. 'I don't
want nil inflation if we have nil employment at the same time,' he said.
He welcomed the new commitment to a 'full, total and open review', though he
added that he wished all 31 pits were covered by it.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921022

