FT924-940

FT  21 DEC 92 / Economics Notebook: Exchanges spurn much-vaunted Maastricht
rules


   By PETER NORMAN


NINE days ago in Edinburgh, European Community leaders reaffirmed their
commitment to the Maastricht economic convergence criteria as part of the
EC's drive towards economic and monetary union.
The intervening days have shown just how irrelevant these criteria are to
the foreign exchange markets which act as the judges of one nation's
economic standing against another.
For if the Maastricht criteria, with their insistence on low inflation and
sound budgetary policies were any guide, the D-Mark would have been under
pressure to devalue in the European exchange rate mechanism last week and
not the French franc.
Developments in the ERM since September have gone a long way to justify the
criticism of Sir Alan Walters, Mrs Thatcher's economic adviser when she was
prime minister, that the European Monetary System is 'half baked' and doomed
to instability.
The system has certainly been inhospitable to France, which fulfils the
Maastricht criteria more fully than any other big EC nation.
France has pushed its annual inflation rate a good percentage point below
that of Germany to well below 3 per cent.
It meets the Maastricht requirement of having a budget deficit of less than
3 per cent of gross domestic product.
It has been categorised by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development as a 'low debt country'.
France's reward has been to suffer repeated speculative selling of the franc
over the past three months that has forced it to have higher short- and
long-term interest rates than Germany.
It might be argued that this is not the fault of the ERM, but of financial
markets.
The markets see, rightly, that France may be heading into a period of
political uncertainty ahead of the March national assembly elections.
They believe, probably wrongly, that the D-Mark is a more credible currency
than the franc because it has never devalued.
But the French franc's problems should also be telling the EC's policy
makers that the Maastricht convergence criteria are too crude a yardstick if
the ERM is to continue to act as a glide path to Emu.
Because of events since September, some EC monetary experts believe
convergence should be considered over a far wider spectrum of economic
activity than laid down in the Maastricht Treaty.
Largely ignored so far, is the very wide gulf that exists between economic
interests and aspirations of the low-inflation countries grouped around
Germany and the EC's poorer peripheral nations such as Spain, Portugal,
Greece, Ireland and, it must be said, Britain.
The former group increasingly are 'rentier' societies with financial assets
spread widely through the population and an interest in preserving the value
of those assets through price stability.
For the other group, a main attraction of EC membership should be the
opportunity of faster growth: an opportunity that has been frustrated by
high German interest rates over the past year.
At the micro-economic end of the spectrum are the different national
techniques of monetary policy and monetary policy instruments, where the
recent experiences of France and the UK point to future problems on the way
to Emu.
One reason France has been able to fend off the speculators has been the
ability of the Bank of France to defend the franc with high interest rates
while sheltering its domestic economy from the effects of such measures.
In September, when the franc was under its heaviest selling pressure, the
Bank of France made sure it supplied sufficient liquidity in its money
market operations for normal domestic needs at the intervention rate of 9.60
per cent. But it pushed up its emergency rate at which it lends against
collateral for five to 10 days to 13 per cent from 10.5 per cent.
This move to make speculation against the franc more expensive was
reinforced by a particularly fastidious choice of the securities that banks
could offer for francs in the repurchase arrangements. Many speculators
wanting francs to sell were therefore forced on to the domestic money
market, where rates rose to more than 30 per cent. During this period the
banks were able to hold their rates stable for their domestic clients.
Such an approach was impossible for the UK authorities in September. The
government floated the pound on Black Wednesday when it became clear that
the announcement of 15 per cent base rates had failed to stop the selling of
sterling. It knew that the high interest rate would have been passed on
almost immediately by banks and building societies to their customers.
The UK has a banking system that is far more market-oriented than some on
the continent. UK banks pay market or near market rates on the great bulk of
their liabilities. They no longer have a significant income endowment from
non-interest bearing current accounts. As a result, Bank of England actions
in the money market are almost immediately reflected in the UK banks'
interest rate structure.
France's recent experience has shown that fulfilling the Maastricht criteria
is no safeguard against speculative attack. If Britain were to rejoin the
ERM with the Maastricht criteria fulfilled, it would, in conditions such as
the past three months, presumably have a difficult struggle to maintain
sterling's parity. The UK's money market structure and system of interest
rate determination would make it less likely that the UK could win that
battle than France so far this year.
So long as the ERM retains its present characteristics, eventual UK re-entry
would therefore seem to involve an unpalatable choice. Either Britain would
have to accept that sterling was more vulnerable than other currencies
because of its financial system. Or it would have to change that system,
even though it has evolved to suit best the needs of the UK economy.
These are big issues and they throw yet another question mark against the
EC's goal of moving rapidly to Emu by 1999 at the latest.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921221

