FT923-9829

FT  03 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: Gilts


The allocation of institutional assets between bonds and equities continues
to stir debate. Pension fund managers, though, seem more interested in more
mundane choices between bond markets. Provisional figures produced by the
performance measurement specialist Caps for the first half of this year
suggest UK pension funds increased their gilt weighting, including
index-linked, from 5.1 per cent to 6.9 per cent over the period. This slow
build-up was at the expense of overseas bonds rather than domestic equities.
The average allocation to overseas bonds fell from 5.5 per cent to 4.1 per
cent over the period. UK equities were steady at 58.5 per cent.
Institutional cash has been flowing into gilts faster than this suggests.
Bank of England figures show domestic investors buying Pounds 6.8bn of gilts
in the last quarter alone. Anecdotal evidence points to life companies as
more enthusiastic buyers. Norwich Union, which sparked the bonds/equities
debate last year by switching Pounds 1bn from equities into gilts in a
single week, is now directing the bulk of its cash flow to UK government
bonds. Its main with-profits fund is now 25 per cent in sterling bonds. A
few institutions, such as Scottish Equitable, admit to a weighting as high
as 60 per cent.
Even so, the behaviour of pension funds is a reminder that the relative
value of gilts against other bond markets is an important factor in
determining overall demand. This is equally true of overseas investors. The
government needs the support of both if its funding programme is to proceed
at current yields or lower. The gilts market knows as much: figures showing
a resurgence of overseas buying in June were greeted with relief.
The broader question is whether demand will be sustained. Judged against
continental European markets, UK government bonds look expensive. As the
chart shows, the yield spread between gilts and French government bonds at
the 10-year maturity has narrowed from 1.2 per cent in January to 0.3 per
cent at the end of last week. In terms of economic fundamentals, France
offers lower inflation, a lower budget deficit and no less room for monetary
easing. Either the French market is oversold ahead of the Maastricht
referendum, or the risk premium on gilts is too low.
If France does vote against Maastricht on September 20, pressures for an ERM
realignment will intensify. This is not just a problem for France. So far
this year the weakness of sterling within the mechanism has encouraged
overseas investors to buy gilts in anticipation of a currency gain. If the
credibility of current ERM parities is seriously called into question, the
effect could be reversed.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920803

