FT921-1293

FT  25 MAR 92 / Nestle details FFr15bn payment for Perrier


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


ONE of Europe's most tortuous corporate sagas ended yesterday when Nestle,
the Swiss foods group, disclosed details of its agreement with Italy's
Agnelli family to take control of Perrier, the French mineral water, in a
FFr15.46bn (Pounds 1.6bn) deal.
'Reason has prevailed,' said Mr Reto Domeniconi who, as director-general of
Nestle, led the fight against the Agnellis for control of Perrier. 'We have
a clear, comprehensive agreement. Everyone has ended up with something.
There are no losers in this affair.'
Nestle has been pursuing Perrier on the Paris stock market and through the
French law courts since its original FFr13.42bn bid made with Indosuez, the
French bank belonging to the Suez industrial group.
Under the agreement, finalised early on Monday, Nestle and Indosuez will
increase their offer for Perrier from FFr1,475 to FFr1,700 a share. Exor,
the French property company that controls Perrier, has promised to support
the offer. Ifint, an Agnelli vehicle, is the biggest single shareholder in
Exor for which it has launched a FFr5.6bn bid.
The Agnellis will emerge with a substantial cash profit estimated at more
than FFr1bn on Exor's Perrier shares. They will also keep Exor's property
interests, worth around FFr3bn, and Chateau Margaux, the French vineyard.
Meanwhile BSN, the French food group which turned against its old allies,
the Agnellis, to side with Nestle, its chief competitor, will drop its
FFr6bn counter-bid for Exor. Instead it joins the Agnellis - as a 10 per
cent partner - in a higher FFr6.12bn bid for Exor. BSN will buy Volvic, one
of the Perrier waters, from Nestle under the terms of a prior agreement.
The stormy saga of Perrier might not yet be over. The European Commission is
approaching the end of its preliminary inquiry into Nestle's bid and has
until tomorrow to decide whether or not to mount an in-depth investigation.
'Such an investigation would involve freezing the bid for four months,' said
Mr Domeniconi. 'And given that this affair is so very complex we have to
assume that the commission may well decide to do that.'
Dynastic hopes, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920325

