FT923-15481

FT  02 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Hurd to visit Hong Kong


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


MR DOUGLAS HURD, the foreign secretary, announced in the Commons yesterday
that he will visit Hong Kong from July 26 to July 28.
Replying to demands for early action to extend democracy in Hong Kong before
it reverts to Chinese control in 1997, he made clear that decisions about
the election to be held in 1995 were still some way off.
Mr Hurd said Mr Chris Patten, setting out later this week to take up his
post as the last British governor of the colony, would be undertaking
wide-ranging consultations.
When Mr Patten had weighed up the different views he would deliver his
advice to the British government.
Mr Hurd emphasised that he would not be announcing any decisions about the
1995 election during his visit later in the month.
Responding to a charge by Mr Tony Banks, Labour MP for Newham North West,
that the UK government was distancing itself from the democratic movement in
Hong Kong, the foreign secretary reaffirmed that the government hoped to
ensure that the arrangements made for 1995 continued after 1997.
Mr Alastair Goodlad, foreign office junior minister, stated that the total
number of people in Hong Kong eligible to vote in the legislative council
elections in September 1991 was 3.7m of whom 1.9m registered. The turnout
for the 18 directly elected seats was 39 per cent.
Mr Hurd disclosed that he had talked on the telephone with South Africa's
foreign minister on Tuesday night about implementing the European
Community's proposal for a visit by the foreign ministers of Britain,
Portugal and Denmark.
The foreign secretary said he would head the trio 'at the right time and in
a way that would be helpful in bringing back people to the conference table
and not just as a prestige gesture'.
He also refused to associate the British government with calls to ban South
Africa from all international sporting events.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920702

