FT924-11476

FT  26 OCT 92 / Management: Putting a value on people in a changing world


   By ANDREW JACK


While many companies are now starting to address broader issues than profit
and wider audiences than shareholders, few have been able to back up the
rhetoric with much statistical rigour.
Tentative steps in that direction are being taken as part of a three-year
research programme by Britain's Royal Society of Arts into 'Tomorrow's
Company: the role of business in a changing world'.
Making the case for change at the RSA's latest seminar on the subject, Roger
Stubbs, deputy managing director of Mori, the market research company,
unveiled a poll showing that 42 per cent of City analysts and 80 per cent of
the public believe British companies do not pay enough attention to their
treatment of the environment.
They rank environmental protection, employee welfare and community service
as companies principal social responsibilities. Anti-pollution measures and
a safe workplace were also important.
These are not idle, irrelevant concerns for companies. The poll showed that
38 per cent of fund managers expected private investors' influence over how
their funds are invested to increase in the next few years. That would seem
to suggest that shareholders may increasingly take action against companies
adopting practices with which they do not agree.
How companies can measure and improve their performance to a wider group of
stakeholders remains extremely difficult. Most discussion at the RSA seminar
concentrated on valuing people.
Alan Benjamin, chairman of Alphameric, argued that every company's key asset
is people, and yet they are not valued under existing performance measures
and are rather simply written off as annual expenditure.
He said renewing 'people assets' using continual education and training was
essential. Without it, the 'knowledge base' of a company would depreciate.
David Budworth, a consultant, suggested that one approach would be to use
what he called an 'innovation ratio'. This would measure current expenditure
not expected to produce a return in the current year, such as money spent on
research and development.
The ratio would record the deterioration of intangible assets - the
non-physical elements of a company which generate value, including their
employees.
Given that there is considerable controversy about how to value intangible
assets, he suggested circumventing the debate by using a measurement of cash
flow.
It may be some time before companies need to take these issues too
seriously, however. There is considerable progress yet to be made, however,
as a second survey presented by Crispin Tweddle, chairman of Piper Trust,
showed.
A sample of contributors to investment funds such as pensions - drawn from
middle managers in industry - knew nothing about how their money was
currently invested, nor the policies adopted by the institutions, and did
not look on themselves as shareholders.
This suggests that change in the short term is more likely to be brought
about by their own realisation of a need for more sophisticated measures
than by any direct shareholder action.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921026

