FT922-4406

FT  05 JUN 92 / EC pledges to keep door open for Danes: Renegotiation of
treaty ruled out as ministers play down vote crisis


   By DAVID BUCHAN and ROBERT MAUTHNER


   OSLO


EUROPEAN Community nations yesterday promised to 'keep the door open' for
Denmark to change its mind and join the political and monetary union set out
in the Maastricht treaty.
But they declared there would be no renegotiation of the treaty, which
Danish voters narrowly rejected on Tuesday.
EC foreign ministers, in an emergency session in Oslo, ruled out a special
summit to deal with the crisis. They said they would pursue ratification of
Maastricht 'on the basis of the existing text' by the year end.
Ministers sought to play down the crisis in spite of its potential to
sabotage the plans painstakingly negotiated at Maastricht.
Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, Denmark's strongly pro-EC foreign minister, joined
his 11 colleagues in confirming that they wanted 'to see the European union
established by all member states'.
He was well received when he told the others that the Danish government
acknowledged that Maastricht could not now be renegotiated, that it would
keep all its options open, and that it needed time to decide what to do.
The vote was 'No to Maastricht, but not No to Europe', Mr Ellemann-Jensen
stressed. Even the anti-EC minority in the Danish parliament concurred with
that interpretation, he added.
Mr Poul Schluter, the Danish prime minister, said he might call a second
referendum if Denmark could win support for a 'special arrangement' at a
conference in the autumn.
Denmark's partners, discreetly encouraged by the Danish government, clearly
hope that ratification by the 11 other states will exert growing pressure on
Danish opinion as this year wears on.
'We need a period of calm reflection,' said Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign
secretary. 'We, British, will go forward with our legislation to ratify
Maastricht,' he said, adding that the Danish referendum 'has had an effect
on some of those among the British people who were prepared to give
Maastricht the benefit of the doubt in the first instance'.
Mr Joao de Deus Pinheiro, the Portuguese foreign minister, who chaired
yesterday's meeting, praised the 'solidarity and cohesion' shown by
ministers. Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, whose brainchild of
monetary union is now at risk, said: 'Even if we have a little crisis, we
shall overcome it.'
Ministers deliberately put off consideration of the legal complexities
raised by the possibility of Denmark being left behind by its partners. EC
legal experts will meet their Danish counterparts, but their findings will
not be ripe for political decision 'for the next few weeks or months'.
Mr Hurd said he expected yesterday's session to be the first in a series of
ministerial discussions on Denmark's future and the fate of Maastricht,
which has still to be definitively ratified by any EC state. Its next test
is Ireland's June 18 referendum.
Mr Pinheiro ruled out advancing the June 26-27 Lisbon summit to discuss the
crisis, or convening any special summit. Indeed, Mr Hurd doubted whether the
problem would even be discussed at Lisbon, such is the desire of EC
governments to pretend they are conducting business as usual.
MAASTRICHT IN BALANCE
Page 2
Danes ponder their fate
Kohl, Major to respond
D-Mark gathers strength
One way forward, Page 18
Bonds, Page 29
Currencies, Page 31
London stocks, Page 40
World stocks, Page 37

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920605

