FT921-3863

FT  12 MAR 92 / International Company News: Nimble players in a global
market - The performance of the big three Swiss banks


   By IAN RODGER


In the past few years, doubts have often been expressed in international
banking circles about the ability of the big three Swiss banks to thrive in
the deregulated, borderless markets of the future.
But those doubts must be largely put to rest following the publication of
record profits by the three, Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS), Swiss Bank
Corporation (SBC) and Credit Suisse, for 1991, a year in which big banks in
the UK, the US and Japan all sagged under the pressure of weak economic
conditions.
The performance of the banks is all the more remarkable coming only a year
after most of the conventions which had enabled them to limit competition
and keep margins high in Swiss financial markets were removed.
Swiss bank managers are seen as slow moving and unimaginative, running their
banks like they run their country's citizen army, and their initial attempts
at achieving global reach often foundered. UBS and its chief executive Mr
Richard Struder had a long struggle with its Phillips & Drew acquisition in
London before receiving any return on its investment, and Credit Suisse's
problems with its First Boston subsidiary in 1990 put great strain on the
bank's resources.
But, in the past year, these problems have been dealt with and the big three
have shown themselves to be nimble and successful global players.
Credit Suisse said 30 per cent of last year's net income came from foreign
operations, while UBS drew attention to the 25 per cent contribution from
foreign operations to its bottom line last year. At SBC, overall progress in
this direction was concealed by the cost of huge write-offs on bad loans in
the US and the UK.
In their basic lending business, the three took full advantage of sound
capital bases and the retreat of US and Japanese banks from the
international corporate market, booking loans to highly rated companies all
over the world at healthy margins. UBS reported interest income up a
handsome 23.3 per cent to SFr626m (Dollars 417.3m), but its loan book grew
only 4 per cent.
The three have also reacted successfully to the liberalisation of commission
rates in the Swiss equity markets by enticing small customers into managed
investment funds. Investment funds managed by Swiss Bank Corporation, the
second largest, nearly doubled to SFr21.1bn.
All three, but SBC and Credit Suisse in particular, have made enthusiastic
use of derivative products to manage risk.
SBC revealed that its association with the derivative specialists, The
O'Conner Partnerships in Chicago, in which it invested about SFr90m a little
over a year ago, yielded net income of SFr107m last year. Profits from
trading at Credit Suisse, driven mainly by the Credit Suisse Financial
Products subsidiary in London, soared nearly sixfold to SFr1.3bn.
All three also showed big gains on foreign exchange trading and officials
made clear that these came from offices in New York, London and Tokyo, not
from Zurich.
In securities-related business as well, the big three have decided it is
more important to be competitive than to be in Switzerland. No less than 88
per cent of Credit Suisse's investment funds are now based in Luxembourg,
mainly to avoid Switzerland's stamp duty. SBC and UBS operate about 60 per
cent of their managed funds in Luxembourg.
Like other international banks, the big three felt obliged to make big
provisions for bad loans last year. SBC and Credit Suisse were among those
who loaned large sums to companies controlled by Mr Robert Maxwell. Polly
Peck, Brent Walker and Macy's are among other foreign names that appear
prominently on bad loan lists.
At home, the big problem has been the slump in the property market. As Mr
Robert Jeker, chief executive of Credit Suisse, said last Friday, 'in the
past, we did not imagine that property prices in Switzerland would decline'.
All reported having to make significant numbers of repossessions for the
first time in memory - 72 properties worth SFr99.4m in the case of UBS - and
Mr Heinz Muller, a group director, said he would not be surprised to see the
figure double this year. UBS and SBC have 45 per cent and 40 per cent
respectively of their advances to customers in mortgages, Credit Suisse only
a third.
The banks have been rapidly adapting their disclosure practices to
international standards, and they now provide much more information about
their activities and financial health. The near mythical secret reserves
have been exposed, revealing that all three have capital resources well
beyond those required under the Bank of International Settlements
guidelines.
That does not mean they do not take advantage occasionally of the leeway
that exists between international standards and the more lax Swiss ones.
Last year SBC pulled SFr400m out of a general provision for sovereign risks
that it said was no longer needed and used it to reduce bad debt provisions
to SFr1.5bn.
Some analysts worried about the increasing proportion of the banks' income
coming from trading activities, especially from derivative products.
Others point out the number of banks in the world that have the skills and
the financial strength to compete in these sophisticated areas is small and
perhaps shrinking.
And that is probably one reason why the big three are all confident of
further profit growth this year, in spite of dreary economic conditions in
Switzerland and in many other countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920312

