FT924-6059

FT  24 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Summit focus on Danes, Hurd says


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER, Diplomatic Editor


A MAIN priority for the Edinburgh EC summit next month would be to find a
solution to Denmark's demands for clarifications of the Maastricht Treaty,
after its rejection by the Danish people in a referendum last June, Mr
Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, told the Commons foreign affairs
committee yesterday.
The difficult task for the UK presidency was to find a way in which Danish
views would be taken into consideration in a legally binding document
without any renegotiation of the treaty. But although a Foreign Office
memorandum submitted to the committee stated specifically that any solution
to the Danish issue must satisfy the concern of other partners that the
treaty itself should not be reopened, Mr Hurd did not entirely rule out the
possibility of amendments to the treaty.
'We cannot have the treaty without the Danes,' he said. He again raised the
possibility that Britain might complete its own treaty ratification
procedures before the second Danish referendum had taken place. The British
parliament was due to complete all stages of the Maastricht ratification
bill by June next year. Although the Danish government had indicated that it
would like to hold another referendum in May 1993, that was by no means a
certainty.
'If everybody waits until everybody else has ratified the treaty, it will
never be done. That is an argument for Kingdom Come,' Mr Hurd told Mr Peter
Shore, Labour MP for Stepney and Bethnal Green.
Mr Hurd made clear that the UK wanted negotiations for an enlargement of the
Community (with Austria, Sweden and Finland) to start next year, even if all
countries had not ratified the Maastricht treaty before they began.
It is highly unlikely that some of Britain's partners would allow
contravention of the firm agreement not to start negotiations with new
applicants until the treaty had been ratified by all members and new
budgetary arrangements had been agreed.
Mr Hurd also said that the European Community's Council of Ministers did not
need to take an immediate decision on the Gatt trade negotiations, thus
lessening the likelihood of a French veto.
The Council of Ministers would not have to take a decision on the Gatt
agreement until after it had been reached, probably not before March next
year.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921124

