FT922-7235

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (10): Life gets tougher in France -
Alice Rawsthorn looks beyond a disappointing results season


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


THESE DAYS there is a somewhat subdued tone to the grand old banking halls
straddling the streets around Boulevard Haussman in Paris.
France's banks may have been spared the same ravages of recession that have
haunted their counterparts in the US and the UK, but they have just emerged
from a second successive year of fierce pressure on profits and a worrying
rise in bad debts.
When the big French banks unveiled their 1991 results this spring, their
outpourings did not make pleasant reading. Paribas, the prestigious
investment bank, began by announcing its first ever loss, of FFr184m (Pounds
18.6m). Credit Lyonnais confirmed its critics' worst suspicions about its
aggressive expansion in the late 1980s by disclosing a decline in net
profits from FFr3.7bn to FFr3.2bn after doubling client risk provisions to
FFr9.5bn.
Societe Generale struck a brighter note by returning to profits growth,
after a fall in 1990, as did Banque Nationale de Paris. But neither group
managed to return to the same level of profits as in 1989, their last year
of growth.
The performance of the smaller banks was equally lacklustre. France's banks
managed to increase their collective net profits by just 2 per cent to
FFr15.23bn in 1991, according to the Association Francaise des Banques a
fall in real terms. The main reason was a steep increase in provisions of
nearly 22 per cent to FFr38.4bn.
'Last year was pretty tough for the French banks,' said Mr Sasha
Serafimovski, European banking analyst for Morgan Stanley. 'Their position
is not nearly as bad as that of the British or the Americans, but life for
them is getting tougher and tougher.'
The outlook for 1992 is little better. The French economy ought to improve,
provided there is a reduction in interest rates this autumn, which will not
only alleviate the pressure on the banks but should also provide a sorely
needed boost to demand for credit.
But the French banks still face fierce competition in some sectors of their
domestic market, notably deposits, where the government's SICAV scheme has
siphoned cash away from the banks.
The investment banks face continuing competition from the international
concerns that are continuing to expand in France. Morgan Stanley of the US,
Nomura of Japan and the UK's Kleinwort Benson have all recently announced
plans to extend their banking or broking operations in Paris.
Meanwhile, the retail banks are haunted by the French post office's plans to
start issuing cheques. The post office, helped by its huge network, could
become a daunting competitor as the AFB has recognised by mounting a
campaign against its plans.
Further, the banks seem set for yet another year of hefty provisions, given
that there is no sign of a fall in the rate of French business failures, nor
of a recovery in the property market to which some banks, notably Credit
Lyonnais, are heavily exposed. And, although the litany of international
corporate horror stories seems to be abating, there will almost certainly be
enough multinational traumas this year to add to their problems in France.
However, the French banks have made progress on some fronts, notably in cost
control. Credit Lyonnais, for instance, managed to offset its difficulties
with bad debts by the impressive performance of its restructured and
rationalised French retail network. Both BNP and Credit Commercial de France
(CCF), one of the leading private sector banks, managed to keep their cost
increases in France beneath inflation.
'The French banks have done very well at controlling costs,' said Ms Susan
Sternglass, European banking analyst at Goldman Sachs. 'They have also
managed to avoid the dramas of the massive job losses in the UK and the US.
The French have taken a more moderate approach by gradually shedding staff
through early retirement and relocation programmes.'
Such initiatives augur well for the future, given that, even after the
French economy recovers, the level of competition in French banking seems
set to get even more ferocious. Meanwhile, France's banks are still
struggling to strike a balance between the parallel pressures of their old
roles as state-controlled institutions and the commercial constraints of
operating in international banking.
This dilemma is most acute for the state-controlled banks, notably BNP and
Credit Lyonnais. But the legacy of government ownership affects all the
French banks. For instance, they are not allowed to charge their personal
customers for cheques given that owning a cheque book is seen as a citizen's
right in France.
The links between the state and the banking sector have lessened in recent
years. BNP and Credit Lyonnais still take large stakes in state-controlled
companies which, or so most banking analysts suspect, they would not have
done without the 'encouragement' of the French government. This is not,
however, entirely to their disadvantage. Credit Lyonnais financed much of
its controversial expansion by expanding its equity through such deals.
Moreover both banks claim that their links with the government are not as
strong as in the past.
Those links are likely to be even weaker in the future. The privatisation of
Societe Generale was seen as the beginning of the end of the era of state
ownership. The socialist government has already identified the insurers as
candidates for its partial privatisation policy. The banks may be next. Most
observers suspect that sooner or later both BNP and Credit Lyonnais will
join Societe Generale in the private sector.
In the meantime, the government's influence over BNP and Credit Lyonnais is
slowly being eroded by the commercial disciplines of modern banking.
'The reality of life is that the need to comply with international capital
standards is much more important to a bank than what the state tells it to
do,' said Ms Sternglass. 'The market is slowly taking over - even in
France.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920520

