FT923-6620

FT  22 AUG 92 / Motoring: A Jaguar that no one needs


   By STUART MARSHALL


AS EVERYONE who reads a tabloid newspaper must know by now, the Jaguar XJ220
is the dearest (Pounds 415,000), fastest (217 mph/350 kmh) and most
sought-after car in the world. No fewer than 1,500 people - more than 400 in
recession-stricken Britain - are said to have applied to buy one within 48
hours of Jaguar's announcement in December 1989 that 350 would be made in a
limited edition.
Last week, two of these precious machines were made available for press
testing. When a journalist accidentally over-revved and damaged the engine
of one of them, it made headlines. You would have thought no one had muffed
a gear-change before.
In essence, the XJ220 is close to being a de-tuned sports/racing car clad in
a strikingly beautiful, if wildly impractical, body. It has two leather
seats and a boot just about big enough for a document case and a packet of
smoked salmon sandwiches.
It is difficult to enter and leave although, once you have strapped yourself
into the full racing harness, the air-conditioned interior seems comfortable
enough. Clutch and brakes (no power assistance or anti-locking system) are
very heavy; the gear-shift is no lightweight, either.
There is no power steering, no traction control system and no spare wheel.
Even if there was room for a spare, which there is not, it would not be much
good because, if you took off one of the monstrous road wheels, either it or
your passenger would have to be left on the roadside. If you get a flat tyre
(a new set cost more than Pounds 2,500), you call up your private helicopter
and have the car collected on a lorry.
The engine, in full view under the rear window, is a 3.5-litre V6 from
Jaguar's XJR11 racing car. Twin turbo-charged, it belts out 548 horsepower -
which makes the XJ220 about 20 per cent more muscular than a five-litre,
12-cylinder Ferrari 512.
The exhaust system with catalytic converters is, of course, road-legal. Even
so, an XJ220 in full song at 6,000 rpm would thrill motor-racing buffs but
have environmental protection officers reaching for their noise meters. At
start-up, the V6 is so coarse and rattly that it makes the XJ220 sound more
like farm machinery than a Pounds 415,000 motor car.
Jaguar racing driver John Nielsen hurtled me round the Salzburg Ring racing
circuit in Austria for three laps before handing over the XJ220. In all
honesty, I cannot pretend to have gained any real idea of its performance in
fewer than 10 minutes on a track. All I can say is that the cornering grip
was sensational, the acceleration head-jerking, the steering razor-sharp and
the brakes very powerful.
Buyers who plan to drive their cars on the road will be relieved to know the
engine is flexible enough to pull in third or even fourth gear at speeds
that will not cause blue lights to flash.
Driving on a deserted circuit is exciting; a wonderful, once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity to play with a car-mad millionaire's latest toy. But what would
it be like on a motorway, or in London's Park Lane on a wet Friday
afternoon? Mercifully, I shall never have to find out.
Jaguar stresses, with pride, the XJ220's great structural strength and crash
protection qualities. But, without wishing to be the spectre at the feast,
one has to ask: what business does the company have making a car like this
at all?
As a road-going car it has no relevance. There is nowhere in the world
except a private circuit where it can be allowed to show its potential.
The XJ220 was conceived - originally as a V12 with four-wheel drive before
being watered down to a rear-drive V6 - in the boom days of the mid-1980s.
There might have been no justification for it even then, but at least a
buyer would have had a chance to see how it went on the autobahn (always
providing he had the skill).
Times have changed. Very high speeds on the autobahn are frowned-upon and
many now see a projectile like this - available to anyone with the money to
buy and insure it - as an affront to common sense.
You can argue that there is no compulsion to drive a car like the XJ220 at
illegal speeds. Of course there isn't. But to buy it, and use only one-third
of its potential, is like ordering dinner in a Michelin three-star
restaurant knowing you are going to eat only the pate, toy with the soup,
and send all the other courses back to the kitchen, untouched.
The mere existence of 200 mph-plus cars provides a hostage to fortune. If a
missed gear change and a few bent valves had the tabloids panting with
excitement, just think what a high-speed accident involving an XJ220 would
do.
Isn't it time the motor industry grew up and stopped pretending the public
highway is still a suitable place for rich exhibitionists to indulge their
taste for conspicuous consumption?

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920822

