FT923-15508

FT  02 JUL 92 / UN launches operation to feed Sarajevo


   By LAURA SILBER, JUDY DEMPSEY and NANCY DUNNE


   BELGRADE, LONDON,, WASHINGTON


THE United Nations is today expected to launch a massive humanitarian relief
operation aimed at feeding the 300,000 starving inhabitants of the besieged
Bosnian capital of Sarajevo.
The operation will be assisted by 1,200 Canadian troops, who will arrive in
Sarajevo early this morning after travelling overland from Croatia where
they have been deployed as UN peace-keepers.
The troops, equipped with 80 armoured personnel carriers, will immediately
take control of the airport, which until last Monday had been blockaded by
Serb irregulars, and Serbia's proxy Bosnian army.
Western governments and international relief agencies are on standby, ready
to send food to Sarajevo, which has been under siege by Serb irregulars for
86 days.
Yesterday, the local inhabitants got their first taste of fresh water for
many weeks after UN troops delivered 27 tons of supplies to three charities
representing Moslems, Serbs and Croats, Bosnia's main ethnic groups.
The aid was delivered by four French aircraft following French President
Francois Mitterrand's visit to Sarajevo last Sunday.
But UN officials and locals warned that any upsurge in the fighting could
jeopardise the entire relief operation.
Mr Radovan Karadzic, one of the leaders of the Serb irregulars, promised to
court-martial anyone who broke the ceasefire.
A western diplomat dismissed the statement, issued only to international
newsagencies and not to the Serbian media, as 'a public relations exercise
and not done in good faith'.
The besieged suburb of Dobrinja was yesterday again attacked by Serb
irregulars.
In Washington, President George Bush said he had 'no plans at this juncture'
to use the six US warships which have been moved from the Mediterranean into
the Adriatic Sea.
However, he said he was 'appalled at the human suffering and the killing in
Sarajevo. . . we will do what we are called upon to do.'
Appearing on a morning television chat show, the president said the forces
were meant to 'send a signal to the people over there that we're serious'.
They include four warships carrying marines, as well as attack and transport
helicopters which could provide air and naval cover for food aid
distribution efforts.
Tanjug, the Belgrade-based news agency, accused the US of wanting to launch
a military intervention in Bosnia. 'It is very likely that Washington is
waiting for a motive for intervention and, without any doubt, it will
intervene if it gets the motive' said Tanjug.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920702

