FT924-5973

FT  24 NOV 92 / Arts: Sickert, the-odd-man-out - William Packer admires this
artist, too French for the English and too English for the French


   By WILLIAM PACKER


Walter Sickert is one of the great figures in British art in the modern
period. His example directly influenced his contemporaries, set the
character of much of our art school education well into the 1960s, and
persists at a general level even today. Such work is well-mannered,
well-observed, the paint rich and lively on the surface, close in tone,
thoroughly painterly and professional. The subject-matter is intimate and
domestic, scenes of the bedroom and the kitchen, theatre and music-hall, the
local street, the corner cafe, the unassuming shop.
And among our best painters of that period, Sickert again must stand high on
the list, perhaps even in first place. Yet in that very company  - from
Whistler, Sargent, Bomberg and Spencer to Bacon and Freud - we discover an
odd paradox of British art at large. For to be thus typical of us, it seems,
is necessarily to be an outsider of some sort, incomer or eccentric, typical
only in peculiarity.
Born in Munich in 1860 of a Danish father and Anglo-Irish mother, as much at
ease in French and German as in English, he was as naturally cosmopolitan as
the American painter, Whistler, his first mentor. Through him he met Degas,
who introduced him into the Paris art world of the 1880s. He was a constant
traveller, staying abroad for years on end, notably at Dieppe and Venice.
Ever independent, he soon distanced himself from Whistler, writing in 1888
that 'Now that you have taught me to walk I am not crying to be carried.' He
also frequently wrote art criticism for newspapers and magazines. Was it the
occasional wearing of the critic's hat that allowed him the critical
detachment and practical independence that together characterised him until
his death, in 1942?
Too English for the French, who remain largely ignorant of him, too French
for the English to accommodate readily, Sickert is still something of an
odd-man-out, sui generis. There have been small group and dealers' shows
galore, but London has seen no full study since the Arts Council's centenary
show at the Tate in 1960, and nothing major since the show of late work at
the Hayward 11 years ago. This admirably comprehensive Royal Academy
retrospective is thus all the more welcome for being so long over-due.
It is hung in broadly chronological sections, each covering the several
interests of its period. We follow his emergence from Whistler's shadow, the
early influence of Degas, and the establishment of a personal and particular
imagery of music-hall, artiste and audience. Then it is the street-scape of
Dieppe, then Venice and Saint Mark's. And now it is Venice again, but in the
persons of the women, old and young, who were his models. So it is that the
nude, the intimate, domestic, unidealised nude, as of the brothels of Degas
and Lautrec, enters his repertoire of subjects, soon made entirely his own
in the dark and ambiguous interiors of Camden Town, redolent of violence and
murder and the enduring myth of Sickert's involvement with Jack-the-Ripper.
So we move on, the palette lightening, to the interiors, the portraits,
theatre paintings and figure groups of his middle and old age, so often
based on press and theatre-publicity photographs, all set out clearly
enough, though fussy captioning does jar occasionally. And it is surprising
to read that the Italian inscription in the second, splendid painting of
Gwen Ffrangcon-Davies as Marlowe's Queen Isabella - 'The abuse heaped on the
head of a King makes me speechless, makes me tremble' - remains unexplained.
Unidentified perhaps, but it is yet singularly appropriate to the story of
Edward II, and the painting itself is dated about 1936.
But nice matters of iconography and identity, or whether a grey-green wall
means London or Venice, dear as they are to art-scholarship, are not really
the substance of such exercises as this. Rather it is that in bringing so
much of the work together of all kinds and periods, the emphasis returns to
the work as work, and to the act of painting itself. And what emerges is not
merely the refined and careful quest after aesthetic and technical effect,
which we know from the individual works, but collectively something
altogether more robust and radical. The paint lies lush on the surface, the
brush-mark flickering and active, the paint positively relished. The drawing
is only as precise as it needs to be, sometimes all but perfunctory - and
yet it always is enough, the resolution of each image perfect even in its
imprecision. To come to Sickert from Munch at the National Gallery - almost
his exact contemporary - is to catch, by the immediacy of the figures and
portraits of the 1890s and 1900s especially, a decided hint of expressionism
in the air.
The other technical matter is Sickert's use of the photographic reference,
which is open and declared in the later work. Here is no slavish copying -
indeed no artist can properly use the photograph without an understanding of
its inherent distortions and omissions. But, by supplying the image
complete, it does free the artist from questions of composition and
organisation, leaving him only to decide upon the general treatment of the
surface and the actual handling of the paint. It is thus hardly surprising
to find Sickert as free and openly experimental in these later works as ever
he was before.
The question is only: how soon did he begin? It is known that he was using
the post-card or photograph to supplement his own drawings and studies well
before 1900. But already, so it seems to me, from this remarkable
exhibition, a good many of his major paintings of Dieppe or Venice at the
turn of the century, of l'Eglise Saint Jacques, or the horses and facade of
Saint Mark's, were nothing less than comprehensive reworkings of the
standard post-card view.
Sickert: paintings - The Royal Academy, Piccadilly W1, until February 14,
then to the Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam: sponsored in London by the Republic
National Bank of New York

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921124

