FT923-9886

FT  03 AUG 92 / Warning on Bundesbank prices target: Inflation goal of 2%
out of sight for years yet, institute says


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   BONN


WEST GERMAN inflation, the key to the Bundesbank's interest rate policy, is
not expected to approach the central bank's target of 2 per cent until the
second half of the decade, according to the Ifo economics research institute
in Munich.
It will be 'difficult' to hold consumer price increases significantly below
3 per cent before then, the institute says in a medium-term forecast
released today.
As a result there will be 'only a little' relaxation of monetary policy for
the time being. The institute, one of Germany's leading independent research
centres, rules out any cuts in interest rates in the immediate future.
The study's findings suggest that other European governments, clamouring for
relief from the Bundesbank's strictures, may have to wait longer than
expected, or find ways to stimulate domestic economic activity without
relying on reduced German interest rates.
From just under 4 per cent this year, average German inflation should
stabilise near 3.5 per cent during 1993, easing further as the decade
progresses to between 2 and 3 per cent.
The next few years will be characterised by 'a moderate but climbing growth
trend in the west and a permanent recovery process in the east'.
Pan-German growth will average 3 per cent a year, picking up from the 1.25
per cent expected this year. Increased competition for goods and labour,
combined with stability-oriented monetary and financial policies, should
keep inflation under better control.
Even so, the report warns, 'the risk of a loss of stability is still present
in the west because of the current conflicts between monetary, finance and
pay policy'.
But the greatest problem, it claims, will come from the labour market in
east Germany. Projections suggest that, after a further dip next year to
5.5m, the number of people productively employed will not increase for the
next seven years. This implies unemployment rates of about 20 per cent,
against 17 per cent at present.
Urging renegotiation of union agreements which have promised most employees
wage parity with the west by 1994-95, the report says that high pay will
discourage potential investors and worsen the already grim outlook for job
prospects.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920803

