FT921-564

FT  28 MAR 92 / International Company News: SocGen to leave central Paris


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   PARIS


SOCIETE Generale, the French commercial bank, is to move out of its
prestigious central Paris office and into a new FFr5bn (Dollars 883.3m)
headquarters, in the city's largest property transaction.
The spectacular deal gives a lift to the flagging property market in La
Defense, the modern business district on Paris' western boundary.
Societe Generale is the latest of several large companies with plans to move
out of central Paris to seek cheaper and roomier offices in and around La
Defense, but activity has slowed sharply over the past 18 months.
Societe Generale's new headquarters, to house 5,400 staff from early 1995,
will be two 38-storey tower blocks behind the Grande Arche, the square white
marble arch which forms the focal point of La Defense. The move is to take
place in three years.
However, the deal casts a shadow over the central Paris property market,
through the prospect of the 200,000 square metres to come vacant as Societe
Generale's central services move out of their 50 offices spread across the
city.
The bank will keep a branch in its present headquarters in the Boulevard
Haussman, Paris' traditional banking district, but has not yet decided what
to do with the rest.
'This will certainly dynamise the market in La Defense, but it will increase
stocks in central Paris, even if over a long period,' said Mr Philippe
Bastien, analyst at James Capel.
Societe Generale's central Paris property portfolio was worth between
FFr10bn and FFr12bn, he estimated. That is roughly 30 per cent down on its
worth 18 months ago when the commercial property market started to go into
decline under the twin pressures of high values and oversupply.
Recent transactions are at around FFr60,000 per square metre, against around
FFr90,000 in mid-1990, sometimes rising to FFr120,00 for the best locations.
Societe Generale could be expected to await an upturn and sell its
properties in small amounts so as to avoid weakening the market, said
analysts.
Its portfolio is small in relation to the overall stock of potentially
vacant property, but it is concentrated in a small central area around the
so-called 'golden triangle'.
The new headquarters is being developed by Sari - a subsidiary of water and
services group Compagnie Generale des Eaux - headed by Mr Christian
Pellerin. He was recently charged with aiding and abetting financial
irregularities in another property transaction at La Defense.
The deal indicates a warming in relations between Societe Generale and Mr
Pellerin, who supported an abortive attempt to seize control of the bank
four years ago.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920328

