FT924-6197

FT  23 NOV 92 / Bucking the Trend: A leap from doom to boom - How Club 24
found a way to survive by redefining its business


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


ONE DAY last year, after Mr Iain Kendall had agreed his severance terms,
cleared his desk and said farewell to his colleagues in Club 24 - then the
financial-services arm of Next, the clothing retailer - he was driving to
Scotland to buy a small business.
Then his car phone rang with a message from Mr David Jones, the chief
executive of Next. The new customer Mr Kendall had been working on for
months wanted to go ahead. Plans to shut down Club 24 were going into
reverse.
Would Mr Kendall please return to his job as sales and marketing director?
Mr Stephen Fairbank would be continuing as managing director and they would
be fully backed to redevelop the business.
The gloom lifted at Club 24 headquarters in central Leeds as news spread of
the change of mind. The 300 jobs had appeared doomed and management had been
struggling to maintain morale.
Last week staff numbers were up to 605. More jobs are almost certainly on
the way as the business bustles into new territory.
Club 24 started life more than 20 years ago, managing customers' budget
accounts for Hepworth and Burtons. Hepworth's warehouses and tailoring shops
in Leeds were full and busy in those days. Fashion-conscious young men
regularly updated their made-to-measure suits as trousers flared and
straightened and lapels broadened and slimmed.
By the mid 1970s Hepworth incorporated the credit management operation as
Club 24, in a joint venture with Forward Trust. The name came from the
formula for calculating credit limits - 24 times the monthly sum any
customer was prepared to pay.
In 1985 Hepworth took full control and three years later - when Hepworth had
become Next - Club 24 was operating store credit for several high-street
chains and handling 2.3m accounts. A joint venture with Kingfisher added the
credit management business of Comet, B&Q, Charlie Browns and Woolworth.
But the business was a product of the late-1980s credit boom and started to
come unstuck as recession bit. It was increasingly dangerous for retail and
mail-order operators to carry the debts from such operations on their
balance sheets.
Next put the business up for sale. Last year, with no buyer in sight and a
management buy-out ruled out because of the difficulty of transferring the
debt, closure seemed inevitable.
Mr Fairbank and Mr Kendall asked the classic marketeer's question: 'What
business are we in?' They decided it was not financial services, but the
efficient management of millions of small transactions day in, day out,
round the clock and 365 days a year.
Why not try to turn Club 24 into a bureau, managing credit or any other type
of high-volume, telephone-based operation for other companies, but not
carrying the risk of debt on their own books?
Staff were already skilled at computer-based, telephone reception
operations, and Hepworth House, Club 24's tower block, was wired up to take
the calls.
The crucial issue was whether the concept was marketable. Mr Fairbank and Mr
Kendall started a race against time to sell the idea before Next shut them
down.
With the race apparently lost, Cellnet said yes. The British
Telecommunications subsidiary had decided to expand into the consumer mobile
telephones market but to farm out - or 'outsource' - the administration of
the tens of thousands of accounts through various service providers.
Cellnet has given Club 24 a Pounds 2m, four-year contract as sole supplier
of support administration systems. The deal includes development of bespoke
software by Club 24's research and development department.
The services include a rapid system for clearing creditworthiness and
setting up a line and account within 15 minutes of a new customer buying a
handset, so a phone becomes usable almost immediately. Club 24 will also
handle customer queries.
The Cellnet contract stimulated surging growth, with turnover leaping from
Pounds 9m to Pounds 15m this year. Kingfisher retains Club 24 to manage its
credit business and the Co-operative Bank uses Club 24 to process the
fixed-term loans it sells through retail outlets.
New business includes a third of BT's radio paging and credit management for
Yorkshire Electricity. Debt collection - for other people - is also a
growing business. The old Club 24 debt, now transferred to Next's books, is
diminishing as part of this.
Indeed, Next almost certainly over-provided for bad debt in getting out of
financial services, so every pound Club 24 collects for its parent above the
provision will benefit Next shareholders' funds.
Ironically, Club 24 has bucked recession because of it. It makes sense for
its customers to outsource high-volume, low-value operations to a specialist
offering an economy of scale. Many companies appear to be doing so, so
white-collar jobs have been lost elsewhere.
Not that they mind that in Leeds, where Hepworth's old warehouses and
tailoring shops stand empty. Mr Fairbank and Mr Kendall are already talking
to a large computer company about using the warehouse's wide open spaces as
an envelope-stuffing and mailing bureau.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921123

