FT921-1324

FT  25 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Union tunes up the campaign machine - The
GMB's election drive in the north


   By CHRIS TIGHE


IN the Magnesia Bank, a North Shields pub that is popular with Labour
activists, Mr George Thompkins and Mr Kevan Jones are having a quick lunch.
Mr Thompkins is not so much eating his steak as forcing it into submission.
Mr Jones, smartly suited, mobile telephone beside his plate, is polishing
off scampi and chips.
Mr Thompkins, caretaker at the Newcastle headquarters of the General,
Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union, the north's biggest union,
is volunteer driver for Mr Jones during the election.
Mr Jones, the GMB's regional political officer, is helping the Labour
party's campaign in the north-east and Cumbria as its head of logistics. He
is doing what the GMB (motto: Working Together) does best  - organise. Last
week they drove 2,000 miles, preparing the ground for Labour's stars and
smoothing their way.
The day they lunched at the Magnesia Bank, he organised events in Tory-held
marginals Tynemouth and Darlington. They including two factory visits by Mr
John Edmonds, the GMB's general secretary, in support of Labour's Darlington
candidate.
Then they drove to West Cumbria for a meeting between GMB shop stewards from
the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant and Mr Jack Cunningham, Labour's
national campaign co-ordinator, who is defending a 1,894 majority in
Copeland. Also attending was Mr Doug Henderson, the shadow trade and
industry spokesman, a former GMB official and Labour MP for Newcastle North.
Mr Cunningham and Mr Henderson were two of the GMB's five sponsored
northern-region MPs. Each receives a Pounds 600 annual donation to his
constituency party and 80 per cent - about Pounds 4,500 - of his general
election campaign costs. The money comes from the GMB's political fund,
levied from members' subscriptions. Those who object can opt out, Mr Jones
stresses.
GMB activists help with dog's-body tasks for the union's sponsored
candidates and the three non-sponsored GMB members standing in the region.
They include Mr Peter Mandelson, Labour's former image-maker, in Hartlepool.
Mr Alan Donnelly, Tyne and Wear's MEP and former GMB northern officer, is
organising the campaign tour of Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor.
This general election is the first in which Labour candidates have been
selected under the electoral college system. This gives members the right to
vote and limits affiliated bodies to 40 per cent of the votes. The party's
aim of moving entirely to one-member-one-vote has GMB support.
Mr Nick Anderson, GMB northern region secretary, denies that GMB help puts
Labour in its debt. He says the only thing the union has wanted is the
right, included in Labour's manifesto, of union recognition in new plants.
The GMB is trying to persuade members who support the party to become
individual members. Mr Jones has recruited 1,300 people for Labour in the
past two years. The union might recommend a candidate to its members, he
says, but individual Labour members vote by secret ballot so they cannot be
coerced.
'Where the Tories go wrong is arguing that the Labour party is still
controlled by the unions,' he says.
Anecdotes about the GMB's culture vary from warily affectionate to biting,
but they hardly trouble the GMB. 'We have a future,' says Mr Anderson. 'We
are totally efficient, that's why we are the best. So is the Labour party.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920325

