FT922-445

FT  27 JUN 92 / Books: Joyce's characters illuminated - A look at the loves
and hates of the Dubliners who fuelled Joyce's work


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


JAMES JOYCE: THE YEARS OF GROWTH 1882-1915
by Peter Costello
Kyle Cathie Pounds 17.99, 374 pages
IF JOYCE never let go of Dublin, Dublin has never let go of Joyce. An
International James Joyce Symposium was held there earlier this month and
this new biography by a Dubliner has been published to coincide with it.
True, to Dublin's humiliation, it was an American academic, the late Richard
Ellmann, who in 1959 'the precious diadem stole and put it in his pocket',
in the form of a biography of the Irish writer that seems unlikely ever
wholly to be surpassed. That book, re-published by Oxford in 1982 in a
revised form, remains the standard life, and is still indispensable reading
for anyone interested in Joyce.
Meanwhile a completely new edition of Ulysses is awaited, prepared by John
Kidd, another American academic, who works at the James Joyce Research
Center at Boston University. It was Kidd who pointed out the 'errors of
execution' in the previous (1984) edition and set going a furore. His
edition is scheduled to appear in September from Norton and will be the
first volume in the new 'Dublin Edition' of Joyce's works. Each will be
based on a freshly edited text with an introduction by Denis Donoghue.
At the same time Dublin-based scholars of the Joyce industry have not by any
means been idle, as is proved by this informative work from Peter Costello.
The hidden agenda underlying the imaginative work of Joyce came from the
lives of people who lived in Dublin at the turn of the century. Their loves
and hates, their efforts to make a living in a harsh economic climate,
culminating frequently in debt or bankruptcy, their love of music and song,
their complex web of involvement with each other, is continually being
refracted through the fiction. First lucidly, in Dubliners, Stephen Hero and
A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man; later increasingly opaquely, in
Exiles, Ulysses and Finnegans Wake.
Ellmann named many originals but was in some of his identifications
confused; perhaps in one or two instances he was deliberately put off the
scent by the people he interviewed. His main research was done in the 1950s,
since which time more hard facts have emerged about Joyce's prototypes in
real life. Peter Costello possesses an encyclopedic knowledge of the public
history and private feuds of Dublin and its citizens over the past century.
He has previous books to his credit on the Irish revolution in modern
literature and on Clongowes Wood College, Joyce's first school.
Costello stops at 1915, merely summarising the later years. By then Joyce,
aged 33, had left Dublin for good and had, thanks to the efforts of Pound
and his colleagues on The Egoist, gained a measure of recognition as a
novelist. It is the preceding years covering Joyce's childhood and early
manhood that concern Costello. He fills in the tense political atmosphere of
that era in Irish history, interweaving the fortunes of the Joyce family
with those of Parnell and other figures on the larger stage.
John Stanislaus Joyce, Joyce's father, appears here more fully than ever
before. He begins as a man of force and substance with a well-paid job in
local government, a collector of rates; then, sadly, he goes into moral and
financial decline. There is a parallel with what we know of Shakespeare's
father in whose life a similar pattern may be discerned. Unfortunately in
'Jack' Joyce's case his famous son did not redeem the family fortune in his
lifetime.
Many of the more fugitive figures in the Joyce story also come out of this
book more clearly than hitherto. Costello has discovered the original of EC
or Emma Clery - Stephen's beloved in Hero and A Portrait. She was Mary
Cleary, a university contemporary of Joyce's, one of the first women to
graduate in Dublin, and later, as Mrs James Nahor Meenan, wife of a
well-known Dublin physician, a pioneer of women's education in Ireland.
Costello has some new light to shed on Leopold Bloom. His earliest
originator was Alfred H. Hunter, a dark-complexioned man in this thirties
whom Joyce met at the funeral in Dublin of a friend of his father's. Ellmann
describes him as 'putatively Jewish'. But, as we now learn, Hunter was a
Belfast Presbyterian married to a Catholic wife who was unfaithful to him.
His wanderings around Dublin suggested a story to Joyce to be called
'Ulysses' or 'Oolissays' as he pronounced it - a story Joyce never wrote as
such.
Again, Costello offers a fascinating fresh glimpse into the world of the
elderly Flynn sisters, Joyce's aunts, whose annual parties with musical
interludes, dancing and feasting furnished her nephew with the material for
his greatest short story, 'The Dead', where they appear as maiden ladies -
the Misses Morkan. Many of the characters in that crowded tale have
counterparts, as Ellmann indicated, in the Joyce family circle. Costello
brings them back to life and for the first time the heroine's former lover
is identified as deriving from one Michael Feeney. This unfortunate young
man - Michael Furey in the story - was in love with Nora Barnacle when she
was working in a convent before she met Joyce. Feeney died of typhoid and
pneumonia in a workhouse infirmary. He became, in Joyce's imagination, the
young man whom Gretta Conroy, his heroine, remembers so poignantly at the
end of his story.
Such research means there will have to be new footnotes appended to the
lives of a host of fictional characters who, since Joyce died, have belonged
to the world as much as to Dublin. I, for instance, tend to think of Gretta
nowadays as taking on her most recent incarnation, that of Anjelica Huston,
in John Huston's fine film of 'The Dead', much more than I think of her as
Nora Barnacle. But it is salutary to be reminded of her original, along with
those of many other characters in the Joyce canon.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920627

