FT924-6483

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (7): Pemex is transformed - Stephen Fidler
on the restructuring of the national oil company


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


IN THE judgment of Mr Francisco Rojas, who heads Petroleos Mexicanos, one
change above all provides the key to the extraordinary transformation that
has taken place in the world's fifth largest oil company: labour relations.
When Mr Rojas was put in charge of the company by President Carlos Salinas,
the company was dominated by a union and a system that fostered economic
inefficiency and corruption. 'Without changes in Pemex's labour relations,
no other changes would have made sense. That is the fundamental change. The
rest are very important issues but they are secondary to our success in
changing labour relations,' he said this month.
The arrest in the early days of the Salinas administration of the Pemex
union boss was a first step in the rapid debilit- ation of a union which,
having once been among the strongest in Mexico, is now among the weakest.
The workforce has been cut from 168,000 in 1988 to around 120,000 now and
labour contracts have been changed to allow the company much greater
flexibility in the way it does business.
However, the lack of open- ness to competition of Pemex still makes it
relatively inefficient. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, the Paris-based think tank of 24 industrialised countries,
points to estimates suggesting efficiency losses at Pemex could still cost
more than 1 per cent of Mexico's GDP. 'Even if the full privatis- ation of
Pemex is currently not feasible for political reasons, efforts should be
made to increase its efficiency. It might, for example, be feasible to
decentralise the giant company and privatise those parts for which this is
possible under the constitution.'
Though it has generally embraced privatisation, the Salinas administration
has been unwilling to lift the constitutional impediment on selling Pemex to
the private sector. This in part reflects the view that privatisation would
weaken the ability of the state to extract the rent due to it from the oil
being pumped. Pemex's contribution to public revenues has declined, but it
is still substantial - it averaged 26 per cent between 1988 and 1991,
compared with 39 per cent between 1982 and 1984. It still accounts for about
30 per cent of export revenues.
Nonetheless, the logic of further opening Pemex's activities to
international competition is relentless. Not only does the economy suffer
efficiency losses, but at a time of fiscal austerity, it is unlikely that
the government would be willing or able to provide Pemex with the kind of
invest- ment capital it needs for the optimal development of all its
businesses.
If that provided the logic, the explosion in April at Guadalajara - which
killed some 200 people and for which Pemex was held responsible - provided
the public support and strengthened the case for a more radical
reorganisation of the company. That reorgan- isation is now under way.
Pemex has been restructured as a corporate holding company with four subsid-
iaries: exploration and produc- tion, refining, gas and basic petrochemicals
and petro- chemicals. From the start of next year, each of the oper- ating
subsidiaries will charge the other international prices for its oil or
services, a marked change from the previously attempted system of transfer
pricing.
Furthermore, the results for each operating company will be published which
should provide greater precision about loss-making and marginally profitable
operations. The internal transactions between the company are likely to
exceed in total the company's external sales, last year, of Dollars 58.4bn.
There will be a greater willingness to accept private capital. In the coming
year, Pemex will put out to tender 22 wells in the Bay of Campeche, though
not on a risk-sharing basis. 'The market for oil industry services, for
drilling, for seismology is open and isn't prohibited by our laws. But the
change is not a legal change but a change in labour practices. Before, we
had to obtain these services through the union and today we can contract
out.'
Eight basic petrochemicals remain reserved to the state. For the rest,
'Pemex is going to pursue a series of policies where we will make alliances
and co-investments in areas that suit us. We will sell off activities where
private initiative can give greater added value. Plants that are not
profitable and that cannot be modernised technologically will be closed.'
Investment spending by Pemex next year of Dollars 3bn is also likely to be
supplemented by off-balance sheet finance for the construction of 150,000
barrels-a-day in extra refinery capacity at Salina Cruz. The company is in
the initial stage of seeking a financial adviser for this Dollars 1bn
build-lease- transfer project which, unlike the more common build-
operate-transfer projects, is allowed under the constitution.
In such projects, Pemex says it is benefiting from its joint venture with
Shell under which the capacity of the Deer Park refinery in Texas is to be
expanded. Mr Ernesto Marcos, corporate director of finance, says: 'We are
learning a lot about how to do these trans- actions from the Shell deal.'
Furthermore, the govern- ment is also expected to submit to Congress this
year a new tax regime for Pemex aimed at allowing it to operate more as the
international oil company that Mr Rojas says he wants to create. Currently,
revenue transfers to the government are negotiated yearly based on the
company's operating results. The government is unwilling to see its tax take
from Pemex drop, but wants to provide more transparency and consistency to
its tax regime.
The idea is that Pemex would pay royalties based on the oil it brings out of
the ground under a regime with similarities to that operating in the British
North Sea. It would then, like any other corpor- ation, pay corporate income
tax and profits left over would be paid as dividends to the government. On
gasoline sales, Pemex would receive Houston- based prices, with the excess
paid at the pump above that going to the government in the form of excise
taxes.
Until now, says Mr Rojas, this has been one of Pemex's structural problems.
'Pemex cannot analyse itself as a business when its tax structure gives no
direction in relation to business.'
While Pemex remains closed to competition in important areas, it is unlikely
to be able to answer criticisms of its inefficiency convincingly. But senior
management recognises that further change in Pemex is inevitable and
desirable. Pemex should make greater use of automatisation and technology,
and its inter- national operations need to be strengthened. The private
sector should play a greater role in its businesses. If efficiency demands
it, Pemex should import. Above all, the philosophy of the entrepreneur must
permeate much deeper into the company.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921120

