FT924-12216

FT  22 OCT 92 / Spanish steel reform derailed


   By PETER BRUCE and ANDREW HILL


   MADRID, BRUSSELS


A KEY element of Spain's efforts to cut subsidies to state-run industry was
thrown off course yesterday, after the European Commission had failed to
approve a Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3bn) plan to restructure the country's steel
industry in a way that would maintain steel-making in the politically
volatile Basque Country.
In effect, the Commission has told Madrid to find further capacity cuts, or
cut the amount of state aid involved in the plan. Under strict EC rules on
state aid to the steel industry, the Spanish plan needs the unanimous
backing of member states. Commission support would increase the chances of
EC industry ministers approving the plan at their meeting on November 24.
The Spanish plan would cut steel casting capacity and jobs, and lead to the
decommissioning of seven blast furnaces. But in order to satisfy political
pressure from the Basques, the plan also calls for the building of the
world's largest mini-mill at Bilbao, to produce some 900,000 tonnes of
rolled flat steel a year there.
The Commission was deeply split yesterday on proposals from Sir Leon
Brittan, the competition commissioner, which would have blocked the new
steel plant.
The Commission said it considered the Spanish plan was 'viable'. But it said
the balance of aid and restructuring 'needed to be improved'.
Sir Leon, Mr Martin Bangemann, the industry commissioner, and Mr Jacques
Delors, the Commission president, will present the Commission's thoughts to
industry ministers. Meanwhile they are likely to consider the Spanish plans
in the light of the difficulties of the whole EC steel industry.
About 25,000 steelworkers aim to protest at the Spanish plan in Madrid on
Monday. Yesterday's decision will make the restructuring even more painful.
A general election must be held in Spain in the next 12 months; Basque and
Asturian support is vital to the hopes of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez for
re-election.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921022

