FT921-15350

FT  10 JAN 92 / Midlands rail service restored


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, Midlands Correspondent


LOCAL train services on the Ivanhoe Line between Leicester and
Burton-on-Trent are to be restored, the Department of Transport announced
yesterday. Services were halted in the 1964 Beeching railway cuts.
The reopening of the line to passenger traffic is part of a Pounds 16m
railway expansion that involves the resumption of local passenger services
on the line between Loughborough and Leicester and a new station on the
Birmingham-Derby line to serve the emerging Toyota car plant at Burnaston,
Derbyshire. Fifteen other stations will be opened or re-opened.
The initiative for the services came not from British Rail but from
Leicestershire and Derbyshire county councils, which see better
communications as a means of boosting economic development in an area hit by
the closure of coal mines.
Leicestershire County Council applied to the Department of Transport for
funding more than a year ago and expected a response before Christmas.
The timing of the transport department's announcement appeared to be
designed to deflect criticism of the latest British Rail fare rises and
leaked plans to cut some InterCity services after privatisation.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the transport secretary, said the Ivanhoe Line project
was 'another demonstration of the government's faith in rail as a means of
local transport'.
The government is meeting Pounds 5m of the cost of the services.
Leicestershire council, in whose area most of the new services are located,
has been given approval to spend Pounds 9m and Derbyshire council Pounds 1m.
A further Pounds 1m will be sought from the private sector, and there will
be no charge to BR.
The transport department said that since 1982 24 BR routes had been opened
or re-opened to passenger services. Further expansion of local rail services
depended on applications from local authorities. Each would be considered
individually and requests for funding would be examined in the light of the
resources available.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920110

