FT921-11730

FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (2): Victory spurred confidence in
country's future - The economy


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


SAUDI Arabia's business community says it is feeling happier about the
nation's economic prospects than at any time for several years. The Gulf
crisis provoked a sharp rise in government spending and military purchases
created a boom in commission earnings while the arrival of foreign troops
and affluent refugees from Kuwait injected further cash into the commercial
sector and increased the demand for service industries such as banking and
hotels.
The relative ease of the military victory over Iraq spurred another burst of
confidence in the country's future, drawing back to the kingdom funds which
had fled during the early stages of the crisis. In their wake came
additional money eager to take advantage of new opportunities, prompting a
further surge in prices on the small and already overheated stock exchange.
With property prices also showing signs of recovery and the kingdom
producing more than 8m barrels of crude oil a day the 'feel good' factor,
greatly prized by western politicians seeking re-election, has been much in
evidence.
In such a positive atmosphere the announcement in the long-awaited budget at
the end of December that some Dollars 14bn had been allocated for special
projects was immediately greeted as another boost for the private sector.
'Since last March there has been prosperity here such as people have not
seen for a long time,' said one of the country's leading businessmen. 'This
area has been in recession since 1984. Now there is a sense of being born
again, encouraged by the fact that it has been demonstrated that the private
sector is no longer 100 per cent dependent on government expenditure.'
The euphoria, while all too understandable, cannot be entirely supported by
figures. Certainly the economy grew by more than 20 per cent in 1990 as a
result of increased oil exports. Last year saw a further 5 per cent rise and
total gross domestic product has again topped Dollars 100bn, or some
two-thirds of the peak it hit in the early 1980s.
But although the Gulf war brought those real advantages to the Saudi economy
it was also extremely costly. It has bitten a large chunk out of the
country's reserves, increased the probability of bigger budget deficits over
a longer period and ensured that military spending will continue to consume
an important part of oil revenues.
The government has now paid fully almost all the contributors to Desert
Shield and Desert Storm. This includes nearly Dollars 17bn to the US,
Dollars 1.7bn to Egypt, Dollars 1.5bn in aid to the Soviet Union, Dollars
1bn each to Britain, France, Syria and Turkey, and other substantial amounts
to a number of smaller contributors. In addition Saudi Arabia committed
itself to arms purchases worth more than Dollars 9bn from the US.
Together with the domestic costs of mobilisation, arming, clothing and
feeding some of the friendly forces, plus the investment that was required
to step up oil production, a final bill of Dollars 60bn does not seem
unrealistic.
Reserves held overseas appear to have been drawn down by close to Dollars
10bn and in addition the kingdom raised an international loan of Dollars
4.5bn, a total sum equivalent to just over four months' oil revenues at
current rates of production. A better perspective is provided by comparing
Saudi Arabia's external position 10 years ago. Then the total funds managed
by the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency and those available to government
ministries exceeded Dollars 220bn. Today the comparable figure is Dollars
55bn, very little of which is easily realisable.
Economists in the kingdom point out that the government could not finance
another large-scale military build-up without recourse to much heavier
foreign borrowing. They also note that it will be hard pressed to improve
its reserve position in the next few years. The current account deficit for
1990 and 1991 is estimated at close to Dollars 20bn.
The huge drop in reserves over the past decade has further limited the funds
available to the government at a time of increased demand on official
spending. Saudi Arabia has coped with budget deficits for the past 10 years
but as earnings from overseas assets declined it has been forced
increasingly to turn to development bonds and treasury bills to cover the
shortfall.
With the banks eager to find ways of mopping up their excess liquidity, the
government is confident that the Dollars 8bn deficit forecast for this year
can again be comfortably covered. But with no let-up likely in demand for
government spending and oil prices softening, Saudi Arabia is accumulating
deficits at a rate which will impose much heavier debt servicing
requirements during the next few years.
The government's fiscal difficulties are beginning to pose real problems for
the maintenance of a virtually tax-free society. The government has looked
at additional revenue-raising measures over the past few years, such as
taxing expatriates and licensing cars but has backed off in the face of
opposition.
While demands for capital spending on the infrastructure have eased, the
level of recurrent expenditure cannot easily be reduced because of high
maintenance costs, wage bills and the annual growth rate in the indigenous
population of some 3.7 per cent which keeps up the pressure on public
services. At the present rate of increase, Saudi Arabia's population will
rise by 35 per cent by the end of the century and double within 19 years.
The military establishment's appetite for more sophisticated weaponry and
defence systems has soared over the past two years. Together with plans to
increase the sustainable output level and develop downstream facilities,
this could involve expenditure of at least another Dollars 40bn by the end
of the decade. Saudi Aramco will meet part of that investment from its own
funds, but the overall implications for the budget are clear.
The members of Opec will need to make their own calculations. If the Saudi
government is this year predicting its revenues at around Dollars 40bn
(close to the average achieved in 1990 and 1991) this would suppose, after
costs, oil production of some 8m b/d at an average price of about Dollars
16. It could, of course, earn as much by pumping less at a higher price. But
what the government will not contemplate, even temporarily, is pumping less
at a lower price. 'The days of the swing producer are over', said one
official. 'Maybe there are some people still arguing for it, but the simple
truth is that we cannot afford to be the swing producer and the others had
better understand that.'
There are areas where costs could be cut to the benefit of the economy
although not perhaps to the popularity of the country's rulers. For example,
more than 90 per cent of the water consumed in Saudi Arabia is used for
agriculture and the creation of a large wheat surplus which is then exported
at a heavy net cost to the exchequer. One economist has calculated that the
government could have saved more than Dollars 2bn last year simply by
reducing wheat production to the level needed for domestic consumption.
It is the sort of calculation which will have to be addressed if Saudi
Arabia's spending plans are not to come into more serious conflict with the
revenue limitations imposed by western governments which believe that they
can now impose a political and financial cap on the price of a barrel of
oil.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920130

