FT924-11936

FT  23 OCT 92 / Franco seeks far-reaching fiscal reform


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


   RIO DE JANEIRO


MR Itamar Franco, Brazil's acting-president, has abandoned plans to impose
new emergency taxes in favour of a sweeping fiscal adjustment to be
introduced by the end of the year, in order to cover an expected Dollars
20bn shortfall in the budget next year.
He rejected proposals from his economic team on Wednesday night to introduce
two stop-gap taxes - one on cheques and another on items such as fuel and
telecommunications - that would have left restructuring for next year.
Instead, he said he wanted to take advantage of his current political
support in Congress to push through structural changes requiring
constitutional amendments in an 'all or nothing' strategy.
'Let us be daring]' he was quoted by ministers as saying, as he outlined
ambitious plans to redress completely the balance between the federal
government and states and municipalities.
Under the constitution, most revenues are divided among local governments,
while most responsibilities remain in the hands of the cash-starved centre.
Mr Franco is well placed to tackle this controversial issue. Brought to
power three weeks ago by a popular movement and a Congressional vote to
initiate impeachment of President Fernando Collor, he has the most support
in Congress of any president in recent Brazilian history and intends to
exploit that.
Unlike Mr Collor, Mr Franco is working closely with politicians, involving
congressmen, state governors and mayors.
Fiscal reform has long been viewed as vital for the struggle against
inflation, but has always been put off because of the difficulty of
obtaining Congressional approval. A 25 per cent real fall in tax revenue
over the last two years and the rise in inflation to 27 per cent a month
have injected new urgency.
The Brazilian Senate has approved the issue of Dollars 7.2bn in bonds for
unpaid interest on the country's foreign debt, accumulated during a debt
moratorium in 1989-90.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921023

