FT924-6092

FT  23 NOV 92 / Now the tough talks can begin: The EC and US have
compromised on farm trade, but the Uruguay Round is a long way from
completion


   By DAVID DODWELL


Free trade, one of the greatest blessings which a government can confer on a
people, is in almost every country unpopular,' wrote Thomas Babington
Macaulay in 1824.
The US and EC negotiators who on Friday settled a long-standing dispute over
EC subsidies to oilseed farmers, and made a potentially historic
breakthrough on their two-year dispute over reform of Europe's farm
subsidies regime, may find comfort in Macaulay's words as they read of
French farmers rampaging across their countryside in defence of subsidies
that have distorted the agriculture sector for decades.
Friday's compromises, which defused an imminent and possibly ruinous trade
war, have also paved the way for resumption of long-stalled multinational
negotiations aimed at ambitious and unprecedented reform of international
trade.
This so-called Uruguay Round aims for the first time not just to liberalise
farm trade; it would reform the quota-blighted trade in textiles and
garments; open markets up to trade in services; impose rules protecting
patents and copyright; cut tariffs across the world by at least 30 per cent;
and strengthen rules for settling international trade disputes.
'The real victory is for international trade,' said Mr Ray MacSharry, the
EC's agriculture commissioner, who  - along with Mr Edward Madigan, his US
counterpart  - played a pivotal role in settling the long-standing farm
trade dispute. But neither he, nor any of the other trade negotiators
involved in Friday's breakthrough, is so disingenuous as to believe all will
now be plain sailing.
The first and most severe problem facing trade negotiators is one of time.
The Uruguay Round, launched in the coastal resort of Punta del Este six
years ago, should have been completed two years ago. Deadlock on reform of
farm trade has blocked progress in all of the other areas since the end of
1990. But the package must be complete before March 1 next year, when the US
administration's 'fast track' authority expires. Uruguay Round negotiators
know they must have the package complete by March 1 or face the danger of it
being torn apart by the US Congress.
Settling the many outstanding Uruguay Round issues 'will be a day and night
exercise,' Mr Arthur Dunkel, director general of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (Gatt), the trade watchdog that has the task of
negotiating agreement between the 108 countries participating in the round.
'The first decision we have to make is the decision to conclude the round,'
says Mr Dunkel: 'If we have this decision, then one way or another, we can
be sure the work will be done.' A focal point for final agreement is Mr
Dunkel's 'final act', an inch-thick draft settlement which he published in
December last year in a bid to forge a breakthrough. Much of the detail of
an agreement is already documented in the 'final act', and Mr Dunkel will be
fighting hard to ensure speedy progress by limiting changes to the minimum
possible.
The first task of negotiators gathered back in Geneva will be to win wide
international backing for the US-EC farm trade deal. Particularly important
here will be the Cairns Group of farm exporting nations, which includes
countries such as Australia, Canada, Argentina and New Zealand. It was the
walkout led by Argentina in Brussels two years ago over the inadequacy of
Europe's proposals for reform of farm trade which almost scuppered the
round. All of these countries have made it clear that they will not open
their markets in areas such as services unless farm trade reforms are
adequate.
The US, with the backing of other farm exporters, was initially pressing for
the elimination of the EC's farm subsidy regime. This was probably never the
real US objective, but it raised expectations. Gatt officials are optimistic
that the more modest cuts agreed on Friday, which range from a 36 per cent
cut in the value of subsidised farm exports over six years to a 21 per cent
cut in volume, will be enough. The reforms are unlikely to provide
significant new export opportunities into Europe, but will be valuable if
world food prices rise following a decline in the volume of EC food
surpluses dumped onto world markets.
The next task in Geneva will be to press countries to open their markets to
trade in services. This already accounts for at least 19 per cent of world
trade  - about Dollars 810bn in 1990  - and is forecast to be a booming area
in the decades ahead. The US and the EC have jointly called for 'maximum
liberalisation and minimum exemptions', but a number of areas remain
fiercely controversial:
Financial services  - which embrace banking, securities, and insurance - are
especially important to countries such as the US, France, the UK and
Germany. In Brussels a month ago, US and EC trade negotiators agreed a
common position, and plan joint action to cudgel compromise from key
countries including Japan, Korea and the five Asean nations of Singapore,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand  - all of whom have made
'woefully inadequate' market-opening offers so far, according to US
officials.
Telecommunications: the world's 12 main telecoms markets  - including the
US, the EC, Japan, Canada and Australia  - are understood to be close to
agreeing an 'extended negotiation' which will last for two years, leading to
rules for opening up basic telecommunications to international competition.
Audio-visual services  - that is, the international marketing of films,
videos and television programmes  - is particularly important to the US, and
particularly contentious in Europe. Films and TV programmes were the US's
second most important export to the EC last year, according to US trade
officials. The EC's Dollars 30bn market in these services accounts for
almost a third of total world trade, and would be even more lucrative if it
were liberalised. At present, France insists that 60 per cent of any
prime-time television programming should be of EC origin. Other member
states want between 40 and 50 per cent. There are strict limits on video and
film production and distribution. The US will not be alone in pressing the
EC for a significant market-opening offer in this sector.
Maritime services has attracted a great deal of controversy, but it is
uncertain whether reform of 'cabotage' arrangements  - allowing foreign
ships to carry cargo between two ports inside any one country  - will be
possible. Some liberalisation of international shipping will be pressed for,
along with action against 'closed' shipping conferences which allow shippers
plying a route to block new entrants.
Government procurement contracts have long been closed to international
competition, and again have been an important target for US trade
negotiators. Reforms will be resisted by powerful domestic industrial
lobbies, particularly in the construction sector. Even the US could face
local controversy, where the 'Buy America' act, under which state and local
authorities must buy US-made products where available, is widely used to
ensure government contracts go to local companies.
The third task in Geneva  - and perhaps the most time consuming  - will be
to negotiate tariff cuts across a wide spectrum of industrial and
non-industrial goods, and to press governments to replace non-tariff
barriers to trade (such as quotas) with simple tariffs.
These market-access negotiations are particularly cumbersome because they
have to be negotiated bilaterally between all 108 countries involved in the
Uruguay Round.
The overall aim is to obtain average tariff cuts of at least 30 per cent,
but difficult issues have yet to be resolved:
Zero-for-zero versus tariff peaks: the US is pressing for the EC to
eliminate entirely its tariffs on a number of goods  - particularly in the
chemicals and pharmaceuticals areas. At the same time, the EC has been
unwilling to agree these zero-for-zero deals unless the US agrees to attack
some of its high tariffs on products such as glassware and ceramics. EC
officials appear confident that compromise is possible.
Rice imports for Japan and South Korea: this issue falls at the intersection
between farm trade and market access. Up to now, Japan and South Korea have
kept their local rice markets firmly closed, bowing to pressure from vocal
farm lobbies which are potentially more violent even than French farmers.
Following US-EC agreement to liberalise farm trade, these countries will
come under pressure first to open at least 3 per cent of their markets, and
then slowly to cut tariffs  - which may initially be set as high as 700 per
cent.
Bananas have become a controversial issue for Europe, where preferential
import quota regimes targeted at former French and British colonies have
attracted criticism inside the Gatt. Demands for comprehensive replacement
of quotas with tariffs will force such arrangements to be dismantled,
arousing consternation particularly among small Caribbean island exporters.
Banana trade may appear to be an arcane area for heated controversy, but its
symbolic importance is likely to be great if Japan or Korea could use it to
prevent concessions on rice trade. If the only way to force Japan and Korea
to open up their rice markets is to accept tariffs in banana trade, the
Community may have no choice but to compromise.
But perhaps as sensitive an issue as any is what the Japanese government
decides to do. So far, the US-EC dispute has sheltered the Japanese from any
difficult decisions. Significant concessions in the coming weeks will be
called for from Japan, and if it fails to deliver, it might not only scupper
the Uruguay Round, but also lay the ground for a potent anti-Japanese
backlash, particularly in the US.
As Mr Dunkel said after talks in Washington last week: 'The hour of Japan
has come.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921123

