FT924-8154

FT  12 NOV 92 / Insurers may cut cover for terrorist damage


   By RICHARD LAPPER


INSURERS ARE expected to reduce cover for damage caused by terrorists on the
British mainland after heavy losses from two IRA bomb explosions in London
in April.
The Association of British Insurers, the industry's trade association,
confirmed yesterday that its members 'were giving serious consideration' to
the introduction of an exclusion clause in commercial property policies for
damage and business interruption.
The move comes in the wake of the IRA's current bombing campaign and the
April attacks, which included serious damage to the Commercial Union
building in the City and are estimated to have cost Pounds 800m.
It also follows discussions between UK insurers and their influential
European reinsurers, who are concerned about their own potential exposure to
terrorism.
As discussions at the association continued yesterday, it was unclear
whether the exclusion would affect domestic household policies. Further
details will be announced later this week.
The association stressed that policyholders may still be able to obtain
cover by 'buying back' the exclusion clause, but companies seeking insurance
are concerned about the potential impact on British business.
It has already led to fresh demands from insurance buyers for the government
to extend to the mainland the Northern Ireland scheme which compensates for
damage caused by terrorists.
The Association of Insurance and Risk Managers in Industry and Commerce
(Airmic), which represents insurance buyers at more than 300 British
companies, criticised the potential withdrawal of the exclusion clause.
'(This will) leave British industry in a grievously exposed position,' it
said. 'It will be impossible to protect assets and earnings against a real
hazard exposure.'
Airmic urged the Confederation of British Industry to start discussions 'at
the highest levels' with both government and insurers to ensure 'terrorist
activity does not achieve a major success in its campaign to undermine the
British economy'.
Under the Northern Ireland scheme, introduced in 1977, the government meets
most of the cost of terrorism or riot damage. Claims under the scheme
amounted to Pounds 33m in the 1991-92 financial year.
Airmic said it believed the exclusion 'is being promoted by the influential
continental reinsurance market'. Companies such as Munich Re of Germany, the
world's biggest reinsurer, provide extensive reinsurance coverage to British
companies.
In a letter last month to UK insurers, Munich Re said: 'We would prefer to
exclude terrorism from our reinsurance treaties.' The company said talks
among UK insurers had been based on 'the consensus that the insurance and
reinsurance industry cannot continue to pay for IRA terrorist attacks on
mainland Britain'.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921112

