FT923-10762

FT  29 JUL 92 / Arts: Die gluckliche Hand


   By MAX LOPPERT and DAVID MURRAY


SCHOENBERG'S 1913 'drama with music' Die gluckliche Hand added on Monday
another brilliantly polished item to the schedule of operas-in-concert at
this year's Proms. It calls for a baritone protagonist, two mimes, chorus,
enormous orchestra and offstage band, and was intended to be mounted with a
paraphernalia of stagecraft so complicated that long stage directions
accompany almost every bar of the score.
A key factor in the genesis was the elopement in 1908 of Schoenberg's first
wife with the painter Gerstl: how typical of the composer's ruthless honesty
in self-analysis to discover in his own wounded psyche the raw material for
music-drama of this kind, and then to clothe the experience in sonorities of
many-layered texture. In many ways it remains the musico-dramatic
Expressionist Handbook, a vision of several arts uniting in the depiction of
extreme states of mind.
Twenty or so minutes of its passage seems like anyone else's 60. At various
times attempts have been made to bring it to the stage (recently, for
instance, by the Netherlands Opera) - but these, I submit, are doomed to
prove unfaithful to the letter of Schoenberg's text, if not the spirit.
During this superbly achieved and finished concert realisation by the BBC
Symphony Orchestra and Singers under Oliver Knussen, with David
Wilson-Johnson as The Man, I felt once again that the mind's eye, aided and
informed by the ear, is probably the ideal location for any production.
That way, at least, concentration on Schoenberg's tantalisingly tight-packed
musical matter can build up without distraction. Knussen's gifts of
sympathetic elucidation are now all but unequalled among conductors of
20th-century scores; with masterly confidence he led the orchestra, and the
listener, through the labyrinth of motivic relationships, the closely worked
developments and cross-references, the webs of luminous, icily glittering
sound.
I have seldom been so gripped, fascinated, deeply stirred. This Gluckliche
Hand came at the end of a 'difficult' - but in fact wildly pleasurable -
20th-century concert, of a kind only the BBC would now dare promote.
Stravinsky's Four Studies, Colin Matthews's rhythmically complex and
coruscating, rawly energetic Broken Symmetry (first performed at the
Barbican last March) and Elliott Carter's austerely exhilarating Three
Occasions were its other parts, all delivered with magnificent authority.
                        *      *      *
At Sunday's Prom the Glyndebourne Festival Opera scored its annual triumph,
this time with Chaikovsky's The Queen of Spades. With minimal props,
Caroline Sharman contrived the 'semi-staging' resourcefully. A surprising
amount of the gambling-house action was crammed on to the modest sloping
platform; in other scenes the chorus were represented there by a few token
figures, while their colleagues sang from the choir-stalls at either side.
The London Philharmonic played in front of them, and Andrew Davis drew
brilliant work from them without threatening his singers.
Very little of the drama was lost, thanks above all to Yuri Marusin's
wonderfully louche, haunted hero, prowling the platform and its borders like
a driven predator. The principal ladies, Nancy Gustafson and Felicity
Palmer, again made striking impressions; Sergei Leiferkus and Dimitri
Kharitonov sang the male aristocrats nobly; Marie-Ange Todorovitch lent her
lovely, penetrating mezzo to Pauline, and as 'Daphnis' also partnered Anne
Dawson's charming 'Chloe' in the Pastorale. With all the lesser roles firmly
cast, the performance was wholly rewarding, and tumultuously received.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920729

