FT921-15465

FT  10 JAN 92 / Infighting starts for Oracle franchise


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


THE ITV companies are planning to bid against each other for the UK's
commercial teletext franchise.
Oracle runs the present ITV teletext output - the news and information
service broadcast on spare lines in the television picture. It is a
wholly-owned subsidiary of the ITV companies and is working on its own bid
for the franchise.
But Oracle, which has turnover of about Pounds 10m and pre-tax profit
approaching Pounds 3m, is to be opposed by a consortium being put together
by Independent Television News, which is also a wholly-owned subsidiary of
the ITV companies.
Anglia and Yorkshire are believed to be seriously considering backing the
ITN bid. Scottish Television has been approached but is considering its
position.
To add to the complexity two of the new franchise winners are planning bids.
Carlton Communications may bid with Intelfax, which provides the information
for Channel 4's teletext service.
MAI Broadcasting, the company behind Meridian, winner in the battle for the
franchise for the south of England, is also considering involvement in a
bid, as is TV-am, the loser of the commercial breakfast franchise.
Some ITV managing directors believe the situation is 'totally dotty'. Others
suggest that by mounting more than one bid they will have a better chance of
winning.
The government decided that the commercial teletext franchise should, like
the ITV franchises, go to the highest bidder.
Bids are due in at the Independent Television Commission by January 20.
The prospect of some ITV companies apparently bidding against themselves
seems to stem from the new imperative at ITN to make a profit. ITN provides
the news elements the Oracle service, at a cost estimated at Pounds 1m a
year. It receives a fee of about Pounds 50,000.
Oracle, it is believed, was planning to go to a new supplier of news after
being asked by ITN for the full cost of news provision plus a profit.
In return ITN decided to try to get the business for itself with a number of
ITV com-panies.
Teletext is available in more than 40 per cent of British homes. The
proportion is likely to increase as television sets are replaced.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920110

