FT922-7460

FT  19 MAY 92 / Settlement brings mood of relief rather than jubilation at
IG Metall


   By ANDREW FISHER


   FRANKFURT


THE mood at the IG Metall trade union headquarters in Frankfurt yesterday
was one of relief rather than jubilation that a west German engineering
strike had been averted by a last-minute settlement.
'It's a compromise', said Mr Horst Neumann, deputy head of economic research
at the trade union. 'I'm pleased there's not a strike, but the risk that the
21-month settlement will be overtaken by inflation next year has not
disappeared'.
The union, representing nearly 4m workers in the German engineering industry
was happy that employers' demands for a pay settlement of less than 5 per
cent - the formal initial offer was only 3.3 per cent - were effectively
overcome. The union was also relieved the already agreed move to the 35-hour
week has not suffered a setback.
IG Metall's own demand was 9.5 per cent, a level presented by Mr Franz
Steinkuhler, head of the union, as a concession to mounting concern in
Germany over inflation and monetary stability. The latest annual inflation
figure was 4.5 per cent, though it has touched 4.8 per cent this year.
But, Mr Neumann added, many of the union's disgruntled members do not
necessarily separate out the official consumer price figure from the overall
burden on their incomes. 'Price rises, tax increases, higher consumer tax
levels - these are all seen as part of the same thing'.
Thus it was that the preliminary warning strikes called by the union in
recent weeks to bolster its claim had such a strong response. 'We were
pleased, and the employers possibly surprised, at the size of the turnout.
People were willing to get into buses and travel to demonstrations'. On some
days, more than 100,000 people took part in warning strikes of up to four
hours.
Such actions, Mr Neumann reckons, must have swayed what he calls 'the
radicalised Mittelstand' - the host of small- and medium-sized companies
which had lined up firmly behind demands for as low a wage increase as
possible after last year's 6.7 per cent. Many of them, especially in the
automobile supply sector, are suffering from an intense squeeze on profit
margins in the face of weak foreign markets and pressure from the car
companies to keep prices low.
In IG Metall's view, this is a problem within the industry that should not
be solved by keeping a lid on pay. The employers see it differently, though
it is noticeable that some of the motor manufacturers expressed less concern
about settlements approaching 6 per cent than did smaller engineering and
components companies.
The risks from an all-out strike would have been high on both sides. Because
of a change in the law, employees laid off or put on short-time working
because of a strike at another plant would not have been entitled to state
welfare. This would have put pressure on the union to widen strike action so
that it could pay all affected members from its own funds.
Employers had also threatened extensive lockouts so that the consequences of
a strike could have been severe. Many companies, especially in the car
industry, rely heavily on just-in-time deliveries, which would have been
totally disrupted.
If a strike had occurred, said Mr Neumann, 'it would have been like a raging
fire over a wide area'. Obviously, neither the employers nor the union
wanted any of the opprobrium which that would have caused.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920519

