FT924-983

FT  21 DEC 92 / Bucking The Trend: A good living depending on tube bending /
A look at how a northern engineering company makes the most out of a niche
market


   By ANDREW BAXTER


IT IS Friday afternoon and raining hard in Preston. While hundreds of
British engineering companies close early for the weekend in time-honoured
tradition, an overtime shift is cutting metal at Addison Tube Forming.
About half the direct labour force of 52 people are making machines that
bend tubes and pipes, and closely related measuring equipment. In the middle
of the machine shop is an automatic Pounds 500,000 machining centre from
which Addison is getting 30 hours of unmanned work a week.
'It's a nice feeling switching the lights off at night and letting the
machine get on with it,' says Mr John Brown, managing director. 'We could
not have managed without it.'
The company still has to subcontract some of its machining. In contrast to
the gloomy news from much of the UK machinery sector over the past two
years, Addison's sales are rising - by about 13 per cent to Pounds 9.5m this
year - and employment has risen by about 30 per cent since 1986 to 142,
excluding temporary workers taken on to help meet demand.
According to Mr Harry Addison, vice-chairman, the performance promises to
continue. 'The prospects are excellent, and certainly as far as next year is
concerned we've upped our forecasts again.'
All that might sound surprising for a company that depends on the automotive
industry for about 70 per cent of sales - its tube bending machinery is used
heavily by the exhaust industry - and serves depressed UK sectors such as
aerospace and furniture.
Addison is part of B. Elliott, a struggling engineering concern that this
month announced a big financial restructuring after the collapse of the
mainstream UK and Continental machine tool trade. Addison's tube bending and
forming equipment has emerged from the restructuring as the linchpin of B.
Elliott's machinery division.
'They've divested themselves of the parts that were pulling the group down,'
says Mr Addison. 'We still are, and hope to continue to be, ones that are
making money.'
Addison's performance through the recession shows that there are no magic
recipes for bucking the trend. Rather, it is a combination of planning ahead
and taking advantage of opportunities as they come up.
The company has a head start over many machine tool producers of a similar
size by operating in a specialist niche. Worldwide, it is among the top five
or six of about 35 producers of tube bending equipment, and clear market
leader in the UK.
Having a niche is no use unless it is exploited. Mr Addison has heard
reports that some of the company's competitors are on two-day or three-day
weeks. 'It's not necessarily the case that we've taken orders from them, but
we've gone out to find new markets and develop new products.'
In contrast to most machine tool companies, Addison was founded in 1956 as a
sales company - by Mr Addison's elder brother Eddie - and did not make its
first tube bending machine until 1981.
'It's still basically like a sales company,' says Mr Brown, the only senior
executive at Addison with a machine tool background. 'It's very much a
question of making what we sell, not selling what we make.'
The roots of Addison's current performance were laid down in 1985, when Mr
Brown joined the company. Addison was then virtually entirely dependent on
the automotive sector, and mapped out its future with a set of targets
including expanding its market sectors and product range, increasing exports
and widening its export markets, and improving quality and reliability. That
policy is bearing fruit. As the UK market has contracted, exports have risen
from about 50 per cent of sales in 1989 to 70 per cent, but have also risen
sharply in absolute terms.
The product range for tube bending machines has been extended to 16
machines, including smaller equipment that can bend pipe as narrow as 4mm
diameter to leviathans that can handle tube as wide as 275mm. The result is
that, even if some sectors in some countries are quiet, others are buoyant.
In particular, Addison has been helped through the recession by 'specials'
made in response to individual customers' needs. In the assembly shop,
workers are putting the final touches to a complex machine to produce petrol
pump filling pipes. 'Specials have ensured that we keep growing,' Mr Addison
says.
Prompted by the parent company, which bought the formerly family-owned
company in 1989, a quality programme is now 'digging itself in', Mr Brown
says. The parent company has also provided capital for important investment
in manufacturing technology to reduce delivery times and increase
flexibility.
Mr Addison is convinced the growth will continue, barring a collapse in the
world economy. 'There are still markets to go to, and still products that we
don't yet make,' he says.
The company has four months of orders in hand, with machines to be delivered
at home and abroad. But, helped by the devaluation of sterling, Addison will
be continuing to emphasise exports. Mr Addison does not see the UK coming
out of the recession yet.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921221

