FT922-13368

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Personal mandate delights Major


MR JOHN MAJOR, speaking outside No 10 Downing Street yesterday, described
himself as delighted with the outcome of the general election, and in having
his own mandate.
He said: 'I can now accept that the country has elected me in my own right.'
Asked when the UK would be out of recession, he replied: 'No one can be
precisely sure when we will be out of recession. The final ingredient to
lift us out of recession was our election victory. We can now move forward.'
The prime minister, speaking to reporters and members of the public, said
that many governments facing elections in a recession had lost power. 'We
have bucked that trend,' he declared, 'and we have bucked that trend in the
most spectacular fashion.'
Commenting on the opinion polls during the election campaign, he said, 'They
were wrong, the Conservative party was right.'
It was, he claimed, the result that showed that the British people
understood the realities. 'They understand who is going to get them out of
the recession, who is going to build the recovery.
'They actually want to have more of their money in their pockets, to spend
in their fashion and they want those choices and opportunities that we are
proposing to give them.'
Describing his previous 17 months of office as 'exhilarating', Mr Major
said: 'We have in the next few years the most remarkable opportunities in
front of us in this country. I want to make sure that this country is in the
right position to take advantage of all these opportunities.'
He continued: 'The first thing we must do is to move the country out of a
recession and back into growth, and then we must continue to extend those
opportunities and those choices which make such a difference to people's
lifestyles, such a difference in the way in which they live their everyday
lives free of interferences from outside.'
The prime minister added: 'I want to see those education opportunities that
we have spoken of, the extra training opportunities, the chance for an
ever-increasing number of our fellow citizens to own their own homes, to
build up their own wealth and their own shares, and to have the opportunity
 -in due course  - of making sure that what they have earned in their
lifetime can be handed on to the people they love, and passed on between
generations.
'We do believe, as a party, in the cascade of wealth between generations,
not least with the security and independence that that provides the people.
Mr Major said: 'Let me make it clear beyond a doubt: we shall continue to
build up and cherish the National Health Service.
'It will remain as it is now, it will not be privatised, not now, not at any
stage while I am in Downing Street.
'We will continue to build it up as an NHS available for all the people in
this country in precisely the way it has been in the past.'
Speaking of foreign relations, he said: 'We propose to do all we can to
build up Britain's standing in the world, to play a leading role in the
Group of Seven, in the European Community, in the United Nations and in the
international events in the world.'
Mr Major went on: 'When I first had the opportunity of standing on the steps
of Downing Street, I said that I believed in a nation at ease with itself,
the development of a truly classless society with opportunities for all from
wherever they come, and to do whatever they can with their own lives by
their own efforts and with encouragement to achieve everything that they
can.
'That is the sort of society that my colleagues and I will be working hard
to build in the next few years.'
Asked about the Conservative party's performance in Scotland, Mr Major said
that - in spite of some predictions that the party there would be 'wiped
out' - 'as far as I can see, our votes were up in Scotland, our seats were
up in Scotland and our argument is getting through in Scotland. We will
continue to debate all the constitutional issues in Scotland and take stock
as I promised.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920411

