FT923-6341

FT  25 AUG 92 / Banks move back to basics: David Barchard explains a retreat
from the marketing culture and a return to tradition


   By DAVID BARCHARD


With his immaculate silver hair, designer suits, and smart Italian shoes, Mr
Don McCrickard. the TSB Group chief executive who resigned yesterday, always
seemed to belong more to Manhattan than to Lombard Street. A marketeer par
excellence, Mr McCrickard cut his teeth as a businessman in Procter & Gamble
and American Express, rather than a provincial bank branch.
He devised the catchphrase 'That'll do nicely' which propelled the Amex
green card to market leadership in the 1970s and 1980s and the American
Express aura never deserted him. Under Mr McCrickard, TSB became 'The bank
that likes to say yes'.
When TSB's chairman Sir Nicholas Goodison announced yesterday that Mr
McCrickard was departing as TSB group chief executive after three years, it
was the latest of several signs that the UK clearing banks have jettisoned
the high-flown marketing culture to which they aspired during the 1980s boom
and are concentrating on the traditional business of managing the quality of
their assets, cutting costs, and widening margins.
Mr McCrickard's departure comes a few days after the resignation of the
other arch-marketeer in 1980s UK banking, Mr Kevin Gavaghan, the marketing
director of Midland Bank, the man who designed Midland's eye-catching
current accounts such as Vector and Meridian.
In Mr Gavaghan's heyday, Midland liked to think of itself as having closer
affinities to designer retailers, such as Sir Terence Conran's shops, than
to a traditional clearing bank. Today, like all the UK clearing banks,
Midland is extolling traditional banking skills such as the control of
lending procedures and setting charges at profitable levels.
'The banks and the building societies are suffering from a squeeze on their
margins which is forcing them all to reconsider their approach,' says Mr
John Cheese, marketing director of Barclays Bank.
Mr McCrickard has left his mark on TSB. Almost all the leading figures of
the pre-flotation regime were replaced by a new generation of McCrickard
appointees. A series of restructuring operations converted 70 fusty savings
banks and other companies into a clearly defined group, dominated by a
centralised retail bank.
However, hardly had TSB retail bank become more efficient than things
started to go seriously wrong at Hill Samuel, the loss-making merchant bank
which TSB had bought for Pounds 777m in 1987. Mr McCrickard admits some of
the responsibility was his.
In 1990 and 1991, Hill Samuel plunged into heavy losses as loans went sour.
As a result in 1991, losses of Pounds 419m at Hill Samuel dragged the group
into a humiliating pre-tax loss of Pounds 47m.
Another spate of executive departures accompanied the Hill Samuel losses. In
March 1990, the chief executive, Hamish Donaldson, was removed with almost
all his senior lieutenants. Of 70 directors, 15 were made redundant or took
early retirement.
The problems of Hill Samuel over the past year contrasted with a record of
steady profitability at TSB Retail Bank, run by Mr Peter Ellwood.
As the months passed, mutterings inside TSB Retail Bank have grown louder
that 'Group'  - shorthand for Mr McCrickard and others in the TSB head
office at Milk Street  - contributed little to the profit and loss account.
Mr Ellwood said yesterday that the retail bank and the group head office are
to be partially 'fused', involving yet another management reorganisation.
Yesterday he announced three priorities for TSB: to concentrate on
activities capable of generating a sustainable income; cut costs; and manage
risk better. He was speaking the language of bankers not marketeers.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920825

