FT924-923

FT  21 DEC 92 / US Money and Credit: Spotlight on Little Rock


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


IT WAS the week before Christmas and all through the Treasury bond market
trading was light and lacklustre, with prices fluctuating in a narrow band
and much investor attention focused on Little Rock, site of an extraordinary
two-day economic talkathon.
President-elect Bill Clinton spent the first two days of last week as the
master of ceremonies in a televised confab that was originally billed as an
economic summit, then restyled for the American media as a retreat and which
ended up being a quintessentially CNN sort of media event.
Mr Clinton proved himself, once again, an able communicator, and even more
importantly he displayed a grasp of detail on economic and social policy
issues that dazzled much of the American media.
The Little Rock conference broke little new ground, but it was probably a
politically astute move for the coalition-building populist from Arkansas.
Mr Robert Brusca, the acerbic chief economist at Nikko Securities, called it
the 1990s economic counterpart to Woodstock.
The most important message to emerge from Little Rock, consistent with the
previous week's appointments of the Clinton economic team, was that the US
deficit matters.
And while that may seem self-evident to denizens of the money market,
getting the deficit issue on to CNN during 19 hours of live television is a
useful educational exercise for the American public.
The real issue now to be pondered is to what extent signs of a strengthening
recovery will allow the Clinton Administration to reduce the size of any
planned fiscal stimulus package. Or, in other words, will the Keynesians win
out in the short-term or not?
The bond market, while less than enthusiastic about Little Rock, is taking a
rather relaxed view on this matter, not least of all because interest rates
are low and the past week saw improving figures for housing starts and
industrial production in November.
On Friday there was little price movement in the benchmark 30-year Treasury
bond, which was down by a mere  1/16 of a point, with a yield of 7.42 per
cent, compared to 7.43 per cent a week before.
Analysts at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette seemed unusually impressed that Mr
Clinton's cabinet appointments and the Little Rock summit showed the
incoming Clinton administration to be 'deeply committed to budget deficit
reduction'.
As a result DLJ predicted that bond yields would remain in a narrow range of
variation over the next few weeks, but could drop significantly in the next
three to six months.
This week sees two big Treasury auctions coming up. On Tuesday, the Treasury
is expected to auction Dollars 15.5bn of two-year notes and a day later it
will offer Dollars 11.25bn of five-year paper.
Also on the pre-Christmas agenda is a meeting of the Fed's Open Markets
Committee, which is likely to leave monetary policy on hold for the time
being.
Tomorrow's final third-quarter gross domestic product number is expected to
remain at the previously revised level of 3.9 per cent.
On Wednesday, comes the durable orders data for November, a volatile measure
in recent months that was up by 4.1% in October and which is likely to be
down by 1 to 2 per cent for November.
On the same day the leading economic indicators are expected to show a rise
of 0.3 per cent for November, against a 0.4 per cent increase in the
previous month.
So the debate on deficit reduction, fiscal stimuli and the path of the US
recovery is now shifting to a post-Christmas view of whether Mr Bill Clinton
will prove himself to be more of a Santa or a Scrooge on the macro-economic
front.
For the next instalment we will have to wait until after the holidays.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921221

