FT923-9832

FT  03 AUG 92 / Letter (4): Devaluation, a common currency and the answer to
Britain's current account deficit


   From Lord EZRA


Sir, I would like to query two points made by Mr Walter Eltis. He states
that 'on balance when taken together there is net borrowing by the personal
sector, companies and government.' I do not believe that is a correct
statement of the present situation. Assuming GDP to be approximately Pounds
580bn, private savings at the current level of 11.5 per cent would amount to
Pounds 66bn whereas the corporate deficit is presently running at some
Pounds 10bn and, assuming the PSBR to be at a level of, say, Pounds 35bn,
the net effect of these three is still substantially on the positive side
because of the very high level of private savings.
The risk I see in Mr Eltis' reasoning is that it lends support to the
accepted view that the PSBR must be substantially cut back. If this included
a cut back in productive investment in the public sector I would consider it
quite wrong. The problem the UK faces is the progressive diminution in
productive investment in the private and public sectors. These trends need
to be reversed before confidence can come back and people encouraged to
spend more.
Also, where Mr Eltis states that 'as the economy recovers, companies will
raise investment and personal savings will fall', I feel it should be put
the other way round. So that the economy can recover, companies need to
raise investment and personal savings need to fall. In other words, unless
there is a recovery in productive investment it is difficult to see how
confidence can return and private spending can be stimulated. What is needed
is a stimulus to companies to invest more, which could be helped by an
increase in investment allowances, and for public spending in productive
sectors, such as construction, transport, training and research, to be at
least maintained and if possible increased. If the government were to bring
forward its major capital projects it would achieve the benefits of their
being undertaken at very low cost, given the state of the construction
industry, and could lead to corresponding investment in the private sector.
Derek Ezra,
House of Lords,
Westminster, SW1

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920803

