FT924-5972

FT  24 NOV 92 / Arts: 'Fedora' and 'Die Frau ohne Schatten' - Opera in
Switzerland


   By ANDREW CLARK


Never have so few done so little for so much. One cannot begrudge singers'
fees of SFr 20,000 (Pounds 9,200) a night if the market is willing to pay.
But it would help if they sang a decent evening's music. For the audiences
who paid seat prices of SFr 250 (Pounds 115) to hear Giordano's Fedora in
Zurich this month, Agnes Baltsa and Jose Carreras evidently gave value for
money. What they sang was of no matter: their fans simply wanted to hear and
acclaim them. But it was a pity they could find nothing better than
Giordano's verismo shavings, which make a three-act opera out of a tenor
aria and a few fragmented outpourings for an ageing diva.
If one discounts Santuzza, sung by as many mezzos as sopranos, Fedora is
Baltsa's first soprano role. It is a curious choice, which her
artfully-managed (to put it kindly) top register fails to justify. Baltsa's
middle-voice has for some time been hit-and-miss - some notes are simply
lost - while the bottom register is increasingly squally. Carreras, taking
up position for 'Amor ti vieta' as if he was rehearsing for the next Three
Tenors Concert, commands less vocal colour since his illness. He also seems
to have lost sight of the distinction between singing and shouting.
Their partnership, which caught fire ten years ago when Baltsa learned her
Carmen from Ponnelle in Zurich, still cracks plenty of sparks: both have
enormous stage presence, reacting to each other with the instinctive skill
and generosity of a dedicated couple. Nevertheless, it is sad to see two
stars living off their reputation, wasting their fading vocal talents on
operatic trivia.
Time has been kinder to Grischa Asagaroff's production. First staged in
1982, it now returns at the head of a Fedora revival extending in coming
months to Milan, Vienna, Bregenz and Berlin - all of which will be lucky to
match Andrzej Majewski's handsome belle epoque decor and Jan Skalicky's
period costumes. The Zurich ensemble, conducted by Manfred Honeck, made the
best of the cameo role-playing and orchestral colour-packaging which pad out
this flimsy Sardou-based melodrama.
Switzerland's other large-scale operatic event this month was Die Frau ohne
Schatten at Geneva: a noble venture which made awesome sense of the
Strauss-Hofmannsthal fairy-tale and its vast orchestral tapestry. The
production - conducted by Horst Stein, staged by the young German director
Andreas Homoki and designed by Wolfgang Gussmann - steered clear of oriental
or naturalistic associations, opting instead for a stark metaphysical
setting. The decor consisted of two white walls, sprinkled with tiny
hieroglyphics and converging on a black void. Within this permanent
single-level framework, the Emperor's world was suggested by a random group
of giant pink spear-shafts; a collection of outsize yellow boxes and rags
signified the human world of Barak's home, while a suspended ball
represented the spiritual domain of Keikobad.
None of this told a simple narrative. There was a whiff of bathos whenever
Keikobad's ball loomed into view. The metaphor of the shadow was ignored,
Barak was a simpleton. But the production's strengths far outweighed its
weaknesses. Homoki created dramatic space from the music, drawing out an
expressive visual language between the characters. The acting and blocking
was refined and purposeful. Freed from visual conventions, the production
struck the emotional and symbolic core of the work.
Stein's conducting, spacious but never slack, showed masterful grasp of
Strauss's themes and crescendos. The cast was of uniform strength. Beneath
his grubby overalls and cropped hair, Wolfgang Schone's Barak combined the
all-suffering simplicity of a Wozzeck with the vocal dignity of an Amfortas.
As the Dyer's Wife, Deborah Polaski resembled a towering frump of a
Hausfrau, but sang with warmth, power and freedom. Thomas Moser eloquently
captured the tragic dimension in the Emperor. Ellen Shade's Empress looked
beautiful and sang radiantly. Reinhild Runkel's white-haired, androgynous
Nurse was plausibly malevolent.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921124

