FT923-6517

FT  24 AUG 92 / Arts: Mark Morris Dance Group - Edinburgh International
Festival


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


MARK Morris, one of the triumphs of this year's Edinburgh Festival, has
moved from the King's Theatre to that inimical barn, the Playhouse, to
present a sextuple bill. The move is successful. The dances project well;
the audience cheers lustily.
The programme, though it lacks the authority of Dido and Aeneas,
demonstrates Morris's awesome range. Musical accompaniment, as always with
Morris, is of high, high quality - whether with Gareth Jones conducting the
Scottish Ensemble and Schola Cantorum or with Linda Dowdell at the piano.
Five of the six works have been made in the last fifteen months.
Two of these are jewels - the slow, serene duet Beautiful Day and the fast,
furious choral dance Polka. Beautiful Day is set to the brief but haunting
cantata 'Schlage doch, gewunschte Stunde,' variously attributed to JS Bach
or G-M. Hoffmann. Alone together, a man and a woman exist in a strange, rapt
calm, caught in a spell that is larger than themselves but that includes
their own delight in each other. A bell keeps chiming in the music; each
time, one dancer 'chimes' the other's body.
Polka is many things: folk dance, war dance, Dionysiac frenzy, cartoon
explosion, polka. Barefoot, stamping, sitting, slapping, shaking heads and
hands, the dancers move in a single ring, in sliding semi-circles, in
opposed columns. Their non-stop and full-bodied attack has astounding
vehemence; and yet the 'Two to the left, two to the right' sequences also
add a dash of absurdity. As so often with Morris, something apparently
simple is utterly ambiguous. The piece seizes by its command of the music's
metre, its pulse, its force, and its incessant energy.
The evening begins with A Lake, which Morris made for the White Oak Project,
with whom it was seen in London this spring. A pure-dance work to Haydn's
second horn concerto, it is a happy introduction to Morris's world. Men
partner men, people exist as individuals and in the group, gestures and
motifs recur with curious emphasis, separate events coincide with masterly
harmony. Every bit is admirable, and the simplicity, weight, and fullness of
phrase that the Morris dancers bring to it are highly appealing (more so
than White Oak). I don't, however, 'get' it as a structure; or why it is
called A Lake.
The world of Bedtime is now sweet slumber, now tense nightmare. To three
Schubert lieder - 'Wiegenlied,' 'Standchen' (the 'Zogernd leiser' with
back-up chorus), and 'Erlkonig' handsomely sung by Lorraine Hunt - its
imagery hangs between the worlds of waking and dreaming. Children are
lulled, impressed, commanded, terrified and betrayed by parents.
The meanings of this riveting piece will surely multiply with further
viewings. In Three Preludes, Morris himself is alone with Gershwin and in
impish mood. His exceptional coordination and rhythmic mastery are evident;
so, alas, is his big, heavy bottom.
The programme ends by bringing an 'old' masterwork, Gloria (1981, revised
1984), to a British stage for the first time. How did he ever think of
setting these anecdotes, this behaviour, to this Vivaldi Gloria? This dance
shows you the highs and lows of the human spirit in bewildering array.
Individuals are disregarded and rejected - but find strength and grace by
themselves. Couples and even families fail - but soloists come together.
People lose their private selves and discover a larger energy. The mighty
shall fall flat; the lame shall dance. How Morris fits this humanist vision
so firmly to this music is his secret, and a sure sign of his genius.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920824

