FT923-15428

FT  02 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Canada set to impose ban on
Atlantic cod fishing


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


CANADA IS expected to impose an 18-month ban today on all cod fishing off
the coast of Newfoundland and Labrador, together with a massive aid package
for the 20,000 fishermen whose livelihood is threatened by the moratorium.
The ban, which follows years of scientific study and gradually dwindling
catches, is the most drastic action so far in efforts to restore one of the
world's richest fishing grounds. Last month, the European Community agreed
to suspend cod fishing for the rest of this year in international waters off
the Grand Banks.
Canadian fishing boats had a northern cod quota of 135,000 tonnes this year.
In addition, the EC had awarded its trawlers a 27,000-tonne quota in the
area.
According to local reports, the ban will apply to Canada's entire 200-mile
fishing zone off the coast of Newfoundland and Labrador, and will remain in
effect until at least the end of 1993.
The crisis in the east coast fishery has soured relations between Canada and
the EC in recent years. Ottawa blames foreign trawlers, especially from
Portugal and Spain, for the decline in the cod stocks. There is evidence
however that other factors, including unusual bands of cold water blocking
fish migration and over-fishing by Canadian boats, have also contributed to
the problem.
The government aid package to be announced today by Mr John Crosbie, the
fisheries minister, could cost as much as CDollars 500m (Pounds 220m).
It will include early-retirement incentives for older workers and
short-term, make-work projects to enable fishermen and processing plant
workers to qualify for unemployment insurance.
Aid will also be provided for retraining, and to help fishing communities
maintain boats and other equipment.
Cod fishing is the mainstay of Newfoundland's economy. The province, which
is one of the poorest regions of North America, already has an unemployment
rate of almost 20 per cent.
The two biggest east coast fishing companies, Fishery Products International
of Newfoundland and Nova Scotia's National Sea Products, announced a
rationalisation of activities last week which will have the effect of
lowering FPI's dependence on cod and increasing its shrimp business.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920702

