FT922-620

FT  26 JUN 92 / The Lisbon Summit: Union treaty likely to delay enlargement


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   LISBON


A MAJORITY of EC leaders at today's summit are likely to back the European
Commission's insistence that the Maastricht union treaty be ratified before
any negotiations for other countries to join the Community.
This will leave Prime Minister John Major isolated in his belief that the
start to enlargement negotiations with European Free Trade Association
(Efta) countries need not necessarily await resolution of the fate of the
Maastricht pact on political and monetary union.
The final version of the commission's hotly contested paper on enlargement
of the Community clearly states that 'the new treaty (of Maastricht) must be
ratified' first. It goes on to say that 'the entry negotiations, which could
then begin, must be conducted so as to contribute to the reinforcement of
the union'.
Referring to the neutrality of all four Efta applicants - Austria, Sweden,
Finland and Switzerland - the paper says new members 'must equally accept
and be capable of following the common foreign and security policy which
will be elaborated in coming years'. Any country whose constitutional
position would prevent it joining other EC states in foreign commitments
'would not be able to integrate itself into the union in a satisfactory
manner'.
The UK government, which takes over the EC presidency from Portugal next
week, agrees with its partners that all new members must subscribe to all of
the goals of the Maastricht treaty. But, keen to demonstrate the Community's
openness to Denmark's fellow-Nordic countries and thus to influence Danish
public opinion, it wants the Lisbon summit to commit the Community to open
enlargement talks early next year, irrespective of the Maastricht treaty's
fate.
The final commission paper drops earlier controversial ideas from Brussels
that the Community should adopt more voting by majority in order to prevent
decision-making in a larger Community seizing up.
It also indicates how the summit will probably tackle the diplomatically
sensitive question of what to say to non-Efta applicants for EC membership.
Such countries as Cyprus, Malta, and Turkey must continue to wait, but the
Community 'should try with all the means at its disposal to promote their
economic development'.
As for potential EC applicant countries in central Europe, the commission
says the Community 'must now commit itself to preparing them economically,
even if their membership only seems possible in a very distant future'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920626

