FT924-8020

FT  13 NOV 92 / Arts: Phoenix Dance Company - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


I very much admire Phoenix Dance Company. The troupe emerged a decade ago
from the inspiring dance teaching offered by two schools in Leeds, Harehills
and Intake - have other educational authorities absorbed the message about
serious training in an art as a way of realising youthful potential? - and
its original complement of five young black men soon won public and critical
acclaim. The company expanded, acquiring five women, official subvention,
and the appurtenances of success. It retains, though, the freshness and
vigour, and the physical distinction, which it had from the very first.
As an ensemble of dancers it must be ranked very high for the rhythmic
alertness, the fine flash of step and limb, the clarity of its dancing.
Though the repertory has, from the first, been uneven - and sometimes dire -
Phoenix style has come to the rescue. Returned for a brief season to
Sadler's Wells this week the company is in magnificent form, albeit its
repertory has a somewhat reach-me-down air.
The best piece is Aletta Collins' Gang of Five, made for the men of the
ensemble. The chaps look very natty in suits and the right trimmings for a
business interview, even down to gold-rimmed spectacles. There seems a
double theme: about conformity - the gang will not tolerate deviation from
the sartorial code - and (with the appearance of a man dressed in rather
more hip gear, with dreadlocks) about what young black men are expected to
wear. I don't think either of these ideas matters much. What holds us
enthralled is superb physical statement by the cast: hair-trigger reactions;
lithe, brilliant steps; and a subtle expression of feeling. They are all
fine actors as well as fine dancers.
The company's dramatic powers rescue an entirely vapid work, Family by
Danial Shapiro and Joanie Smith, where the dancers perform acrobatics on,
over, around an armchair. The playing is warm, funny, ebullient; the piece
is none of these. Nor is there much to commend in Bebe Miller's Spartan
Reels save the fact that its brings Phoenix dancers on stage. Its manner is
bland, but Phoenix's artists pan for gold, and find some nuggets. I was
bewitched by one girl in the troupe - the programme was absolutely no help
in identifying the dancers - who just had to dance, and did so with the most
enchanting humour.
The programme is completed by Philip Taylor's Sacred Space, which was on
view in last year's Wells season, when it boasted a handsome back drop by
Norman Perryman. It has an air of faintly dubious religiosity - a seance
where the medium has been at rather different spirits than those coming
through from 'the beyond' - but it gets heart-whole performance from its
cast.
The evening suggests how expert the company is at making dance bricks with
very little creative straw. As an ensemble it is most gifted. Its repertory,
as I noted last year, needs to rise to the level of the dancers' artistry. I
would love to see them challenged by great choreography, by revivals of
major dance pieces. They merit nothing less than the best.
Phoenix Dance is at Sadler's Wells until November 14. The company is
sponsored by Yorkshire Television

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921113

