FT922-675

FT  26 JUN 92 / International Company News: Ercros closer to receivership


   By TOM BURNS and REUTER


   MADRID


ERCROS, the debt-burdened Spanish chemical conglomerate which is controlled
by the Kuwait Investment Office (KIO), edged closer to receivership
yesterday as negotiations broke down over the sale of a majority stake in
its fertiliser subsidiary to Freeport McMoran of the US.
Sources close to Ercros said the KIO, which owns 40 per cent of Ercros, was
unwilling to offer Freeport guarantees to cover future losses by the
subsidiary, Fesa-Enfersa. A final decision over the guarantees is expected
from KIO early next week.
The fertiliser company posted losses of Pta13.6bn (Dollars 138m) and is
responsible for half of Ercos' Pta99.1bn consolidated debt. A joint
fertiliser venture between Fesa-Enfersa and the New Orleans-based commodity
company is seen as the only way of averting Spain's biggest corporate
failure.
Negotiations for Freeport's acquisition of a 51 per cent stake in
Fesa-Enfersa opened last month at the instigation of Mr Javier de la Rosa,
the Barcelona financier who was KIO's chief Spanish executive until three
weeks ago.
However, the deal, which was for an unspecified amount, ran aground after Mr
de la Rosa severed his executive links with KIO and a new management team
was appointed that was wary of pumping new funds into Spanish assets.
If the deal is agreed, under the salvage plan the Barcelona financier, who
controls a 20 per cent stake in Ercros, would inject Pta10bn into the
conglomerate; Spain's publicly-owned bank, Banco Exterior, which is Ercros'
main creditor, would lead debt renegotiations; and KIO would be expected to
provide a further Pta25bn in capitalisation.
Telefonica de Espana, the Spanish telecommunications group which also owns
and operates telephone networks in Argentina and Chile, is interested in
acquiring a stake in Uruguay's state-owned Antel telephone company when it
is privatised, a Telefonica executive said in Montevideo, Reuter reports.
The Uruguayan government intends to sell off 60 per cent of the company to
foreign and local investors. It has not yet organised a tender for the sale
of Antel stock because there is a poll on July 5 calling for a referendum on
the privatisation proposals.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920626

