FT923-15745

FT  01 JUL 92 / Rabin government 'intent on reform'


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   JERUSALEM


ISRAEL'S new government, to be led by the Labour party following its
election victory last week, will be committed to market reforms of the
sluggish economy, a key economic policy adviser to Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the
prime minister-elect, said yesterday.
But Mr Avraham Shochat, a senior Labour MP who is a leading candidate to
become finance minister, admitted in an interview that the party had not
formulated a detailed plan for the immigration-burdened economy. This was
despite calls from the US during the election campaign for an urgent
liberalisation programme.
Mr Shochat added that, although Labour backed privatisation, it opposed
allowing at least four of the biggest state-owned companies to slip out of
government hands. They were Israel Chemicals, Israel Aircraft Industries,
the telecoms monopoly Bezeq, and the Israel Electric Corporation utility.
He suggested a majority of the shares in these four could be sold through a
stock exchange flotation, but the government would keep a form of control as
the biggest shareholder through a stake of 'at least 26 per cent'. Mr Rabin
has said he also favours keeping El Al, the state airline, under similar
control.
But Mr Shochat insisted the party's commitment to socialism had changed,
reflected in the endorsement of market-oriented reforms at a party
convention last year.
Accelerated privatisation is one measure being urged on the new government
to help cope with mass immigration from the former Soviet Union. It is
supported by the Bank of Israel as well by as the US, which provides Israel
with Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.6bn) in annual aid.
Mr Shochat said he accepted much of the central bank's advice, saying
Labour's privatisation plans would achieve 'quite a release of government
control over the economy'.
He said about Shk1bn (Pounds 217m) a year would be diverted from spending on
Jewish settlements in the occupied territories to boost infrastructural
investment in Israel 'proper'. Labour hopes this will persuade the US to
provide Dollars 10bn in loan guarantees to boost investment. Mr Rabin said
yesterday he sought 'continuous negotiations' with Palestinians in an effort
to reach an interim settlement in the occupied territories. He wanted to
abandon the previous custom where the parties met for a few days only every
two months.
His call was welcomed by Mr James Baker, US Secretary of State, who said in
Washington: 'We were very pleased to see the statement by Mr Rabin saying,
let's engage and let's stayed engaged and let's get something done.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

