FT924-5965

FT  24 NOV 92 / Leading Article: The future of the ERM


WITH THE realignments of the Spanish peseta and the Portuguese escudo, the
ERM has become still more clearly a two- tier exchange rate system. The
possibility that most member countries of the European Community would move
smoothly from a hard ERM into European monetary union (Emu) itself has now
disappeared. But there is a more pressing question: whether the ERM itself
will survive and, if so, in what form.
In the light of hindsight, the EC's determination to sail the good ship ERM
on a direct course to Emu - despite the gale created by German unification -
was a serious error. It might have made sense if, as some hoped before the
inter-governmental conferences, the voyage to Emu could be completed within
one or two years. But once it was evident that the Germans would insist on a
character-forming long haul, the course needed to be changed.
The Spanish peseta, the pound sterling and the Portuguese escudo had all
joined the ERM during the 5 3/4 years before September's devaluation of the
lira; the Finnish markka and the Swedish krona were linked to the Ecu; and
there was just one, technical realignment, when the lira was put into the
narrow bands. Now, however, the markka, the lira, the pound and the krona
have been forced to float; the peseta and the escudo have been realigned;
the French franc, strongest of the major currencies after the D-Mark, has
been subjected to great pressure; and even stalwarts such as the Irish punt
and the Danish krone are in the firing line.
Vicious spiral
With changes this frequent, a vicious spiral sets in. The more currencies
come under pressure, the more governments insist they will never realign and
the more credibility they lose when they do. The greater the gains won by
the speculators, the more willing they are to try again. The larger the
devaluations by competitors, the more painful it is to resist realignment.
And the more painful it is to resist, the less credible such resistance
becomes. An adjustable peg exchange rate system that suffers from such
frequent realignments is in grave danger of total collapse.
The French finance ministry says that the weekend realignment means that
'our difficulties are behind us'. But Ireland sends 30 per cent of its
exports to the UK, while the punt has gained 10.9 per cent against the pound
since before Black Wednesday and short-term real interest rates are about 12
per cent. Even the French franc has suffered a trade weighted appreciation
of 2.3 per cent since early September, while short-term real interest rates
are 7 per cent.
The danger is that currencies will be picked off one after the other. This
may not matter too much if depreciation is imposed only on minor currencies.
If the franc were to retain its position, there would be more to European
fixed exchange rates than a German Gulliver among the Lilliputians. Should
the French franc be forced to realign, however, European wide monetary
stability would have to be reconstructed, almost from scratch.
Course of action
The question is, what should be done now? First, thinking about whether the
EC will get to Emu, what Emu might look like and who might get there seems
futile in the current tempest.
Second, it seems equally pointless to maintain currencies at levels that
investors judge overvalued, especially when monetary policy is already too
tight in virtually every ERM member country except, arguably, Germany.
Countries suffering from overly tight monetary policy and inadequate growth
need real depreciations.
Finally, countries that are convinced they can stick with Germany until the
Bundesbank starts to ease need to do everything they can to reinforce their
commitment. Moving to still narrower bands is the obvious route.
If the ERM is to survive as more than just a managed float around a core of
Germany and a few small countries, either Germany must readjust its monetary
policies soon, or other currencies must be credibly reinforced at their
current parities, or parities must be realigned to convincingly defensible
levels. If German macroeconomic policy continues to thwart growth at the
European level, competitive devaluations are the inevitable outcome.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921124

