FT924-920

FT  21 DEC 92 / International Bonds: Complaints about poor liquidity


   By SARA WEBB


A PRIVATE investor who inherited his mother's investment portfolio, decided
to sell some of the assets. He was unable to find a buyer for his mother's
triple-A rated yankee bonds. The lead manager for the issue refused to quote
him a price.
Eventually, he rang up the treasurer at the company which had issued the
bond and complained - the issuer contacted the lead manager and told him to
do his job.
There are plenty of institutional investors who complain - usually
off-the-record - about the poor liquidity in the secondary market for
Eurobonds.
Mr Roger Gray, head of fixed income and currency, at Rothschild Asset
Management, says: 'In general with Eurobonds the bigger issues are preferred
to the smaller ones because of their greater after-market liquidity.'
A fund manager at one of the leading UK asset management groups, says:
'There are so many problems with liquidity. We usually set a minimum size of
issue which we are prepared to own.
'Often the problem is that when you want to buy a new issue, there are 20
market makers, but after six months the number of market-makers drops and
it's difficult to find anyone willing to quote a price for the issue.'
According to one fund manager's analysis, if you break down the fixed coupon
dollar Eurobond market into the number of market makers per issue, you find
that only 7 per cent of issues have 21 or more dealers, while 8 per cent
have between 11 and 20 dealers, and 59 per cent of the issues have fewer
than three dealers.
In addition, bid-offer spreads may widen considerably with time. For
example, Isveimer, the Italian state borrower, launched a USDollars 125m
floating-rate note in July which was recently quoted at a spread of
97.80-98.85 with one market maker. The wide spread indicates there is very
little trading in the bond.
Market makers tend to play down investors' complaints. Mr Jerry Goldstein,
chairman of the ISMA Council of Reporting Dealers and a director of Sanwa
International, claims 'institutional investors will always be able to get
immediate bids and offers in any trade from major market makers except maybe
in cases where you have very old bonds or bonds which don't trade very often
 -or when bond markets are very volatile'.
Investors eager to dump Ecu bonds this summer experienced such a problem.
When the Danes rejected the Maastricht Treaty on June 2, they sowed
confusion over European economic and monetary union. Investors were
desperate to sell their Ecu bonds, but at one stage found the market makers
were not prepared to quote prices.
Mr Goldstein points out anyone who is a lead manager or co-lead should be
prepared to make markets in an issue for at least a year. 'If they don't, it
is regrettable but I can't see any way of improving this situation,' he
says, although he is in favour of continued discussions with the
International Primary Market Association (Ipma) to try to improve these
guidelines.
Mr Peter Luthy of Luthy Baillie Dowsett Pethick, which advises on bond
investments but is not a market maker, points out it does not make sense -
economically - for market makers to continue making markets in each of the
stocks in which they were involved.
'There is no point (for the market maker) wasting time on issues which trade
only seldom. It would be very costly for the trader to stay aware of the
prices, to do all the research on the issue and constantly assess it.'
He maintains fund managers often make the mistake of buying paper without
considering its future liquidity. 'Investors should only buy something
illiquid if the yield is sufficient to justify the risk that they might have
to sell it later.'
Mr Goldstein recommends improving liquidity by encouraging borrowers to make
a regular appearance in the Eurobond market, going for large issues and, if
practical, fungible bonds (in other words, bonds with the exactly same terms
which count as one issue).
In practice, borrowers may be unwilling to use fungible issues, particularly
if bond yields are falling and they want to save costs by offering a smaller
coupon. And they are certainly unlikely to want to borrow more than they
actually need. However, investors acknowledge that issuers are making an
effort to launch bigger issues in order to improve liquidity in the
secondary market.
One fund manager at a UK insurance group says: 'Over the past few years,
average issue size has increased. Eurosterling bonds are normally about
Pounds 100m and that is considered a fairly good size. However, there are
very few Eurosterling issues of around Pounds 500m. The point is that in the
gilt market, a Pounds 500m issue would be considered an illiquid bond.'
Figures provided by Euroclear show that new issues - rather than existing
bonds - tend to be the most actively traded Eurobonds.
There's no doubt that investors generally find it easier to buy large
amounts of stock in the new issue market. But one fund manager says his
strategy is to ignore the new issue market and concentrate on the much older
issues which have been sold off cheaply.
'We feel that people are paying too high a price for liquidity,' he says.
Other investors who need to be able to sell their holdings at short notice
and at as high a price as possible, admit that they prefer to concentrate on
the more liquid government bond markets instead.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921221

