FT923-10698

FT  29 JUL 92 / Stevens to step down as chief executive of Invesco


   By ROBERT PESTON


LORD STEVENS is stepping down as chief executive of Invesco MIM, the fund
management group, after pressure from its non-executive directors.
However, he will stay on as chairman until the group's annual meeting next
April. In the meantime, the group, which manages more than Pounds 30bn of
funds, will search for a new chairman from candidates outside the group.
The departure of Lord Stevens, who for 20 years has been a prominent figure
in the City, was approved by a board meeting on Monday. It was under
negotiation for the previous 'week or two', according to a board member, and
was first discussed three or four months ago.
Lord Stevens is also chairman of United Newspapers, owners of the Daily
Express, and of Alexander Proudfoot, the management consultant.
An Invesco director said there were three main reasons for Lord Stevens'
resignation:
The poor performance of Drayton Consolidated, an investment trust managed by
Invesco and chaired by Lord Stevens;
The board's view that the role of chairman and chief executive at Invesco
should be split;
The adverse publicity which the group had attracted for its role as a
manager of Maxwell pension funds. This publicity may have been damaging
Invesco's relationship with clients, the director said.
Imro, the self-regulatory organisation of pension fund managers, is
investigating Invesco's role as a manager of Maxwell funds. The director
said there was 'no hint of impropriety with regard to Maxwell'.
Lord Stevens is staying on as chairman of Invesco as a demonstration of the
board's confidence that it has nothing to fear from the Imro investigation.
But the poor performance of Drayton, and in particular parts of its unquoted
investments portfolio, was regarded by the non-executive directors as 'the
final straw', the director said. The value of its net assets has fallen
sharply.
Invesco's non-executives include Mr Vittorio Serafino, representative of its
biggest shareholder, IMI, the Italian investment group; Mr Anthony Solomons,
chairman of merchant bank Singer & Friedlander; Lord Rippon, a former Tory
cabinet minister, and Sir David Nicholson, former chairman of BTR, the
conglomerate.
Lord Stevens is being replaced as chief executive by Mr Charles Brady, who
runs the North American operations. He is stepping down as a joint deputy
chairman, as is Mr Nicholas Brady, who will continue to run the European and
Pacific division. Mr Wendell Starke takes over the North America role.
Lord Stevens was not available for comment.
King Midas ends his golden reign, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920729

