FT922-7118

FT  20 MAY 92 / World Stock Markets: Military might crushes Thai equities -
The civil unrest has upset attempts to encourage investment


   By PETER UNGPHAKORN


Share prices suffered their worst falls in history on the Bangkok stock
market yesterday, the first day of trading since the military crushed
protests against the appointment of General Suchinda Kraprayoon as a
non-elected prime minister.
Prices of all but three stocks fell, and many hit their floor prices -
suffering declines of 10 per cent, the maximum permitted in a single day's
trading. The SET index dropped 8.9 per cent to close at 667.84, down 65.05
from last Friday, its lowest close since December 1991. Monday was a bank
holiday.
Stock market directors and members of the Securities and Exchange Commission
said they had been watching the situation carefully to see whether the
political crisis would justify closing the market.
They are scheduled to meet before the market opens this morning to decide
whether the situation has eased overnight. Mr Nibhat Bukkanasut, chairman of
the SET board, said that Thailand's fundamental economic position remained
sound and he urged investors to ignore rumours.
Trading was thin yesterday, turnover being about Bt3.14bn (Dollars 123m).
Investors in brokers' trading rooms were reported to be more interested in
the previous night's violence and the many unsubstantiated rumours about
further protests and other political developments.
One broker attributed the sharp setback in prices and the low trading volume
to the difficulty of obtaining reliable information.
Television and radio coverage of political events has been heavily censored,
and telephone connections were severely disrupted yesterday, apparently by
the high volume of calls, as people all over Bangkok tried to find out what
was happening.
One group of investors was reported to have organised a petition calling for
General Suchinda's resignation.
In the first quarter of the year, the market appeared to be heading for a
recovery, after last year's global recession and the coup d'etat in
Thailand. After the March 22 general election, the SET index climbed to
reach this year's peak of 832.39 on April 7, the day General Suchinda's
appointment was announced.
Since then, the index has declined with increasing speed, except for a few
days of short-lived recovery. The announcement on April 17 of General
Suchinda's cabinet, which included a number of ministers from the government
that he overthrew in last year's coup, and accused of being corrupt, set off
sharper falls that only eased last week, when the crisis appeared to be
resolved.
The nervous market has reacted particularly sensitively to political
developments. On May 7, the index weakened 25.5 points in only about 10
minutes, the time General Suchinda took to make a controversial televised
speech in parliament attacking his opponents.
For the SET, the political troubles come at an unfortunate time. Yesterday
was the first day of trading under new legislation that is designed to
reduce manipulation and political interference, encourage more companies to
list, and promote new types of equity and loan papers. One of the objectives
is to increase national savings in order to meet the rapidly expanding
economy's surging need for investment.
A new Securities and Exchange Commission has been created with powers to set
broad policy guidelines for the SET, and to supervise new share issues and
trading in existing shares both on the stock market and over the counter.
Companies listed on the SET will have to become public companies within the
next two years. The new law seeks to make this more attractive by easing
some of the stringent conditions of the previous public company law, such as
the requirement that a large proportion of shares be owned by many small
investors.

The Financial Times


London Page 39

920520

