FT923-15391

FT  02 JUL 92 / Suggestions of fraud and malpractice dismissed


   By ANDREW JACK


LLOYD'S of London has been cleared of any suggestion of fraud or malpractice
by the committee of inquiry set up under the chairmanship of Sir David
Walker.
But in the report submitted to the insurance market's governing council
yesterday morning, Sir David criticises the standards of some market
professionals. He says the care and diligence of a number of members'
agents, managing agents and active underwriters fell 'materially below best
practice'.
He calls for new regulations to ensure fairness in the allocation between
syndicates of Names.
He also calls for a system of peer review, meaning that those in the market
constantly monitor one another's standards of practice to raise quality.
Sir David emphasises that the existing weaknesses in the market are not
significantly caused by the regulations under which Lloyd's is governed.
The Walker committee was established in February to examine allegations that
so-called external Names were disproportionately placed on syndicates that
lost most.
The report says that the 'catastrophic losses' sustained in the 1988 and
1989 underwriting years can be wholly explained in terms of commercial
factors and judgments.
It says the losses sustained on so-called LMX - London market excess -
business were not confined to Lloyd's syndicates but were also experienced
by a number of corporate reinsurers.
The report says: 'We do not find the developments of the LMX spiral to have
been improper or to have been distorted by conspiracy or mis-feasance.' It
adds that confidence in the market can be rebuilt, and recommends reforms
that could be undertaken within the existing framework of self-regulation.
It calls for action to restore the capital base and to create the conditions
under which corporate capital could be introduced, as the Lloyd's task force
suggested earlier this year.
It says, however: 'We believe that there is need to underpin the duties of
members' agents under the law of agency and existing Lloyd's bye-laws with
further and specific conduct of business regulations designed to ensure
fairness in syndicate allocation and to promote standards of advice and
protection for Names comparable with those for private investors under the
Financial Services Act.'
Lloyd's said yesterday: 'The council has considered (Sir David's) report and
welcomed it. Several of its recommendations - including the call for peer
review - accord with its own current thinking. There is obviously much to be
learned from his committee and we will apply these lessons vigorously.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920702

