FT923-11021

FT  27 JUL 92 / The Lex Column: UK banks


Bid battles aside, the recent history of the UK clearing banks has been
dominated by disappointment about the scale of domestic bad debt provisions.
There is unlikely to be much relief when the banks start reporting interim
results. Barclays, thanks to its relatively low rate of provisioning in the
past and its well-publicised problems with Heron, Mountleigh and Olympia &
York, is likely to report a sharp increase in provisions compared with the
Pounds 639m set aside in last year's second half. Abbey National's
provisions are also likely to rise, while the absence of economic recovery
means other banks will show only modest falls at best.
So much for the recovery hopes with which investors consoled themselves
after last year's poor results. The longer term trend in provisions is
difficult to predict. By and large,the market's record has been one of
excessive optimism. To be sure, there are one or two hopeful signs on the
horizon, not least a slight fall in administrative receiverships. BZW
calculates that cumulative provisions at the four largest clearers now
average 3.1 per cent of loans outstanding, a ratio which has more than
tripled over the past five years. It might thus be legitimate to ask whether
provisions need to continue at such a high level
Unfortunately, the overwhelming impression is that they easily could. The
stock market hardly reflects a picture of glowing corporate health. There is
no sign of interest rates coming down and the property market remains
depressed. For the year as a whole, there is scant reason why interest rates
should fall much, if at all, and the chances are that any decline in 1993
will only be gradual.
The outcome may, of course, vary from bank to bank. Midland's loan book grew
more slowly in the late-1980s than those of its three main competitors and
its provisions rose faster with the onset of the recession, so it may have
dealt with the problem earlier. Lloyds has the offsetting benefit of a large
surplus in its developing country debt provisions, while National
Westminster will at least be able to show a sharp drop in provisions on its
US business.
The more general consolation is that the slow growth in lending will prevent
any threat to capital ratios. That said, only lacklustre growth can be
expected in operating income, from which the provisions have to be financed.
Not only have retail fees and charges been raised just about as far as the
market will bear; there is also increasing competitive pressure in the
hitherto lucrative life insurance market. Net interest income is being
squeezed on the one side by a rise in the volume of non-performing loans and
on the other by the higher cost of retail deposits. That leaves a redoubled
effort on cost control as the banks' main hope for earnings growth.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920727

