FT923-15533

FT  01 JUL 92 / International Company News: Canary Wharf wins some breathing
space


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


A JUDGE yesterday gave Canary Wharf some breathing space by temporarily
blocking moves by American Express to pull out of the project.
Mr Justice Blair of the Ontario Court of Justice refused to let American
Express set a deadline for declaring Olympia & York in default of its
obligations towards tenants in the London Docklands development.
Similar filings in New York and London have yet to be resolved.
Mr Justice Blair upheld arguments that the entire Canary Wharf project,
which is currently under administration, could be irreparably harmed if the
US-based financial services group was allowed to repudiate its lease at this
time.
American Express said last night the judge's decision was 'procedural at
this point. It does not affect our fundamental legal right.'
American Express signed a lease for 20 Cabot Square, one of the Canary Wharf
buildings, two years ago and is due to move in this autumn. It claims that
O&Y, which is under court protection in the UK and Canada, has defaulted on
the lease by suspending payments totalling Pounds 22m which are required for
completion of the building.
American Express sought court permission yesterday to accelerate its claims
against O&Y by setting a deadline for the lease conditions to be met. If O&Y
failed to meet the deadline, American Express was seeking the right to
terminate the lease and other agreements with O&Y.
The American Express application was opposed by O&Y, as well as by Credit
Suisse First Boston (CSFB) which owns another of the Canary Wharf buildings.
CSFB argued that by allowing American Express to proceed, the court would
clear the way for a flood of other tenants to cancel their leases to the
detriment of the project as a whole.
The amount paid by the Reichmann family owners of O&Y for assets of the
property group was about CDollars 500m (Pounds 225m), documents filed in an
Ontario court reveal. Beginning in early 1991, the assets were bought
through private companies at the going market rate, injecting cash into the
troubled company.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920701

