FT924-6391

FT  21 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Friendly trends


STOCK MARKETS are not noted for the delicacy with which they treat
depressing news, and this week was no exception to the rule. In the face of
further dismal announcements of job cuts across the economy the FT-SE 100
Index rose cheerfully to within striking distance of the all-time high
reached in May this year. No matter that the third-quarter GDP figures,
excluding oil and gas, showed a decline of 0.3 per cent on the second
quarter and a fall of 0.8 per cent on the comparable period last year. Since
Black Wednesday, when Britain parted company with the ERM, the trend in
equities has been inexorably upwards. And rightly so: few market turning
points have been so clearly signalled by changes in government policy. Even
allowing for any setback after the recent rise, it is too soon to expect the
upward trend to be reversed.
It is not as if the coincidence of rising share prices and bad news is
difficult to rationalise. Unemployment is a lagging indicator. Indeed, in
the recession of the early 1980s, the unemployment figures did not stop
rising until well after the middle of the decade, even though the economy
turned the corner in early 1981. In any event there was also some modestly
encouraging news around last week. The British consumer, hitherto assumed to
be moribund, was seen to twitch a little, with retail sales showing a rise
of 0.9 per cent in the three months to the end of October. The market also
took heart from the US and European trade negotiators' potential compromise
on the intractable issue of farm trade.
Inflationary risk
Nor is the news on the job front devoid of a silver lining. A depressed
labour market has contributed to a decline in earnings growth over the six
months to September from 7 1/2 per cent to 5 1/2 per cent, while pay
settlements, a forward indicator for earnings, were down to 3.9 per cent in
the three months to October. That is a trend that needs to continue if the
inflationary risk inherent in the recent devaluation is not to render the
whole exercise nugatory. Note, though, that despite the continuing
stagnation in the economy and under-utilisation of industrial capacity,
productivity has started to improve, while output per head has actually been
on a rising trend. The other encouraging point for the future is that
inflation tends to go on falling well into an economic recovery, helped by
high productivity growth as companies reap the benefit of the good
housekeeping measures undertaken in the recession.
Against that background the Bank of England's latest Quarterly Bulletin
argues that the impact of sterling's recent depreciation on prices will be
delayed, compared with experience in previous devaluations, and may even be
smaller than in the past. Coming from an institution that is not accustomed
to risk its central banking credentials by belittling a potential
inflationary threat, that is quite an admission. That said, worries are not
confined to conditions in the labour market. In so far as investors have had
second thoughts on the Autumn Statement, they simply confirm earlier
thoughts that the deterioration in Britain's public finances will be giving
gilt-edged investors nervous moments for the foreseeable future.
Remarkably resilient
Ultimately, equities cannot escape the backwash from turmoil in the gilts
market. But for the moment that prospect looks just sufficiently distant to
allow the equity party to continue. If there is a more helpful signpost to
the future, it lies in the United States, where equity prices have proved
remarkably resilient despite the delayed effect of monetary loosening on the
economy. British investors are now confronting a steeper yield curve, with
short interest rates significantly lower than long rates. This tends to
enhance the attractions of securities against bank and building society
deposits. Not only are professional investors adjusting their portfolio
dispositions accordingly; private investors are showing interest in such new
issues as Commercial Union's Pounds 100m offering of irredeemable preference
shares.
If the inflationary threat to the British economy can be exaggerated, so too
can the prospects for export-led growth. While the unspectacular improvement
in the US economy is good news for British exporters, the slowdown in the
European economy is not. Nor is the increasing preoccupation of European
policymakers with fiscal expansion necessarily the best way out of a bind
which has been precipitated by the combination of loose fiscal and tight
monetary policies in Germany.
But nothing in continental Europe is set in concrete. This week saw Sweden
finally give up its fight to shadow the ERM and the peripheral ERM
currencies weaken. And despite having weathered the earlier currency storm,
even the franc is not without risk. How long can France sustain such high
real rates of interest against a background of rising unemployment and an
impending election in the spring? The markets are not only indelicate. They
have a nose for inconsistent domestic and external policy. The speculators'
game is not over yet.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921121

