FT924-6472

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Home Entertainment (6): Monopoly is still leading
the field - Non-Electronic Games


   By CHRISTOPHER PRICE


PURVEYORS of Britain's board games must have blanched at the news of fights
breaking out among several thousand youngsters locked out of a computer
games exhibition in London earlier this month.
It is not the sort of thing that happens in the staid world of
non-electronic games, where Monopoly (circa 1930) remains the number one
seller, followed by old rivals Cluedo (circa 1950), Scrabble and the newer
Trivial Pursuit.
'The traditional board games offer a good value way of bridging the
generation gap and in which all the family can participate,' says Mr Alan
Thompson, managing director of Waddington Games, makers of Monopoly.
'Computer games are usually designed for single players.'
However, the new wave of electronic entertainment has dented the growth in
board game sales, although they have held up well in the face of the
recession.
Last year, board game sales grew to Pounds 127m from Pounds 114m in 1988,
with Monopoly selling 300,000 units - and Junior Monopoly an additional
200,000.
New growth areas are generally limited to one-off blockbusters such as
Trivial Pursuit, or adaptations from television game shows. Hence healthy
sales are expected this Christmas for the likes of 'Big Break', 'Give us a
Clue' and 'TV Addicts'. Toy executives maintain close contacts with
television companies, producing a two-way stream of games linked to TV and
vice versa.
Meanwhile, Subbuteo, the table football game, has seen a seven-fold increase
in sales in the past six years, mirroring renewed interest in the domestic
game. There has also been a flood of games on the 'Dungeons and Dragons'
theme.
However, a stroll down the aisle of any large toy store reveals hundreds of
board games lacking either the pull of television support or the staying
power of the established giants. One cannot help but fear a short shelf life
for the likes of 'Mall Madness' and 'Beware the Bog]'.
The cost of introducing new games is high, with its success dependent on
good distribution. Periphery players also struggle because with two-thirds
of sales made in the Christmas period, large amounts of stock have to be
held throughout the year. 'I think the industry will become centred around
fewer players,' says Mr Thompson. Experienced toy industry watchers predict
a New Year fall-out for some of the smaller manufacturers.
One of the few new companies to make in-roads into the UK market is the
Japanese group Tomy, which in the past 10 years has seen its sales grow from
zero to Pounds 60m.
With no traditional board game as a backbone, Tomy has concentrated on
developing activity games with an emphasis on skill and dexterity. 'There's
nothing more boring than a flat piece of cardboard,' says Mr Peter Brown,
managing director of Tomy UK. 'People, and especially children, want
something extra to do while they're playing.'
But despite Tomy's efforts to widen the market, the search for the lucrative
'new Monopoly' continues to exercise not only some of the great minds of the
toy world, but also the British public.
Mr Brown says he receives up to a dozen suggestions a week from the public
for new board games. At Waddingtons the number of suggestions regularly runs
to a hundred. In the meantime, Monopoly looks likely to live up to its title
and maintain its dominant position.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921120

