FT922-534

FT  27 JUN 92 / CIS leaders fail to agree on currencies


   By JOHN LLOYD and DAVID WALLER


   MOSCOW, FRANKFURT


A MEETING of heads of the Commonwealth of Independent States yesterday
failed to agree on crucial procedures to establish separate currencies.
Disagreement between Russia and Ukraine was blamed for the failure to sign
an agreement on the most critical of economic issues between the republics.
Mr Alexander Granberg, the economic adviser to Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian
president, said last night that the Ukrainian delegation had 'put in doubt'
the arrangements for transferring cash roubles to Russia when Ukraine
introduces its own currency in three months time. Mr Granberg said that the
only price Russia was prepared to pay for the roubles was 'the cost of
printing them'.
The disagreement is significant because the issue had been said to have been
agreed between Mr Yeltsin and Mr Leonid Kravchuk, the Ukrainian president,
in talks earlier this week at Dagomys on the Black Sea coast. Mr Yegor
Gaidar,the Russian acting prime minister, said after the meeting that the
issue would be discussed again in Moscow on July 6, where he hoped an
agreement would be signed.
A deal between the republics on which would introduce their own currencies
and which would stay within the rouble zone is now regarded by Russia as
crucial to the stability of the rouble.
Mr Sergei Glaziev, the deputy foreign economic relations minister, said
yesterday that other republics were simply expanding credit - extended by
the Russian Central Bank - to compensate for the extra price of goods
provided by Russia.
Russia plans to unify its exchange rate on July 1, and to move towards a
convertible currency in September. Mr Glaziev said the unification of the
present three exchange rates will mean a saving to the Russian budget of
Rbs500bn over the remainder of the year as subsidies paid to keep the rouble
artificially high for the sake of exporters are cut.
July 1 will also see the introduction of import taxes at a basic rate of 5
per cent, the lowering of some export duties and the auctioning of export
licenses.
Western bankers have agreed another 90-day deferral of the principal on the
commercial debt owed by the former Soviet Union, writes David Waller from
Frankfurt.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920627

