FT921-11825

FT  30 JAN 92 / Rebel Serbs endanger UN peacekeeping plan: The decision
facing the Security Council tomorrow


   By JUDY DEMPSEY and LAURA SILBER


   LONDON, BELGRADE


A DECISION by the United Nations Security Council to send UN peace-keeping
troops to Croatia hangs in the balance because rebel Serb leaders oppose
deployment of troops.
Western diplomats in Belgrade said yesterday the security council, which is
expected to meet tomorrow, will be given a less than optimistic report by Mr
Cyrus Vance, the UN's special envoy to Yugoslavia.
Although the 15th ceasefire, brokered by the UN early this month, has
generally held in Croatia, several elements still stand in the way towards
the deployment of 10,000 UN troops. One is Mr Milan Babic, leader of the
self-proclaimed Serbian republic of Krajina, southern Croatia.
Mr Babic, catapulted into power by Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the president of
Serbia, does not want the Yugoslav federal army to be withdrawn from
Krajina, and replaced by UN troops. Nor does he want local Serb paramilitary
units to be disarmed, despite Mr Milosevic's support for the peace plan.
Under the Vance plan, the federal army - which, along with Serb militants
controls a third of Croatia - will withdraw from all Croatian territory; and
all paramilitary forces, including Serbian units, will be disarmed. The
regular Croatian army will be required to return to barracks.
Mr Lazar Macura, Krajina's minister of information, recently said the Serbs
would not give up their weapons. To complicate matters, local Serbs from
Krajina make up 80 per cent of the army in that region, which means that
practically no withdrawal by the federal army to areas outside Croatia would
take place.
Mr Babic opposes withdrawal of the federal army from areas in Croatia where
the Serbs are in a majority before the status of the Serb communities in
Croatia has been defined. These regions include Krajina, and the Baranja and
western Srem which are in eastern Slavonia, in the east of the republic.
Mr Babic wants the Serbs in Croatia to be able to opt out of an independent
Croatia.
In addition, Mr Goran Hadzik, head of the Serbs in eastern Slavonia, and Mr
Babic, are seeking guarantees against Croat reprisals when UN troops leave
the republic.
The UN troops are expected to stay six months, and the regions to which they
will be deployed will have the status of protectorates.
Western diplomats fear that if no political solution on Croatia's borders
and the status of the Serbs in Croatia is reached within that period, civil
war will return.
Croat officials said the deployment of UN troops would give them time to
re-establish law and order and try to regain control over the entire
territory. Any deployment might allow presidential and local elections to
take place.
Mr Franjo Tudjman, the president of Croatia, wants presidential elections as
soon as possible to capitalise on his success in attaining international
recognition.
The other, and less predictable element which could destabilise the Vance
plan is the federal army. So far, the army, under General Blagoje Adzic, a
Serb nationalist, has endorsed the peace plan. But it remains unclear what
role will be played by General Ratko Mladic, head of the federal army in
Krajina, or General Vladimir Vukovic, commander of the Banja Luka garrison
in northern Bosnia-Hercegovina, in persuading Mr Babic to accept the plan.
'The army continues to play a crucial role,' said Mr Haric Silajcic, the
foreign minister of Bosnia-Hercegovina. 'Its relationship with both Mr
Milosevic and Mr Babic must not be underestimated. The situation remains
highly unstable.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920130

