FT921-3775

FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: Carmakers reduce prices


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


CARMAKERS moved quickly yesterday to reduce retail prices by about 4 per
cent to reflect the cut in special car tax announced in the Budget, but the
industry appears reluctant to follow Ford, the UK market leader, into a
further price war.
Ford suffered a heavy fall in sales last mont, but it is moving aggressively
to try to regain lost ground with a series of price cuts.
In a letter to dealers, it has set a target of winning a 30 per cent market
share this month compared with the share of less than 20 per cent it
achieved in February.
Peugeot yesterday reported an immediate gain in sales in the wake of the
Budget with the confirmation of several fleet orders amounting to Pounds 11m
and a higher number of visitors to showrooms.
Several other carmakers said that the first real impact in higher 'showroom
traffic' would come at the weekend. Peugeot and Ford said that the
chancellor's moves had freed a large number of orders delayed pending the
Budget.
Ford, which suffered a much steeper decline in sales in February than most
of its rivals, has added further price cuts to some of its best-selling
Fiesta and Escort models beyond the cuts reflecting the reduction of car tax
from 10 per cent to 5 per cent. Ford is anxious to repair the damage of its
February sales performance, when its new-car sales plunged 30.3 per cent.
One leading carmaker said last night that the Ford move was 'a clear sign of
distress marketing', while Rover claimed that its priority was 'to maintain
an orderly market' so that resale values could be 'kept sound'.
Vauxhall and Rover said they were considering the Ford move, but Rover added
that it did 'not envisage a specific response to Ford's actions'. Ford
triggered a price war in July in a failed attempt to stimulate the market.
It was followed by rivals including Vauxhall, Volkswagen and Fiat.
Ford said its additional price cuts averaging 3.5 per cent to 4 per cent
would affect about 30 per cent of its sales volume.
The most significant reduction has been made in the price of its cheapest
model, the 1.1 litre 3-door Fiesta, where the pre-tax list price has been
cut by 10.5 per cent.
Along with the car tax reduction, the price of this model has been reduced
by 14.1 per cent from Pounds 7,250 to Pounds 6,230.
Part of the reduction has been achieved by cutting the dealer margin for
this model from 15 per cent to 10 per cent. This will reduce the scope for
bargaining over discounts between dealers and customers, a pattern set by
Vauxhall last autumn.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920312

