FT922-4551

FT  05 JUN 92 / Summit's arch-demon waves a sharp trident


   By DAVID LASCELLES and CHRISTINA LAMB


It was, Bill Reilly admitted, 'a character-building experience'.
The head of the US Environmental Protection Agency was the summit's
arch-enemy before he even arrived in Rio because of the US's obstructive
attitude towards the treaties. His eventual appearance on Wednesday
unleashed a barrage of hostile comment.
But the youthful Mr Reilly rose to the occasion with a highly accomplished
performance. He appeared at a press conference wearing a green flecked tie
and bright green handkerchief and fielded sniping questions for the better
part of an hour.
Reilly cuts a good public figure. He has well-chiselled looks, a fluent
tongue and a phenomenal memory for facts and figures. Every answer he gave
contained some supporting nugget, ranging from the amount of waste produced
per capita in the US (4lb a day), to the volume of US aid compared to other
countries.
But for many people it was also a poignant performance. He was, after all,
once president of the US arm of the World Wide Fund for Nature and is widely
believed to have accepted the EPA job because he believed George Bush's
claim to be the 'environmental president'. That has not turned out to be the
case. And Mr Reilly now has to defend the record of an Administration with
which he must feel deeply at odds.
The Earth Summit produced its first result yesterday - a treaty to limit
greenhouse gases which produce climate changes. But many admitted it fell
short of expectations.
President Fernando Collor of Brazil, the first to sign, said the complexity
of the negotiations had reduced its scope, though he stressed it was an
important beginning.
The treaty obliges signatories to come up with plans to limit greenhouse gas
emissions, but it does not, as first hoped, impose an actual duty on them to
reduce emissions.
However a group of 'like-minded countries' led by Austria, Switzerland and
Norway is trying to win support for a side declaration that would impose an
actual target of reducing emissions to their 1990 levels by the year 2000.
The treaty requires ratification by 50 countries. No summit participant has
said it will not sign, so it is certain to come into force.
ONE of the less welcome guests at the Earth Summit is Mr Michel Camdessus,
managing director of the IMF. Brazil failed to meet the first quarter
targets of its latest IMF accord in April and looks unlikely to meet the
next quarter with inflation remaining stubbornly at 20 per cent a month.
Economy Ministry officials are vainly hoping that in the interests of a
better climate Mr Camdessus will politely not mention the matter and instead
restrict his interest in things green to trees and plants.
Referring to Mr Camdessus as 'the Grim Reaper,' one official said yesterday
'if he starts talking economics he could really wreck the party.'
Brazil, which has never taken the second drawdown of an IMF loan, still
barefacedly insists 'we only sign agreements we can keep' - perhaps
something the UN conference organisers should bear in mind as Brazil rushes
to be first to sign summit treaties.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920605

