FT921-15531

FT  09 JAN 92 / Tory prospects in tatters: Scotland will show its wrath at
the polls


   By JAMES BUXTON


It is a cruel political irony that the privatised British Steel, one of the
proudest creations of the Conservative government, should have delivered
what could be the coup de grace to Tory election hopes in Scotland.
As it prepared to shut the remains of its Ravenscraig complex two years
ahead of schedule, Mr Lang, the Scottish secretary, was left with a
difficult task. All he could do yesterday was to promise more funds and an
enterprise zone for the regeneration of Lanarkshire, and ask, almost
certainly in vain, that British Steel explain to the Scottish public the
full commercial reasoning behind its decision.
For the past four years ministers could at least parade the commitment which
the Conservatives extracted from British Steel chairman Sir Robert Scholey
in 1987 that steel-making at Ravenscraig would continue to 1994, 'subject to
market conditions'. Now Sir Robert has ruthlessly swept aside that slender
piece of the government's protection from the wrath of Scottish voters.
Many Scots will see the shutdown as the inevitable result of Tory economic
policies which, in their eyes, have undermined Scottish manufacturing. More
broadly, it will reinforce their conviction that the government does not
care about Scotland.
This perception has grown over the past 10 years. But Ravenscraig owes its
survival through the 1980s to the Tories. In the early part of the decade,
Sir George Younger, the then Scottish secretary, insisted that the
state-owned British Steel did not close it. The plant always posed a dilemma
for the party, however: it was not on a coastal site for easy transport and
most of its main Scottish steel users, such as car makers, had disappeared.
Its supporters refused to recognise these inescapable facts.
Labour politicians, trade unionists and the Scottish media invested the
plant with a symbolism it never merited, often based on muddled and romantic
thinking of the kind expressed in 1990 by the Scottish rock singer Pat Kane,
who said: 'If Scotland wants to have a 21st century manufacturing future it
needs to have a Ravenscraig. It is regarded as a link to our manufacturing
past.'
That link was shattered in May 1990 when Sir Robert declared that
Ravenscraig's hot strip mill was to close. The Conservatives at last began
trying to convince the Scots that they should look to an economic future
beyond steel-making. Consultants who were asked to examine the options for
steel-making in Scotland, stated bleakly that there were virtually none.
In the past year Scottish politicians have at last been able to discuss the
future of Lanarkshire after steel without automatically being accused of
defeatism. The mood among steel workers and local people in Motherwell
yesterday was one of dignified resignation, unlike the anger of May 1990.
For Mr Lang that is about the only favourable thing to emerge. The boost to
the Tories' standing in the Scottish opinion polls which followed the
departure of Mrs Margaret Thatcher in November 1990 has almost completely
evaporated and the party is now back at about 20 per cent.
The disastrous performance of the party in the Kincardine and Deeside
by-election in the autumn, where a Tory majority of 2,000 was turned into a
Liberal Democrat one of almost 8,000, was a reminder that the party is
identified as the English party, imposing unpopular measures such as the
poll tax that only a minority of Scots voted for. Since then, the party has
been on the ropes.
Opinion polls suggest that the Tories could lose five of the nine Scottish
seats (out of a total of 72) which they still hold. Mr Lang could lose his
seat in Galloway.
By his timing Sir Robert has ensured that it is the Tories who will take
almost all the blame for Ravenscraig; an incoming Labour government would
find little left to save, a point that may have occurred to him. Since it
was the Conservatives under Prime Minister Harold Macmillan who created
Ravenscraig, that may be poetic justice.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920109

