FT924-11528

FT  26 OCT 92 / Council tax estimates soar to an average of Pounds 600


   By ALISON SMITH and RALPH ATKINS


ESTIMATES FOR the average council tax bill for a home in the middle property
band have soared and could exceed Pounds 600 when the tax is introduced next
April, senior Whitehall officials believe.
The figure is higher than ministers were suggesting even in private earlier
this year, and is above the Pounds 400 average figure produced by the
Department of the Environment last year.
The new, one-per-household tax, which will replace the poll tax on
individuals, is understood to have suffered in the current fierce contest as
public spending on local government is cut in favour of capital projects
which would boost jobs.
Environment ministers are keen to play down the importance of notional
average figures for the council tax, but the Pounds 600-plus figure is a
sign that bills are set to rise faster than expected in areas such as London
and the south-east where house prices were above national averages when
valuations were carried out.
Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary, is said to have asked Mr John
Major to protect spending to support the tax, but was told the prime
minister would not intervene.
Ministers know that the new tax will create a vocal protest group of those
who were better off under the poll tax. But they are convinced that the
structure of the tax - which provides discounts to single people, and
exemptions for those on very low incomes - makes it likely to be more
popular than the poll tax.
Mr Howard hinted yesterday that support for the new tax had become a victim
of the tough spending round discussions.
Speaking on BBC television's On the Record, Mr Howard said that whether to
give his department the Pounds 2bn it has been estimated it would need to
soften the impact of the new local tax system was one of the 'very difficult
decisions' faced by ministers on the public spending committee.
He wanted to ensure that the government made 'the right judgment, the right
balance', about the council tax and projects such as London's Jubilee Line
extension and roadbuilding.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, has reinforced his efforts to
secure the extension, but the Treasury is adamant that it should not get
priority.
Mr Michael Portillo, Treasury chief secretary, is to hold an informal
meeting today with senior members of the Tory backbench finance committee
and with Tory MPs on the all-party Treasury committee to discuss public
spending in advance of the autumn statement.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921026

