FT921-15452

FT  10 JAN 92 / Personal View: More power needed in electricity competition


   By DAVID NEWBERY


The extensive restructuring of the English and Welsh electricity supply
industry in March 1990 was meant to make the industry more competitive. With
growing public antipathy to the replacing of public monopolies with private
ones - as with BT and British Gas - the government was under pressure to
design a more competitive industry.
Now, against the wishes of the Central Electricity Generating Board, England
and Wales have 12 private regional distribution companies, two private
generating companies and the publicly owned Nuclear Electric. The
distributors jointly own the National Grid Company (NGC), which in turn owns
the transmission system and co-ordinates the generators. The regional
distribution companies are closely regulated by the Office of Electricity
Regulation, as they are natural monopolies, but the two private generators,
National Power and PowerGen, are not regulated.
Together with Nuclear Electric, they submit price bids one day ahead for
each power station to the NGC controller. The controller computes the
least-cost combination of stations to meet demand, informs the companies
which plants to hold ready for despatch and then, on the day, despatches
power to meet the varying demand. The 'pool' price for each half hour is
then normally the price of the most expensive plant to be called on to meet
demand in that period.
This practice of generators bidding against each other was presumably the
argument for not regulating them, as they would be induced to undercut one
another. If they failed to compete aggressively, new suppliers might enter
the market with combined cycle gas turbine plants. These are cheap, quick to
build, and more efficient than existing coal and oil-fired generators.
Upon privatisation, the generators were fitted with a set of contracts for
the supply of coal to the generators, and for the sale of electricity to the
distributors. While these contracts remain in force, they have a powerful
effect on electricity prices; in the first few months of privatisation, pool
prices were rather lower than expected. Recently, however, as some of these
contracts have expired, prices have edged up by about 20 per cent since last
year, although demand and fuel prices are both lower.
What is likely to happen when the generators come to renew their contracts?
What should we expect to happen to the price of electricity in 1993, when
the present price caps are relaxed? Electricity consumers are unlikely to
sign contracts at prices much above pool prices, and generators would be
imprudent to sign contracts below the expected pool price, so future
contract prices are likely to approximate the expected pool price.
To predict the pool price without contracts, we have built a simple model*
of the pool to see whether the generators are compelled to behave
competitively, or whether they can exercise market power.
At low levels of demand, both generators will bid close to fuel costs to
ensure that their base-load plant is despatched, but at higher levels of
demand it becomes profitable to bid a price that leaves a larger margin over
fuel costs. In periods of very high demand, National Power, the largest
generator, knows that the demand cannot be satisfied by the remaining
suppliers, and so it has a monopoly in this residual market. If National
Power bids in its more costly plant at a very high price, it may not be
called until demand is high, but then it will be highly profitable.
PowerGen, observing this, can afford to raise its bids. The pool will be in
equilibrium if each generator has no wish to change its bids, given the
schedule of bids of the other. In such an equilibrium, raising bids would
mean lower supply and profits, while reducing bids would mean higher supply
but lower prices and profit.
What about the threat that such high prices would tempt new generators to
enter? This does reduce the temptation for the generators to raise their
prices. The best strategy for National Power and PowerGen results in an
average pool price about 35 per cent above variable costs, but this is still
sufficiently high to attract some 8GW of entry by 1994. At these prices,
National Power and PowerGen together have an operating surplus more than
twice as high as in their last year under public ownership.
How might the privatisation have been better managed? If the fossil-fuelled
stations had been divided into five equal-sized companies, each would have
had a well-balanced set of power stations.
The effect would have been dramatic. The incentive to raise prices would
have been almost eliminated and, looking to 1994, competition between the
five would have kept prices low enough for no extra entry to take place. The
average price in 1994 would have been 10 per cent lower than with the
duopoly, but the main saving would have been on the extra investment cost of
unnecessary new capacity. The country as a whole would be Pounds 250m better
off each year. The profits of the generators would be slightly lower (by
about Pounds 100m), but the consumers benefit by Pounds 350m.
Put starkly, there are two ways to increase competition. The best way would
have been to create an initially competitive industry. Failing that, entry
by new companies will achieve similar results, but at the cost of
unnecessary spare capacity and higher prices. If our predictions are
correct, consumers have further price rises to look forward to as contracts
are renegotiated, all because of a failure to get the original structure
correct.
*Competition in the British Electricity Spot Market, by Richard Green and
David Newbery, Centre for Economic Policy Research, 6 Duke of York Street,
London SW1Y 6LA.
The author is director of the Department of Applied Economics at Cambridge
University.

The Financial Times


London Page 13 Illustration (Omitted).

920110

