FT924-11295

FT  27 OCT 92 / World Trade News: Shipowners face higher insurance premiums


   By RICHARD LAPPER


INTERNATIONAL shipowners can expect to pay increased insurance premiums next
year, as the industry struggles to keep pace with rising claims.
The UK P&I Club, one of the world's biggest marine insurers, which insures
the liabilities of over a quarter of the world's fleets, said yesterday it
expected premiums to increase on average by 15 per cent in 1993 compared
with a 20 to 25 per cent increase this year.
The Club, which is owned by the 800 fleets whose insurance it provides, has
also warned its members that it may be forced to place a limit on the level
of insurance cover it offers, although this would only occur if the world's
15 other P&I clubs agreed to follow suit.
The UK Club insures the liabilities of more than 800 fleets including such
household names as Shell, BP, Chevron, Hapag Lloyd, Mitsui and Sealand. It
covers such risks as pollution, damage to other ships and marine
installations and bodily injury to passengers and crew. Traditionally this
level of cover has been unlimited.
Lloyd's of London and a number of European and US companies provide an
entirely separate market for the insurance of marine hulls and machinery.
But Mr Stephen James, director of Thomas Miller P&I, which manages the UK
Club, said increases were less than he had feared at the beginning of the
year.
'Claims are beginning to level off mainly because of the slowdown in the
shipping industry,' said Mr James. 'Claims are continuing to rise but not at
the same alarming rate as in recent years.'
The club expects overall claims from 1991 to total Dollars 382m (Pounds
234.3m). Claims have risen steadily during the 1980s, topping Dollars 420m
in 1990, the worst year in the club's history. Oil spills, especially in the
US, have been a particular cause for concern. Clean-up costs after the Exxon
Valdez tanker accident in Alaska in 1989 amounted to over Dollars 2bn,
although the P&I clubs were able to offset the bulk of claims through
reinsurance.
Insurance premiums, which can account typically for about 5-10 per cent of a
fleet's costs, have risen at a rate averaging 3 per cent above inflation
over the last decade. Premiums for P&I cover were now generally higher than
those for hull and machinery. Insurance represents the biggest item of
expenditure after fuel.
UK P&I Club is also stepping up its efforts to improve the quality of
management on board ships to reduce accidents and potential claims. A number
of club members have been expelled because their safety and management
standards have failed to measure up.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921027

