FT921-1496

FT  24 MAR 92 / International Company News: Finmeccanica deal produces
indifference - Reaction to the latest example of Italy's privatisation
strategy


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


HAVING sold its Cementir cement operation and further diluted its
telecommunications interests through convertible bond issues, Italy's giant
IRI state holding company has turned to an outright flotation to muster
funds for cash-hungry subsidiaries.
The candidate this time is Finmeccanica, the holding company for most of
IRI's engineering interests. So far, the stock market has reacted with
caution to the latest example of the Italian government's strategy on
privatisation.
Milanese brokers gave Mr Giulio Andreotti, Italy's premier, a cool reception
when he visited the bourse last week just one day after the Finmeccanica
scheme was unveiled. Their reaction stemmed from cynicism about the
government's privatisation policy in general and indifference to the deal in
particular.
Many dealers are bitter that privatisation, Italian style, has been
disappointing so far. Powerful vested interests among state companies'
managements and the desire of politicians to keep their hands on the strings
have meant that flotations have involved minority stakes or just slight
dilutions of the state's entrenched majorities.
Even when more than 50 per cent of a state-owned company has changed hands,
as in the case of Cementir, the transaction has been conducted via an
auction, by-passing the bourse. To make matters worse, the Cementir deal
took place just days before a new law came into effect protecting the rights
of minority shareholders. Had the deal been postponed, the buyer, a Rome
building group, would have had to offer small shareholders the same generous
terms it bid to gain IRI's controlling interest.
The Finmeccanica deal will do little to diminish brokers' scepticism about
privatisation. Under the complex terms, Finmeccanica will be floated via a
reverse takeover by Sifa, a stock market-listed property and financial
services subsidiary. That will be followed by a two-stage capital increase,
with the eventual target of having 40 per cent of Finmeccanica's capital on
the stock exchange.
Unless the pricing is unusually generous, the deal will do little to excite
the market. Some of Finmeccanica's businesses, like the troubled Alenia
aerospace concern and Elsag Bailey, a precision engineering outfit, are
already listed. Others, like the Franco-Italian SGS Thomson electronics
joint venture, would find it difficult to attract private-sector capital on
their own.
The mixture of Finmeccanica's interests is one reason why analysts do not
share politicians' enthusiasm about the proposed float. Selective investors
can already buy into the group through the quoted subsidiaries. And if
raising money is the priority, why not list Ansaldo, Finmeccanica's heavy
engineering arm, which is the only big part of the group not already quoted,
ask some analysts? As matters stand, only its Ansaldo Trasporti subsidiary
has a listing.
The practice of floating both a public-sector holding company and its
subsidiaries is not new in Italy. Both STET, the IRI-owned
telecommunications holding, and its leading operating units like SIP and
Italcable are traded on the market.
But the telecommunications set-up is easier to justify than that now planned
for engineering. STET's quotation dates back longer. Analysts point out that
buying shares in STET gives an investor a proxy for the entire Italian
telecoms sector from manufacturing to operating utilities. The same can
hardly be said for Finmeccanica.
The company has thoroughly restructured its activities since the days when
it was best known for its loss-making Alfa Romeo cars operation, sold to
Fiat in 1986. Finmeccanica has invested heavily, partly through purchases
abroad, in high-tech businesses such as Elsag Bailey and Esaote Biomedica, a
small bio-technology operation also due to be quoted.
Yet, despite its acquisitions, not all of Finmeccanica is flourishing.
Alenia, formed in December 1990 from the merger of Finmeccanica's Aeritalia
aerospace unit and Selenia, the defence electronics subsidiary of STET, has
run into heavy turbulence following the dive in the civilian and military
aerospace business. Earnings last year shrank to L56bn (Dollars 44m),
forcing the company to cut its dividend for the second time running.
Although Alenia is now starting to slim down, the outlook is not rosy.
Ansaldo, which had sales of L2,372bn in 1990, may now be faring somewhat
better, having returned to profit in 1990 after its nuclear electricity
generating operation was knocked for six by Italy's 1987 referendum against
nuclear power. However, the group is still suffering from the economic
downturn which has affected the world's big engineering and contracting
concerns.
Even the legacy of Alfa Romeo lives on. One reason for Finmeccanica's
current need to raise cash is to repay IRI L615bn, plus interest, which the
European Commission says it gave in illegal subsidies to the cars group
while still owned by Finmeccanica.
The repayment explains why Finmeccanica posted a L525bn group loss for 1991,
compared with net profits of L119.6bn in 1990. Sales rose by 14 per cent to
L10,966bn last year, but even after stripping out extraordinaries, the ratio
of net profits to sales of 1.5 per cent in 1991 is hardly stunning.
Meanwhile net financial liabilities jumped by almost 17 per cent to L4,862bn
 -representing 44 per cent of turnover. Sceptics say Finmeccanica's argument
that the high capital content of its activities dictates a lengthy pay-back
period can also be used as a cover for poor results.
A marked improvement in operating earnings showed Finmeccanica may now be
getting to grips with some of its problems. Next year will also see the
arrival of the first tranche of the L1,025bn due from Fiat under the terms
of the Alfa Romeo sale. The total is payable, interest free, in installments
over the next five years. If Finmeccanica could offer terms like that to its
future shareholders, there might be more of a rush to buy its stock.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920324

