FT924-5994

FT  24 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Historic building experts to plan
work - Commons row over liability for repair costs fo up to Pounds 60m after
Windsor Castle fire


   By RICHARD EVANS


HISTORIC-building and art experts are to meet shortly to make preliminary
plans for the restoration of the castle's damaged state apartments. They are
expected to report within a month.
The extent of the damage will possibly take weeks to establish, as the
structure has to be inspected, and rescued and lost pictures and furnishings
checked against the castle's inventory.
First priority will be to put a temporary roof over the burnt-out sections
to keep out rain, dampness and frost that could further affect masonry and
timbers weakened by the fire and the thousands of gallons of water pumped on
the blaze.
A number of organisations will be involved, including the National Heritage
Department, which will be responsible for paying for repairs to the
structure; English Heritage as the historical and technical experts; and the
royal household as occupiers.
According to English Heritage, which will play a big role in advising on the
form restoration should take, the building should be allowed to dry
naturally rather than by using industrial heaters, which might harm
surviving timbers.
The most likely judgment is that the state apartments should be returned to
the condition they were in before the fire, based on the wealth of archive
evidence available.
That will require a pool of skilled labour, particularly carpenters and
plasterers, either from specialist builders or individual craftsmen. Several
building companies specialise in historical restoration and retain teams of
craftsmen. One, Sussex-based James Longley, won the contract at Hampton
Court palace, damaged by fire in 1986, in open tender. English Heritage also
maintains teams of specialists.
Sir Geoffrey de Bellaigue, director of the royal collection, has reported to
the Queen that the greatest damage was to the fabric of the castle.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921124

