FT923-10922

FT  28 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Opting for the quiet life


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


RESIDENTS IN the tax-haven of St Helier have devised an alternative tour for
curious visitors. On the left, they say, is the house where Guinness money
changed hands, on the right Polly Peck and down the road, the bank where
Brinks Mat gold finds a home.
The latest addition to the tour is Maxwell Chambers, home of Bryant & Co.
These small accountancy offices have sparked a Serious Fraud Office
investigation into a possible share support scheme in at least two quoted
companies - Richmond Oil and Gas and Butte Mining.
Bryant & Co was once a thriving firm, looking after the needs of hundreds of
off-shore clients. Yet when police raided the premises in April, they walked
into the Marie Celeste. Just a pile of unopened mail and thousands of papers
cramming numerous filing cabinets.
The local fraud office is still puzzled as to how the office came to be
deserted.
One of the few men who can answer that question is Mr Kelvin Myles, Bryant's
burly office manager since 1989. He took over the day-to-day running of the
business after the death of proprietor Mr Peter Bryant and the departure of
a fellow manager.
In the months preceding the raid, however, Mr Myles gave up his Jersey
career for a quiet life running a fishing tackle shop in the Republic of
Ireland. He, his family, their Bentley, Corvette and Jaguar now live in
peaceful obscurity in the tiny village of Danore, outside Drogheda.
Standing on the steps of his Pounds 70,000 home - a Costa del Sol
construction sited oddly among the cattle fields of Louth - Mr Myles refused
to answer the question preoccupying the police. Nor would he comment on his
role in the London flotation of Richmond Oil & Gas.
Yet it is clear from documents that Mr Myles did have a legitimate part to
play. Cheques made out to Richmond, totalling several million pounds, were
signed in his distinctive scrawl.
Letters from Richmond, demanding repayment of Pounds 12m in January 1990,
were addressed to him as a director of Oakwood Management Enterprises.
When asked about Oakwood, however, Mr Myles would only say that he had
'heard of it'.
Whatever the case, it is clear that Mr Myles has more pressing matters on
his mind. Down the road from the Myles hacienda, patrons in the local pub
are sure of it. 'Two hundred thousand pounds worth of cars,' said one with
an ironic grin, 'and not one of them is even working.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920728

