FT921-15325

FT  10 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Kick-starting global growth


OF THE plethora of initiatives dreamed up by Japanese and US policy-makers
over the last few days, their joint strategy for world growth is actually
rather tame. Ignore the froth: the world economy is not on the verge of a
depression, and panic measures by worried governments would probably do more
harm than good. Both the US and Japan have already taken the necessary steps
to ensure that their economies will grow in 1992; the 'package' contains
nothing new.
It is the growth-starved countries of western Europe, not the US or Japan,
that need stimulus. It is these countries which are desperately seeking
policies for low-inflationary growth this year. Judged by the negative
European reaction to Mr David Mulford's pleas for them to join the
pro-growth chant, he could be forgiven for thinking that growth in Europe
has become a dirty word.
The US Treasury under-secretary's pleas are nothing new. Washington has been
trying to persuade the rest of the group of seven industrialised countries
to cut interest rates, and use fiscal policy to reflate the world economy,
for the best part of a year. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve has been
practising what the administration has preached. A succession of interest
rate cuts has reduced US real rates to below 1 per cent.
The US has little room to manoeuvre a fiscal reflation. The joint communique
does confirm that a pre-election US tax package will be announced later this
month. But the size of the US fiscal deficit, and the risk that relaxing
policy might actually raise US long rates, mean that the package will
largely consist of pre-election lollipops.
Play along
Japan has so far been the only country willing to play along with the US.
Its monetary policy has eased steadily over the past year, with the latest
cut in the discount rate coming just before Mr Bush arrived in Tokyo.
Predictable politics; but also precisely the right policy for Japan. Yet
once again, the communique says little new about Japanese policy. The
promise to ease fiscal policy in 1992 is merely the modestly expansionary
budget package announced in December. With a projected general government
budget surplus of around 2 per cent next year, Japan certainly has room to
ease further if it wishes to.
Crude bashing
If it is Europe, not the world, that needs a strategy for economic growth,
crude bashing of Germany, or more particularly the Bundesbank, are not the
answer. High German short-term interest rates, to curb German wage
inflation, have raised the real interest rates of the members of the
European exchange rate mechanism to choking proportions. But the Bundesbank
is no more required to take account of this wider, European impact of its
policies than other ERM countries are required meekly to follow its lead.
One option they do have is to call for an upward realignment of the D-Mark.
But this poses a difficult dilemma. It would probably deliver higher rather
than lower interest rates outside Germany because of the risk that it would
happen again. But, if large enough, it would ease inflationary pressures by
squeezing Germany's export sector, thereby allowing German rates to fall
faster.
Alternatively, a tighter German fiscal policy would further squeeze German
domestic demand, thereby allowing an easier monetary policy. It is Mr Helmut
Kohl, not Mr Helmut Schlesinger, who needs to be lectured on how to be a
good European. Nor is there any good reason why fiscal consolidation in
Germany should not be combined with offsetting fiscal expansion in the rest
of Europe. Certainly France and the UK, though not Italy, have sufficiently
low levels of public debt and budget deficits to afford more public
investment or lower taxes aimed at stimulating private investment.
There is a further element which should be included in any growth strategy.
The failure of the Uruguay Round would do at least as much as slow growth to
raise 'the spectre of world protectionism' that the communique fears. Both
Mr Bush and Europe's farm ministers should act on this before it is too
late.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920110

