FT921-14130

FT  17 JAN 92 / International Company News: Nokia surprises with choice of
new chief


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


   STOCKHOLM


NOKIA, the leading Finnish technology group, has appointed Mr Jorma Ollila,
the 41-year-old head of the company's mobile phones division, as president.
He takes on the top job at once.
He will also become chief executive and chairman on June 1 with the
retirement of Mr Simo Vuorilehto, aged 61, from those positions. By
combining the two senior positions Nokia will ensure Mr Ollila becomes a
powerful head of the company.
Mr Ollila, who has run Nokia's mobile phone division for the past two years,
is seen as a surprising choice. The decision has precipitated the
resignation of 42-year-old Mr Kalle Isokallio who, as the company's chief
operating officer and president since January 1990, had been widely tipped
to take the top job.
However, the board has been impressed by Mr Ollila's ability in transforming
the performance of Nokia's mobile phones division, which accounts for about
17 per cent of company sales. It has turned into the one positive business
area for the company, which will make a loss this year.
While other divisions suffered declining sales in the first eight months,
mobile phones enjoyed 20 per cent growth and a 50 per cent expansion in
output.
When Mr Ollila was put in charge of the mobile phones business in February
1990 it was making an operating loss, but in his first year he increased
Nokia's net mobile phone sales by 33 per cent to FM2.3bn (Dollars 522m) and
expanded its production capacity by 65 per cent from its 1989 level.
Early last year Nokia acquired Technophone of the UK for Pounds 34m (Dollars
60.86m) in a deal that by bringing Europe's two largest cellular
phone-makers together turned Nokia into the world's second largest
manufacturer after Motorola of the US.
Last summer, Mr Ollila reached a FM400m agreement with Microtel
Communications of the UK to supply infrastructure and hand-portable phones
for a personal communications network in Britain.
Nokia's new president has only been with the company since 1985 when
appointed vice-president of its international operations and then spent
three years as the company's finance officer. Before joining Nokia he was
employed by Citibank where he was account manager in London for two years.
A noted Anglophile who was educated at the Atlantic College in Britain, Mr
Ollila is an engineer with economics degrees from the London School of
Economics and Helsinki University.
His financing and marketing expertise combined with his record with mobile
phones convinced the board he was the man to revive the company's fortunes
in the 1990s.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920117

