FT921-14100

FT  17 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Recovery stocks attract the buyers


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


HEAVY switching from the pharmaceuticals sector into cyclical stocks in the
UK stock market yesterday appeared to reflect growing confidence that the UK
economy will soon begin to recover from the recession. The trend was set
from the US but confidence received a further boost when three leading UK
home loan groups cut mortgage rates by just over half a point.
Equities continued to display volatility, however, and the FT-SE Index moved
between a 13.8 fall and a 12.3 gain before closing firmly, albeit well off
the top. While drug stocks were badly hit, there were substantial gains
among the banks, building and construction issues and the stores.
The final hour of trading saw London reacting to an erratic opening on Wall
Street which was down 11 Dow points in UK hours.
The final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,541.6, a net gain of 4.5. The
Index was distorted yesterday by substantial falls in such heavily weighted
stocks as Glaxo, which suffered one of its worst day's trading, and
SmithKline Beecham; between them, these two pharmaceuticals took nearly 12
points off the Footsie scale. Some Wall Street stocks were also left behind,
notably Reuters, the global financial data communications group, which gave
back some recent gains.
Fund managers were taking their substantial profits on pharmaceutical stocks
as analysts warned that the sector might have reached its peak for the near
term. Traders said that most of the cash raised by selling drug stocks was
put straight back into sectors now identified as recovery prospects.
Institutional business, which has been increasing this week, remained high
yesterday, with Seaq-recorded volume totalling 638.4m shares, against 673.6m
in the previous session. Stock Exchange statistics show that daily retail,
or customer, business in UK equities topped the Pounds 1bn mark in five out
of the past six trading sessions.
The cut in mortgage lending rates by the Abbey National, Halifax and
Nationwide, provided encouragement across the range of housebuilding and
construction stocks. It also helped the banking sector by offering some
relief for the weight of debt hanging over the customers of the high street
banks. Poor trading figures from TSB, the former Trustee Savings Bank, were
no surprise.
Store shares extended this week's gains, heartened both by the move towards
lower interest rates and the signs that the Budget, in March, may bring
reductions in personal taxation. Both moves are likely to put more money in
consumers' pockets.
Oil shares tended to lag behind the market and Lonrho continued to attract
nervous selling as the market awaits the trading news due this month.
Some market strategists expressed doubts about yesterday's apparent move
towards cyclical, or recovery stocks. An analyst at a leading UK investment
bank commented that while such moves might be rational in the US, where
interest rates are now historically low, it was less easy to justify them in
the high interest rate environment of the UK.
The market paid little heed to the disclosure that domestic unemployment
reached a four-year high in November. Rising unemployment this year has been
widely predicted by City analysts.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

920117

