FT924-12007

FT  22 OCT 92 / Capital body plans to boost London pride


   By RICHARD EVANS


A PARTNERSHIP between the private and public sectors aimed at maintaining
and enhancing the reputation of London as a world-class city was launched
yesterday.
London First aims to harness leadership and management skills, encourage
investment, improve the quality of services and boost civic pride in the
capital. It seeks to make up for the lack of a strategic body with
responsibility for London.
Behind the launch is the belief that more effort is needed from both the
public and the private sectors to promote London to ensure it can meet
growing competition for trade and tourism from New York, Tokyo, Paris,
Berlin, Frankfurt and a host of other cities. Its first programmes will
focus on education and training, transport, economic development and the
quality of life.
The new organisation will work closely with London Forum, a private-sector
body announced by the government in July to promote London internationally
and to expand the capital's role as a centre for tourism and culture. Core
funding for both bodies will come from the private sector.
Sir Allen Sheppard, chairman and group chief executive of leisure group
Grand Metropolitan, is to be chairman of both organisations, and to ensure a
consistency of approach they will share a common executive committee chaired
by Mr Stephen O'Brien, executive vice-chairman of Business in the Community,
which promotes links between companies and local communities.
Sir Allen said that the lack of a strategic body for London had generated an
important debate on how best to maintain the quality of London's living and
working environment and to secure its status as a world capital.
He added: 'This debate has led to the establishment of the two separate
initiatives of London Forum, which will concentrate on promoting London, and
London First, which will concentrate on making London promotable.
'London First will provide the much-needed strategic framework and will act
as a catalyst for the many initiatives already under way. My role as
chairman of both bodies will be to ensure that the two organisations work
together closely and effectively in pursuing their respective objectives.'
A further link between the two organisations is Sir Brian Wolfson, chairman
of leisure group Wembley, who has been appointed as London First's deputy
chairman and a member of London Forum.
Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary, welcomed the initiative, calling
it 'a new boost for London'. He supported the proposal to increase the
capital's profile overseas with a campaign in north America, Japan and
Europe.
London First has no political affiliation. It has support from more than 40
companies, the Confederation of British Industry, London Tourist Board,
Business in the Community, London Chamber of Commerce & Industry, and the
London Training and Enterprise Councils.
The four areas chosen for the initial studies will be addressed by strategy
teams led by the deputy chairmen and deputy chairwoman of London First.
They are Dr John Ashworth, director of the London School of Economics, who
will focus on education and training, Mr Peter Foy, a senior partner of
McKinsey & Co (transport), Mr Stuart Hampson, deputy chairman of the John
Lewis Partnership (economic development), and Dr Anna Mann, managing
director of the Whitehead Mann Group (quality of life).
The intention is to draw on the models of leadership teams developed in the
US, and by Business in the Community and the CBI in the UK.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921022

