FT923-10686

FT  29 JUL 92 / Plea to nations for temporary retreats: UN conference on
Yugoslav refugee crisis opens today in Geneva


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS, ROBERT MAUTHNER and LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


THE 31 countries attending a United Nations conference in Geneva on refugees
from the former Yugoslavia will be urged today to offer 'temporary
protection' to those fleeing to neighbouring states.
Refugees needed to be given temporary refuge and ought not to be put through
the normal political asylum interrogation procedure, Mrs Sadako Ogata, high
commissioner for refugees, said in an interview with the Financial Times.
Germany was continuing to urge other EC states yesterday to agree on refugee
quotas, in order to share the burden of supporting those trying to flee the
fighting. Mr Klaus Kinkel, the German foreign minister, said every effort
had to be made to house refugees in more countries across Europe, not simply
in those closest to the fighting.
However, Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, and his French counterpart,
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, backed a local solution to the crisis, saying the 'best
answer' was to deal with the problem on Yugoslav soil.
UN officials are hoping that EC wrangling over burden-sharing will not
detract from the main aims of the one-day Geneva conference, to be attended
by ministers and top officials. These are to mobilise international support
for the humanitarian effort and prod governments towards finding a lasting
political settlement.
In addition to aiding those forced to leave their homes, the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees is trying to get relief supplies to more than
850,000 people in Sarajevo and three other Bosnian towns - Bihac, Tuzla and
Gorazde - under siege by Serbian irregulars.
Talks continued in London yesterday between leaders of Bosnia's warring
factions. But hopes of a breakthrough were fading, diplomats said, as
Bosnia's foreign minister declared he would not negotiate while the streets
of his republic were littered with unburied corpses.
At a meeting in Downing Street today, Mr Major is to discuss the whole
Yugoslav crisis with Mr Milan Panic, the new federal prime minister of the
rump Yugoslav federation.
The Serbian government is trying to push through a package of laws to
tighten President Slobodan Milosevic's grip on the republic, writes Laura
Silber in Belgrade.
Parliament yesterday debated a public order bill, under which, opposition
deputies say, a citizen could be sentenced to 20 days in prison for arguing
in public. The other laws aimed at clamping down on opposition range from
the government's planned takeover of Politika, the Belgrade daily, to a ban
on rallies.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920729

