FT924-6052

FT  24 NOV 92 / Current account deficithit by rise in imports


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


BRITAIN'S current account deficit widened last month to its highest figure
since April after the effects of sterling's devaluation led to a sharp rise
in the imports bill.
The rise in the deficit to Pounds 1.1bn from Pounds 891m in September came
as imports increased by 5 per cent between September and October to Pounds
10.2bn, the highest monthly figure since mid-1990.
The widening deficit was in spite of a strong rise in exports in October
compared with September, which indicates UK exporters are holding their own
in difficult trading conditions caused by the international economic
slowdown.
Much of the large rise in the value of imports was due to the 13 per cent
devaluation in the pound since it left the European exchange rate mechanism
in mid-September. This had the effect of pushing up unit prices of imports
by 3.4 per cent between September and October.
The increased imports suggest that underlying economic demand may be picking
up as part of a recovery. However, any large increases in the prices of
imports in the coming months could increase inflationary pressures, making
it more difficult for the government to keep to its target of maintaining
underlying inflation at beneath 4 per cent.
The increase in exports to a value of Pounds 9.1bn in October from Pounds
8.7bn in the previous month helped sentiment on the stock market, where a
burst of buying support saw the FT-SE 100 index of leading shares reach a
new trading high of 2,745.2. This beat the previous record established in
May shortly after the election.
Profit-taking and uncertainties on world currency markets saw the index lose
ground in late afternoon, to finish an overall 9.5 points down on the day at
2,722.9.
Britain's current account deficit decreased gradually during the early
stages of the two-year recession as demand for imports fell, but has
increased during recent months. The deficit fell to Pounds 6.3bn in 1991
from Pounds 17bn the previous year. In the first 10 months of this year, the
deficit has so far reached Pounds 9.7bn.
Details, Page 9
London stocks, Page 42

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921124

