FT924-925

FT  21 DEC 92 / UK Gilts: Hopes on inflation soften yields


   By PETER MARSH


YIELDS moved slightly downwards as gilt practitioners weighed the
contrasting signs about future inflation trends with the implications of the
large volume of funding expected over the next 12 months.
The welter of economic statistics published last week gave few further clues
about the degree to which Britain is emerging from recession. Though many
believe that a recovery will become established in the next six months,
there are few unambiguous signs about whether an upturn has started.
On balance, last week's data probably further encouraged the belief among
some UK investors that the next few months will be a good time for bond
purchases.
There were few indications that - once Christmas is over - people would
return to the shops in droves to push up consumer spending significantly.
Nor did the latest survey of manufacturing trends by the Confederation of
British Industry do much to encourage any thoughts that UK factories were
about to see a spurt in activity.
Lending by Britain's banks and building societies to the private sector fell
by Pounds 600m last month, reversing a strong Pounds 5.1bn increase in
October and adding to the general uncertainty about an upturn. November also
saw a bigger than expected increase of 41,000 in unemployment, bringing the
total to 2.91m.
The run of figures encouraged the view that inflationary pressures are
extremely fragile, and was probably behind the small drop in yields of about
10 basis points shown by most classes of gilts during the week in generally
thin trading.
Even though many believe inflationary pressures will exert themselves once a
recovery gets under way, on the basis of the recent evidence gilt yields
will continue to fall gradually over the next few weeks, with a
corresponding small increase in prices.
One factor expected to place a floor under yields is the Pounds 1bn or so of
gilts that the Bank of England will probably issue every month in the
1993-94 financial year, due to the need to finance increasing state
borrowing.
Mr John Shepperd, an economist at SG Warburgh Securities, wants the Bank to
re-examine its system of gilt auctions to enable this large amount of stock
to be sold as efficiently as possible, without leading to large drops in
gilt prices.
A reminder that demand for gilts in recent months has fallen among overseas
investors - even while UK investors have remained reasonably enthusiastic
about the instruments - came with news from the Central Statistical Office
that investment in UK stocks and securities by non-UK organisations in the
third quarter came to just Pounds 1.3bn.
This lowest quarterly figure since late 1990 was due largely to the big
fall-off in overseas purchases of gilts.
Meanwhile the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, in
comments last week about the UK economy, illustrated the uncertainties of
predicting the inflation pattern over the next year.
The 24-nation group said that 'inflation is projected to rise in the near
term' due to the effects of higher import prices arising from sterling's
devaluation. However, it is 'expected to recede again' given the large slack
in the economy.
Accordingly, the organisation expects inflation, as measured by the deflator
in growth of nominal gross domestic product, to climb from a low 3.9 per
cent in the second half of this year to a somewhat high 5.7 per cent in the
first half of next year.
On the OECD's projections, inflation would then fall by the end of 1994 to
roughly the current figure, with the numbers for the six-month periods
starting in the second half of 1993 being forecast at 4.6 per cent, 4 per
cent and 3.8 per cent respectively.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921221

