FT923-6494

FT  24 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: UK food makers


The traditional defensiveness of the entire UK food manufacturing sector has
taken a serious knock in the past couple of weeks. Stock market attention
has been focused mainly on Hillsdown - whose shares have collapsed by more
than a quarter since August 8 - yet there is barely a quoted company apart
from Unilever which remains unscathed by recent broker downgrades. Northern
Foods, Unigate, United Biscuits, and Ranks Hovis McDougall - a
representative enough sample from a peculiarly diverse industry - have all
underperformed the FT-A All Share Index by more than 10 per cent in the past
month.
The savagery in some analysts' pens has startled even experienced observers,
prompting suggestions that some of the latest estimates are wild and
possibly unduly pessimistic guesses. With many companies in their closed
reporting season, after all, the market would normally wait to see interim
numbers in September before making any substantial end-of-year profit
adjustments. One can also point to special factors behind the more
substantial falls: Unigate's vulnerability to imminent changes in the
methods of milk distribution by the Milk Marketing Board, Northern's and
UB's sensitivity to trends in the UK biscuits market, and the impact on RHM
of a tight harvest for bread milling wheat.
Even so, the market is understandably worried about postponement of economic
recovery beyond the important Christmas season, and growing evidence from
the high street that on top of lower prices for seasonal items food price
inflation generally has almost disappeared. That means manufacturing margins
will be under pressure from the retailers, notably for non branded products
or those where there are other suppliers. Sainsbury's tendency to purchase
chickens from France and Iceland's ability to source pizzas from Germany is
a reminder that supermarket buyers have become increasingly European.
Possibly the biggest threat, though, comes from the consumer in a long
recession. The discretionary element of the shopping basket, after all, has
grown bigger and bigger in the past 10 years as manufacturers sought to
widen their margins with higher added value products.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920824

