FT924-8032

FT  13 NOV 92 / People: Investing in links in the chain


Charles Lousada, who runs his own Bedford-based property company, has
stepped in to rescue the Invest in Britain Campaign, by temporarily
financing it and taking over as chairman. He replaces broadcaster David
Jacobs, who has been made vice-president.
The campaign, started in a bid by the current director Margaret Charrington
and her apple-growing husband to stem the flow of French Golden Delicious
into British supermarkets, is ten years old but had exhausted its voluntary
funding sources of donations from companies and individuals.
So Lousada, who is incensed at such things as the British propensity to
import bottled water, stepped in. He says he has for years been 'preaching
the gospel' of buying British, particularly as regards cars, to
acquaintances in Bedford; he himself drives a Range Rover and a Jaguar,
though confesses that he breaks the rules when indulging his passion for
flying small helicopters because of the plain lack of a suitably-sized
British product.
One of his first initiatives is to start a chain letter requesting donations
of Pounds 10 towards refloating the campaign. A chain letter? 'Yes, it is
slightly embarrassing,' he agrees. (Instructions to the sender include
telephoning an apology to the prospective recipient for making the contact
in the first place.) 'But we had to do something quite dramatic. And it is
working; total strangers are sending in money.'
Lousada, 54, founded his eponymous property company in 1969; he is also
non-executive chairman of The Imperial Bathroom Company, a manufacturer of
upmarket bathroom equipment, in which he controls 25 per cent of the shares.
*****
Sol Kerzner, chairman of Sun International and founder of Sun City, the
leisure and gambling resort in the South African homeland of Bophuthatswana,
is to open his latest creation next month. Lost City, adjacent to Sun City,
boasts the world's first man-made tropical rain forest and wave pools the
size of rugby fields.
Once Lost City is open, Kerzner intends to focus on Europe where he has said
he wants to build an attraction to rival Euro Disney. To strengthen its
European operations, Sun has appointed Roger Wharton (left) as European
sales and marketing director. With the company for 14 years, Wharton will be
based at the European headquarters at Henley on Thames.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921113

