FT924-6530

FT  20 NOV 92 / Arts: Garbarek and Scofield - Jazz


   By GARRY BOOTH


Unmistakeable for its frosted beauty, the usually melancholic music of the
Jan Garbarek Group took on full blizzard dimensions for the Festival of
Scandinavian Arts. Flaxen haired Eberhard Weber's eddying electro-bass and
Rainer Bruninghaus' gothic keyboards wrapped around Garbarek's saxophones
remain at the core. But the addition of Danish born Marilyn Mazur on
percussion and Norwegian singers Mari Boine and Agnes Buen Garnas expanded
and energised the outfit to exhilarating effect at the Barbican on Sunday.
Garbarek's lonesome and reedy bent soprano or his dissonant tenor can
insinuate eastern exoticism when taken with a tabla accompaniment (Ragas and
Sagas is his most recent offering on the ECM label). To hear his great
swirling anthemic arrangements of nordic joiks (sic) as in last year's I
Took Up The Runes is to hear the 45 year old Norwegian in his natural
setting, however.
The numbers, unannounced and improvised on at length, are based on simple
and even hooky folk tunes. Where some have empty spaces occasionally crossed
by Bruninghaus' cranky notes, carried by Weber's sonorously and
electronically interwoven bass lines, others swing densely with Mazur's
dynamic percussion as if for a snow bound calypso.
The re-introduction of singers - Garbarek has worked with both before - is
especially welcome, alongside the appointment of Mazur's dancing percussion.
Mari Boine was first on with a ringing and probably salutary tale set
cleanly against a flat synth background, Garbarek also piercing the gloom
occasionally on soprano.
Later Agnes Buen Garnas, stern but striking, belted out an ululating harmony
with Garbarek's shrill tenor, closing with an uplifting chant that suggested
a nordic muezzin.
In stark contrast to the wide open landscape of sound created by Garbarek's
group, American guitarist John Scofield's group sent his nervous neo-bop
tunes ricocheting around the Festival Hall on Monday. Teamed up with his
favourite saxophonist, burly Joe Lovano, bassist Dennis Irwin who crouches
over the upright and young drummer Bill Stewart, Scofield's absorbing and
sometimes Monk-ish technique is to tie up his melodies in knots.
In a selection of tunes taken from recent and forthcoming Blue Note
recordings, Lovano and Scofield exchanged solos jerkily, Irwin and Stewart
taking turns by rote. A new ballad, 'Easy For You', (the new album is Jazz
Camp) followed a bluesy theme, 'Since You Ask', Scofield beautifully teasing
out a romantic melody. 'Grace Under Pressure', the title track of the
current recording, closed with more knotty soloing from Sco', followed by
shading, as a bouncing Lovano picked up the lead.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921120

