FT921-519

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: A l'anglaise? Not in this city - A look at
the London restaurant scene for the best of British


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


AT 2.15pm four American tourists sit down at one of the communal dining
tables in Sweetings, the 100-year-old City restaurant. In deep southern
accents they order from an Italian waiter pints of Irish stout in silver
tankards and traditional British seafood - fish pie, salmon fishcakes and
smoked haddock with poached egg - which comes up from the kitchen on a
Dickensian 'dumb waiter'.
In the East End, just around the corner from a large mosque, in a former
synagogue hall is the Kosher Luncheon Club (instant membership 50p). This is
the last in the line of soup kitchens established in the 18th century to
feed a wave of Jewish refugees. Now with waitress service the food is
excellent and just as filling: bean and barley soup, fried fish and lokshen
pudding all for Pounds 9.
London is full of such gastronomic variety. A political safe haven, it
boasts German, Polish, Czech and Afghan restaurants; as a major port it
allowed Chinese sailors to jump ship and open their own restaurants in what
is now Docklands; as the centre of the British Empire it attracted cooks
specialising in the dishes of most Indian and Pakistani regions. There is
even an Australian restaurant. The oil crisis of the early 1970s was
wonderful news for lovers of Middle Eastern cuisine and at one time the
Fakhreldine, a Lebanese restaurant on Piccadilly was busier than Langan's,
London's most successful post-war restaurant.
During and after the 1950s came Italians, Spaniards and the French came
initially to work in the big hotels. It was however, not long before they
had opened their own trattorias and bistros as foreign holidays made foreign
food acceptable to the British. In the 1970s London was introduced to the
American hamburger and the Japanese sushi bar as the Japanese made London
their European business capital.
Is there is a nationality missing? Only one of significance. Where is the
British input into the London restaurant world?
Sadly, absent until late. For the past 150 years we have been only too
willing to abandon our culinary highspots to the good and the great so long
as they come from overseas: Alexis Soyer at the Reform Club; Auguste
Escoffier at the Ritz; Silvano Trompetto at the Savoy; and most recently,
the Roux brothers at Le Gavroche and the Waterside Inn.
But London has not made life easy for the restaurateur, whatever the
nationality. It is a hard profession but in the capital it requires almost a
streak of masochism. Take the case of one of the city's most successful
restaurants which, in spite of the recession, is looking to expand. It would
like to take over two adjacent shops, create an extra 20 jobs, spend Pounds
200,000 on capital works and risk a further Pounds 10,000 on its planning
application. It has, however, been told that it has little chance of success
 -the council will not condone a restaurant in place of a retail outlet.
It is part of a small restaurant empire which employs 90 in total and is
owned by a quintet of British managers and chefs. So too are almost all the
most currently successful London restaurants.
These restaurants have not only created a new social class in London - at
last, the esteemed British chef and restaurateur - but also threaten the
supremacy of their French counterparts. Today, London's top French
restaurants - L'Arlequin, Chez Nico, Le Gavroche and Tante Claire - find
their customers wanting to eat more simply and drink less expensive wine.
They are also beginning to lose customers to other rivals, hotel dining
rooms, where income from bedrooms can be used to bolster thin food profit
margins.
At the turn of the century London's leading restaurant writer, Colonel
Newnham-Davis, of the Pall Mall Gazette, ate most of his memorable meals -
seven courses and champagne - with a bill for two of under Pounds 3, at
Claridges, the Ritz, the Savoy or the Hyde Park. Their fame still lingers,
but today the most exciting food in London's hotels is to be found in places
which did not exist 100 years ago. Try Philip Britten's cooking at the
Capital, Bruno Loubet at the Four Seasons Inn on the Park, or David Chambers
at Le Meridien.
My ten leading London restaurants, in alphabetical order, with British chefs
and managers, are: Alastair Little, W1, 734-5183; Bibendum, SW3, 581-5817;
Bistrot 190, SW7, 581-5666; The Brackenbury, W6; 081-748 0107; Le Caprice,
SW1,629-2239; Clarke's, W8, 221-9225; Hilaire, SW7, 584 8993; Kensington
Place, W8; 727-3184, The Quality Chop House, EC1, 837-5093; The River Cafe,
W6, 381-8824.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920328

