FT921-15194

FT  11 JAN 92 / Arts: New Year in the City of Music - The start of
Birmingham's year long festival


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


FOR 1992 Birmingham has been designated Britain's City of Music, the
guinea-pig in the Arts Council's 'Arts 2000' project that intends to
spotlight a different region and a different art form each year until the
millennium. The accolade is being celebrated with 'Sounds like Birmingham',
a year-long festival designed to range across the spectrum from local
community-based performances to the most glamorous international visitors.
With the opening of Symphony Hall last spring and the continued prosperity
of the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra Birmingham had already placed
itself at the very centre of our concert life. The new year promises to show
just how the musical profile is to be rounded out, so that the goodies are
not confined to the juiciest programmes from Simon Rattle and the CBSO but
can offer a truly varied diet of events and, one hopes, set the pattern for
years to come. Certainly the omens look promising: in the first ten days of
January, while London music is still struggling to rouse itself from its
seasonal torpor, Symphony Hall has already staged a Rakhmaninov Festival
with Alexander Lazarev and the Bolshoy Symphony Orchestra and an account of
Schubert's Winterreise by Peter Schreier of memorable penetration and
intensity.
Russian orchestras are a very visible part of the hall's roster - the Moscow
State Orchestra visits next month, while the return of the St. Petersburg
Philharmonic is promised for a complete cycle of Tchaikovsky symphonies in
the autumn. The Bolshoy may not on the level of either of those orchestras
but its performances of Rakhmaninov, had spirit and, for good or bad,
lashings of local colour. The symphonies were coupled with three of the
concertos, played by an impressive trio of young soloists - Dmitry Alexeyev
played the Paganini Rhapsody, Mikhail Rudy the Second Concerto and Nikolay
Demidenko the Third.
I caught the second programme, in which Rudy gave an admirably fluent
performance, technically faultless yet surprisingly bland: there were few
idiosyncracies, and few fresh ideas; even a Chopin Nocturne offered as an
encore failed to reveal the expressive personality of this fascinatingly
gifted performer. Lazarev accompanied efficiently enough and his account of
the Second Symphony was similarly uncontroversial, if sometimes a little too
obviously excitable. The Bolshoy has the well-drilled, solid string sound
one has always associated with Russian orchestras and which the St
Petersburg orchestra delivers most thrillingly of all; less appealingly it
has vibrato-laden wind tone. Thin, watery horns may be an acquired taste,
but wavering clarinet intonation is nothing but a positive liability in the
slow movement of Rakhamnonov's Second. In such circumstances one was
grateful for Lazarev's shortcuts through its longueurs. Yet the performance
was rapturously received, and the concerts attracted evidently large,
enthusiastic audiences.
Schreier's recital on Thursday was less crowded, though all but the upper
galleries were full, and the hall managed to convey every detail of his
beautifully focussed sound and minutely studied performance with effortless
clarity. The bloom is starting to fade from his tone nowadays, and there are
indications that artfulness is replacing artlessness in what used to be one
of the most purely sung contemporary accounts of Winterreise.
He seems no longer willing to trust to purity of line and intonation alone
to make his points. Syllables are occasionally stressed to the point of
pushing them out of tune, while abrupt switches of vocal characterisation
and colour are reminders that this tenor is one of the finest Loges and
Mimes of our day. It holds together still because of the intelligence and
absolute security informing his performances; throughout the 24 songs
Schreier takes his listeners into a poetic world from which he never allows
them to escape. He was wonderfully supported here by Graham Johnson, tactful
and responsive by turn; it was in every respect an utterly compelling event.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920111

