FT921-14396

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Lee elected chairman of HK
Stock Exchange


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


HONG KONG'S broking community yesterday signaled its desire for a calmer
life when it unanimously elected Mr Charles Lee Yeh Kwong chairman of the
Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
Mr Lee, 55, is an independent member of the stock exchange's council, and
takes the helm after a tempestuous year which witnessed confrontation with
the Securities and Futures Commission, the colony's financial watchdog.
After a long battle, the SFC forced the exchange to change from a club run
for the benefit of small Chinese brokers to one that represented a broader
range of broking interests and the public.
One council member said after the meeting that it was reassuring that Mr Lee
was elected unanimously. He had shown that he could garner support from both
the independent members of the council and, importantly, from the local
Chinese brokers.
After his election last night Mr Lee struck a conciliatory note. He said the
business of the exchange was to protect the interests of the investing
public, and he aimed to work closely with the SFC and others in the tasks
that lay ahead.
Mr Lee said the council looked forward to the development of Hong Kong
markets in 1992 with the planned introduction of financial products such as
traded options, short selling and other hedging instruments.
'Underlying and vital to these new developments would be the provision of a
modern infrastructure such as a centralised electronic clearing system,
including an automatic trade matching and execution system,' he said.
Mr Lee, is a lawyer and has been the convener of the exchange's listing
committee since October 1990 and a member of the exchange's council since
October 1987. He is a director of more than 20 listed companies. Mr Kwan
Cheong Yiu and Mr Alex Wu Shu Chih were elected first vice-chairman and
second vice-chairman respectively.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920116

