FT921-14080

FT  17 JAN 92 / World Trade News: US and China resolve copyright row


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


THE US and China last night narrowly averted a damaging trade war when
Chinese trade officials agreed to strengthen protection of intellectual
property rights for foreign companies.
China's capitulation in Washington, just hours before a midnight deadline
for settlement, will be seen as a big victory for Mrs Carla Hills, the US
trade representative, who kept the pressure on Beijing and took part in the
final talks.
China had vowed to retaliate if the US carried out its threat of imposing
trade sanctions. US farmers, who regard China as a major grain market, would
have been the likely target of any sanctions by Beijing.
The settlement is a victory for 'Special 301', the section of the 1988 US
trade law used frequently by American officials to enforce improved
protection of patents, copyright, trademarks and other intellectual property
under threat of trade sanctions.
A spokesman for Mrs Hills welcomed a 'good agreement'. China has promised to
improve protection of computer software, sound recordings, pharmaceuticals
and agri-chemicals. Copyrights will be granted for 50 years.
China will join the Berne Copyright Convention by October of this year and
the Geneva Phonogram Convention by June 1993.
Mrs Hills issued a statement saying the agreement provided 'significant
opportunity' for US businesses wishing to invest in China now that they were
assured that their intellectual property would be protected.
Both American and Hong Kong companies will be relieved by the settlement.
The threat by Mrs Hills to impose 100 per cent tariffs on Dollars 300m
(Pounds 167.5m) to Dollars 500m in imports jeopardised hundreds of importers
of textiles, clothing, leather and other products who have come to rely on
partnerships with Chinese companies offering cheap labour.
One of the main US beneficiaries of the agreement is Microsoft, a leading US
software manufacturer.
The company said MSDos, the company's IBM-compatible software, is the most
widely used operating system in Chinese personal computers.
However, a large part of it had been pirated and adapted for Chinese use,
costing the company millions of dollars.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920117

