FT922-714

FT  26 JUN 92 / FT Law Report: Enforcement case cannot be argued


   By RACHEL DAVIES, Barrister


AIGLON LTD AND L'AIGLON SA v GAU SHAN COMPANY LIMITED
Queen's Bench Division (Commercial Court): Mr Justice Hirst: June 10
1992
A MAREVA injunction freezing a company's assets pending grant of leave to
enforce an arbitration award against it will be discharged if there is no
good arguable case for enforcement in that the award is a nullity as against
the company, the arbitrators having exceeded their jurisdiction by deciding
that it was party to the contract out of which the dispute arose.
Mr Justice Hirst so held when proposing to grant an application by L'Aiglon
SA (SA) to set aside a Mareva injunction and an order for disclosure of
assets obtained against it by Gau Shan Ltd.
(The injunction has since been continued by the judge, on fresh grounds  -
see next Wednesday's law report. The reasoning based on enforcement
proceedings still stands.)
HIS LORDSHIP said the litigation arose out of the award of the Technical
Appeal Committee of the Liverpool Cotton Association in favour of Gau Shan
against Aiglon Ltd, an English company, and L'Aiglon SA, a Swiss company.
On May 1 1992 Mr Justice Gatehouse granted an application by Gau Shan for
Mareva injunctions, including an order for disclosure of assets, against
both Ltd and SA.
The present application was by SA only, to set aside the Mareva and
disclosure orders as against it. Gau Shan counterclaimed as against SA under
section 26 of the Arbitration Act 1950, for leave to enforce the award in
the same manner as a judgment.
The dispute arose under a contract of sale of 3,000 tonnes of Benin raw
cotton, in which the sellers were described as Ltd, and which was signed on
behalf of Ltd and Gau Shan.
SA's case for discharge of the Mareva and the disclosure order was, inter
alia, that Gau Shan were unable to show a good arguable case on the merits
because there was no enforceable award against SA, since the Technical
Appeal Committee did not have jurisdiction to determine whether it was party
to the sale contract.
The contract specified Gau Shan as buyers and Aiglon Ltd as sellers.
Signatures were annexed under the respective headings 'Sellers - Aiglon Ltd'
and 'Buyers - Gau Shan Co Ltd'. In the top left-hand corner of the contract
appeared the words 'L'Aiglon Ltd'.
The contract contained a force majeure clause which provided that sellers
should not be responsible for non-delivery due to third parties' faults.
No delivery took place, and Gau Shan claimed for non-delivery. The defence
was that the force majeure clause applied due to the fault of third parties.
The matter came before first tier arbitrators of the Liverpool Cotton
Association.
Their award was headed as being in an arbitration between Ltd and Gau Shan,
by a contract between Ltd as sellers and Gau Shan as buyers. The award was
in Gau Shan's favour. The force majeure defence was rejected.
In their appeal submission in support of the force majeure defence, the
sellers relied on a contract between SA and a third party for the purchase
of cotton giving rise to the force majeure defence. The parties were
described in the text as Ltd and Gau Shan, though in the title Ltd's name
was preceded by L'.
The counter submission on appeal, in relation to the force majeure defence,
stated 'L'Aiglon Ltd are not a party to the contract in dispute' and
referred to Aiglon and L'Aiglon as related companies.
It was common ground that 'L'Aiglon Ltd' referred to SA, and 'Aiglon'
referred to Ltd. Up to that stage in the proceedings, Ltd had been treated
by both sides as sellers and were the only parties on their side to the
arbitration.
In paragraph 8 of their reply submissions, in the context of force majeure,
the sellers stated 'Sellers are in fact Aiglon Ltd. For the purpose of this
appeal there is no real distinction between the two companies. Any purchases
by L'Aiglon SA would be utilised for the sales by Aiglon Ltd. The two
com-panies are under the same control'.
As a result, Gau Shan put forward supplemental appeal submissions that both
companies should be made parties to the arbitration.
The solicitors for SA sought to render submissions to the appeal committee
with regard to the appellant's identity. The committee considered that the
evidence already presented set out the position.
The committee's award was issued on February 12 and was headed 'an
arbitration between Aiglon Ltd/L'Aiglon SA' and Gau Shan.
It stated 'sellers are in fact Aiglon Ltd. For the purpose of this appeal
there is no real distinction between the two companies'.
The award was against both Ltd and SA.
Mr Colman submitted that for the purposes of a Mareva injunction, the
criterion of a 'good arguable case on the merits' should be applied.
Mr Milligan submitted that was putting the test too high. He relied on
Nimenia (1983) 1WLR 1412,1417 where Lord Justice Kerr said 'a 'good arguable
case' is no doubt the minimum which the plaintiff must show in order to
cross the 'threshold' for the exercise of the jurisdiction'.
He submitted it was sufficient for the plaintiffs to establish that their
case on the merits was 'better than nothing'.
That was rejected. A good arguable case test on the merits was the correct
test, as Lord Justice Kerr made clear in referring to its being the
'minimum' the plaintiff must show.
Mr Colman submitted that by no stretch of the imagination could the appeal
committee have had jurisdiction to determine whether SA were party to the
sale contract, so that the award against SA on the footing that they were
contractually subject to the arbitration was a nullity (Buccleuch (1870) 5
Exch Cas 221).
He submitted that vitiated the whole award against SA.
Mr Milligan accepted that the principle was sound, but submitted it was
irrelevant in the present case. He contended that in considering the
application for enforcement of the award under section 26, it was for the
court to decide who were parties to the contract and therefore to the
arbitration, and that the arbitrators' decision on that topic was
irrelevant.
He said it was necessary under section 26 for the court at this juncture to
evaluate the underlying evidence, and to decide who were the sellers under
the contract.
That interpretation of section 26 was not correct.
The section gave the court power to enforce an award on an arbitration
agreement in the same manner as a judgment. The detailed procedure was
prescribed by Order 73 Rule 10.
It was common ground that the arbitrators exceeded their jurisdiction in
deciding that SA were party to the contract. That part of their award was a
nullity.
There was therefore no award to enforce so far as SA were concerned, and it
was no part of the court's function under section 26 to salvage it by
considering the issue as to who was party to the contract.
Mr Milligan could not invite the court to enforce the award against SA, when
SA only became party to it because the arbitrators chose to determine an
issue which they had no power to determine. It was not open to the court to
embark on an investigation of the merits to see if they came to the right
conclusion.
Mr Milligan's argument on this point was rejected in principle, so his
argument on the facts became academic.
His analysis of the evidence hinged essentially on paragraph 8 of the
sellers' reply.
That paragraph was directed solely to the force majeure issue and suggested
that for that purpose there was no real distinction between the two
companies. There was no suggestion in it that SA were also parties to the
contract. It followed that the court would have been against Mr Milligan on
the evidence.
There was no good arguable case on the merits in support of the section 26
application against SA, and the whole foundation of the Mareva and
disclosure orders against SA disappeared. The court proposed to set them
aside insofar as they affected SA.
For SA: Anthony Colman and Graham Dunning (Weightman Rutherfords,
Liverpool).
For Gau Shan: Iain Milligan QC and Andrew Baker (Middleton Potts).

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920626

