FT924-915

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (4): Vital source of
growth - Exports


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


WITH Japanese domestic demand severely depressed, the strength of the
country's exports has been a vital source of growth for the economy as a
whole.
The Japanese trade surplus with the rest of the world is set to rise to
unprecedented highs this year. The Japan Foreign Trade Council, which
represents the country's leading trading houses, forecasts that the trade
surplus will reach Dollars 115bn this year. The Bank of Japan expects it
will reach Dollars 120bn. In 1993 it could go even higher if recovery in the
US sucks in imports while the Japanese economy remains depressed.
However, as yet there is little evidence that Japanese manufacturers are
exporting in much higher volumes to offset the decline in the domestic
market. Although the trade surplus this year is likely to surpass the peak
it reached in the mid 1980s, it is fundamentally quite different in
character.
The growth in the trade surplus in the mid-1980s was fuelled by very strong
growth of export volumes combined with stagnant imports. The volume of
exports rose rapidly in the mid-1980s but in the past few years it has grown
much more modestly.
However the growth in the surplus in the past year has not been due to a
surge in export volumes. Since 1989, the ratio of exports to imports has
remained virtually stable. Export volumes are growing only at a rate of
about 2.6 per cent a year. In October, export volumes rose by only 0.7 per
cent from a year before - even though the value of the trade surplus rose by
more than 50 per cent.
The explanation for the surge in the trade surplus is that the prices of
Japanese exports have risen steeply. Measured in dollar terms, exports are
growing at a rate of about 9 per cent a year.
This largely reflects the recent strengthening of the yen, which has made
exports more expensive, without yet choking off the growth in export demand.
When the yen appreciates, the US dollar price of exports rises if those
goods were originally priced in yen. This may partly reflect the importance
of exports from Japan to manufacturing plants abroad owned by Japanese
companies.
It is also due to the increasing technological and design sophistication of
Japanese products which has allowed them to claim higher prices in export
markets.
Meanwhile, the opposite fate has befallen imports.
Imports into Japan rose markedly in the late 1980s but have fallen off
lately because of the downturn in the domestic economy. Import volumes were
down by about 4 per cent in August compared with the same month the year
before.
However, import prices have fallen as well, particularly oil and other
commodities which Japan relies upon.
So the rise in the trade surplus is much more a reflection of price changes
rather than a large quantitative expansion in Japan's exports. However, the
fact that exports are still rising, albeit it slowly, in the face of the
higher US dollar export prices, is a sign of the continued competitiveness
of Japanese manufacturing.
The other main change in the character of the surplus is the destination.
Asia is becoming increasingly important for Japanese exports.
Exports to Asia rose by 14.6 per cent in the year to October, led by sharp
increase in transport machinery with car exports up 56 per cent, truck up 54
per cent and motorcycle exports to Asia 107 per cent higher. Asia has
replaced Europe as Japan's second-largest market for exports of transport
equipment.
Japanese exports to Asia are being pulled by the region's strong economy
growth fuelled both by corporate investment and consumer goods.
The prospects of revival in the US economy may be lifting Japanese exports
of machinery and capital equipment to the US. Exports of general machinery
to the US rose by 20 per cent in October from the year before.
Meanwhile export growth to Europe is slowing as growth in Germany slows.
Exports to Europe were 5.5 per cent up in October at Dollars 5.3bn, while
imports were 9.8 per cent down at Dollars 2.5bn.
The rate of growth of the value of machinery exports has risen from about
7.3 per cent in 1990 to more than 15 per cent this year, with electrical
machinery exports up 11 per cent. However the automotive industry has
delivered the strongest increase in exports despite only minimal growth in
car exports to the US, where the Japanese car companies have extensive
manufacturing operations.
Vehicle exports to the EC were 25 per cent up in the year to October, with
automotive parts up 43 per cent. Automotive exports to Asia were 50 per cent
higher. In contrast, car exports to the US rose by only 1.8 per cent over
the same period.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921221

