FT922-13418

FT  11 APR 92 / Soccer: Ferguson's finest face the final whistle


   By PETER BERLIN


SOCCER professionals are not bookish types. They value educated feet over
educated minds. But while none of the players at Manchester United or Leeds
United is likely to be reading Campaigns of Napoleon in the dressing room,
history will weigh heavily on them as they drag their weary legs round the
muddy playing fields of England in the last weeks of the long struggle for
the English League championship.
In the past 25 years both clubs have failed, in different ways, to live up
to expectations.
Manchester United have struggled to meet the expectations of the Matt Busby
years. Busby created three great sides, the last of which - the team of
Charlton, Law and Best - completed in style the task which the tragic Busby
Babes began: the quest for the European Cup. Since then, the club has failed
to recapture either the League title, the greatest domestic honour and the
only ticket to the European Cup, or the elan of the Busby period. In spite
of the wealth its huge support gives it, and the continued fertility of its
youth system, its best has been second place behind Liverpool twice.
Leeds, which succeeded Busby's last team as the dominant club in English
soccer, won the championship in 1969 and 1974. But in the 10 years from 1965
they finished second five times, lost three of four FA Cup finals, and lost
in the finals of all three European competitions.
Alex Ferguson, the Manchester United manager, has been struggling to build
(or buy) a winning side since he took over six years ago. If his team do win
the championship this season, they will perhaps most resemble the first of
Busby's great teams: the 1952 champions. They were an ageing side which had
finished second four times in five years before grasping the title. Busby
broke up the team and started building again. There are signs that Ferguson
may have to do the same, win or lose, after this season.
Ferguson will soon have to replace the spine of his team. Brian Robson and
Steve Bruce, the two north-easterners who give Manchester United so much of
their competitive back-bone, may be nearing the end of their time at Old
Trafford.
Robson is 34. His body is battered and, even when he plays, he always seems
to be carrying some sort of injury. He might calculate that now is the time
to follow the example of two former England team-mates, Peter Reid and
Trevor Francis, the successful player-managers of Manchester City and
Sheffield Wednesday, while he still has enough football in his legs to
persuade some First Division (or Premier League) club to gamble on him.
Robson's heir-apparent in central midfield, Neil Webb, has hardly played
this season. He seems never to have regained his full fitness or his
manager's confidence since an injury three seasons ago. He will be 29 at the
end of this season and his usefulness to Ferguson could nearly be over.
Bruce is the model of the English centre-half: big, strong and fearless,
indomitable in the tackle and dominating in the air, with an eye for goal
when he joins the attack. If he had had a little pace in his legs to go with
the crispness of his thought, he would have played many times for England.
But, at 31, age and opposing strikers are catching up with him.
Ferguson has spent on possible replacements. He signed Paul Parker, an
international defender, and Paul Ince, a skilful and competitive midfielder.
Both had histories of injury problems which have continued this season.
The most expensive item on Ferguson's summer shopping list will probably be
a goal-scoring striker. Brian McClair, bought to fill that role, is playing
deeper every season - perhaps a tactical ploy to bring much-needed deftness
to midfield but perhaps because the Scot, who suffered nightmares in front
of goal last year, has not regained his appetite for leading the attack
despite scoring 16 league goals.
His attacking partner, Mark Hughes, also prefers to strike from deep-lying
positions. For all his combative qualities, though, Hughes is a scorer of
great goals rather than a great goal-scorer, and has hit just eight in the
league.
This season, Manchester United have demonstrated one of the qualities said
to separate good teams from great ones: they win when they are not playing
at their best. Their greatest strength is on the wings where Ferguson can
chose between the Ukrainian, Andrej Kanchelskis; Lee Sharpe, last year's
'new George Best'; and Ryan Giggs, this year's 'new George Best' - and
perhaps the genuine article.
But the midfield frequently lacks a player who can reliably deliver long,
accurate, early passes to set the wingers galloping at, or past, full-backs,
and the attack often lacks players in position for crosses.
Manchester United hold the edge in the league race simply because they can
afford to lose one more game than Leeds. But with half-a-dozen games
remaining, there may be no second chances.
Napoleon said he prefered lucky generals to good ones. Ferguson and Howard
Wilkinson, his Leeds counterpart, could well discover he was right.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920411

