FT922-4013

FT  08 JUN 92 / Post offices may bid for lottery sales


   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent


POST Office Counters, which runs Britain's 19,000 post offices, is seeking
clearance from the Department of Trade and Industry to bid for a central
role in operating the planned national lottery.
The organisation, which has 28m customers a week and carries out 150
different types of counter transaction, believes that it can be a
front-runner among competitors to help provide a nationwide network of
outlets for lottery ticket sales.
The government is pledged to have the lottery operating by 1994. It is
expected to raise at least Pounds 1bn a year for sport, the arts and
charities, and will be run on a day-to-day basis by the private sector under
contract.
Competition to operate it might be tough, with the Horserace Totalisator
Board, known as the Tote, and the pools promoters among possible candidates.
At least two leading merchant banks are also thought to be actively engaged
in preparing proposals which might involve substantial expenditure.
The DTI, as the sponsoring ministry, has to agree to the Post Office
Counters initiative. The Post Office Act has tended to inhibit deals with
the private sector, but management is hopeful that it will be permitted to
submit its proposals to ministers.
Post Office Counters' interest is limited to offering, in return for a fee,
points of sale for the lottery, which would be administered by a partner. It
has privately calculated that as many as 30,000 outlets might be needed,
which would require a supplementary network of sale points to be provided by
other partners.
The organisation, which is having talks with potential partners, is hoping
that DTI ministers will not object in principle to its plan.
It is also pressing its case at Westminster by emphasising its need to
secure new sources of income in the face of a decline in some of its
traditional counter business. With its 10,000 rural post offices losing
Pounds 20m a year, Post Office Counters' management is also emphasising that
additional income sources are required to assure their future.
The deadline for representations in response to the government's lottery
white paper is at the end of this month. The government is expected to set
out more detailed proposals later in the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920608

