FT921-1216

FT  25 MAR 92 / Survey of North Wales (4): Green, lovely and poor - Rural
Wales is in steady decline


   By ANTHONY MORETON


FROM the restaurant at the Portmeirion hotel in the world-famous Italianate
village created by Sir Clough Williams-Ellis, the world could not look a
finer place. The gentle hills, the small cottages, the wide river estuary,
and verdant farm land proclaim a prosperity that is all-too-clearly missing
the closer one gets to actuality.
Rural north Wales, away from the tourist spots and the industrial areas of
Clwyd, is green and beautiful and a repository of values that probably have
gone for good in much of the rest of Britain. But it is also a part of the
country in which wages are as low as emigration is high, and in which the
prosperity that has lifted so much of the rest of Wales over the past 20-30
years has passed by.
In Clwyd, despite the large number of big companies which have relocated,
paying good wages, four people in every 10 earn less than the Council of
Europe's decency threshold, which was Pounds 163 a week in 1989. In that
year, one worker in every five earned less than Pounds 120 a week.
It is not the area's remoteness from urban centres of wealth, nor is it the
lack of good roads that might attract inward investment. The low wages have
meant money cannot be ploughed back into enhancing investment. The area also
suffers from a lack of job skills, especially in those sectors that are
eminently suited to the countryside.
Above all, north Wales is suffering from a dangerous downturn in farming,
one of its important occupations, and there is serious concern about the
changes that might come out of Brussels following any review of the common
agricultural policy. The hill farmers, many still hit by the consequences of
Chernobyl, which has meant their produce cannot be marketed, face changes in
their whole way of life.
To inject new economic vigour and hope into the area both the Welsh
Development Agency and the Development Board for Rural Wales have been
working in conjunction with the local authorities to strengthen the economic
base. They have been assisted by the government which has put increased
resources into a rural initiative.
Mr David Hunt, the Welsh secretary, sees the rural project as a vital part
of the government's commitment to the economic life of Wales. He has made
Pounds 25m available this year to develop a rural programme and has promised
to boost that spending to Pounds 32.5m in the 12 months starting April 1.
For Mr Hunt the rural initiative is what the valleys programme for
industrial south Wales was for his predecessor, Mr Peter Walker.
'One of our main problems,' says Mr Alun Daniel, executive director of the
Welsh Development Agency, 'is to bring prosperity to the small town and its
surrounding areas the further west you go. It is much more difficult to
interest potential investors in places such as Bethesda, Penygroes or
Llanrwst in Gwynedd than in Denbigh, further east in Clwyd.'
The WDA has drawn up a rural prosperity programme which has identified 11
action-plan areas. The strategy is to get local communities to take the
initiative in spelling out their own needs and then suggest ways in which
these might be realised.
Such plans depend for their success on leadership within the designated
communities and the WDA has deliberately sought 'drivers', or
'entrepreneurs', as Mr Hunt would prefer to call them, who will take the
lead in developing programmes.
If they are to be successful all the projects have to be bottom-up schemes,
coming from the people affected, rather than imposed top-down from the
agency. It is therefore necessary to find someone in each community who will
be responsible for getting all those concerned together, drawing up a
strategy, and suggesting ways in which problems might be overcome.
'The merit of this approach,' Mr Daniel says, 'is that it fits in squarely
with European policy. Two years ago the European Commission produced a
document, The Future of Rural Society, which talked about the need not just
for co-ordination and integration of local plans, but for the communities to
be involved in planning their own future.
'We have been working on this approach for the last five years, and both the
European programme and the government initiative fit in with our philosophy
and with what we have actually been doing.'
Some progress has been made. Take Denbigh, a dozen miles south of the
holiday centre of Rhyl. Four years ago the town was the subject of any
number of independent studies concerning local matters such as the closure
of its mental hospital and the future of tourism. These have now all been
brought together in one action plan which has linked, for instance, traffic
needs, the environment, and business opportunities.
An old building has been pulled down to make way for a road scheme that the
local authority could not have afforded; the WDA has built advance factories
and encouraged the private sector to put up more; a traffic management
scheme has been introduced.
'If we can do that for Denbigh then there is no reason why we cannot also do
it for places like Bethesda,' Mr Daniel says. There is also need for income
levels to be raised and Coed Cymru, set up by the farming unions and the
Countryside Commission, and assisted by the WDA, is endeavouring to turn one
of the area's natural products, timber, into a more profitable end-product.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920325

