FT922-13357

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Scottish opposition shares out the blame


   By BETHAN HUTTON and CHRIS TIGHE


LABOUR and the Scottish National party angrily blamed each other for their
loss of a seat each to the Tory party, while Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish
secretary, claimed a mandate to rule Scotland in spite of holding only 11 of
the 72 Scottish seats.
Mr Alex Salmond, leader of the SNP, blamed its poor electoral showing on
opinion polls a week before the election which convinced SNP waverers that
Labour was about to win the election in the UK and could deliver its promise
of a Scottish assembly.
He said Labour had conned the Scottish people and delivered them into the
hands of a fourth English Tory government.
Mr Donald Dewar, shadow Scottish secretary, attacked the SNP for splitting
the vote in seats including Stirling, permitting Mr Michael Forsyth's
re-election.
Condemning the SNP as isolationist and 'constantly unconstructive', Mr Dewar
said it must compromise on its absolutist position.
Both Labour and the SNP argued that the Tories had no mandate to pursue
policies Scotland had rejected. The Conservatives would face serious
political troubles if they ignored calls for constitutional reform, Mr Dewar
warned.
But Mr Lang insisted: 'We are the legitimate voice for the people of
Scotland. We are the United Kingdom government.'
He did not rule out the possibility of a referendum on constitutional
change. He also hinted at working more closely with other parties in
Scotland.
Mr Salmond spoke of the 'frustration, anger, disappointment and despair that
will be felt in Scottish society that once again Scotland is to be faced
with another term of an English Tory government elected on the votes south
of Birmingham'.
Mr Andrew Welsh, one of the SNP MPs returned, said the election result had
proved that independence was the only way for Scots to be properly
represented. 'The devolution option is a road to nowhere. It has failed
where it always will fail, at the London Westminster road block,' he said.
Mr Dewar, pressed to spell out what Labour could now do to achieve
devolution, said it would continue campaigning. He rejected suggestions
Labour faced a 'doomsday scenario' in Scotland - the Tories ruling on a
minority vote and denying influence to the majority.
Mr Dewar denied that the party could face defections from within its ranks -
but signs of potential division were already apparent yesterday. Mr George
Galloway, re-elected MP for Glasgow Hillhead, called for a 'patriotic front
of anti-Tory forces' and a revamping of the constitutional convention.
'We're going to have to extend the hand of friendship to the SNP and they'll
have to be big enough to accept it,' he said.
Mr Salmond said the SNP was looking at the 'potential meeting of minds' with
individuals from other parties who shared the eventual goal of independence,
but rejected joining the pro-devolution constitutional convention.
Repeated questions about whether he would rule out civil disobedience met a
stone wall from Mr Salmond.
For the Scottish Liberal Democrats, Mr Malcolm Bruce said: 'Scottish
Conservatives must not forget that their gains have been made as a result of
a split opposition and does not represent a vote of confidence in the status
quo; 75 per cent of the Scottish electorate voted against this government.'
The case for electoral reform was now unanswerable, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920411

