FT924-930

FT  21 DEC 92 / International Company News: RJB plans flotation for greater
flexibility


   By MAGGIE URRY


RJB Mining, the open-cast coal mining group, plans a flotation next year
with a value at over Pounds 100m. It has appointed Barclays de Zoete Wedd as
financial advisers, and BZW's broking arm de Zoete & Bevan as broker to the
issue.
The aim of the float is greater financial flexibility, enabling, for
example, a bid for parts of British Coal. A bid could be made for some of
the 31 collieries whose future is currently being reviewed by a Commons
select committee.
Mr Richard Budge, chief executive, said it 'will provide us with additional
funding flexibility as we look for further expansion opportunities'. These
could stem from the coming liberalisation in the coal industry. In the past
Mr Budge said he could run British Coal's pits more cheaply, cutting 20 per
cent from costs.
In 1991 RJB made turnover of Pounds 76m and operating profits of Pounds 15m.
Its operations, which began in 1974, are entirely in the UK. It runs 11
opencast and one deep mine. It is also involved in private mining under
licence and in all has interests in about 2m tonnes of coal reserves. Its
other operations include coal washing and land reclamation.
RJB was the subject of a Pounds 106.5m management buy-out in February from
AF Budge, the private construction company headed by Mr Tony Budge, the
brother of Richard. AF Budge went into receivership earlier this month.
The mbo was financed with Pounds 45m of equity from a consortium including
Schroder Ventures, Midland Montagu Ventures, Charterhouse Development
Capital and Prudential Venture Managers. Some of the equity investors are
expected to stay with RJB after the float. Mr Richard Budge and the senior
management are also shareholders.
Trading starts today in the shares of International Food Machinery which has
joined the official list through a Pounds 3.9m placing at 51p a share. IFM
trades in used food processing machinery mainly for the meat and bakery
trades. The money is to purchase JH Food Machinery, which specialises in
fish processing machinery, and to restructure working capital. IFM's market
value is Pounds 8m.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921221

