FT924-6270

FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (11): On the elusive scent of profit -
What makes a classic perfume? Lucia van der Post unbottles the secrets
behind a potent image


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


LIKE PROUST and his madeleines, scent works at a powerful level in us all.
Smell is the most acute of our senses and the scent we dab on transmits as
potent an image as the clothes we wear and the make-up we apply. And for
that image women, it seems, will pay whatever it costs.
With a small bottle of fine perfume costing around Pounds 50 the price may
seem high for a bottled smell - but they are not too high if the customer
can be persuaded that she is buying a little magic.
With her head she knows that the contents of the bottle account for a small
fraction of the total cost, lost in the overall expenses of a top 'nose',
expensive packaging, glossy advertising, marketing, distribution and finally
the retail mark-up of some 45 per cent. But with her heart she is seduced.
She may not be able to afford one of Chanel's signature jackets but she can
dab herself with Chanel No. 5. Issey Miyake may be beyond her reach but
there, no further away than a crystal bottle, is a little of his genius. The
allure is compelling.
Though the market in the UK is huge and growing (worth some Pounds 330m at
wholesale) the fine fragrance people still wish that we would become more
'European' in our attitudes to scent. According to Peter Norman, managing
director of Parfums Givenchy UK, we use half as much fine fragrance as the
average French woman. Though there are some who would, perhaps unkindly,
attribute this to their apparent habit of bathing half as often, this cannot
be the whole story. Deep in our culture is the tendency still to regard
fragrance as a wanton indulgence. Our European cousins accord it a much
deeper respect, recognising its powerful psychology, seeing it as an
essential enhancer of day-to-day living, an expression of self, of style.
What everybody knows is how important perfume sales are to France's haute
couture fashion houses. Due to French accounting laws and to the fact that
some of the houses are still privately owned, just how important it is is a
not-so-well-guarded secret. All those delicious frocks float on oceans of
scent. When put together with cosmetics, they are estimated to account for
80 per cent of the revenue of most houses.
It was Coco Chanel who first explored the idea of attaching a perfume to a
designer name when she dreamed up Chanel. No. 5 back in 1925. Nobody has yet
thought of a better way of expanding the customer base, of retaining an air
of exclusivity whilst at the same time selling to thousands of women.
Today companies invest millions of dollars in the hope that they will find
the Chanel No. 5 of the day. The world's two longest lasting great classics
 -Chanel No. 5 and Guerlain's Shalimar - are each rumoured to do Pounds 50m
worth of business a year. At Chanel, where the fragrance business accounts
for 60 per cent of sales, Chanel No. 5 alone makes up for 40 per cent of
that.
Whereas 15 years ago there were about 100 fragrances to choose from, today
there are nearer 1,000. But the cost of launching them is vast and the
failure rate high. Each year sees somewhere between 50 and 100 new perfumes,
and well over half of them eventually disappear quietly from the shelves.
Only one in five has a chance of real success. But still the houses keep
trying.
Fashion in perfumes change as much as in anything else but it does not
change at whim. Like all the arts - and creating a great perfume IS an art -
it anticipates the ready unconscious. So fashions in scents change in mood
with the times.
The 1970s saw the heyday of the so-called Life-Style perfumes - remember
Charlie? Smitty? Stevie B? Jaunty, youthful, exuberant, they conjured up
visions of a newly fashionable modern woman. Today, it is hard even to
recall their names. They were seen off by the bold, racy, power perfumes of
the 1980s, the years when women wheeled and dealed with the best of them as
the consumer boom took off. Opium, Giorgio, Poison, Obsession, redolent with
imagery from the video/rock/Hollywood cultures, were the olfactory hallmarks
of the decade.
The 1990s has seen a real change. Subtlety and sophistication have taken
over from the boldly obvious. Calvin Klein, for instance, whose Obsession
claimed the provocative high ground in the 80s, launched Eternity at the
beginning of the '90s and the orgiastic writhings deemed appropriate to
convey Obsession were replaced with angelic visions of a mother and child.
Out, too, with the eighties have gone the celebrity perfumes. Cher and Omar
Sharif, Sophia Loren and Linda Evans, all tried to capitalise on their names
but most failed within a year. This week saw the announcement of the
withdrawal of the last of the survivors - Liz Taylor's Passion. But we
should not mourn their passing. It marks the end of the cynical marketing
ploy. Many were launched in tacky bottles and most smelt dreadful. It only
proved what most astute observers of the scene have always believed - that
somehow integrity, authenticity and heart do matter.
As Bernard Aloy, general manager of Nina Ricci, which in L'Air du Temps has
one of the great perfumes of all time, puts it: 'We are still family-owned
and so the house still has a family spirit. When we create a fragrance we
try to create something which we think is nice. It is still a creation, an
artistic venture. We do not believe in 'doing a marketing'.'
LVMH's launch of C'est la Vie is a vivid example of a house getting it
wrong. Christian Lacroix is a delightful man, but, as style guru Peter York
puts it: 'He was too new on the scene, too little known in the wider world,
he tried to invent his own history too fast.' It was, to be brutally
truthful, a not very attractive smell.
Louis Urvois, managing director of Loewe, which has just launched its new
fragrance, Gala, in the UK with great success (it has more than beaten its
first year budget),
believes that for a new perfume to succeed what is essential is great
coherence between the name, the packaging, the product, the advertising, and
the distribution. 'If, for instance, we had launched a perfume called Gala,
which we believe conveys evening, glamour, complexity, but which was made
with light, green notes, it would have been a great inconsistency. It could
not have succeeded.'
Coming back, and one can see why, are the great classic perfumes. Their
history is solid and intact. They offer the magic of nostalgia, visions of a
past rich with pleasures, secure in its luxuries. Lanvin's Arpege, in its
day a heady conveyor of sumptuous glamour, is being newly successful. Miss
Dior is being repackaged and relaunched. Meanwhile, Chanel No. 5., its
bottle subtly updated over the years, and Shalimar go on and on.
But also succeeding are the best of the new. The best truly capture the
spirit of the times and can do stunning business whilst their moment lasts.
In Harrods perfumery hall - a showcase for new exclusive launches - of the
ten best-sellers last year all except Chanel No. 5 were new or nearly-new.
In no particular order they were Safari by Ralph Lauren, Eternity by Calvin
Klein, Cabotine by Gres, L'Eau d'Issey from Issey Miyake, Volupte by Oscar
de la Renta, Gala by Loewe, Oleg Cassini, Escada by Margaretha Ley,
Beautiful by Estee Lauder, and, but of course, Chanel. No. 5.
But what has done most for the perfume giants is that whereas once a woman
remained faithful to her one true love, the perfume of her choice, today she
plays around, she flirts a little, trying one and then another.
Look on the fashionable woman's dressing-table today and you will find at
least three scents on top and three tucked away. She will go for light,
fresh green notes for a sporty summer week-end, a mix of tuberose and
bergamot, of musk and jasmine for her winter satins and velvets; a classic
to go with her twinset and pearls; and something crisp and not too heady for
the boardroom. And, not content with buying the perfume, today's woman
(alas, she still has to buy most of it herself) will go for the bath oils
and gels as well.
All of which explains why the cash tills are still ringing - not quite as
frenetically as they did in the consumer boom but, as Peter Norman puts it,
'holding their own in a pretty grotty retailing environment.' Certainly
enough, at any rate, to keep the big couture houses in frills and furbelows,
giving them time to reassess the future and plan their strategies for the
years ahead.
Finally, if what you are really bothered about is which is the one for you,
I leave you with the words of Karl Lagerfeld, the designer who revamped and
revitalised the Chanel label. 'There are no rules . . . it's not like a
bottle of medicine. It's all about fantasy and dreams and each woman has to
make her own.' In other words . . . choose your dream. Ultimately, Like all
the arts, it is still a mysterious business  - and one person's Poison is
another's life-long addiction.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921121

