FT923-10976

FT  28 JUL 92 / RMT dock workers lose rights


   By DAVID GOODHART


ASSOCIATED British Ports, one of Britain's largest docks employers, has
withdrawn recognition rights from the transport union RMT. The move is a
further step in the company's campaign to put all staff on to personal
contracts.
Although 650 of the company's 2,000 staff are nominally members of the
union, only 90 have refused to sign the personal contracts which require
them to give up all their rights to union representation.
Until now the union has continued to bargain on behalf of the 90 - who are
mainly manual workers in Cardiff, Swansea and Newport, south Wales - but the
company has now written to the RMT saying that it will no longer be
recognised for collective bargaining or individual disciplinary issues.
Lawyers for the union believe that the company may have decided to go ahead
with de-recognition after the Employment Appeal Tribunal recently upheld an
appeal by Associated Newspapers, publishers of the Daily Mail, against the
National Union of Journalists.
Mr David Wilson, an NUJ official at the Daily Mail, had won a case at an
industrial tribunal complaining that he had been denied a 4.5 per cent
salary increase because he remained a union member and had refused to sign
an individual contract.
The appeal tribunal's reversal of that decision makes it unlikely that
Associated British Ports could now be sued for discriminating on grounds of
union membership against the rump of staff refusing to sign personal
contracts.
The company denies that the decision is connected to the Daily Mail case. It
is, however, appealing over three dockers at Southampton who refused to sign
personal contracts and won compensation from an industrial tribunal ranging
from Pounds 1,500 to Pounds 2,850.
The appeal tribunal met last week but has not yet reached a decision. If the
company's appeal fails the RMT is likely to seek similar compensation for
others who have refused to sign personal contracts.
Mr Tony MacGregor, assistant general secretary of the RMT, said yesterday
the company's decision would penalise all RMT members in the company and not
just the 90 who have refused to sign.
'ABP are in breach of their agreement with us on notice of termination but
there is no legal redress for the union,' he said.
'Most of our members felt they were coerced into signing personal contracts.
The choice facing those brave enough to stand up to the initial intimidation
is to sign personal contracts now or accept that there will be no
improvements in existing conditions,' he added.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920728

