FT921-3761

FT  12 MAR 92 / BR plans assault on telecoms market


   By ALAN CANE


BRITISH RAIL is seeking the go-ahead to compete with BT and Mercury in the
international telecommunications market with an investment of up to Pounds
500m over the next decade.
British Rail Telecom (BRT), its wholly owned subsidiary, announced yesterday
that it was applying for a public telecommunications operator licence two
years after it signalled its intention to enter the Pounds 15bn-a-year
telecommunications market.
BRT, which already operates the biggest private telecommunications network
in the UK, aims to capture about 7 per cent of the public market by the end
of the century.
It plans to use the Channel tunnel to carry cables linking its British
network to European customers. A radio system is being developed to allow
individuals to tap into BRT's main network.
British Rail is one of the first large organisations to challenge BT and
Mercury Communications, the country's two existing licensed operators.
Its move follows last year's telecommunications white paper which, in
effect, opened the UK market to all-comers. BT dominates telecommunications
in the UK and Mercury has won only just over 5 per cent of the market.
BRT was established two years ago to manage the group's private network.
Some 3,000km of optical fibre cable carrying voice and data messages run
along UK rail tracks.
Mr Peter Borer, BRT managing director, said yesterday: 'Our existing
nationwide network means we have the capability to provide
telecommunications services to the public very rapidly.'
The licence application has been made in BRT's name alone, but the company
is known to be negotiating with potential partners and is expected to
conclude agreements in the next two months.
BRT is applying for a full international licence with the aim of focusing on
routes to North America, the Far East and the rest of Europe. It plans to
collaborate with local companies in the US and the Far East. Services to
mainland Europe would be provided in conjunction with Hermes, a joint
venture involving most European railway operators and providing a broad
range of services, including telecommunications.
It plans to offer customers comprehensive services including voice and data
communication, digital private circuits and mobile radio services. Capital
expenditure of between Pounds 350 and Pounds 500m has been planned over the
next 10 years.
Since the white paper, more than 20 companies have lodged licence
applications with the Department of Trade and Industry and a further 20 have
expressed interest in doing so. Six companies have been granted licences but
only two - Sprint of the US and National Network of the UK, which resells
use of the Post Office network - have so far put forward plans to build full
international networks to compete with BT and Mercury.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920312

