FT924-8025

FT  13 NOV 92 / Technology: A chilling experience - What happens when
innovation is put on ice


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Karl Krapek apologises for the noisy air conditioning in the office in
Connecticut from where he runs Carrier, the Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.6bn)
heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment subsidiary of
United Technologies (UTC).
'It's not one of our systems,' the chairman, president and chief executive
of the world's largest HVAC company hastens to add. But Krapek, who displays
a daunting grasp of all the issues and statistics in a complex,
fast-changing industry, will not let it distract him from his task - nothing
less than beating the Japanese.
'This is one of the last planned experiments to see if a US company with a
global product can maintain leadership against the Japanese,' he says
ambitiously. 'We're sitting here 42 per cent bigger than Matsushita (in
HVAC), and my job is to ensure that 20 years from now - whoever's sitting in
my chair - we're still there.'
After Carrier, which has 11 per cent of the world HVAC market and accounted
for about one fifth of UTC's Dollars 20.8bn sales last year, Japanese
companies rank second to eighth with a combined 45 per cent share. And while
HVAC may not be able to match UTC's Pratt & Whitney jet engines and Sikorsky
helicopters for glamour, there is plenty at stake.
Carrier expects the world HVAC market to grow by more than 65 per cent to
Dollars 40bn by the end of the century, paced by growth in the Pacific Rim
but also by expansion in Europe - which is emerging as the key global
battleground. The prices are higher and the market is far less mature than
North America. On top of that are the untapped opportunities in eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union.
At the same time, the industry - one of the world's big users of
ozone-damaging refrigerants - is having to face the cost of responding to
environmental pressures by adapting or even redesigning its product ranges.
For all these reasons, Krapek wants Carrier to be financially stronger. 'Our
profits have been too low over the past couple of years to even threaten the
survivability of the company,' he says, 'and I don't want to go to UTC for
investment dollars.'
Up until 1988, it looked as if Carrier, whose founder Willis Carrier gave
birth to the air conditioning industry, was playing right into the hands of
its newer Japanese competitors. Carrier made his first sale of 'Apparatus
for Treating Air' in 1904, and the company has by far the broadest product
range in the business, from small window-mounted room-conditioners to huge
chillers for office blocks and shopping malls.
But in the mid-1980s, it was underspending on technology, under-using the
potentially significant benefits of learning from its UTC sister companies,
and - by viewing air conditioning as a commodity product - had lost its
focus on customer service.
As a result, Carrier let its Japanese rivals steal a march on product
features and innovation at the smaller end of the market. The venerable US
company lost eight points of North American market share from 1985 to 1991.
The fight back began in 1988, when George David, the senior UTC executive
who had oversight of both Carrier and Otis Elevator, decided that technology
in the air conditioning industry did matter.
William Wilson, Krapek's predecessor at Carrier, set in train a recovery
strategy, while Krapek joined Carrier from Otis in September 1990 and has
had the difficult task of implementing the strategy.
He established six core technologies - heat transfer, compression, air
management, refrigerants, indoor air quality and variable speed electronics.
In compression technology - a key area as the compressor can account for
one-third of the cost of smaller units - Carrier has leaned heavily on
Pratt's expertise in the development of a new range of efficient 'scroll'
compressors, which have hitherto defied attempts to manufacture them
economically.
Elsewhere, manufacturing techniques are being modernised, reducing
floorspace and raising productivity. In Europe, Carrier's three main
factories in France, Spain and Italy are taking responsibility for different
product lines, and the Italian plant near Milan is half way through a
Dollars 60m programme to reduce manufacturing costs.
To help catch up with the electronics expertise of Japanese rivals such as
Toshiba, Krapek has hired Gerald Wilson, former dean of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, to be Carrier's head of engineering. Overall,
Carrier's annual research and development spending has risen from 1.6 per
cent of sales in 1989 to 3 per cent.
The results are beginning to come through, but it will be a long process.
'You don't take big companies like these and fix them in two years,' says
Krapek.
Last year, Carrier's pre-tax return on sales was a meagre 1 per cent, but,
says Krapek, Carrier ought to be up to around 8 per cent by the end of the
decade, and in any case needs to get up into the 4-5 per cent range quickly.
Looking ahead, one analyst says, 'raising margins to 5-6 per cent ought to
be achievable,' and Krapek himself feels comfortable with his targets. 'I
know where the waste is, where the inventory is, where the lead times are
still too long, and where we still have the wrong products.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921113

