FT922-4234

FT  06 JUN 92 / Markets: A warm Wellcome from the brokers - The Bottom Line


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


THE bandwagon for the largest yet international share offer trundled into
view this week. The sale, which could raise as much as Pounds 4bn, is for up
to 50 per cent of the shares in Wellcome, the British pharmaceuticals group.
The shares are being sold by the Wellcome Trust, the medical charity which
owns a 73.6 per cent stake in the company. The fact that it is selling
should prove no disincentive. Pharmaceuticals companies tend to be poor
dividend payers, and the charity wants to increase its income by broadening
its portfolio. For the investor, pharmaceuticals groups offer capital
growth.
Robert Fleming, the UK merchant bank co-ordinating the sale, spelt out some
of the details this week. The tender period starts on July 6, closing
between two and three weeks later. The offer is available to private
investors, but there are none of the incentives associated with UK
privatisations.
The conundrum posed for private investors is whether this is a good time to
purchase drugs stocks, and if so whether Wellcome is the one to buy.
If history is any guide, the temptation to take the plunge looks
irresistible. Investors who bought Wellcome in the original flotation in
1986 can afford to be smug. Although the stock has fallen from a high this
year of Pounds 11.31 to 945p, the loss was small compared with profits. The
original flotation price was 200p.
Last year pharmaceuticals stocks gave a glittering performance. Since then
the sector has underperformed, particularly in April when US investors
switched out of defensive stocks, such as pharmaceuticals, into cyclical
companies.
Pharmaceuticals companies will undoubtedly enjoy significant earnings
increases over the next few years. But the remarkably rapid growth they have
enjoyed is far from assured. Although demand for products continues to grow,
there is increasing political pressure to control drug prices.
Only this week, the German government announced proposals to freeze drug
prices in the world's third largest market for two years. In Japan, the
world's second largest market, price cuts have become the norm. In the US,
some drugs groups have introduced voluntary price freezes to reduce pressure
from Congress.
Finding objective City advice about Wellcome itself is tricky. Most UK
financial houses are involved in the flotation in some way and some
generally bullish tomes have been produced on the company. There have been
some remarkable about-turns in brokers' sentiment about Wellcome since the
flotation was mooted.
Only one significant institution, County NatWest, is not involved, and its
analysts have not been particularly bullish about Wellcome's long-term
earnings prospects.
Nevertheless, all are convinced of Wellcome's immediate prospects. The
company is the fastest growing among the world's 20 largest pharmaceutical
companies. Sales are likely to continue rising, while there is also plenty
of scope for improving margins.
On the revenue side, sales of Zovirax, the group's herpes treatment, are
expected to grow 20 per cent to Pounds 820m by 1994. Annual sales of
Retrovir, the anti-HIV medicine, could reach Pounds 340m within two years.
On the margin-side, John Robb, Wellcome's chief executive, expects
improvements. Margins have improved from 15.7 per cent in 1987 to 24.6 per
cent last year. Robb has promised to reach a target of 30 per cent by 1996.
Pharmaceuticals stocks are notoriously volatile, liable to react violently
to barely comprehensible technical news. Over the next few weeks, as the
flotation approaches, Wellcome, with its narrow public shareholder base of
25 per cent, will prove no exception.
If its price continues to drop, the flotation could be worth a look. Under
the flotation rules, investors applying early will have more chance of
receiving their full allocation. They will need steel nerves.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920606

