FT922-466

FT  27 JUN 92 / Finance & the Family: Not just a black and white choice -
Investing in . . . South Africa


   By JOHN AUTHERS


SOUTH AFRICA forces a personal investor to face a unique dilemma. Any
decision you make will not just be based on investment merits, for in the
past two decades the climate of world opinion about the country has ensured
that any such move must involve ethical and political judgments as well.
Even those who had no qualms about investing in a nation governed by
apartheid still had to assess the stability of the regime. The effect of
sanctions imposed on the nation's economy also remains to be weighed.
The ideal scenario is for South Africa to transfer peacefully to a regime
which the rest of the world can stomach. This would leave the strengths of
the nation's economy intact and, by allowing sanctions to be lifted, allow
greater economic vigour.
Optimism that this could happen has grown since the release from prison of
Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, in early 1990.
However, it remains only a vague sentiment as far as big UK investors are
concerned.
Trustees of charity funds have slowly begun to warm towards South Africa -
for example, David Edwards, of the charity investment management service at
Henderson Crosthwaite, says: 'What has tended to happen over the last year
is that trustees have become less averse to the inclusion of South Africa,
and that mirrors the sentiment of the average private client.'
However, this mood has not translated into active investment. Edwards
continues: 'Now that trustees are relaxing their attitude to South Africa,
investment fundamentals come back in. And I don't think many fund managers
have put money into South Africa because it hasn't looked right, even though
the political situation looks better.'
Stuart Bell, of Pensions Investment Research Consultants, surveyed UK
pension funds in 1990 and found that about half had some restriction on
investment in South Africa. Nothing much has happened since then - the only
local authority pension fund to change its policy was that of the London
borough of Brent, following loss of control by the Labour party.
'Basically, it's still a political football,' says Bell. 'From the
commercial outlook, there has been no reason for them to amend their views
anyway.'
As a legacy of South Africa's pariah status, there are few ways to buy
direct exposure to the country in the UK. Unit trusts are authorised by the
Securities and Investments Board to invest up to 100 per cent of their funds
in the Johannesburg stock exchange, but there are no 'South Africa' unit
trusts.
Funds in a commodities or gold unit trust, however, must almost inevitably
have a considerable stake in the country. M&G's Gold & General fund, for
example, has a holding of 32.8 per cent. But the commodity and energy sector
is not one of the unit trust industry's stars. Over the year to June, the
average trust in the sector lost 11.4 per cent, according to Finstat. Over
two years this figure was 22.6 per cent, and over five years, 33 per cent.
Mary d'Eon, manager of Providence Capitol's Gold unit trust, views the
current situation as a long-term negative, but adds: 'Any sort of strife in
South Africa may make the gold price rise, which is good for the companies
as well. I have a holding of 20 per cent in the major companies, and I will
not be selling it.'
A less risky route is to gain exposure via companies quoted in the UK. Even
'ethical' investors are now prepared to do this. The Merlin Ecology unit
trust polled its unitholders and found a large majority against direct
investment in South Africa until a 'one man, one vote' system has been
achieved. However, they were prepared to invest in a company which did more
than its competitors to introduce good employment practices, and so the fund
has invested in Reckitt & Coleman.
Reinvestment in South Africa has only just started, which may explain the
market's muted reaction to the massacre in Boipatong last weekend. Mandela's
subsequent decision to withdraw from talks on democracy with the government
seemed to confirm the worst fears of the watching world, but the
Johannesburg Stock Exchange index fell a modest 42 points to 3,639, while
companies with overseas assets, such as Lonrho and Minorco, actually rose.
So, ethical arguments aside, is this the time to buy into South Africa? The
answer must be: definitely not.
Jonathan Martin Smith, of the South Africa and mining department of
stockbrokers Williams De Broe, is positive about the country, but says: 'You
have a deep recession in South Africa and the timetable for recovery is put
back by this violence. I'm not saying it's not at the bottom. I'm just
saying it's wise to wait.'
For the longer term he remains confident: 'The will is there on both sides
to make this succeed. We are not entering into a civil war situation.
Violence will not disappear. But the government and the ANC are powerful
enough to control it.'
South African exchange controls are another reason for staying put. There is
a separate currency for external investors, the financial rand, which is
usually at a substantial discount to the main commercial rand. Foreign
investors thus have a strong disincentive to sell, particularly in troubled
times, when the discount grows - it went up to 27 per cent following the
news of Boipatong.
So, South Africa needs to be watched. But those who do not already have
exposure should keep it that way until the political situation is much
clearer.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
FACTFILE: SOUTH AFRICA
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Population (inc. homelands):                                   38.5m
Gross Domestic Product:                             Pounds 190.04 bn
Market Capitalisation:                                Pounds 98.7 bn
Inflation Rate:                                        15.6 per cent
Three-month Treasury Bill Rate:                       13.97 per cent
Currency & Exchange Rate:          Pounds 1 = 5.2265 commercial Rand
                                    Pounds 1 = 7.1220 financial Rand
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page V

920627

