FT923-9776

FT  03 AUG 92 / Turkey faces formidable economic tasks


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ISTANBUL


TURKEY'S economic policies are broadly on the right path but the country
faces a formidable task in maintaining growth and cutting inflation, the
Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development warns in
a report published today.
In its first report since Mr Suleyman Demirel's coalition government was
formed last November, the OECD calls for radical reform of state-owned
industries, wage restraint in the public sector and closer co-operation
between government and central bank on financing the budget deficit.
The OECD says the 'broad lines of the new government's economic programme go
in the right direction' but warns Turkey faces a tough task to maintain
growth, to meet the increase in the labour force and at the same time tackle
the perennial problem of 'persistently high inflation'.
Turkey's gross national product is projected to grow by 5 per cent in 1992,
falling to 3.75 per cent in 1993. The recovery will be driven by household
consumption, bolstered by the generous pay increases of 1991. The current
account is forecast to remain in surplus at around  1/2 per cent of GNP over
the next two years. With a tight budget and monetary restraint, inflation
should fall in 1993 from around 70 per cent, the report says.
Much will depend on being able to cut public borrowing, the report says.
This jumped to a record 12.5 per cent of GNP in 1991. This year, it is
forecast at 8.8 per cent of GNP.
The OECD warns that failure to curb public borrowing could result in higher
inflation, and a faster depreciation of the Turkish lira, boosting the
interest payments on Turkey's foreign debt. This in turn will fuel domestic
interest rates, causing a shortfall in projected budget appropriations for
domestic debt.
The OECD calls for spending discipline and a more reliable revenue
generation mechanism, suggesting that many of the deficit reducing measures,
such as the tax amnesty, are of an irregular nature, and will be difficult
to repeat in 1993.
The OECD urges the government, when financing the deficit, to limit its use
of short-term advances from the central bank, which increase the money
supply and fuel inflation. Under the budget law a ceiling was set for
short-term advances from the central bank. However the government has
already exceeded that figure.
In addition to monetary restraint, the report says unit labour costs will
need to trail prices if Turkish exporters are to regain their competitive
edge, and new employment opportunities created. Given the weight of wages in
government expenditures, the report says the 'public sector has an important
responsibility' in restraining wage growth.
However, the report concludes that only through comprehensive reform will
the state sector industries 'cease to be a drain on public finance and a
threat to macro-economic stability'.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920803

