FT922-4209

FT  06 JUN 92 / Wine: And you can quote me on the wine . . . - Jancis
Robinson with some pithy comments from the wine world


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


PHILIPPE Hernandez of the major Bordeaux negociant SDVF on relative values
in red bordeaux: 'The crus classes are simply too expensive. If you taste
blind one of the many really excellent crus bourgeois against a cru classe,
there is much less of a difference than in the old days. You will have to
pay four or five times more for the cru classe, but it certainly won't taste
four or five times better.'
Chateaux currently outperforming their bourgeois status are Angludet, Beau
Site, Chasse Spleen, Citran, Gloria, Haut-Marbuzet, Lilian-Ladouys, Meyney,
Monbrison, Ormes-de-Pez, Pibran, Potensac, Sociando-Mallet, La Tour de By,
Tour Haut-Caussan and Verdignan. British claret specialists include Adnams
(Tour Haut Caussan 1989 Pounds 8.20); Bute Wines of the Isle of Bute tel:
0700-502730 (La Tour de By 1985 Pounds 8.03); Davisons shops in London and
the Home Counties (Beau Site 1986 at Pounds 8.45); Hungerford Wine Co of
Berkshire (one of the few to make a serious offer of 1991s, including
Lilian-Ladouys); Justerini & Brooks of London SW1 and Edinburgh (wide
range); Lay & Wheeler of Colchester (Chasse-Spleen most vintages and the
lovely Angludet 1990 at Pounds 86 a case ex-cellars); and Peatlings of East
Anglia and London EC1 (La Tour de By 1986 at Pounds 7.85).
Angelo Gaja, who makes Italy's most expensive wines, on the Veneto fungicide
debacle: 'Britain was the main country affected, because the British buy
such cheap wine.'
Britons could prove otherwise by lashing out on Gaja's stunning Gaia & Rey
Chardonnay 1988, a mere Pounds 31 a bottle from Valvona & Crolla of
Edinburgh. A determined iconoclast, he spurns barrel fermentation as too
much of a good thing and is proud of having increased yields slightly, to 38
hectolitres per hectare, claiming this results in less alcoholic and better
balanced wines. His dream is to make great Riesling 'because it, not
Sauvignon, is the great challenger to Chardonnay'.
Dirk Richter, of the Mosel estate Max Ferd Richter, on what might have been:
'I carefully left half a hectare of grapes on the vine to make a 1991
Eiswein, but one December night every single one was eaten by 17 wild boar -
even though the vineyard is right next to the village.' The year 1990 is one
of acidity, unusually high acid plus ripeness. Drink 1989s, then 1988s, then
1990s which may well gain the same fame as the 1921s eventually.'
His Brauneberg Juffer Riesling Kabinett 1990 (about Pounds 6.75 from
Bibendum of London NW1 and Summerlee Wines of Earls Barton (0604-810488). It
is in retreat at the moment but is worth buying by the case to provide a
really revitalising aperitif over the next two, yes two, decades.
Annegret Reh-Gartner, of Reichsgraf von Kesselstatt, a Mosel house being put
aggressively in order, on the super-ripe 1990 vintage: 'To satisfy demand in
the German market where a Kabinett sells out in a year but a (riper) Auslese
takes five years to sell, we had to downgrade lots of Spatlese to Kabinett
and Auslese to Spatlese. But the downgrading was too extreme. We have spoilt
our customers.'
Von Kesselstatt's impressive Josephshofer Kabinett Trocken 1990 was actually
downgraded two categories, from Auslese to Kabinett, but because it has the
dreaded word Trocken (dry) on the label, von Kesselstatt's importers O W
Loeb of London SE1 won't even think of importing it. What a shame that a few
poor early specimens spoilt the reputation of Germany's drier Trocken and
Halbtrocken wines abroad. Nowadays the Germans won't drink anything else -
but the joke is that most good producers in Germany are tending to make
their wines drier in all categories anyway, often simply omitting the T-word
on the label for export markets. Other stockists of von Kesselstatt's 1990s
include Waverly Vintners in Scotland, Berry Bros & Rudd of London SW1 and
The Wine Society of Stevenage.
Michel Juillot, peasant king of Mercurey on oenology (the science of
winemaking) :'Oenology is the motorway. You get there fast but you eat badly
en route. Me, I prefer to take the back roads and to stop at little country
inns on the way.'
His Mercureys, both red and white, are a revelation and deserve to be kept
far longer than most (his 1985 whites are just reaching top form now). Buy
them from Domaine Direct of London EC1 (071-837-1142) for Pounds 7-Pounds 12
a bottle, tasting like wines costing twice as much.
Roger Piquet of Chateaux du Languedoc, a group of truly quality-conscious
producers committed to the long-scorned Midi wine scene for the long term,
on a sea-change of opinion in France: 'Since February or so we've seen
people discover just what good things there are here. They do comparative
tastings with, say, a Macon Blanc and a Bordeaux petit chateau and see what
value we can offer. We're benefitting from the French consumers' rebellion
at the high prices charged in Bordeaux, Burgundy and Beaujolais.'
And no wonder. Even the Chateaux of the Languedoc are able to offer
seriously well-made wines in the crucial Pounds 3.50-Pounds 4.50 bracket.
Piquet's suave red Minervois Chateau de Gourgazaud 1989 is Pounds 3.55 at
Sainsbury's. Even denser and more dramatic reds come from fellow-member in
the Corbieres, Chateau de Lastours whose Cuvee Simone Descamps is well worth
Pounds 4.99 a bottle from Peter Dominic, Bottoms Up, Wine Rack and Thresher
Wine Shops. Blends of interesting grape varieties such as Viognier, Syrah
and Mourvedre from the historic Abbaye de Valmagne are sold for little more
than Pounds 4 by Eldridge Pope, of Dorchester, and its associated Reynier
Wine Library shops in London EC3 and SW1. Domaine de Raissac's particularly
good Syrah 1990 and Merlot 1991 can be had from Haughton Fine Wines of
Chorley, Cheshire.
Other exciting single varietals from Chateau de Coussergues are available
from Bordeaux Direct of Reading, while those from the Domaine de Montmarin
next door are sold by Winecellars of London SW18.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920606

