FT923-9825

FT  03 AUG 92 / Economics Notebook: Powerhouse of the UK runs out of steam


   By PETER NORMAN


Is Britain's imbalanced regional economic structure proving bad for the
nation's welfare?
For some years the concentration of economic and political power in the
south east of England has appeared increasingly anomalous in a Europe where
regional influences are of growing importance. But the ability of the south
to function as a powerhouse for the UK economy has tended to offset such
concerns.
Now, with the economy showing no signs of coming out of recession, fears are
growing that conditions in the south may instead be acting a as brake on
recovery.
The recession has been less savage in northern England, Scotland and Wales
than in the heavily indebted south east. Unemployment increased 111 per cent
in Greater London between April 1990 and June 1992 and jumped 192 per cent
in the rest of the south east. But it rose only 16 per cent in Scotland and
29 per cent in the north of England over the same period.
In the past week, two reports suggest that this trend will continue in the
short term at least. Business Strategies, a consultancy specialising in
regional issues, forecasts growth of 1 per cent in the small East Anglian
economy this year, 0.8 per cent in the north west and 0.5 per cent in
Yorkshire and Humberside. By contrast, it expects output in the south east
to drop by 0.4 per cent this year and in Greater London by 0.8 per cent.
In his latest 'Economic and Financial Outlook', published today, Mr David
Kern, the chief economist of National Westminster Bank, expects the south
east economy, including Greater London, to contract by 1.1 per cent this
year and that unemployment in the region will jump by 19 per cent in the 12
months to next June.
By mid-1993, around one in three of Britain's expected 3.05m jobless will be
in Greater London and the remainder of the south east. However, output north
of a line from the Wash to the Bristol Channel will be barely changed with
unemployment in these regions only slightly higher, Mr Kern believes.
Economists at James Capel, the London stockbrokers, have taken the study of
regional economic trends further. They say the regional imbalance in UK
economic growth and unemployment explains the failure of consumer spending
to recover and pull the economy out of recession.
Consumer spending is the largest component of demand in the UK and has in
the past 10 years acted as the main engine of economic growth. But it
declined in real terms by 1.8 per cent last year and a further 0.7 per cent
in the first quarter compared with the final three months of 1991.
Most explanations for the poor performance of consumer demand have centred
on the after-effects of the sharp rise in household indebtedness in the late
1980s, especially in the south east. However, the James Capel team, headed
by Mr Keith Skeoch, the company's chief economist, argues that the problems
of debt and the housing market fail to provide a full explanation of the
fall in consumption.
The Capel study concludes that unemployment in the south east has a more
powerful impact on spending than suggested by its direct effect on real
income growth and debt service obligations. Increases in unemployment in the
region seem to affect strongly the savings habits of people who are in work
and do not have debt problems.
The Capel team sum up their findings in a simple mathematical formula. 'If
the unemployment rate in the south east rises by 1 per cent relative to the
national rate, national consumption will fall by 1 per cent,' they say.
The reasons for this lie in the south east's traditionally high levels of
consumption. The region contains just over 30 per cent of the UK population
but accounts for more than 35 per cent of total UK consumer spending because
consumption per head is 17 per cent higher than the national average.
The south east spends nearly 25 per cent more per head on housing compared
with the rest of Britain, making the region especially vulnerable to a
housing market slump. Personal disposable income in the south is 14 per cent
higher than the national average.
These figures explain how the south east was the powerhouse behind the
economic boom of the 1980s and why rising unemployment in the region has a
big impact on consumer spending. The problem has been exacerbated by a sharp
rise in savings in the south east by people not directly affected by job
losses.
Saving in the south east slumped in the 1980s, with the result that personal
savings as a percentage of personal disposable income fell in the region to
less than 3 per cent in 1987. Since then, the sharp rise in unemployment in
the south east has coincided with - and triggered - a sharp recovery in the
region's savings ratio.
The Capel economists calculate that between 1987 and 1990 (the most recent
date for regional savings figures), savers in the south east accounted for
45 per cent of the increased flow of personal savings in Britain. This
trend, which subdued consumption at the national level, is assumed to have
continued.
If the link between high south east unemployment and consumer spending is
valid, the future must surely be grim. NatWest's Mr Kern, for example,
anticipates an increase of 150,000 in the number of jobless in the south
east over the next 12 months.
But Mr Skeoch's team hesitates to pile on the gloom. Although the sharp rise
in the saving ratio in the south east has been a major factor depressing
consumption, they believe that the 'worst may well be behind us' because
consumers will have adjusted their balance sheets and worked off their
excess debt. Even more important, they say that real income growth may have
picked up since the first quarter of this year.
These conditions could produce a 'robust revival' in consumer spending by
the end of the year. For Mr Lamont and his embattled Treasury colleagues
that will not be a moment too soon.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920803

