FT922-4446

FT  05 JUN 92 / World Stock Markets: Analysts cautious about Elkem's revival
 -This year's recovery leaves the shares a long way below their best


   By KAREN FOSSLI


Oslo has reacted quietly to the Danish referendum vote this week but its
favourite bombed-out equity, Elkem, has burst into life again with its free
shares up from NKr102 last Friday, through NKr114 on Wednesday to NKr117
yesterday.
The light metals producer staged an apparently impressive first quarter
share price recovery, the free shares rising by 26.5 per cent against a 3.4
per cent gain for the Norwegian component of the FT-Actuaries World Index
series.
This was as nothing compared with the gains for April alone: 38.4, and 2.1
per cent respectively, after which there was a 3.7 per cent fall in May,
compared with a 2.0 per cent gain for the market as a whole.
However, analysts are inclined to say that inherent financial and cyclical
risks should restrain further advances in the shares. Their caution is
understandable, for Elkem's share price performance since 1989 has made the
most terrifying of rollercoasters seem tame.
Peaking in 1989 at NKr400, Elkem ended last year's free-fall at NKr59 after
plunging to a year low of NKr39 on December 2. By comparison, it achieved a
year's high in 1991 of NKr185.
Mr Anders Braatenius, an analyst with Goldman Sachs in London, says that
Elkem's ebullience stems from a 5 to 10 per cent rise in US and European
metal prices, and a better-than-expected first quarter financial
performance. Ferro manganese prices seem to be the only obstacle to overall
price strength as they continue to fall.
But Mr Braatenius believes that Elkem's glory days are over: 'I don't think
Elkem will ever get back into the NKr400 range,' he says, 'and
fundamentally, we cannot justify a price higher that NKr110.'
He believes that a restructuring of the domestic ferro-silicon market could
help shore up Elkem once the company's consolidation begins to yield
positive results. Last year, the company posted sales of NKr7.8bn and a
pre-tax loss of NKr572m compared with the previous year's NKr230m pre-tax
loss on NKr8bn of sales. Since end-December 1990 it has shed some 600 jobs,
but plans call for a further 400 to be cut this year. Elkem reckons each
employee costs it up to NKr300,000 annually.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd points out that with a very weak balance sheet and
gearing in excess of 200 per cent at the end of last year, Elkem's net debt
position could deteriorate further this year. If the cycle does not turn by
mid-1993, it warns, 'Elkem will almost certainly be in serious financial
problems'.
'Elkem has lost market share in Europe as it has to comply with a minimum
price agreement between the EC and Norway,' adds BZW, although the aluminium
business is 'holding up well' due to a large share of 1991 production having
been sold at higher prices.
'However,' say the brokers, 'Elkem's markets are subject to over-capacity
and unusually high metal stock levels which is why we expect only a minor
improvement in the market balance.'
BZW says that Elkem's main objective - to rein in costs to a level where the
company can remain in the black at the trough of the cycle - has proved an
impossible aim so far. 'The rewards (of the Elkem stock) are potentially
great but the financial risk leaves it in the highly speculative category,'
it adds.
But Elkem may yet surprise the market further. Mr Bjoern Segrov, an Elkem
executive, highlights the company's policy of disposing of non-strategic
assets.
Elkem is seeking to shed its real estate shareholdings and, in addition, it
is currently in negotiations with the Danish company, Rockwool, which is
considering the acquisition of Elkem's 50 per cent Norwegian Rockwool
shareholding in three plants in Norway.
Mr Segrov adds that Elkem's board hopes to appoint a permanent president and
chief executive officer before July, but this does not imply a change of
direction in strategy. Mr Fredrik Vogt Lorentzen, Elkem's former CEO left
the company mid-March after failing to achieve his personal goal to restore
the company to profitability even in 'bad times'.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

920605

