FT923-9712

FT  04 AUG 92 / High-tech trials urged: Blue Arrow judge calls for computer
support for fraud cases


   By JOHN MASON


JUDGES should make greater use of computer technology to help to keep
complex fraud trials manageable, Mr Justice Brooke, the second Blue Arrow
trial judge, said yesterday.
Mr Justice Brooke - who replaced Mr Justice McKinnon after the first Blue
Arrow trial - was speaking after formally acquitting the remaining four
defendants charged with fraud over the affair.
Not-guilty verdicts were returned against Mr Paul Smallwood and Mr Tim
Brown, both former equities directors with UBS Phillips & Drew; Mr Charles
Villiers, the former chairman of County NatWest; and Ms Elizabeth Brimelow,
County's former compliance director. Their costs, thought to approach Pounds
1m, were awarded from public funds.
Contributing to the debate on reforming the handling of large fraud trials,
Mr Justice Brooke said the public and business community were 'justifiably
looking with impatience' to the courts' finding ways to manage such trials.
Judges in such cases faced an enormous intellectual and physical burden, he
said. Computer support was crucial.
American experience had shown that the use of laptop computers by judges
could save much time and cost. Edited evidence could be recorded on computer
within 20 seconds of its being given. With the judge freed from making
handwritten notes, up to 10 per cent more evidence could be heard in a day.
'It is, I believe, incumbent on English judges to be willing to learn new
techniques if they may make such a substantial difference to the length of a
trial or the overall cost of proceedings,' said Mr Justice Brooke, who had
planned to use a laptop in the now cancelled second and third Blue Arrow
trials.
To reduce court time further, he called for firmer timetabling of legal
arguments heard when juries are out. He added that his suggestion, made
during an earlier hearing, that electronic clocks should be installed in
courts to register the mounting financial cost of trials every 15 minutes
was not entirely a joke.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920804

