FT924-6078

FT  24 NOV 92 / Pressure mounts on ministers over terror cover


   By RICHARD LAPPER and NORMA COHEN


INDUSTRY and its insurers could ask the government to help them launch a new
reinsurance scheme that would pay for any losses caused by terrorists.
The Association of Insurance and Risk Managers in Industry and Commerce
(Airmic), which represents more than 300 leading companies, and the
Association of British Insurers (ABI), the industry trade association, are
examining details of such a scheme, after a meeting in London yesterday.
The move comes amid widespread concern among businesses about the probable
withdrawal of terrorism cover by most commercial insurance policies. They
fear they will be left without cover for damage by bombs. Mr Alan Fleming of
Airmic said: 'We have to get industry's strength of feeling across to
government.'
Yesterday's meeting was also attended by representatives from the CBI and Mr
John Greenway, Conservative MP for Ryedale and chairman of the Commons
all-party insurance and financial services committee.
Airmic and the ABI are unlikely to call for the government to introduce its
Northern Ireland compensation scheme in mainland Britain. Mr Greenway said
that would give a 'huge propaganda advantage to the IRA'.
Ministers are thought to be concerned about cost. The government has paid
about Pounds 620m for property damaged by terrorists in Northern Ireland
since 1968, while claims from the two London bombs in April are an estimated
Pounds 800m.
Instead, the focus is on ways in which the government and business could
support the reinsurance market, allowing insurers to continue offering cover
against terrorism.
Mr Fleming said Airmic had presented a proposal to the ABI, although no
details were made available.
In a letter to ministers last week, Mr Greenway suggested that the
government work 'in partner-ship with the private sector to provide the
levels of reinsurance that the market was able to offer in the past'.
The Baltic Exchange yesterday agreed a settlement with its insurers for its
St Mary Axe building, which was damaged in the April bomb attack in the
City. Royal Insurance and other insurers have agreed to pay the Pounds 27.6m
claim in full.
Sales of all types of life assurance policies fell in the third quarter of
this year, while sales of single-premium policies, the industry's most
successful product, fell for the first time since 1984, the ABI said, Norma
Cohen writes.
Mr Mike Jones, chief executive of the association, said the drop largely
reflected the recession and general economic uncertainty.
Sales of personal pensions remained buoyant, largely because of a rise of 35
per cent in single-premium business. Tax rebates from the Department of
Social Services fell by 19 per cent. That suggests that much of the growth
in personal pensions may be due to people who have exhausted all the
available tax benefits topping up their existing pensions.
Letters, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921124

