FT924-12131

FT  22 OCT 92 / London Stock Exchange: Big gains in equities after policy
shift


   By STEVE THOMPSON


THE FUNDAMENTAL shift in economic policy detailed on Tuesday evening by Mr
John Major, the UK prime minister, was the trigger for another burst of
enthusiastic buying in London's equity market.
The prime minister's new strategy - 'Growth is what we need; a strategy for
growth is what we are going to have' - gave an immediate shot in the arm to
a market already on the upward tack and looking for a series of Europe-wide
interest rate cuts.
The Footsie 100 index followed Tuesday's near-55 point jump with a further
improvement of 28.7 to 2,645.7. The latest rise in the market was
accompanied by a sharp surge in activity.
Equity turnover expanded rapidly yesterday, when over 850m shares changed
hands in the market. Dealers said that figure almost certainly would see the
value of customer business transacted in the equity market top the crucial
Pounds 1bn mark. Customer business on Tuesday, when the markets factored in
hopes of more cuts in interest rates, totalled Pounds 1.22bn.
The shift in strategy by the government coincided with a general round of
easing of monetary policy across Europe. The Bundesbank, as expected,
signalled an easing of policy yesterday by encouraging lower money market
rates, albeit by slightly less than some of the more optimistic market
observers had hoped.
Marketmakers, already wrong-footed by last week's sudden one-point reduction
in UK interest rates and the recent unexpected backing down over pit
closures, moved quickly to hoist share prices as the market opened.
The Footsie 100 index was up over 25 points within an hour and was driven
some 43 points higher at its best, in mid-morning, as UK and overseas
institutions, both piled into the market.
There was more good news for investors, with official retail sales figures
for September showing a better than expected rise of 0.2 per cent; the
general consensus in the market had been for a marginal decline in retail
sales over the month.
Cyclical stocks, including retailers, building materials and contractors,
properties and leisure stocks were keenly bought. But the utilities,
regarded as safe, defensive areas of the economy, attracted periodic bouts
of profit-taking and closed with widespread falls. Food retailers also
suffered, with at least two of the City's leading broking firms adopting a
cautious stance.
BP and Shell were given a rough ride after broker downgrades while Lloyds
Bank followed Barclays in being downgraded by market analysts.
A late bout of profit-taking in the equity market, caused by a lacklustre
performance by Wall Street, a slight decline in short sterling and the
sterling exchange rate, took the Footsie 100 off its best in the afternoon,
but dealers remain happy with the short and medium-term outlook for the
market. 'We'll see nothing more than small setbacks in the near-term,' said
the head of marketmaking at one UK securities house. Another market observer
said the fundamental change in the political and economic outlook could see
the Footsie challenge its all-time high of 2,744.5, achieved on May 11 this
year.

The Financial Times


London Page 44

921022

