FT922-419

FT  27 JUN 92 / EC leaders unanimously reappoint Delors as president


   By Our Foreign and Political Staff


   LISBON


EUROPEAN Community leaders last night declared their determination to save
the Maastricht treaty and reappointed its principle architect, Mr Jacques
Delors, to a further two-year term as European Commission president.
But while Mr Delors was unanimously reappointed at a late-night session of
the Community's Lisbon summit, the leaders remained divided over the pace of
admitting new member countries and the level of the EC budget.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said that although Denmark had rejected
Maastricht, which sets out closer union, 'the Community should go ahead at
the same speed with all 12 passengers on board'.
Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, Denmark's foreign minister, hoped that ratification
by Germany, France and the UK - coupled with a drive towards more open and
decentralised decision-making - would 'lead to a new landscape, where new
decisions can be taken'.
Mr Ellemann-Jensen was apparently hinting at the possibility of a second
referendum in Denmark, but he added: 'Political leaders should have the
courage to propose changes to their electors.' This could equally refer to
the possibility of renegotiating aspects of Maastricht, a prospect firmly
ruled out by all 12 governments.
Britain's tactic of luring Denmark back into the fold by starting
enlargement talks with European Free Trade Association countries during
London's forthcoming EC presidency found little support.
Mr Ruud Lubbers, the Dutch prime minister, suggested that, with the southern
EC countries pushing for more Community aid and the north preoccupied with
enlargement, public opinion would only be satisfied if the summit gave equal
weight to both issues.
EC leaders will try to achieve this in today's final communique. Just how
difficult this will be was underlined last night when Mr Anibal Cavaco
Silva, Portugal's prime minister, suspended the summit's plenary session.
Instead there would be talks with Mr Kohl and Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the
Spanish prime minister, standard-bearer of the south's quest for more
structural aid.
Earlier debate had shown positions far apart. A majority, led by Germany and
the UK, was opposed to making firm pledges of money. They backed a
suggestion by Mr Delors that a plan to increase EC spending by a third
should be stretched out over seven, rather than five, years.
The Lisbon summit, Page 3
Man in the News, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920627

