FT922-7424

FT  19 MAY 92 / Management (The Growing Business): How to find a partner to
fly the flag in Europe - Many British companies have been broadening their
horizons in pursuit of growth


   By HESTER THOMAS


Three years ago, Gerard Lecoeur and David Mackay, directors of Crabtree
Hall, a London-based design company, sat down to talk about the future of
their industry.
They thought that there were too many design companies in Britain and
decided that they should reduce their total dependence on the UK market.
'We decided that a quick way to make an impact,' explains Mackay, 'would be
to ally ourselves with a French design company which had complementary
skills to our own'. Since Lecoeur is French, it seemed the obvious answer.
By the beginning of 1990, having researched the market, Crabtree Hall
settled for the Paris-based company Plan Creatif. A year later, a joint
venture company, Crabtree Hall-Plan Creatif was launched.
'The aim,' says Mackay, 'is to identify areas where we can operate together,
amalgamating our skills on large projects such as the design of shopping
centres'.
At the same time, both Crabtree Hall and Plan Creatif continue to operate as
individual concerns.
Small companies look for partners in continental Europe for a whole host of
reasons.
Ake Franzen, managing director of Glassfibre Flagpoles, based in Darlington
in the north-east of England, wanted to sell in Europe because he considered
his company had saturated the UK market.
The Slough-based marketing services group, Clarke Hooper, specialises in
sales promotion work. Barry Clarke, group chairman, initially wanted
European partners so that the company could refer its international clients
to reputable groups in other countries.
Finding a partner in Europe can be an onerous task. Crabtree Hall eventually
found its partner through published information.
Linda Shoppee, business development director, obtained a list of France's
top 25 design groups from a directory published by a French media magazine.
Shoppee wrote to most of the design groups asking for more background
information. Those which were affiliated to advertising agencies - and thus
not independent - were quickly dropped, as were those which did not have
design services complementary to Crabtree Hall's.
Shoppee then visited 10 companies from which she drew up a short-list of
three for Mackay and Lecoeur to see.
'We felt an immediate rapport with Plan Creatif,' says Mackay. 'The two
principals, Claude Braunstein and Clement Rousseau were of similar ages and
temperaments to ourselves. In terms of personality and attitudes, they were
our sort of people.'
Franzen found distributors and agents for his company's flagpoles by a
variety of means.
He took part in two trade missions to Belgium and Italy, organised by the
Department of Trade and Industry, coming away with distributors in each
country.
The regional development agency, Northern Development Company (NDC), was
also helpful in supplying European contacts. 'I also found distributors
through embassies, by looking up trade lists, even by reading local
telephone directories,' Franzen says.
For Clarke Hooper, finding European partners was relatively easy. Before
setting up his company, Clarke had worked as European vice-president of an
advertising agency and had made contacts in the sales promotion industry.
He started by contacting old colleagues, initially in Gruber Titze und Blank
in Germany and Group IPC in France, to see if they would like to set up an
informal network.
The three British companies have set up very different types of partnership.
Under guidance from its lawyers, Crabtree Hall/Plan Creatif opted for a new
legal formula - a European Economic Interest Grouping (EEIG).
Created by the European Commission, it allows companies from more than one
community country to establish a joint business venture.
Under the Crabtree Hall-Plan Creatif agreement, each partner contributes
equally to an annual marketing budget of about Pounds 125,000.
One partner acts as the lead on a project and the other invoices it in local
currency for consultancy time and expenses. Profits are shared among the
partners and taxed in their hands.
With just eight employees and little time to spare for developing close
relationships, Franzen decided to go for a more arms length approach with
his partners.
Glassfibre Flagpoles has set up exclusive trading contracts with its
distributors and agencies. It is up to each distributor and agent to develop
business in its country.
The incentive to do so comes in the form of a percentage cut of sales.
Clarke Hooper has developed the most informal of networks. From the start,
Clarke was adamant that he did not want to create a time- consuming
bureaucracy of companies.
As a result, no contracts exist and the only piece of paper that members are
asked to sign is a simple mission statement.
The network, comprising eight companies in Europe and six from other parts
of the world, has banded together to become the Promotional Consulting
Association International (PCAI).
Its main purposes are to exchange information on sales promotions and to
help one another with the implementation of international promotions.
Members contribute to an annual kitty of around Pounds 100,000 to fund the
group and they meet once a year. These various partnership agreements have
provided the companies with numerous benefits.
Both Crabtree Hall and Glassfibre Flagpoles have ceased to depend wholely on
the UK market for business. In 1991, Crabtree Hall gained Pounds 450,000 -
almost 25 per cent of its turnover - from work in Europe.
'It's more than compensated for what we lost in the UK because of the
recession,' says Mackay.
Franzen expects 50 per cent of Glassfibre Flagpoles' estimated turnover of
Pounds 1m to come from exports to Europe this year.
He has been particularly successful with his Spanish agency, Epok, which has
negotiated sales of flag poles worth about Pounds 600,000 for the Olympic
Games and Expo 92.
Of the effectiveness of PCAI, Clarke says: 'It's hard to see the results of
the partnership in our balance sheet. Mostly, it's given us access to a
world of promotional ideas and information - and that's what wins us
business.'
However, there have been direct benefits too. The partnership has
cross-referred clients successfully. Recently, PCAI's French company, Groupe
IPC, introduced its Orangina account to Clarke Hooper's US arm, Joseph
Potocki & Associates.
The benefits of forming partnerships are not only commercial. In retrospect,
Mackay realises that he and Lecoeur had worked together for so many years
that they had started to think like an old married couple.
'By bringing in the French partners, we had to re-assess our creative stance
and ideas. They continually questioned what we were doing. It's been
tremendously stimulating,' he says.
There is, however, a downside to finding European partners - not least in
time and money.
'It took us twice as long as we expected to find a partner and get things
running,' says Mackay. Crabtree Hall also spent about Pounds 12,000 on legal
fees setting up the EEIG.
Discipline is also needed to maintain the relationship. 'We meet once a
month and that's quite hard when you're very busy,' says Mackay.
'It's tempting to let things drift and say you haven't got time to see one
another.'
Staff at Crabtree Hall have also had to adjust to a French business culture,
where potential new clients have to be courted far harder than in the UK.
That involves more meetings prior to drawing up a contract.
French clients' approach to the design process is also different. 'The
French are much more philosophical and the design solution, especially in
graphic design, is often esoteric,' says Mackay. 'UK clients, in comparison,
are far more hard-nosed and practical.'
Despite the difficulties of building a new business relationship, Mackay
says the benefits of having a partner far outweigh the downside.
'It's changed our attitude. As a combined group we're larger, have a huge
breadth of work and greater capability.
'We're much more confident now about selling our skills.'
SOURCES OF INFORMATION
The Single Market: Guide to Sources of Advice, available from the Department
of Trade and Industry. Gives details about European Information Centres
(EICs) and the Business Co-operation Network (BC-Net) which help smaller
companies to identify partners in other Community countries.
Your local chamber of commerce can also put you in touch with the local EIC
or BC-Net.
Your clearing bank may be able to help: many have computer services to help
match up companies from different countries.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
WHAT YOU NEED TO THINK ABOUT WHEN LOOKING FOR PARTNERS IN EUROPE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Should you be thinking about Europe at all? Have you exploited
opportunities in the UK?
Which is the best country for you?
What kind of partner do you want? A distributor, a joint venture, an
acquisition, or an informal network with no legal ties?
Are there any foreign contacts who you can exploit? Have you the time
and money to look for a partner?
Can you speak the local language?
Do you understand the local business culture?
European companies have different financial reporting rules. Have you an
accountant who can decipher them?
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920519

