FT924-11438

FT  26 OCT 92 / Edwards to quit Lucas for TI Group


   By ROLAND RUDD


   LONDON


LUCAS Industries, one of the UK's largest engineering groups, is to lose its
chief executive designate, Mr Tony Edwards, to the rival TI Group.
Mr Edwards, who was made group managing director in February, lost the
support of his directors after a power-struggle with Sir Anthony Gill,
chairman and chief executive.
A recent board meeting decided not to appoint Mr Edwards to the top job and
instead asked Sir Anthony to remain as chief executive for a least another
year and as chairman until the end of 1994.
Sir Anthony said: 'It is disappointing Mr Edwards did not establish himself
as a suitable successor to me. It became clear in late August that it was
not going to work.'
He has approached somebody to replace Mr Edwards and an announcement is
expected shortly.
Mr Edwards' resignation is the second to hit Lucas in a year. In March, Mr
David Hankinson, then finance director, unexpectedly resigned after losing
key boardroom decisions.
Mr Edwards had been credited by analysts with transforming Lucas Aerospace
from three nationally-based companies into a leading player in Europe's
aerospace components sector.
However, Sir Anthony said Lucas Aerospace was already a leading player in
Europe when Mr Edwards took charge. 'To credit Mr Edwards with transforming
the aerospace division is not true. It recently reported the lowest
operating profits for seven years, he said.'
Sir Anthony said he received a letter from Mr Edwards on Thursday telling
him he intended to join the TI Group by December.
Lucas recently announced a three-year restructuring programme involving
4,000 job cuts and the sale of companies not central to its aerospace and
automotive business.
Pre-tax profits fell to Pounds 22.5m (Dollars 36.7m) in the year to July
from Pounds 82.8m a year ago. A net loss of Pounds 8.8m compared with a net
profit of Pounds 49.4m last time.
TI Group will contribute to Dowty's pension fund after a winding-up
valuation by the actuary showed a possible shortfall of about Pounds 11m.
Dowty, taken over by TI Group in June, ceased contributions to the pension
fund earlier this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921026

