FT924-6165

FT  23 NOV 92 / Test flight ushers in new era for long distance travellers


   By PAUL BETTS


   HONOLULU


AN AIRBUS A340 - the new flagship of the European aircraft consortium - set
a record for a non-stop passenger flight from Europe when it touched down in
Honolulu at the weekend after 16 hours and 12,500km.
The Lufthansa flight to Honolulu was part of an exhaustive airworthiness
certification exercise for the new aircraft. The crew rested during the
flight in bunk beds in a special compartment below the passenger cabin.
To make the time pass during the otherwise uneventful flight, passengers
were treated to what seemed an unending banquet of food, a wine tasting
accompanied by classical music, and live music by two Hawaiian minstrels
accompanied by a Hawaiian dancer. This sort of special treatment is unlikely
to be available when regular Lufthansa and Air France flights with the A340
begin next year.
The introduction of the wide-bodied, four-engined A340 is expected to usher
in a new era of long distance non-stop flights. In its Dash 200 version, it
has the longest range of any civil aircraft in the world. It can carry 263
passengers up to 14,500 kilometres on 16 to 17-hour non-stop flights. It
will also enable Airbus to challenge more aggressively the traditional
dominance in this market of the US manufacturers.
After the Lufthansa flight touched down, Mr Jean Pierson, the Airbus chief
executive, warned that the commercial aircraft industry will remain under
intense pressure well into next year and probably into 1994.
Despite the deep recession in the airline industry, Mr Jean Pierson, the
Airbus chief executive, said he still expected the consortium to show an
operating profit this year.
But net profit risked being hit by financial provisions to cover future
aircraft delivery risks as well as possible order cancellations and
deferrals by financially troubled airlines.
'Nobody knows when the pick-up will finally come,' Mr Pierson acknowledged.
Airbus reported last year the first operating profit in its 20-year history
totalling about Dollars 220m (Pounds 145.4m). It is expecting to report a
similar operating surplus this year. This reflects a steady rate of
deliveries during the current year which are expected to reach about 160
aircraft, similar to the 1991 figure.
Long-range flights and frozen chickens, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921123

