FT924-11358

FT  27 OCT 92 / International Company News: Cragnotti puts Lawson Marden
into focus - The Canadian packaging group's progress since the Italians took
a stake


   By BERNARD SIMON


FOR THE past nine months, a string of Canadian consumer-goods analysts have
encouraged clients to buy shares in Lawson Mardon, the Toronto-based
international packaging maker.
Investors are now discovering that they might have done better to wait.
Earlier this month, Lawson floated a new equity issue at a considerable
discount to market levels. The underwriters, led by Wood Gundy, have
struggled to find buyers.
The CDollars 106m (USDollars 85.40m) issue is a landmark for Lawson. In one
sense, it is a sign of the progress the company has made in the 18 months
since it was taken under the wing of Cragnotti & Partners, the Italian
investment group.
The extra capital is required if Cragnotti is to realise its ambition of
propelling Lawson from a base of flexible packaging, folding cartons and
labels in the UK and Canada into a much more powerful force across
continental Europe and North America.
But Lawson also badly needs to strengthen its balance sheet. The company was
keen to press ahead with the new equity issue to reassure lenders, led by
Bank of Nova Scotia, with which it will soon renegotiate its CDollars 160m
loan facility. Long-term debt has risen almost 50 per cent in the past year
to CDollars 297m, bringing its debt-to-equity ratio up to 1:1. With the
pinch of recession compounded by the cost of revamping operations, Lawson
has generated little capital lately from its own business. It earned a
minuscule CDollars 1.1m in the first six months of this year, including a
one-off CDollars 15m restructuring charge.
A 3 per cent rise in sales, to CDollars 627m, was due largely to recent
acquisitions and foreign currency windfalls stemming from a weak Canadian
dollar. Almost three-quarters of Lawson's sales are in the UK.
The unusual combination of a head office in Canada, the leading market in
Britain, and a controlling shareholder in Italy has its origins in the 1950s
when a Canadian packaging company, Lawson & Jones, forged links with UK
printers Mardon Son and Hall.
The combined company was later taken over by BAT Industries, the UK tobacco
group. BAT sold its stake in 1985 through a management buyout, but cigarette
and tobacco packaging continues to be a pillar of Lawson's business both in
the UK and Canada.
Cragnotti, whose shareholders include Ferruzzi, Swiss Bank Corp, Credit
Lyonnais and Banco di Napoli, bought a 48 per cent voting interest in Lawson
early last year with the aim of expanding in an industry which has gained a
reputation for being less volatile than most others.
Cragnotti reasons not only that profits should remain reasonably stable but
that the packaging industry will have little trouble persuading banks to
lend it money through thick and thin.
Mr Andrea Mattiussi, who was a senior Cragnotti executive before taking over
as Lawson's president last April, has devoted his energies over the past six
months to bringing a sharper focus to Lawson's business and cutting costs.
He commutes between Milan, London and Toronto, and calls his briefcase and
cellular telephone 'my office',
'He's very, very determined to make money at this level of business,' says
Mr Patrick Slattery, analyst at Maison Placements of Toronto and one of
several Canadian stock market watchers who are recommending Lawson shares.
Divisional managers have been told that any new capital investment must meet
a target of a 1 to 3 per cent annual rise in production volumes, but a cut
of between 3 per cent and 9 per cent a year in costs.
Mr Mattiussi has trimmed the workforce, centralised many corporate functions
(such as advertising) and tried to create an employee culture which puts the
company's interests above those of any individual division. Six out of nine
vice-presidents have left, and a new generation of younger executives has
been promoted.
On his travels, Mr Mattiussi has also been cajoling customers to co-operate
in the belt-tightening in the form of lower inventories and fewer salesmen.
'Half the reduction (in costs) can remain in our pockets, and half can go to
our customers,' Mr Mattiussi says.
He predicts that sales per employee will rise to at least CDollars 190,000
by December, a 24 per cent improvement over the year.
Although the austerity drive and the financial restructuring are by no means
complete, Lawson already has its eye on expansion. The immediate aim is to
transform it into a 'really European company,' Mr Mattiussi says.
Earlier this month, Lawson paid Cragnotti CDollars 13.2m in cash plus a
CDollars 51.5m interest-free bond for Cartonajes Suner, one of Spain's
largest packaging groups. An acquisition is now being lined up in Italy.
These purchases give Lawson a manufacturing presence in southern Europe, but
the idea is also to open up export markets for high-value flexible packaging
made by its UK factories.
Lawson could end up biting off an even bigger mouthful in North America.
Cragnotti is negotiating to buy the US division of Del Monte Foods from
Merrill Lynch and other investors who organised a leveraged buyout of the
San Francisco-based company in early 1990.
Should Cragnotti's bid succeed, it would spin off the Del Monte packaging
interests to Lawson. This would double the Canadian company's business in
the US, where it has only three plants specialising in detergent boxes,
labels, lottery tickets and postcards.
Mr Mattiussi hopes the infusion of capital from the recent equity issue
would give Lawson the strength to seek a large acquisition or merger during
1993.
One possible target is Mexico, whose packaging industry is expected to
benefit greatly both from domestic growth and the opportunities presented by
the North American free trade agreement. 'We have to get there before the
Americans,' Mr Mattiussi says.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921027

