FT924-6247

FT  23 NOV 92 / Irish punt, Danish krone seen as targets for selling


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


THE weekend realignment of currencies in the European exchange rate
mechanism met with a negative response from currency analysts and economists
who forecast increased tensions on the foreign exchange markets in the days
ahead.
The Irish punt and the Danish krone were singled out as candidates for
renewed attack after the 6 per cent devaluations of the Spanish peseta and
Portuguese escudo were criticised as 'too little, too late'.
Analysts said that outside the ERM, they expected speculative selling of the
Norwegian krone and last night Norway's central bank moved to bolster the
currency by raising its key overnight lending rate from 17 to 25 per cent
with effect from today. The krone has been under pressure since Sweden
floated its currency against the Ecu on Thursday.
Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at Union Bank of
Switzerland in London, said: 'What we have is a piecemeal realignment. It
spells the death knell of the ERM.'
'It isn't big enough and it doesn't involve enough currencies,' said Mr Jim
O'Neill, Swiss Bank Corporation's London-based head of research. 'The
markets will think: 'OK, those have gone, which will we go for now?''
'There is a week of turbulence ahead,' predicted Mr Gerry Holtham, chief
economist of Lehman Brothers International in London. 'The main problem
concerns the Irish punt, which is very vulnerable. But the markets could
also attack the Danish krone and if that goes, the French franc will come
under pressure,' he added.
The apparent reluctance of the Bundesbank to agree to any easing of its
monetary policy in connection with the peseta and escudo devaluations was
seen as an especially weak feature of the third ERM realignment in 10 weeks.
'The disappointment is likely to be all the greater this time around as
there is no promise of a cut in the Bundesbank's key lending rates in return
for the realignment,' said Mr Mike Gallagher, director of economic research
at IDEA, which forecasts market trends.
Indeed, for many analysts, a close reading of the communique issued by the
EC monetary committee yesterday appeared to confirm the Bundesbank's
determination not to adjust its monetary policy to save the ERM.
'Member states whose currencies are in the exchange rate mechanism will
implement their economic and monetary policies in such a way as to improve
their convergence on price stability and ensure the stability of their
currencies within the parity grid,' the statement said.
'That doesn't amount to a declaration of mutual support,' argued one
specialist in international monetary affairs. 'If the statement had referred
to ensuring the stability of the parity grid, it would have imposed
obligations on the Bundesbank. As it stands, it will be up to the weaker
currency countries to raise interest rates if necessary to keep their
currencies in line with the Deutsche-mark.'
According to Mr Chertkow of UBS, the markets were likely to question whether
Ireland, Denmark or France would have the stomach to raise rates.
Before September, Denmark and Ireland were counted among the low inflation
'core' countries of the ERM, and excluded as candidates for devaluation. But
currency changes have meant reduced competitiveness for Ireland in its
important UK market and for Denmark in Britain and Sweden. This would add to
pressure on the punt and krone, economists said.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921123

