FT923-9525

FT  05 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Malaysia makes Pacific waves - Calls for
east Asia trade pact are worrying some


   By KIERAN COOKE


MRS RAFIDAH Aziz, Malaysia's minister of trade and industry, does not mince
her words. On a recent visit to Tokyo she described Japan as acting like 'a
bashful bride'. On a subsequent visit to Canberra, she asked the Australians
to decide whether they were part of Asia. In between Mrs Rafidah launched a
thinly veiled attack on the US, warning it about interfering in Asia's
affairs.
The subject under discussion has been the East Asian Economic Caucus (EAEC),
an idea inspired by Malaysia to combat what it sees as a growing tendency
among the industrialised countries to divide the world into regional trade
blocs. Malaysia wants the fast growing economies of east Asia, including
Japan, to join together to form common positions on questions of trade.
Now it seems to be making a determined effort - through Mrs Rafidah and Mr
Abdullah Badawi, the Malaysian foreign minister - to bring the EAEC to
reality. So far the Japanese remain bashful about the EAEC, the Australians
are still undecided, while the US makes no secret of its continued hostility
to the idea.
An EAEC was first suggested by Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime
minister, more than a year ago. Malaysia's fellow members in the Association
of South East Asian Nations - Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, the
Philippines and Brunei - have not been greatly enthusiastic about the idea.
In the first instance it appears the other Asean members were not consulted.
There has also been the fear that a new trade grouping, including the
powerful north-east Asian economies, would be looked on with great anxiety,
especially in North America where it would be likely to increase already
strong protectionist sentiment.
Mrs Rafidah insists that the EAEC would not become another trade bloc. She
says the idea of the EAEC came into being because of frustrations about the
lack of headway being made in the Uruguay round of multilateral trade talks.
'Because we do not see free trade coming, we would like to talk about
getting freer trade in this part of the world,' says Mrs Rafidah. 'It is
important for east Asian economies, which account for 20 per cent of total
world trade, to meet at private sector, official and ministerial levels to
discuss how they can enhance trade and investment.'
The US has clearly stated its opposition to any move towards an EAEC. In the
words of Mr James Baker, the US secretary of state, an EAEC would 'draw a
line down the Pacific' with the US on one side and Japan and the other Asian
economies on the other. Though Malaysia has watered down its original
proposal - describing the EAEC as a caucus rather than its original group
title and stressing its proposed mainly consultative role - it seems the US
will not be satisfied until the idea is dropped entirely.
'Washington clearly sees the EAEC as the camel's nose under the tent,' said
one US source.
Instead, the US is stressing the importance of Apec - the Asia-Pacific
Economic Co-operation forum. On a recent visit to Kuala Lumpur, Mr Paul
Wolfowitz, the US under-secretary of defence, said the US could not afford
to drop its commitment to east Asia.
'In 1991, our two-way trade across the Pacific exceeded Dollars 310bn -
nearly one third larger than our trade with Europe. The US exports more to
Malaysia than to the countries of the former Soviet Union; more to Indonesia
than to eastern Europe and more to Singapore than to Spain or Italy.'
Japan has been non-committal so far about an EAEC. On one hand Japan is
deeply involved in the region's economies, with an estimated Dollars 33bn
invested in the Asean countries - nearly a third of its total overseas
invest ments.
But Japan remains sensitive not only to US trading pressures but also to
fears expressed in some south-east Asian countries about growing Japanese
economic dominance - which inevitably conjure up wartime memories of Japan's
'Greater Co-Prosperity Sphere' in Asia. For these reasons Tokyo would be
unlikely to want to take a lead role in an organisation such as EAEC.
Malaysian officials privately argue that an EAEC would in fact contain
Japanese power in the region. Within an EAEC forum Japan could be pressured
and steered in the right direction.
Malaysia risks embarrassment by continuing to press the EAEC idea so
strongly to an apparently unappreciative outside audience. But as the
fastest growing economy in the Asian region over the last four years it
clearly feels its onward success is threatened.
The fear for countries such as Malaysia, said one government minister, is
that the world trading environment is disintegrating into regional blocs
'with each appearing like a beautiful castle from inside but in effect a
fortress to those outside'.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920805

