FT921-11951

FT  29 JAN 92 / West urged to hire Soviet N-experts


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   BRUSSELS


WESTERN industry - and governments if need be - should employ the former
Soviet Union's nuclear scientists, to prevent them being tempted into
dubious work in the third world, a senior US defence official said
yesterday.
These 'very capable' nuclear scientists 'ought to be a valuable economic
asset for commercial industry in western Europe or the US,' said the
official, who was in Brussels to brief Nato allies after 10 days of
US-Russian talks on dismantling nuclear weapons.
'It should not necessarily be the job of (western) governments to subsidise
the use of these scientists' talents, though it might come to that,' he
said.
However, he dismissed stories that there was already a nuclear brain, or
bomb, drain from the former Soviet Union. 'I know of no cases of
weapons-grade material leaving the former Soviet Union,' he said. Any
exports appeared to be of either depleted uranium, which is used in
conventional warheads, or minute quantities of plutonium, used to detect
alpha-radiation. 'Nor do I know of any (scientist) being approached to work
elsewhere or leaving.'
After the 24 talks in Moscow with the Russian general staff and the Atomic
Power Ministry the US official praised their sense of reponsibility in
proceeding with the dismantling of tactical nuclear weapons, promised by
former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev last October and re-confirmed
since by Russia's President Boris Yeltsin.
Fears that Soviet nuclear weapons could fall into the wrong hands centre as
much, or more, on the 15,000-16,000 nuclear artillery shells, mines and
short-range missiles spread around the former Soviet Union, as on the more
tightly-held 11,000 strategic missiles. The US official said all of Russia's
fellow republics appeared to be 'responsible and supportive' in returning
the tactical weapons for storage and eventual dismantling.
The US has offered to help Moscow with a range of tasks, the official said.
These include help in 'providing secure transport of weapons from bases to
central storage inside Russia, disabling weapons before transport, providing
intermediate storage for weapons awaiting destruction, dismantling of
weapons, transport of disassembled components and long-term storage of
fissile plutonium and uranium.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920129

