FT922-13454

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: The Fed rides to the rescue - Wall
Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


JUST AS Wall Street was circling the wagons this week, the Federal Reserve
rode to the rescue with a timely interest rate cut.
The Fed's decision on Thursday to lower the federal funds rate (the interest
rate at which banks borrow from each other) from 4 per cent to 3.75 per cent
may have been motivated purely by a desire to breathe fresh life into the
halting economic recovery, it mattered little to the stock market, which in
the two days prior to the rate cut had wiped more than 90 points off the Dow
amid panic about a financial meltdown in Japan and its effect on the world
economy.
Thursday's easing, however, saw the Dow regain halve that lost ground, and
by midday yesterday another 30-odd points had been put back on the index.
Although the Fed may be privately pleased with the impact of its rate cut on
share prices, it insists restoring confidence in financial markets was not
the idea behind the policy ease.
No, domestic economic priorities steered its hand, says the Fed. If you
subscribe to this view, money-supply and inflation appear to have been the
key factors at play.
Until the middle of the first quarter, the money supply was growing steadily
as lower interest rates persuaded banks to increase lending. From
mid-February onwards, however, the money supply started to shrink again,
with the various measures of money (M1, M2 and M3) all posting declines for
four to five straight weeks.
The most recent numbers must have been particularly disturbing to the Fed,
which reported late on Thursday that its most widely favoured measure of
money shrank more than Dollars 7bn in the last week of March, following a
Dollars 10bn drop the previous week. This put the money aggregate's annual
growth rate at just 2.4 per cent, taking it outside the Fed's target range
of 2.5 per cent to 6.5 per cent.
Alan Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, has always placed great emphasis on
controlling the money supply, and he will have been especially worried to
see it shrinking just at the time when the recovery appeared to be picking
up pace.
Fortunately, the lack of inflationary pressures in the economy left plenty
of room for an easing of policy. Thursday's morning's March producer prices
data, showing a modest 0.2 per cent increase in wholesale prices meant the
Fed could cut rates one more time without the fear of fanning the
inflationary flames.
(Admittedly, the market, and the Fed's, complacency about inflation took a
knock yesterday when the March consumer prices figures showed an
unexpectedly sharp rise of 0.5 per cent. Analysts, however, were quick to
dismiss the number as an aberration created by seasonal factors, arguing
that the weakness in the economy all but guarantees that inflation will
remain dormant over the medium-term.)
Whatever the reasoning behind it, the stock market took to Thursday's rate
cut like a drowning man to a rope. Wall Street, however, in typical fashion
has probably overdone its reaction, both to the likely impact on US markets
of the problems in Tokyo, and to the likely economic effectiveness of a cut
in fed funds.
Talk of a meltdown in Japan plunging Wall Street into crisis and the US
economy back into recession is off the mark. The withdrawal of Japanese
assets from overseas markets started more than two years ago, and Japan's
international lending has already been cut nearly in half since its peak in
1989.
The bulk of Japan's foreign assets are concentrated in bonds and direct
investments, not US stocks, while the Japanese finished selling the bulk of
their holdings of US Treasury bond more than a year ago. Turmoil in Tokyo
should also have little impact on the US economy. Its recovery is, and will
be, driven by domestic demand.
As for the effect of the rate cut, a quarter of a percentage point off fed
funds is unlikely to set the economy ablaze. Bank prime rates will stay
where they are at 6 1/2 per cent, and the all-important medium-term bond
yields - which determine mortgage interest rates  - have shown no
inclination of budging from around 7 per cent.
 -----------------------------
Monday    3275.49 +26.38
Tuesday   3213.55 -61.94
Wednesday 3181.35 -32.20
Thursday  3224.96 +43.61
Friday    3255.37 +30.41
 -----------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

920411

