FT921-15299

FT  10 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Liffe presses for early
decision on options


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE London International Financial Futures Exchange has asked firms to
confirm by today which equity options they plan to make markets in.
A final decision is urgently required to complete technical preparations for
the London Traded Options Market's move to join Liffe at Cannon Bridge at
the end of the month.
The establishment of a viable market-making system is vital to the merger of
Liffe and LTOM in March and to the future of the UK's moribund stock options
market.
Liffe is said to be considering fall-back measures, in case it fails to
persuade enough firms to participate in the planned market-making system,
and the Bank of England has been in talks with the firms involved, in an
effort to help resolve the deadlock.
The merger, originally due this month, was postponed until March, because
not enough firms came forward to make markets in the 67 equity options
traded on LTOM. This was despite a reasonable take-up of last year's offer
of 'D' shares, which entitle holders to trade stock options on the new
exchange. Technical problems also delayed the merger.
Large UK integrated houses such as Smith New Court and Barclays de Zoete
Wedd, which wanted equity options trading to move to a screen-based system,
have taken a large number of seats to trade stock options but have said they
will act as principal traders rather than market-makers.
Liffe is hoping that other firms, such as Hills Independent Traders and
O'Connor Securities will commit themselves to market-making in a broad range
of stocks.
According to market sources, Liffe has developed a contingency plan, in case
it fails to gather an adequate group of market-makers. It appears to involve
a shift to a system of brokers, rather than market-makers, but the idea has
so far met with little support, one head of equity options said. There is
also resistance to suggestions that the number of equity options could be
slashed.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920110

