FT922-468

FT  27 JUN 92 / Finance & the Family: Banks face challenge over teller
machines


   By BARBARA ELLIS


BANKS and building societies face their most serious legal challenge from
customers over cash dispensing automated teller machines (ATMs), writes
Barbara Ellis.
This is in spite of words of comfort from the Building Society Ombudsmen
this week. They welcomed the new Pounds 50 limit introduced by the Code of
Banking Practice, on losses from unauthorised use of machines unless the
bank can prove fraud or gross negligence.
Some 400 customers assembled into an action group by J. Keith Park,
solicitors, of St Helens, Merseyside, are to seek a High Court ruling,
within the next two to three weeks, that banks and building societies
operating teller machines are in breach of contract because the machines are
susceptible to error and fraud.
Each of the 400 will make detailed claims for losses through alleged
unauthorised withdrawals ranging from Pounds 90 to Pounds 13,000 and
totalling close to Pounds 500,000. All the claims have been rejected by
banks and building societies.
For example, Barclays stated this week that out of its 15m machine
transactions each month, fewer than one in every 250,000 is disputed - which
would imply 60 disputes a month. Dennis Whalley, of J. Keith Park, says he
has deduced, from ATM dispute case numbers on Barclays' letters to
customers, that disputes have been running close to 9,000 a month.
Barclays says there is no correlation between the volume of teller machine
disputes and the reference numbers which relate to computer files.
For years banks and building societies have insisted that the ATM systems
are completely secure and that money can only be withdrawn with the use of a
card and personal identification number (PIN).
The ombudsmen have almost invariably backed the institutions in rejecting
claims from customers who detected 'phantom' unauthorised withdrawals,
saying that they must have unwittingly lost their cards, disclosed their PIN
number or been the victim of a dishonest family member.
However, the 1989 Jack report on banking acknowledged that the PIN system
was open to fraud and last year an engineer employed by the Clydesdale Bank
confessed to removing Pounds 17,000 from customers' accounts by arranging
phantom withdrawals using a hand-held computer.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920627

