FT922-4028

FT  08 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Bastion of British culture wary
of a bouncer from Brussels bureaucrats - Coulsdon, England


   By DAVID MARSH


THERE is plenty of indifference to Europe on the shopping streets of
Coulsdon, a community nestling on the green edge of London's southern
sprawl. This is tempered by a fair amount of benign Euro-mindedness.
It must be remembered, though, that Coulsdon is a bastion of British
culture. It is the place where the world's first proper game of cricket was
recorded in 1766. So it is hardly surprising that, on Saturday, the main
emotion expressed towards Brussels was suspicion tinged with stubbornness.
A united Europe would encroach on some cherished elements of British daily
life which Coulsdoners are certainly not ready to give up.
'The Danish referendum is indicative of what the man in the street is
thinking,' declares Mr Colin Moore, a clerical officer from British Telecom.
'There's a general feeling that Jacques Delors wants to be king of Europe.'
Mr Moore does not want the Community, for example, to meddle with the
content of British sausages. Warming to his theme he outlines other
treasured traditions under threat. 'We in this country are used to certain
things, like milk being delivered to the door. To sweep all this away
because others don't have it is wrong.'
Representing Coulsdon's indifferent tendency, by contrast, is the robust
manageress in Coughlans Patisserie. Reluctantly she undergoes an FT
interrogation while executing a strategically-placed order to sell four
juicy Danish pastries.
No, she does not have time to think about the Maastricht treaty, she frowns.
No, she has not done a record trade in unloading Danish pastries this week
to Coulsdon customers celebrating the Danes' feat in leaving the Community
sticky-fingered. No, she glares, she does not particularly like them
herself.
Mr Martyn James, who runs a busy butcher's shop, is more forthcoming. He is
more positive, too. He scoffs at Mr Moore's suggestion that Brussels would
interfere with his sausage trade. 'Ten years ago they said Brussels would
stop us selling fresh turkey. Nothing happened.'
Mr James says Yes to Europe. 'It's better to be united.' He gazes at his
wares - leek sausages, Chinese-style chicken wings, marinated lamb  - and
senses that the forces of internationalism are marching in the right
direction.
'We didn't sell all this before,' he says contentedly.
Another man who believes that 'a united Europe is essential' is Mr Robert
Cook, an elderly ex-army officer who met his German wife while in occupied
Germany after the Second World War. They are stocking up supplies after
spending three weeks near Hanover visiting relatives. Nonetheless, he adds:
'I can understand why people are a bit wary.'
Wariness springs from most Coulsdon lips. Mrs Pat Burcher, serving in a
stationer's shop, spots a creeping but ill-defined menace from Brussels. She
would love to say No in a British referendum. 'They will take away our
individuality. I don't want to be moulded into one.' What does she most fear
from Brussels? 'They're already laying down the law, aren't they,' she
replies. In what areas? 'You know, silly little things,' she replies.
Mr Kevin Wood, headmaster of a local school, says the Danish result is 'very
encouraging'. He explained it all at the school assembly on Wednesday,
recalling to the children how Sir Thomas More also declined to say Yes
(although this was to Henry VIII over a royal divorce, of all things, and
not to a Delors edict on sausages). Mr Wood stood for Labour in
Leicestershire on an anti-EC ticket in the 1970 election, lost by 17,000
votes, but now feels the satisfaction of late vindication.
Just back from a coach tour of France, Germany, Switzerland and Italy with
Surrey teachers, Mr Wood backs links with Europe, but does not want full
integration. 'The Danish vote tells me there is a groundswell of anti-common
market feeling.'
Mrs Joan Fazackerley pauses while guiding two small children down the
street. 'I'm in favour of being in Europe, but not of losing our
independence. I'm not in favour of one currency.' She would say No to
Maastricht in a British referendum.
Mr George Stewart, the joint proprietor of a gun shop, sees no reason why
Britain should have to give up driving on the left. He, too, has a German
wife and observes with pleasure how many Germans do not want to get rid of
the D-Mark.
Mr Stewart is also concerned about the remoteness of Brussels. 'The line of
communication between the people making the decisions and the man in the
street is so tenuous as to be invisible.'
Coulsdon clearly believes in town planning. Handily placed next door to the
gun shop is the parlour of W A Truelove, funeral directors. Just the place
for a last judgment on Maastricht.
Mrs Anne Lock, the manageress, says: 'I tend to agree with the Danes.
They've stood out where others have been afraid to. I don't think we should
be ruled by Brussels. No other country can tell us how to run things. We've
always been an independent little island, haven't we?'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920608

