FT921-15361

FT  10 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Code urged for training contracts with
Tecs


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff and CHRIS TIGHE


CHAMBERS of commerce, which are among the largest providers of training for
the unemployed, have urged the government to introduce a code of conduct to
regulate contractual relationships between training organisations and
Training and Enterprise Councils (Tecs).
The chambers believe such contracts are often seriously flawed.
The Association of British Chambers of Commerce, which represents 106
chambers, more than half of which provide training to the adult unemployed
and young people, has written to Mr Robert Jackson, the employment minister,
asking for urgent action.
The association wants the government to set up a working party 'without
delay' to produce a code of conduct which it hopes could be universally
adopted by Tecs.
There has been widespread discontent about contracts among the thousands of
organisations contracted to the 82 Tecs in England and Wales.
Contracts vary, but generally they are for 12 months and can be terminated
at short notice in spite of the fact that contractors have to make long-term
commitments, including capital outlay on premises.
Tecs can technically negotiate longer contracts with training providers, but
because the government gives them money only on an annual basis they must
bear any risk. One provider was recently told by a Tec that its contract to
supply training to unemployed people had been terminated three weeks
previously.
The association said there were examples of Tec contracts that were 'unduly
onerous, seriously flawed and, most important, allow the buyer to impose
arbitrary and significantly deleterious changes without adequate notice'. It
added: 'These are far from the commercial norm.'
The call by the chambers, which include those of Leeds, Sheffield and
Coventry, builds on similar demands made by the Bridge Group, which
comprises 15 non-profit-making training providers including Community
Industry.
The Department of Employment said the establishment of a working group would
be investigated and a reply made in due course.
The GMB general union is today launching a call for immediate government aid
for west Cumbria, which is suffering a wave of job losses, Chris Tighe
writes.
Mr John Edmonds, GMB general secretary, visits the area today. He is urging
the government to restore assisted area status to the borough of Copeland,
to provide additional resources for Cumbria Training and Enterprise Council
and to allow local authorities to create construction work in the area.
The GMB has more than 15,000 members in west Cumbria.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920110

