FT923-10750

FT  29 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Allied Textile outperforms sector with
Pounds 5.2m


   By PETER PEARSE


PRE-TAX PROFITS at Allied Textile Companies, the Yorkshire-based wool group,
slipped to Pounds 5.21m in the six months to March 31.
Last time's reported result was Pounds 5.31m but was restated to Pounds
6.51m to comply with new accounting policies adopted on current and fixed
asset investments valued at market value rather than at cost.
Mr Gerald Wightman, finance director, said textile profits were 'down
marginally in the half', though he pointed out that competitors in the
sector had been reporting losses or sharp downturns.
He ascribed Allied's relative immunity to the sector malaise to 'the more
realistic approach of our management' and the fact that 'we have a wider
spread than most'.
Carpets, he said, did less well than last time.
The domestic market, tied to housing and construction, was poor and the
Blackburn factory was closed.
On the contract side, pub and club refurbishment was stalled by monopoly
deliberations, he said, but bespoke carpets - for the likes of the
Dorchester Hotel in London and luxury liners Cunard Princess and Sea
Countess - had done well.
Nylon fabrics, boosted last year by Ministry of Defence orders for
sand-coloured camouflage netting, had returned to the levels of two years'
ago, but materials for uniforms and corporate clothing did well, especially
in the export market.
Fully fashioned knitwear had seen an upturn, as competitors had gone under
and knitwear became more fashionable.
The company derives about one third of its profits from investments.
It has maintained its cash pile at about Pounds 17m and Mr Wightman expected
that to remain the case until the year-end, by which time the company would
have incurred about Pounds 5m capital expenditure.
The sale of properties has slowed to a crawl - in 1990 disposals earned some
Pounds 4m, in 1991 a mere Pounds 71,000, and in the period under review
'just a few thousand'.
Turnover rose to Pounds 63m (Pounds 59m). Earnings per share slipped to
12.38p (12.81p as reported and 15.71p restated).
The interim dividend is lifted from 4.4p to 4.5p.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920729

