FT921-503

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Musical jewels in tawdry settings


   By MAX LOPPERT


'London - classical music capital of the world': the phrase has by now a
familiar ring. No doubt its coining is owed to the number of regularly
active bodies and places that make all the music happen: the five symphony
orchestras; the numerous chamber orchestra, and choirs large and small; the
six central concert halls - seven if you count the Albert Hall, home of the
summer Proms; the plethora of events in churches; and much, much else.
In recent years the concert scene, unlike the operatic, has become a good
deal less rich in terms of novelty (old-musical no less than new-musical),
variety and chance-taking; but it is still possible to catch a big Mahler or
Bruckner symphony conducted by one of the current Big Names, a substantial
choral masterpiece, a prestige solo or chamber recital, most weeks of the
year.
I have been a London music-follower for 25 years, as (successively) tourist,
music student and critic, and I wince whenever the phrase crops up.
'Capital', after all, means not just 'head town of country, county, etc.'
(OED) but also 'important, leading, first-class' or even '(colloq.)
excellent, first-rate'. The ingredients - programmes, interpreters - may
indeed often be first-rate, but the receptacles are almost all unworthy, in
one way or another, and the final product is too often tinged, even tainted,
by the unworthiness.
It is an extraordinary situation: a city of London's musical importance
possessing not a single fully satisfactory concert hall but, rather, a
collection of them, each with flaws and faults capable of limiting an
audience-member's delight in performance.
My categories of measurement require a brief run-through: acoustics,
sight-lines, seat-comfort, but also ease of access and egress; quantity and
quality of the facilities for food, drink and pre-concert or interval
ablution; and general ambience. All these things contribute to the total
experience of concert-going, pleasurable or otherwise.
The success, acoustical above all, of Birmingham's new Symphony Hall,
provides Londoners with a chastening set of comparisons. Only one of our
halls rides high in at least the first three of my categories, providing
satisfactory basic requirements for listening: the Wigmore Hall,
home-from-home for all followers of chamber music, instrumental recital and
song. The acoustics shed a bloom, particularly on voices; no audience-member
feels too distant from the platform; it is a cosy and a welcoming place.
In the narrow, poky antechamber, however, feelings of cosiness have been
known to diminish drastically. This may change by October, for the Wigmore
is currently midway through an eight-month period of closure for renovation
and extension; the plans were undertaken with the aim of giving a
concert-hall jewel the suitably spacious setting it has always lacked.
For the South Bank complex - comprising the large Royal Festival Hall,
medium-sized Queen Elizabeth Hall, small Purcell Room - more far-reaching
overhaul plans have been drawn up, and will be put into action in (it is
hoped) 1995. These include pulling down the building containing the QEH and
the PR and re-siting both in unattached positions adjacent to the Festival
Hall, which will have its web of hideous grey walkways removed.
It is hard to know which hall causes the visitor the deeper misery, the
Queen Elizabeth or the Purcell. The depression induced by their sullen
concrete casing, gloomy lighting and unclearly-numbered black-leather
seating is common to both; the acoustics of both make all but the most
finely poised and focused performers sound tinny and dynamically uncertain,
as if heard through the wrong end of a telescope. I plump for the Purcell as
the greater horror.
The Royal Festival Hall, which will survive intact in the re-development
scheme, is not exactly misery-inducing; but the neutral environment offers
no lift to the spirits, the lack of leg-room is penitential, and the dry
acoustics, notwithstanding their electronically added resonance, wrinkle the
lineaments of all the bigger works performed there. The drive to attract
increased numbers to the bars, restaurants and exhibition spaces of the
foyers has proved all too successful, and put a strain on the building's
upkeep that has become unpleasantly obvious, particularly at weekends.
In view of all the self-satisfied crowing that has recently accompanied the
10th-birthday celebrations at the Barbican, it is perhaps salutary to point
out yet again the many things that make the place so profoundly unlovable,
such a trial to visit. Arrival by tube necessitates a foot-slog along mean
elevated paths and grim pavements; arrival by car, a nightmare search for
parking.
Inside the concert hall, the feeling of comfort, physical and visual, does
at least work toward soothing of sensibilities already ruffled by all the
external irritants and failings. The acoustics have been noticeably improved
by the removal of the glass roof-hangings, though big climaxes still tend to
clot.
I shan't dwell on St John's, Smith Square, which seems to have lost its way
as a front-ranking concert-hall, for reasons which (to me at least) are all
too plain: the hall, though handsome, is coldly uncomfortable, the
excessively reverberant acoustics suit few types of music, and the prices of
the crypt restaurant are discouragingly high. It is an alienating
environment. During the Proms, the Albert Hall develops a festive atmosphere
which it lacks at other times.
Does all this matter? I believe it does. A capital's housing of its musical
life surely reflects a nation's attitude to culture in general. In London
much music is on offer, but in places that do it - and its audiences - less
than justice. Piecemeal, there are many things worth celebrating; but as a
whole, the picture is not enticing.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920328

