FT922-13358

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Sinn Fein loses Belfast West after tactical
vote


   By TIM COONE


SINN FEIN, the political wing of the Provisional IRA, yesterday lost its
Belfast West seat after the extremist loyalist Ulster Defence Association
advised the strongly Protestant Shankill area to vote tactically for a
moderate nationalist candidate.
The defeat of Mr Gerry Adams, who had never taken up the Commons seat he won
in 1987, by local GP Mr Joe Hendron of the Social Democratic and Labour
party, brought diverse reactions ranging from claims of an SDLP
'breakthrough' to a warning that military actions by the IRA could be
stepped up.
Mr Adams maintained his vote in the constituency at over 16,800, and Mr
Hendron appears to have won largely as a result of tactical voting by
Unionist supporters.
Unionist leaders urged the minority Protestant community in Belfast West to
vote for the Ulster Unionist party, but the UDA, which has a strong presence
in the Shankill area, recommended a tactical vote in favour of the SDLP.
The UDA put out a leaflet on the Shankill Road which said a vote for the UUP
was 'a vote for Sinn Fein'.
The UUP vote in the constituency fell 37 per cent to 4,766 from 7,646 in
1987, while the SDLP jumped to 17,415 from 14,641, giving it a slim 600
majority over Sinn Fein.
Mr Hendron described the result as 'a rejection of violence, of all
paramilitary groups'.
Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the SDLP, said it was the 'real
breakthrough' the party had been looking for in its effort to deprive the
IRA of its political base in Northern Ireland.
Mr Peter Robinson, deputy leader of the Democratic Unionist party, warned:
'There are still 17,000 Provo supporters in west Belfast who may now be
about to put both hands on the Armalite. The security forces must be on the
alert for an upsurge in violence now that (Mr Adams) has lost his political
card.'
Mr Adams described his defeat as 'a temporary setback' and Sinn Fein
officials pointed out that their vote had largely held firm throughout the
province.
Mr Jonathan Stephenson, a spokesman for the SDLP, warned: 'It would be wrong
to claim that a major shift to the SDLP has started.'
He said the real test would be in next year's local elections. 'Sinn Fein
has had a good group of community politicians in west Belfast who have done
a lot of work on the ground,' he said.
A question raised by Mr Adams' defeat is whether it will undermine his
recent efforts to forge a separate identity for Sinn Fein from the IRA, or
whether the militarists will once again win the upper hand.
The UUP and DUP have meanwhile seen their overall share of the Northern
Ireland vote slip by about 2 percentage points, adding to the loss of 2.3
points in 1987.
The DUP and UUP put up competing candidates in three constituencies, where a
split Unionist vote would not let in a nationalist candidate. In South Down,
where the SDLP was defending a narrow 731 majority against a UUP challenge,
a recount was needed.
Mr Ian Paisley, the DUP leader, characteristically began his victory speech
on being returned to his seat at North Antrim by singing 'Oh God, from whom
all blessings flow'. In a thinly disguised criticism of his UUP challenger
he said: 'This constituency needs my voice, my representation and the stand
that I take.'
The appearance of the Conservatives for the first time in a concerted
electoral effort in Northern Ireland made significant inroads into both the
Alliance vote and that of the UUP.
Dr Laurence Kennedy, the Tory candidate in North Down, said that, in spite
of his failure to oust the independent Unionist Mr Jim Kilfedder, 'the
Conservative party is now well-established as an electoral force in Northern
Ireland'.
The Conservatives appear to have won about 7 per cent of the overall vote in
the province.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920411

