FT923-15589

FT  01 JUL 92 / No going back to the bad old days: Michael Cassell meets
Howard Davies, who takes over as CBI director-general today


   By MICHAEL CASSELL


IF Mr Michael Heseltine sets off to bang on Whitehall doors in search of an
industrial policy, he can count on Mr Howard Davies, the new
director-general of the Confederation of British Industry, being right
behind him.
Mr Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, has long deplored the 'averted
gaze' of government when it comes to industry, and is pledged to take up its
cause along the corridors of power.
Mr Davies is an old Whitehall hand - if that is possible at 41 - and will be
expecting results. He takes over today at the CBI, following in the
footsteps of his predecessor, Sir John Banham, by coming from the Audit
Commission.
Although he confesses to some trepidation at the task ahead, he thinks he
has arrived at an exciting time. 'We have a newly elected government which
clearly thinks it ought to have an industrial policy but which has not quite
worked out what that might mean. The CBI is in a good position to engage in
a dialogue with government and to influence events.'
According to Mr Davies: 'Now it is possible to talk about an industrial
policy again, Mr Heseltine has to get the government as a whole to agree the
preconditions for a successful industrial base. Without some sort of
corporate strategy at national level, there is nothing to guide you when you
come to make the difficult decisions.'
In his book, there is no question of a return to bad old days of
interventionism and the discredited language of the corporatist past. But he
says there 'is a place for a kind of ideology in government' which, in the
long run, can have an effect on the nation's ability to create wealth.
If the CBI view prevails, Mr Heseltine will champion industry's cause on the
European stage, where Mr Davies says EC business organisations must begin to
play a much more forceful, influential role. He expects Mr Heseltine to be a
badly needed 'friend at court' in Westminster.
Mr Heseltine, Mr Davies says, has been given a licence to securea long-term
commitment to address British industry's difficulties within a framework of
agreed priorities.
Given the presence of industry's new 'champion' on several cabinet
committees, Mr Davies believes Mr Heseltine has ample opportunity to
influence the decision-making process. But if feathers occasionally get
ruffled in the Treasury or the Foreign Office, then so be it.
He says there 'is intelligent life in the Treasury'. But he suggests that
its narrow perspective badly needs to be broadened, something that the
decision to link the public expenditure and budget-fixing functions should
help.
With ministers now agreed on how public expenditure should be reshaped to
address economic weaknesses and to assist the creation of wealth, the CBI's
new man believes it would be that much harder for them to produce spending
programmes that denied their long-term objectives.
'There are, for example, deep anxieties over whether the government really
sees training and enterprise councils as a long-term investment in the
workforce, or as a way of administering quasi-benefit programmes. We need
clear commitments and spending decisions which support them.'
On Friday, Mr Heseltine is to announce further plans for the reorganisation
of his department. Mr Davies says a priority for industry will be the
appointment of someone within the DTI with responsibility for assembling
views from outside into a coherent framework for action. Mr Davies defines
this role as someone who is 'an interlocuter below the secretary of state
who is always prepared to talk about the things we want to talk about'.
He also believes Mr John Major should lead the new dialogue of understanding
between the government and industry by delivering a personal commitment to
building British industrial performance to match its competitors.
'I would also like to see him go abroad to a country where Britain needs to
improve its trade and to hear him say that he is leading a mission
specifically to do something about it. The process has to start at the top.'
DTI relaunch plan, Page 10
People, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920701

