FT924-8096

FT  13 NOV 92 / International Company News: Norway moves to aid three banks


   By KAREN FOSSLI


   OSLO


THE Norwegian government is finalising far-reaching measures to support the
country's three biggest banks, which are in danger of failing to meet
capital adequacy regulations unless they receive further state cash.
By the end of this year, the banks must have a capital adequacy of at least
8 per cent of risk-weighted assets. Den norske Bank, Christiania Bank and
Fokus Bank are negotiating with the state-backed bank insurance fund to
obtain further capital support.
All three have this year failed to improve their financial positions, in
spite of state cash transfers in 1991 of nearly NKr25bn (Dollars 3.87bn)
which saved them from insolvency.
As a result of last year's actions, the state became sole owner of both
Christiania and Fokus and owns more than 85 per cent of DnB.
Next Thursday, parliament is expected to approve a request by the bank
insurance fund for additional state cash. Local analysts estimate the fund
will call on the government for between NKr5bn and NKr8bn.
Mr Tormod Hermansen, the head of the fund, said he was surprised and deeply
disappointed by the banks' recent nine-month figures - DnB losses, for
example, rose to NKr2.46bn from NKr2.3bn - and was not satisfied with their
efforts to take tougher steps to reduce operating costs.
Mr Hermansen said the banks were not, in general, earning enough to cover
operating costs and were supporting too high a level of service for which
customers were unwilling to pay.
He has called on the banks to cuts costs by 15 per cent, and hopes to
conclude negotiations at the weekend.
The bank employees' association is resisting further staff reductions and
has scheduled a one-hour strike for today.
The association claims a 15 per cent cost-cut would mean the loss of 2,000
jobs. The Norwegian banking industry has already shed more than 8,000 jobs
in the last five years.
The insurance fund may also establish a property company to which the banks
can transfer part of their property holdings. Bank property asset values
have fallen sharply in recent years. DnB has property assets of NKr17bn,
Christiania has NKr2.3bn and Fokus NKr2.8bn. Mr Hermansen said the state,
the banks and private investors would own the new company.
The negotiations will also centre on the commercial banks selling parts of
their distribution networks to savings banks in an effort to consolidate
operations to specific regions.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921113

