FT922-4171

FT  06 JUN 92 / Collecting: A rude awakening - An attempt to put Belgium on
the auction map


   By NICHOLAS POWELL


THE BELGIAN auction scene, the sleepy part of an otherwise highly active art
market, is in for a rude French awakening on June 15 when Paris auctioneer
Jean-Louis Picard wields the gavel for the first time ever in the Esplanade
du Cinquantenaire, a museum building near the centre of Brussels.
Picard is heading a new auction firm, Euro-auction, set up under Belgian
company law and which is an attempt to create a new north European practice.
Picard, who split from his longstanding auction partner Jacques Thajan last
year, inherited the company's Brussels office as part of a settlement. His
main associates are Belgian designer Michel Wittamer and Princess Wauthier
de Ligne. Euro-auction will be using Wittamer's family home, an Art Noveau
mansion in Brusselsdesigned by the architect Horta, in as company
headquarters and showroom.
The sale, aimed at attracting the prosperous and art-minded Germans, Dutch
and Belgians who made this year's Maastricht art and antiques fair such a
success, is deliberately a mixed bag with which Picard intends to test the
market. It comprises 292 lots including Oriental art objects, primitive art,
tapestries, a handful of old paintings, glassware, 18th to 19th century
French and Belgian furniture and 100 pieces of
'Belgium is a country of collectors, of collections, of art lovers and of
considerable private fortunes. Brussels itself is a very important north
European pole with extraordinarily good communications between Britain and
Germany. And it is next door to Holland and Luxembourg,' Picard said.
Brussels also offers the advantage over Paris of a bare minimum of legal red
tape and a 6 per cent rate of VAT on objects sold at auction instead of the
crippling French rate of 18.6 per cent, which applies to everything except
'original works of art.' Belgian auctions rarely bother with catalogues and
are notorious for the inadequacy of their research and the absence of
guarantees and expert descriptions. So Picard, who says his long-term
ambition is to push the auction scene in Brussels to a level comparable with
that of Paris, has published a proper catalogue in French and Flemish and
recruited the services of 10 Paris art experts, all leading specialists in
their fields.
Picard's initiative is being viewed sceptically by many of his Parisian
colleagues. But his enthusiasm for the Belgian market is shared by the
Cologne-based auction company Lempertz, which held its second sale of
primitive art in Brussels, and Sotheby's. The Amsterdam branch of the
British firm is organising its second Belgian sale on June 16 and 17 (it
arranged the dates to avoid a clash with Picard) in the Chateau de Beloeil
near Mons, home to one of the country's most spectacular and most visited
art collections.
Prince de Ligne, who lives in the castle, needs money to have his rooms
repaired. Inspired by the highly successful three-day sale Sotheby's
organised at Castle Howard in Yorkshire last November, the prince contacted
his cousin, Count Henri de Limburg-Stirum, head of the office Sotheby's
opened in Brussels 13 years ago, to see if it could arrange something
suitable.
A spate of chateau auctions comprising objects of dubious provenance, caused
Belgian authorities to outlaw them and Prince de Ligne and Sotheby's had to
apply to a government commission for a legal dispensation in order to hold
theirs. The sale comprises 400 lots. Sotheby's says the prince is only
selling a few 'not very high quality' pictures, pieces of glass, porcelain
and furniture to finance the restoration of his chateau.
Most items have been brought in from Belgium. Germany, Britain, Denmark and
Holland and the bulk of the sale is 17th to 19th century furniture,
including a 19th century neo-classical Russian suite, a rare Belgian 18th
century console table (estimate BFr600,000 (Pounds 2,823) to BFr700,000) a
French Napoleon III desk estimated at BFr1m to BFr1.2m and some good-quality
Biedermeier pieces.
The sale also includes 80 German and Flemish Old Master paintings, a large
selection of French and German porcelain, 200 engravings by 19th century
Belgian artist Felicien Rops and five 17th century Brussels tapestries. Two
of the latter, depicting scenes from the life of Roman emperor Constantine,
and based on cartoons by Rubens, come from the collection of the Duke of
Hamilton and used to hang in Holyrood House in Edinburgh.
Sotheby's philosophy for this sale, according to Count Henri de
Limburg-Stirum, was to attract buyers by accumulating a large number of
good-quality items in one place.
'The advantage of the chateau is it attracts collectors. The mixture of
Sotheby's, the Chateau de Beloeil and Prince de Ligne is a potent one which
will work to the benefit of all concerned. As for our future in Belgium, I
can only say European policy is being permanently reviewed, although our
north European base is Amsterdam and I don't really see us holding rival
auctions here. The average Belgian, however, if you don't me saying so, is a
more enthusiastic art buyer than the average Briton,' the count said.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920606

