FT921-14342

FT  16 JAN 92 / Post Office sell-off ruled out by Lilley


   By ROLAND RUDD


MR PETER LILLEY, trade and industry secretary, used an Adam Smith Conference
on postal services to make clear yesterday that his proposals to inject more
competition into the Post Office did not amount to wholesale privatisation.
While restating his determination to liberalise postal services, he
frequently referred to the government's commitment to a nationwide letter
service with a uniform, affordable price structure. He later added: 'There
are no government plans to privatise the Post Office at present.'
Labour said that did not amount to a clear undertaking from the government
that rural communities would not suffer from privatisation.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow trade and industry secretary, said: 'I have
discovered that both Mr Lilley and Mr Edward Leigh, the minister responsible
for the Post Office, have recorded views which show their commitment to
privatising Britain's postal services.'
That would mean the closure of hundreds of rural post offices, he said.
Mr Lilley attempted to play down the possibility of future privatisation. He
said he would only look at proposals to inject more competition into the
Post Office as long as they did not harm the universal letter service.
After the minister's speech, Sir Bryan Nicholson, chairman of the Post
Office, warned that the government's plans to reform postal services might
lead to excessive bureaucracy if there were too many regulatory bodies.
The government plans to establish a regulator, Ofpost, to advise it on how
low it could reduce the letter monopoly 'floor' level, which at present
stands at Pounds 1. The government plans to reduce it closer to the
first-class stamp price.
Sir Bryan said: 'We already have the Post Office Users' National Council,
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, the parliamentary select committee on
trade and industry and, of course, the secretary of state himself and his
officials, not to mention the European dimension.
'We do need to be careful that the new regulator adds value for the customer
to the regulatory process rather than just being a layer of bureaucracy
building in delay - and cost - to the management process.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920116

