FT922-411

FT  27 JUN 92 / The Lisbon Summit: Lisbon fails to solve central bank
squabble


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   LISBON


A PLAN to site the headquarters of the European Central Bank in Bonn and its
operating arm in London ran into serious opposition last night and will be
discussed later today.
The plan by the Portuguese presidency is the first attempt at a solution to
emerge publicly in more than two years. However, it puts into play the issue
of how the Community is to find a home for six planned new institutions.
In advance of last night's discussion by EC leaders of sites, Mr Dieter
Vogel, the German spokesman, said it was unacceptable for the central bank's
'nameplate to be in Bonn, and the real work to be done elsewhere'. Publicly,
the UK matches Germany in wanting the whole bank for itself, but in private
UK officials admit London would be quite content to get the ECB's foreign
exchange arm.
The third element in Portugal's compromise on the bank - a Dutch head for
the bank - also failed to win the backing of the Dutch government. It
believes its case for the bank going to Amsterdam was strengthened when
London was chosen as the site of the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development.
The key to resolving the deadlock would be a deal between France and Belgium
over the European Parliament. Portugal has suggested a pledge that the
French city of Strasbourg would continue to host a minimum of 12 plenary
sessions of the parliament, but that MEPs could hold up to five
'extraordinary' full sessions in Brussels, where many deputies find it
convenient to be close to other EC bodies.
Other elements of the Portuguese package would place the EC's planned
environment agency in Copenhagen, its trademark office (agreed in principle
a decade ago) in Madrid, its training foundation (for eastern Europe) in
Berlin, and a mooted drugs agency in Lisbon.
Putting the environment agency in Copenhagen would be a clear sop to the
Danes, but were Denmark eventually to hive off from the Community, Milan
could be a candidate for the agency.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920627

