FT924-11324

FT  27 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Invesco in landmark cash pay-out


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


INVESCO MIM's agreement yesterday to pay Pounds 9.5m cash compensation to
investors in Drayton Consolidated Trust marks the first time a fund manager
has compensated shareholders of an investment trust under its control.
'It was maladministration in the widest sense. It was wrongful management,'
said one of the advisers retained to assist in the reorganisation of
Drayton. In short, Invesco MIM loaned nearly Pounds 40m to an unquoted
Scottish confectionary company, Alma Holdings, nursing a 14 per cent stake
valued at Pounds 3m. But Drayton shareholders never fully knew the extent of
exposure, in part because as new loans were being extended old ones were
being written down.
Other Invesco MIM clients held stakes in Alma but were not asked to lend
funds to help it survive. Drayton shareholders were shoring up the value of
other MIM client's investments while diluting their own equity stake.
'The directors did not feel they were fully informed at the time,' said Mr
Nicholas Cobbald, a director at Drayton Consolidated. Mr Cobbald said
Drayton was entitled to seek compensation from Invesco MIM because 'they
should have been informed and that was why there was a settlement,'
The affairs of Drayton have focused attention on the relationship between
investment trust company boards and the investment managers which invest
their funds. Corporate governance, currently a concern of corporate boards,
is becoming a matter for investment trust company boards as well.
The Association of Investment Trust Companies, the industry trade
association, is quietly discussing a code of best practice for boards.
'We are looking into whether it is sensible,' said a spokesman for the AITC.
Industry insiders, however, said an association committee is already working
on such a code. But there is widespread disagreement about just how far the
code should intrude into current practices.
Issues under discussion include the extent to which fund managers should be
represented on an investment trust's board, the role of non-executive
directors and whether trusts should bear the name of the fund manager in
their title.
At Drayton, only two Invesco MIM employees were on on the Drayton board.
They were Lord Stevens, Invesco's chairman and chief executive and Mr
Alexander Reid, its investment manager.
As one of Drayton's advisers notes, as the fund moved away from the listed
shares which had been its traditional investments and into the unquoted
investments which proved its downfall, it made no effort to seek experts in
the unquoted sector for its own board.
Significantly, the advisers to Drayton say, the cash payment to shareholders
is not compensation for mere bad judgement by fund manager Invesco.
Other investment trusts, particularly in the unquoted sector, have made
disasterous investments as well with no corresponding demand for payment
from shareholders.
The lessons of Drayton have been expensive for Invesco MIM. Its chief
executive, Lord Stevens, who was also the chairman of Drayton, was forced to
resign, partly due to the affair.
The settlement, giving shareholders 85p cash per share, will also create a
new investment trust, Second Consolidated, with net asset value of 158p per
share.
Mr Hamish Buchan, investment trust company analyst at County NatWest Wood
Mackenzie, said that without the package, Drayton, whose shares once had a
net asset value of over 400p, would have had a net asset value of 26p per
share.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921027

