FT922-522

FT  27 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Convergence on mediocrity


IF ONE were to encapsulate the message in the latest Economic Outlook from
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, it would be that
policy-makers need to get a grip on themselves. Policy is drifting. The
legacy of the financial profligacy of the 1980s remains worrying. Equally
important are the fiscal problems that the industrial countries are storing
up for themselves.
Last year the performances of the major industrial countries diverged
sharply, stretching from Japan's impressive economic growth of 4.5 per cent,
via Germany's 3.1 per cent, all the way to the US decline of 0.7 per cent
and the UK's still deeper decline of 2.2 per cent. This year, by contrast,
performance is set to be far more uniform. Unfortunately, it is uniform in
its mediocrity.
The OECD believes that the best-performing member of the group of seven
industrial countries this year will be Canada, whose economy is forecast to
grow at only 2.3 per cent, with the US close behind at 2.1 per cent.
Bringing up the rear once more is the battered UK, with economic growth of
0.4 per cent forecast for 1992. Already this looks optimistic. The UK
economy may not grow at all between 1991 and 1992.
When vast numbers of households, non-financial businesses and banks have, in
effect, bet on another bout of 1970s-style inflation, which - to their
credit - policy-makers have not permitted, economic difficulties are
inevitable. With about 3 1/2 per cent inflation expected this year in the
OECD, as against an average of 12 1/2 per cent in the recession of 1974-75
and 9 1/2 per cent in 1980-82, the disillusionment must be profound. But
working through a debt overhang rather than inflating it away, a difficult
enough task in any case, is still more difficult with real interest rates as
high as today's.
Financial difficulties
Short term real rates do not seem so high, at least outside Europe. US
nominal short rates of below 4 per cent are barely positive in real terms,
though those of Japan, at 4 1/2 per cent, still give real rates of nearly 2
per cent. This is quite high enough for an economy facing Japan's financial
difficulties, symbolised by the ever-sliding share price index, which closed
yesterday more than 59 per cent below its peak in early 1989.
Yet in both the US and Japan, the yield curve - the ratio of short term to
long term rates of interest - is at least positively sloped. This is a
fairly reliable indicator of the stance of monetary policy and suggests that
it is expansionary in both cases.
In western Europe, by contrast, monetary policy is very tight indeed. Not
only is the floor for short term rates of interest Germany's 9 3/4 per cent,
but the yield curve is still negatively sloped everywhere. In addition, real
short term rates of interest range from 5 per cent in Germany to about 7 per
cent in France and Italy.
Monetary policy
So far, so gloomy. But in a much discussed paper, Mervyn King, the Bank of
England's chief economist, has argued that investment and much of
consumption depend more on long term real rates of interest than on short
term ones. Taken to its limits, this would suggest that monetary policy,
which works directly on short term rates, is ineffective. But Professor King
has a point. Unhappily, it is not as comforting a one as all that.
The real long term rate of interest, which depends on expected rates of
inflation for many years into the future, would appear unknowable. The
British government has, however, done the world the great favour of issuing
index-linked gilts, which currently yield 4 1/4 per cent. In a globally
integrated capital market, expected real rates of interest should converge,
4 1/4 per cent may, therefore, give no bad indication of the global long
term real interest rate.
It seems rather a high real rate of interest during an economic slowdown -
well above the normal growth rate of the OECD economies, for example. Why,
one might ask, do borrowers have to pay so much? Professor King suggests
that higher prospective returns on investment and lower savings are the
explanation.
The decline in savings rates has been a striking feature of the performance
of the major economies in the 1980s. But in an economic slowdown one might
have expected a lower desire to invest to have offset the lower willingness
to save. The latest OECD Economic Outlook suggests an explanation: a marked
deterioration in the structural fiscal positions of virtually every
significant OECD country between 1989 and 1992, Canada being the sole
exception.
High long term real rates of interest that are the result of excellent
investment opportunities do not imply poor long term prospects for economic
growth. But high long term real rates of interest that reflect low rates of
savings, in general, and fiscal deterioration, in particular, certainly do.
Strong economic recovery may still be possible, at least outside Europe. But
the current high real interest rates are also providing a warning about the
growth that might follow that recovery. The mediocrity may endure.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920627

