FT924-6001

FT  24 NOV 92 / SE chief urges greater powers for regulators


   By TRACY CORRIGAN and RICHARD WATERS


SIR ANDREW Hugh Smith, chairman of the London Stock Exchange, last night
called for greater powers of enforcement for UK regulators.
In a speech to the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants, Sir Andrew
went further than in previous criticisms of the regulatory system,
suggesting that regulation could not be effective 'without statutory power
to interrogate, to demand documents and records and perhaps to demand
answers'.
His views on the shape that regulatory reform should take appear to tally
closely with those of Mr Andrew Large, chairman of the Securities and
Investments Board, who is engaged in a review of the SIB's regulatory role
commissioned by the Treasury.
Last month Mr Large said that he might ask the government for new powers to
mount civil litigation against alleged City wrongdoers, along the lines of
the powers held by the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
Sir Andrew, in yesterday's speech, backed such a plan: 'I believe that (the
SIB) should now receive the statutory powers necessary to provide a fully
effective investigatory capacity.'
He also called for a rationalisation of the rules governing London's
markets, complaining: 'We have too many detailed rules.'
He suggested that rules, framed from general principles, need to be tailored
to suit specific product areas, and advocated greater differentiation
between the requirements of wholesale and retail markets.
Sir Andrew argued for greater co-operation between national regulators,
whether statutory or self-regulatory bodies.
'In a multinational marketplace there will need to be a constant interchange
of information,' he said. 'If miscreants do not observe national boundaries,
then neither should the authorities.'
The London Stock Exchange spent Pounds 13.5m on developing Taurus, its
paperless settlement system, in the first half of its financial year -
taking the total spent so far to about Pounds 60m, Richard Waters writes.
In the period to the end of September, the exchange earned income of Pounds
94.5m, down from Pounds 100.5m in the corresponding period in 1991. At the
same time, operating costs rose from Pounds 76m. 6m to Pounds 82.5m.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921124

