FT924-12184

FT  22 OCT 92 / Perot disdains to speculate on his intentions


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


EVERY morning the news agencies publish a useful item called the daybook,
which lists scheduled events in the nation's capital and, throughout this
year, the itineraries of the presidential candidates.
Yesterday the listings for President Bush in the south, Governor Clinton in
the mountain states and their running mates and wives were exhaustive. Under
the names Ross Perot and James B. Stockdale, the independent ticket, there
appeared, as most days: 'No public events scheduled'.
There were hints from Dallas that before election day Mr Perot would appear
at some political rallies in the week ahead. But these intimations are worth
little, since the only person who takes decisions about this campaign is Mr
Perot, and he does not deign to speculate to the media about his intentions.
His vehicle, as it has been throughout, is television. This has meant the
three debates, in which he was, in order, distinctive, muted and caustically
accusatory, especially against President Bush. At the very least he made his
presence felt, which is more than can be said for poor Admiral Stockdale,
out of his depth in the vice-presidential slugfest.
It also means paid-for half-hour advertised programmes, plus a fistful of
standard short political commercials. The first, which he advertised in the
debates as Jerry Brown once did his toll-free phone number, are
old-fashioned and homespun, just Mr Perot with his charts and a pointer. The
second, in which only a photograph of him appears, are slickly professional.
Mr Perot has already spent about Dollars 35m of his own money on his effort;
he said on Monday that by the time it is over he will have forked out
Dollars 60m. Not a penny of it, he repeatedly reminds his television
audiences, has come from the taxpayer, unlike the Bush and Clinton
campaigns.
His relations with the media are virtually non-existent. After Monday's
debate, he launched a tirade against the press that made Vice-President Dan
Quayle's constant complaints seem complimentary. He claimed reporters 'hate
the fact that I am in the race' and 'have less respect in this country than
Congress'. He called Time Magazine 'a joke'.
One consequence of the nature of this new, closed and totally personal
campaign has been the almost total absence of further revelations about how
he made his money, ran his business and investigated people who crossed him,
all of which were given full airing in the summer, much to his fury.
Sticking to the principle of delegating nothing, he even took Mr Orson
Swindle, the very conservative director of his organisation, United We
Stand, America, to task for daring to suggest that a vote for Mr Clinton
would be 'a disaster'. This, Mr Perot said, was 'a serious mistake' and in
no way reflected his views.
Though more critical of Mr Bush, for whom he often displays a visceral
contempt, there is no evidence that Mr Perot is warming to the Democratic
candidate. On Monday he belittled Mr Clinton's record in Arkansas, which he
likened to that of a corner store operator, and was dismissive of his
economic policies.
Freed, by his own decree, of the necessity of normal political discourse
outside the debates, Mr Perot is, in effect, running a one-issue messianic
campaign, on reduction of the deficit and the national debt. This is both
the source of his appeal, because it is a genuine public concern, and his
weakness, because of the public sense that the presidency is more
complicated than that.
His standing has risen as a result of the debates, roughly doubling to 14
per cent, but the perception that he could win, which seemed fleetingly real
earlier, remains confined to his true believers. But he is getting some
vindication: no one now is calling him 'a quitter'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921022

