FT921-3804

FT  12 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Ireland explores its yachting havens -
Low-cost moorings could provide a bolt-hole from high UK fees


   By TIM COONE


WHEN THE Irish priest St Brendan, set off on his many voyages of discovery
in a tiny curragh over a millennium ago, missionary zeal rather than tourism
was his motivation.
Despite these nascent manifestations of a maritime tradition, Ireland has
until now achieved little in exploiting its unquestioned potential as a
tourist attraction for the growing numbers of sailors and yachtsmen in the
European Community. It has 1,000 miles of coastline, much of it bathed in
the warm waters of the Gulf Stream, and perhaps some of the best cruising
areas off north-west Europe.
Bord Failte, the Irish Tourist Board, has since 1989 been promoting a plan
to build a string of marinas at 40-mile intervals around Ireland's southern
and western coastlines.
Only 10,000 of the 3m tourists who visit Ireland each year go there on
sailing holidays. Bord Failte's plan is to develop the infrastructure
necessary to attract yacht owners big and small, not only to spend their
holidays exploring the inlets, small-town pubs and the food of the south of
Ireland, but to base their boats in Ireland to escape the high costs of
marina fees in the UK.
According to Mr Peter Waring, the National Moorings and Marine Co-ordinator
of the UK's Royal Yachting Association (RYA), there are 2m people in the UK
who participate in sailing activities - 'more than watch football'. In the
UK there are 190,000 mooring berths, 45,000 of them walk-on marina berths.
The RYA estimates that there will be a demand for 85,000 new marina berths
over the next 10 years.
He said that berthing fees charged by the big marinas 'have increased by
between 50 and 100 per cent over the last three years', and that as soon as
the recession ends 'the suppliers of berths will again be dictating the
terms'. Mr Waring said UK sailors 'are voting with their keels' and moving
their boats to lower-cost marinas, or selling their larger boats and
returning to dinghy sailing.
Ireland is hoping to tap that market, but despite the availability of
IPounds 3m (Pounds 2.8m) in funds from European Regional Development Funds
for marina development, only two projects have so far come to fruition since
1989 - the 250-berth Kilrush marina, which opened on the west coast of
Ireland last year, and an 80-berth marina at Kinsale in the south.
Mr Jim McGuigan, the investment manager of Bord Failte, said the entire
strategy was under review. In future greater emphasis would be placed on
involving local authorities in developing simpler low-cost facilities at
frequent intervals along the coast, instead of a few large multi-million
ventures which require long pay-off periods and tend to make yachting
prohibitively expensive.
This shift in focus follows a similar trend in the UK. The RYA this month
set up a new venture with Tenershire Marine Limited (TML), a Swansea-based
pontoon manufacturer, to create new low-cost marina-style moorings through
the 1,500 yacht clubs associated with the RYA.
One such development at Swansea marina has created 200 berths which can be
purchased outright for Pounds 1,800 each, the same as a commercial marina
would charge for one year's mooring fees for a modest-sized yacht. 'We can
solve the mooring problem without spending millions,' said Mr David
Nicholas, the marketing director of TML.
Mr McGuigan said: 'That direction is probably the way we shall go in our
next operational programme for 1994-98.' With the development of marinas,
will come the growth of a yacht-chartering industry which is still in its
infancy in Ireland. Bord Failte has in the past 18 months approved five new
charter projects, which will soon quadruple the number of charter boats
available for coastal cruising to more than 60.
BCP, a Dublin-based stockbroker and financial consultant, this year set up a
financing package for charter-boat companies, under the Business Expansion
Scheme (BES), an investment through which top-rate taxpayers can get full
tax relief for five years. Two new companies will be operating out of
southern Ireland this summer.
Mr David Cullen, a chief executive of BCP and a keen yachtsman said: 'Its
virgin territory down there and marvellous sailing.'
Problems over planning permission have seen two commercial-style marina
proposals turned down by local communities on the south coast in the past
two years.
'It's a dichotomy you suffer in Ireland. There is a shortage of jobs, but I
suppose the last thing they want is Ireland becoming like the Solent,' said
Mr Cullen. However, Bord Failte's changing approach, similar to that of the
RYA in promoting low-cost pontoon moorings, 'is the way to go', he said.
St Brendan might scoff at modern-day sailors in their sleek glass-fibre
boats, who demand the walk-on moorings, the hot showers and restaurants that
today's marinas are expected to provide, but as the Irish patron saint of
sailors, he would at least be pleased to know that his country is at last
rediscovering the maritime tradition he began in sackcloths and curraghs.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920312

