FT924-8301

FT  12 NOV 92 / C and W sells 20% of Mercury


   By ROLAND RUDD and HUGO DIXON


CABLE and Wireless, the international telecommunications group, yesterday
announced the sale of 20 per cent of its Mercury Communications subsidiary
for Pounds 480m to BCE, the big Canadian telecommunications group.
At the same time, C and W is investing Pounds 30m in BCE's UK cable
television interests, which are beginning to provide local telephone
services to residential customers and small businesses.
The two groups said they hoped the deal would support a 'major alliance'
which would pursue opportunities around the world.
Mercury and the BCE's cable interests are both rivals of British
Telecommunications, which dominates the UK telecommunications market. The
partners hope the new alliance will enhance their ability to compete with
BT.
Mercury, which has focused mainly on long-distance services in its 10-year
history, has about 7 per cent of the market.
BCE, Canada's largest company, has interests in cable franchises covering
1.8m homes and 120,000 businesses, most in central London. Only a few
thousand customers use its telephone services but it plans to expand this
business substantially.
Both groups said they would not accelerate their investment programmes as a
result of the deal. Mercury will continue to invest around Pounds 400m a
year.
C and W will make an exceptional profit of about Pounds 300m on the sale
because the amount BCE is paying is significantly higher than 20 per cent of
Mercury's net asset value.
Lord Young, C and W's chairman, said: 'We are getting proper value for our
shares in Mercury.' The deal was welcomed in the City, where C and W's
shares closed 9p up at 658p.
The cash from the deal will in the first instance be used to reduce C and
W's gearing by about 20 percentage points. In the longer term it will allow
the group to pursue investment opportunities outside the UK.
The two groups have agreed not to buy shares in each other for five years
unless there is a hostile bid for either company.
BCE has the right to appoint two directors to Mercury's board and a senior
executive to the company's chief executive's committee. But it has no option
to increase its share in Mercury.
C and W's investment in BCE's UK cable interests will be a combination of
equity and convertible securities. C and W will have an initial shareholding
of 12 per cent, rising to 20 per cent on full conversion.
Lex, Page 22; Background, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921112

