FT922-4120

FT  06 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Purves plays a cool hand


   By ANGUS FOSTER


MR William Purves, chairman of Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, was lunching on
the 11th floor of the bank's Bishopsgate offices when he was told Lloyds was
pulling out of the battle for Midland.
According to one of the guests, Mr Purves scarcely flinched. 'He remained
poker-faced. There was not even a smile. All he said was: 'We can't afford
to relax yet.''
By yesterday afternoon, as he dashed for the evening flight back to Hong
Kong, Mr Purves' normally steely exterior started showing the first traces
of good humour. He even joked about missing the aeroplane. But caution, and
determination not to be seen to be gloating, masked any celebration.
'We haven't won yet. But I'm glad Lloyds has gone away. I'm also glad the
smokescreen has cleared. (Lloyds) has been a diversion and getting the
institutional shareholders to concentrate on our offer was a little
difficult,' he said.
Mr Purves said his bank had no strategy to see off Lloyds. 'I think they
began to see the boulder was too heavy,' he said. 'They've been thwarted at
every turn by people like the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. They lost
the beauty parade. I think they began to realise they were not going to
succeed.'
Back in Hong Kong, where Mr Purves' standing as chairman of the colony's
most important financial institution, as well as chief of the Jockey Club,
allows him to waltz through three or four drinks parties a night, more like
a member of the glitterati than a banker, he will prepare for the next
hurdle.
On Tuesday his bank holds an extraordinary general meeting to approve the
Midland bid, and the second offer document is due to be released on the same
day. 'We've still quite a lot of work to do, but I'm confident,' he said.
He was guarded about Hongkong Bank's longer-term plans for Midland, and
would only comment: 'There must be some rationalisations and some
streamlining. But it's still a bit early to say.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920606

