FT924-11383

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (6): Money is
pouring into mutual funds - United States


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


THANKS to the Federal Reserve's willingness to cut domestic interest rates
to aid an ailing economy, money has been pouring into US mutual funds faster
than fund managers can count it.
According to figures from the Investment Company Institute, in the first
eight months of 1992 sales of stock funds totalled Dollars 92.5bn, compared
to the Dollars 57.7bn sold by the same stage last year. Demand for bond
funds has been even stronger, with sales reaching Dollars 145bn by the end
of August this year, compared to Dollars 80bn in the same period of 1991.
The total amount of assets in mutual funds has also been growing rapidly. In
1990, just over Dollars 1,067bn of assets were invested in funds, a total
which jumped to Dollars 1,347bn in 1991. By the end of the first half of
this year that figure had already reached Dollars 1,419bn.
Vast amounts of cash have been flooding into funds because US interest rates
have dropped to the lowest levels since John F Kennedy occupied the White
House. During the short recession in late 1990 and early 1991 the Fed cut
rates in small steps to boost economic activity.
Yet after the recession ended, the subsequent recovery proved to be much
slower than expected, so the Fed kept on cutting interest rates, only more
aggressively. The end result was that by mid-summer the Fed had eased
monetary policy an astonishing 24 times, and the discount rate was 3 per
cent and the bank prime rate was 6 per cent.
This sharp fall in interest rates was disastrous for investors with
short-term assets such as money-market funds and bank certificates of
deposit, where rates dropped so far that after inflation and fees were taken
out, investors were left with tiny or negative returns on their investments.
With short-term assets yielding such a poor return, investors went elsewhere
in search of better yields, and their prime destination was the stock and
bond markets. Mutual funds became the biggest beneficiaries of this huge
transfer of investor assets.
The investment fund industry, however, has not just enjoyed its best year
because of extremely low interest rates. Industry analysts believe there are
two distinct, yet equally important, secular trends that have been working
in favour of funds.
One is that individual investors are returning to the equity market after a
relatively long absence. Mr Michael Hines, a vice-president of marketing at
Fidelity, the country's biggest fund group with Dollars 180bn of assets
under management, believes that individuals are beginning to see investing
as a more fashionable form of consumption. He says: 'People today get the
same kind of psychic gratification from their investments that they got a
few years ago from buying consumer goods.'
Mr Hines thinks that individuals are now more willing to switch from the
instant gratification they get from consumer purchases, to the deferred
gratification they get from investing in stocks and bonds. 'More people are
becoming long-term, buy-and-hold investors.'
There is certainly plenty of room for more small investors' money to come
into the stock market. The share of household assets in equities is 15 per
cent, an all-time low. While many households are more concerned with
reducing their debt levels than with spending or investing, a growing number
of analysts expect them to steadily build up their holdings of stocks over
the next few years.
Generation factors are at work here. The baby boom generation is growing up
fast, and its members are looking for investments that allow them to save
for their own retirement and their children's future, while offering an
acceptable trade-off between security and the potential for capital growth.
These investors are not going to be put off equities by short-term
fluctuations in market values. A recent series of polls conducted by
Fidelity on investor activity showed that every time the market dipped this
year, individual investors saw the decline in prices as a buying
opportunity. 'These people believe in the long-term resilience of the stock
market,' says Mr Hines.
The other important trend moving in funds' favour is the growing preference
among individuals to entrust their cash to fund managers, as opposed to
investing themselves.
A recent study by the University of Michigan discovered that an astonishing
75 per cent of all the net flows of cash into financial services during the
first quarter of this year went into mutual funds.
'The cyclical trend may be to own more stocks, but the secular trend is
towards funds and away from individual ownership of equities,' says Mr
Hines.
An increasingly wide choice of stock and bond funds now exists to meet
demand from investors, and changes in technology and attitudes means they
can buy top quality money management extremely easily - by telephone
(through toll-free 800 numbers), or by post.
The product itself is also much more sophisticated. Fidelity's customers,
for example, can write cheques on their fund accounts, a service unheard of
a few years ago. Mutual funds are now regarded as a liquid asset, unlike in
the days when money was put away to be left untouched for years.
If the two secular trends hold, they will offer reasonable protection
against the fact that the present rush out of short-term bank assets and
into funds will eventually slow, and maybe even be reversed. Interest rates
are unlikely to go much lower, and the longer-term outlook for the US
economy suggests that over the two years interest rates will creep up again
as economic activity revives and the Fed moves to dampen inflationary
pressures in the economy.
If there is a cloud on the mutual fund industry's horizon, it may well be
the growing competitive presence of other financial services firms, most
notably the securities houses. Some of the biggest broking firms in the US,
such as Merrill Lynch, PaineWebber and Shearson Lehman, are rapidly building
up investment management products aimed at their brokerage customers.
The secret weapon of securities firms is their distribution network. A
brokerage company has hundreds of branch offices across the US and thousands
of brokers, selling not just stocks, but in-house funds managed by the
firm's asset managers. Look at any list of the top performing US funds today
and among familiar names like Fidelity, Dreyfus and Kemper, lurk the likes
of Merrill Lynch, PaineWebber, Morgan Stanley and Dean Witter.

The Financial Times


London Page III

921026

