FT921-11799

FT  30 JAN 92 / Technology: Youthful new look for pylons


   By MAURICE SAMUELSON


Electricity privatisation has prompted a redesign of Britain's most familiar
landmarks - the giant pylons which stride across the countryside from power
stations to cities.
Since 1935, when the national grid was formed, the towers supporting the
grid's high-voltage lines have grown in size as the demand for 'juice' has
grown. The tall lattice structures still bear the hallmark of the original
Meccano-type towers designed for the old Central Electricity Board in the
1930s.
But new shapes are being evaluated by engineers and advisers of the National
Grid Company (NGC), the privately based specialist group, which has
inherited the bulk power transmission systemfrom the now defunct Central
Electricity Generating Board.
The most striking new shape is the folded plate tower, an elegant steel
structure resembling motorway illumination poles. It has three gull-shaped
wings to carry the six bunches of conductors charged with up to 400,000
volts.
Latticed steel is present in all the other new designs. Most are based on a
new standard model so far only used on the lines connecting Scotland's
Torness power station with the main transmission system. Known as the L12,
the model has upward-swept arms compared with the drooping arms of most
British pylons.
The work of the designers is prompted by another by-product of privatisation
 -the proposed 1,800 MW gas-fired power station at ICI's Wilton site on
Teesside, which requires the biggest extension to the national grid for 20
years.
The project has stirred fears about the effect of new power lines on such
beauty spots as the Vale of York. But the changes are not only about
appearances. The lighter and more slender L12 was developed because of the
introduction in the 1980s of all-aluminium alloy conductors to replace
steel-reinforced cables.
The designers hope to have a portfolio of three or four new options ready by
the spring.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920130

