FT924-11958

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (7): Insider tips
don't survive in fresh air - Serious Riches / In any case, the owners of a
field-sports agency for blue-chip clients have their portfolios managed on a
discretionary basis


   By JOHN AUTHERS


EVEN THE seriously rich have to relax.
And that is how the business of Christopher Orssich and Mark Firth has come
to prosper. Between them, they now own Roxton Sporting Agency, the biggest
field-sports agency in the UK.
The company, located unobtrusively above a sporting shop in Hungerford,
Berkshire, has a workforce of only eight; but a quick look at its letterhead
shows that it is well-connected - its two non-executive directors are a
senior vice-president of merchant bank JP Morgan, in New York, and Baron
Benjamin de Rothschild, scion of the great European banking dynasty.
Typical clients on the hunting, shooting and fishing expeditions that they
organise in Britain and around the world are of similar financial calibre.
One of the perks of the job is that both of them regularly accompany their
shooting parties, and also scout out new locations before sending out any
new clients.
It's not a bad way to earn a living. However, any thoughts readers might
have that 'inside' information on share prices, which almost invariably
crops up during conversations, is in any way superior to what you can learn
from doing your homework should be dispelled.
A few years ago, Mr Firth tried a totally notional experiment. He recalls:
'One year, just when insider dealing was all the rage, I took all the share
tips I was given and bought a nominal Pounds 1,000-worth of all the dead
certs I was given, and held them as long as I was told to keep them.'
The result of the exercise made him all the happier that he had avoided
temptation - at the end of the day, after brokerage fees had been taken into
account, he would have incurred a 20 per cent loss. So much for inside
information.
All of this explains why both Messrs Orssich and Firth, both now with young
families, have opted to have their share portfolios managed on a fully
discretionary basis. This means that the fund managers only follow
broadly-set instructions, and are not obliged to inform their clients before
buying and selling shares.
Mr Orssich, who had a few highly-pressurised years in the City as a
stockbroker before moving into field sports full-time, uses Murray
Johnstone, the Glasgow-based firm of fund managers which also has an office
in London. He started to keep his portfolio there after several brokers had
moved there from his previous managers, Henderson Administration. He now
uses Murray Johnstone to cover most of his personal finances, and finds
their professional service gives him invaluable peace of mind.
The remit he gives them is taken straight from the guiding principles of
running the business: 'If I had to find a parallel between the shooting
business and the financial world, I would say the great lesson was to deal
with blue-chip stocks mainly.'
For, just as he found large blue-chip companies to be the most reliable, so
the wealthiest and best established clients could be most relied upon to pay
promptly, and to use the service time and again. So Murray Johnstone has
been instructed to aim for blue chips, and avoid anything too speculative.
Murray Johnstone also arranged a charitable educational trust scheme to pay
for school fees. Mr Orssich is aware that inflation is high and can imperil
the assumptions on which such schemes are designed, but he remains confident
that the difficulty of meeting this large expense will be much reduced.
Mr Firth has also now found his way to Murray Johnstone, who are under
similar instructions to keep to blue chips. He also has a portfolio of
American shares, thanks to an inheritance.
A large share of his wealth is tied up in the company, of which he is the
leading shareholder - a tidy stimulus to ensure that everything is done as
efficiently as possible. The company is small and has few overheads, but
there is a medical insurance scheme to cover them.
Some of his previous financial experiences have been less happy. He has a
personal pension with Laurentian Life, into which he has paid Pounds 1,200
per year over the last five years. 'I've now got my five-year valuation for
it and it stands at Pounds 4,800. Contributions so far are Pounds 6,000.'
He means to set up a pension via Murray Johnstone at the end of this year,
but remains deeply unhappy with his current personal pension.
Other insurance dealings have gone rather better for him. Roxton has
negotiated a very good deal on 'pluvius' rain insurance, which is
understandable. Bad weather, which can ruin a day's field sport, poses a
very real and regular threat in many of their locations, but the company now
has a cheap 'bulk' deal.
Mr Firth was also a member, or 'Name', of Lloyd's until 1988, when he left
after a shooting friend who worked as a Name told him that the risk-reward
ratio was going the wrong way. He made a profit for the 1988 underwriting
year, and all his accounts are closed.
However, losses made at Lloyd's by Names who did not withdraw in time have
had a noticeable effect on business this year, as have problems in the
economy in general. Yet in a way, the business is recession-proof. According
to Mr Orssich: 'An average day's shooting is from Pounds 500 to Pounds 1,600
per person. The people who spend that kind of money on a day's sport for
themselves tend to be at the upper end of their profession.'
So, while there are fewer property developers among their clients than there
used to be, demand stays reasonably constant. Plans to expand the business
further are also well advanced. As Mr Firth puts it: 'You can safely say
that the one way to go to any country in the world was to go and shoot
something. I sent people on shooting holidays to Mongolia six years ago. I
was offered woodcock shooting in King Zog's hunting lodge in Albania six
years ago.'
This is one of the less-heralded results of the fall of the Iron Curtain.
Field sports have always been strong in eastern Europe - apparently the late
President Ceausescu of Romania still holds most of the major European big
game records - and the opportunities to expand there have now increased.
Salmon are so plentiful in Russia, compared with Scotland, that many anglers
are willing to go to the trouble of making an expedition to Siberia in
pursuit of the hobby.
A little exploratory zeal in business, and extreme prudence in finance,
should mean that Messrs Orssich and Firth continue to profit to the full
from the thrill of the hunt. And the seriously rich should continue to
derive the relaxation they crave.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

921023

