FT922-444

FT  27 JUN 92 / Books: Satan at large in Dorchester - A town under the spell
of its puritan preachers


   By J. H. PLUMB


FIRE FROM HEAVEN: LIFE IN AN ENGLISH TOWN IN THE 17TH CENTURY
by David Underdown
Harper Collins Pounds 17.99, 308 pages
A GOOD historian must be something of a magician to transform the very dry
bones of local records into a readable and enlightening account of the
interplay of historical forces - economic, constitutional and, above all,
religious - in the remote setting of a West of England market town,
Dorchester. Perhaps Professor Underwood is a little luckier than most.
Although there are large gaps in many of his records, he has struck two
goldmines which give a richness to this book which it might so easily have
lacked - The Offenders Book that runs from 1629 to 1637, and the diary from
1618 to 1635 and the Commonplace Book of William Whiteway, an affluent,
well-educated townsman with a compulsion to record his life and times. No
Pepys certainly - but a treasure for Underwood.
And of course, Underwood did not pick Dorchester at random. In the early
17th century Dorchester fell under the spell of its puritan preachers and so
reflected the religious and constitutional crises that were imperilling
England's ancient constitution.
In 1613 Dorchester was razed by fire: the churches and the Shire Hall and a
few stone houses survived. Such fires were not uncommon in English towns as
most families lived in wooden, thatched shacks that were little better than
tinder. But for John White, the Minister of Holy Trinity and his ardent
supporters, secular as well as clerical, the Hand of God was clearly to be
discerned in the disaster. Obviously He demanded more discipline, greater
reformation.
White had come from New College in 1605, a reformer of souls who could 'wind
up' a congregation as high as he wished. He was a Calvinist, intent on
turning Dorchester into a New Jerusalem. He believed in discipline, in
exterminating sin, in the Devil who had to be rooted out, but he was also
compassionate, keen on education (he started the Free Schools) and squeezed
astonishing amounts out of his parishioners for charity. He was no
firebrand. Calvinist he might be, but he wore the surplice, accepted the
cross in baptism, and so remained just within the Laudian Church. And for
him kingship was God-given, as was, indeed, all authority and so must be
obeyed.
Authority had obligations - to create a harmonious community, based on God's
Word - best achieved not only by prayer and fasting but by education and
charity; succour for the victims of the harsher life of 17th century England
was high on his agenda. Under his guidance, Dorchester became a model of
godly benevolence. But its success depended on constant vigilance. White,
his friends, his bailiffs and constables battled against Satan who, as
Professor Underwood discovered from the Offender's Book, was at large in
Dorchester.
Boys spat and 'pinged' each other in Church, grew randy out of it, got drunk
too young, handed pornography around; worse still, they used their daggers
and burgled houses. Girls, especially maidservants, seemed to be as randy as
the boys, drank with them in alehouses that were little better than
brothels, and finished up well pregnant before marriage. Below the surface
of a God-fearing, deeply moralistic community, old Adam was up to his usual
games.
Sexuality, however, was not the only problem. Higher in the social scale
charitable money sometimes took years to reach the poor and deserving and,
on occasion, got lost. There were rumours that even John White was not
adverse to lining his own pocket in his promotion of a godly Dorchester in
New England. Piety and profit made restless bedfellows.
The roots of Dorchester's puritan reformation proved shallow. Its
inhabitants could live with it; they were not prepared to die for it and
they succumbed to the Royalist armies in 1643. The corporation behaved with
the utmost circumspection during the turbulent years that followed; with
relief they rang their bells vigorously on Charles II's return.
The great charitable enterprises of earlier decades, the Hospital, the Free
School and the Corporation Brewhouse whose profits paid their bills, slowly
fell into desuetude and Dorchester reverted to being unremarkable - just
another market town.
Professor Underwood's fascinating book is more than a mere contribution to
social and local history. It is also salutary. There is a group of radical
chic historians led by Lord Russell who regard the English Civil War and its
vicious aftermath as a mere squall about nothing that rapidly blew itself
out. We can, in this book, see how the growing elite of Dorchester had to
define, in the most serious and profound way, its attitudes to
constitutional conflicts at the deepest level, the nature of sovereignty and
the definition of the rights of the individual.
This is a very wise book, scholarly in its approach but immensely enjoyable
reading. It will help to bring the debate about the causes of the Civil War
back to reality.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920627

