FT924-11406

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (4): The economy runs out of steam -
Although west Germany's traditional foreign markets have signally failed to
recover and produce the forecast autumn surge in exports, the government
remains outwardly confident


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


THE west German economy has run out of steam at precisely the time when it
was expected to move up a gear and accelerate, taking the country into its
tenth consecutive year of steady growth and carrying the former GDR briskly
towards a bright new future.
The west's traditional foreign markets have signally failed to recover and
produce the forecast autumn surge in exports. The east's markets in the
former Soviet Union, Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia have collapsed and
show no sign of recovery.
Domestic demand has slumped. And in September the spectacular appreciation
of the D-Mark against the currencies of many of Germany's key trading
partners dealt a telling blow to any lingering hopes of a late increase in
export orders.
After a freak spurt of growth in the first quarter of this year, which
stemmed mainly from the effects of fine weather on construction industry
output, the economic growth chart has slid back to the downwards trend which
started in the second quarter of last year.
Independent economists, who have steadily downgraded their predictions for
the past six months, now count on overall economic growth for this year of
below 1 per cent. But the government remains resolutely more confident; it
expects improvements in the final quarter to generate 1.5 per cent growth in
gross national product for the full year.
However, its optimism is based on mainly technical factors. The last three
months of this year include three more working days than in 1991, for
example. Also, Bonn believes a looming one point increase in value added tax
scheduled for January 1, will prompt a pre-Christmas boom in consumer
markets.
But once that is past - if indeed it materialises at all - on current
indications the slide is likely to continue into next year.
As things stand, the volume of new industrial orders to the end of August
has fallen for six consecutive months. Capital equipment manufacturers,
which export around half their output, have been consistently worst hit.
Production this year is expected to be 5 per cent down on 1991.
The depth of the troubles of the motor industry has become apparent more
recently. The underlying effect of fading demand was fudged for much of the
year as manufacturers raced to make up order backlogs. But new orders this
year are now expected to be as much as one-third lower than last.
In Baden-Wurttemberg, home state to Mercedes-Benz, total orders for vehicles
fell more than 16 per cent the first eight months. Domestic demand was down
26 per cent.
The chemical industry expects profits to fall 30 per cent in the current
financial year . . . and the story continues across the broad sweep of west
German industry.
Announcements of labour force cuts - 20,000 at Mercedes, 12,500 at
Volkswagen, 7,500 at Deutsche Aerospace - have become routine news items as
the year has progressed. Growth in the west's labour market, where 3m new
jobs have been created in the last nine years, has stopped.
IN the east, the picture is fogged by wildly gyrating economic data. But the
fact that the government has reduced its economic growth forecasts for the
region from 10 per cent to between 3 per cent and 5 per cent speaks for
itself. Although the official unemployment rate was 12 per cent in August,
only half the labour force in the former GDR is productively employed.
The dawning realisation that the west is going to have to continue
subsidising the east at current rates - transfers this year could reach
DM170bn - for many years to come has served not only further to darken the
immediate gloom. It has opened up a national debate on how Germany is to
manouevre its way out of the current situation and at the same time
consolidate the foundations for future growth and prosperity in both sides
of the country.
According to the pessimists - denounced vigorously by senior officials at
the Bundesbank - Germany now stands on the edge of recession. Hopes of
withdrawing from the brink or injecting growth into the economy rest almost
entirely with the independent central bank in Frankfurt, which controls
German monetary policy. Hopes for a longer-term consolidation lie with
politicians of all parties, trade unions and employers who have committed
themselves to a so-called 'solidarity pact' to foster and underwrite the
unification process.
For the immediate future, much depends on the Bundesbank's interest rates
policy. Expectations of rate reductions this year, which would have allowed
European trading partners to stimulate economic activity and demand for
German goods by cutting theirs, lay behind much of the early optimism which
produced forecasts of an autumn upswing. They have yet to be realised.
The bank stresses tirelessly that its prime task as protector of the
long-term stability of the D-Mark precludes short-term manouevrings to
relieve cyclical economic difficulties. It will need to be convinced that
inflation and the associated explosion in money supply growth are firmly
under control before any significant relaxation can be expected.
While September's acceleration in the growth rate of the M3 money supply
measure was a freak result, the underlying average rate of growth this year
has been almost double the bank's targeted top rate of 5.5 per cent.
Although a marked fall is expected in November as the economic downturn
deepens, the Frankfurt policy-makers have admitted that there is no chance
of bringing the rate within its target range this year.
Meanwhile, inflation seems to be stuck, doggedly resisting the bank's
efforts. A month-on-month prices rise pushed the annual rate to 3.6 per cent
in September, and while the Bundesbank confidently expects the year's
average to come in below 4 per cent, it has also warned of further
deterioration in January when the VAT increase takes effect.
After that, much will depend on the impact of the 1993 pay rounds.
Economists have been heartened by this year's two-year pay deal for 4m
engineering workers which included a 3 per cent rise next April, and the
recent 5.4 per cent claim from the Volkswagen workforce. They are now
forecasting a 4 per cent average award for 1993 - compared with 6 per cent
this year - and overall inflation of 3.75 per cent.
Given that the Bundesbank describes 2 per cent price inflation as merely
'tolerable,' present prospects give little cause for over-optimism about
large, early cuts in interest rates in Germany. But if the bank can be
convinced that a change of popular mood and realignment of people's
expectations with economic reality is firmly underway, more concessions are
possible.
It will need to be convinced that the government can deliver promised real
cuts in public spending and look for evidence in the progress of Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's solidarity pact, now being debated at the expert level. Early
signs are not promising: the bank's recent statements indicate profound
scepticism about the finance ministry's ability to rein in federal spending,
and trade union leaders have already declared that they will not accept any
renegotiation of deals to bring east German pay up to western levels by
1994.
However, early indications are not always to be trusted, as German
economists who forecast an autumn recovery can verify.

The Financial Times


London Page III

921026

