FT924-8277

FT  12 NOV 92 / Survey of Jordan (7): 'One family' under strain - In Middle
East peace moves, Jordan must face both ways


   By HUGH CARNEGY


JORDAN'S role in Middle East peace negotiations has a double aspect which
makes the country a pivotal player.
Not only must it hammer out a settlement on its own account with its
neighbour Israel; it is also inextricably involved in the question of how to
resolve the core dispute between Israel and the Palestinians.
From 1948 until the 1967 Six Day War, Jordan ruled the West Bank and east
Jerusalem, including the Old City, which, with the Gaza Strip, are the areas
the Palestinians and their Arab backers envisage, as they bend their efforts
towards making up a future Palestinian state.
King Hussein renounced Jordan's claim to the West Bank and Jerusalem in
1988, ostensibly clearing the way for the Palestine Liberation Organisation
to push ahead unhindered with its quest for a fully independent Palestinian
nation.
But now, faced with the economic and political difficulties such a putative
state would face, and the opposition to its creation still voiced by Israel,
the Palestinians themselves are looking to forge a new relationship with
Amman based on some kind of confederation.
In effect, therefore, Jordan must not only negotiate with Israel, but also
work out a deal with the Palestinians which would allow the central pieces
of an Arab-Israeli settlement to fall into place.
Jordan is treading cautiously along this second track, afraid of putting the
cart of a future Jordanian-Palestinian relationship ahead of the horse of an
Israeli-Palestinian agreement.
But it accepted the inevitability of such a link in effect when it agreed
that there should be a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to the peace
talks when they opened in Madrid a year ago.
For the time being, however, the two parties are in practice negotiating
separately with Israel.
The Palestinians are struggling to achieve terms for an interim period of
self-government that would precede a final settlement in which the nature of
a Palestinian-Jordanian relationship would have to be worked out.
In the latest round of talks last month - the seventh since Madrid - Jordan
and Israel drew up a draft agenda on how to proceed to a full peace accord.
In itself something of a breakthrough, the agenda envisages reaching a full
peace treaty, renouncing the use of force.
To get there, the most important issues to resolve are Jordan's claims to
some 400 sq km of territory, mainly along the Wadi Araba frontier south of
the Dead Sea, the fate of the Palestinian refugees that Jordan has taken in
since 1948 and the sharing of water resources.
By themselves, none of these should be too difficult to overcome. But the
Jordanians are committed not to sign a treaty with Israel unless there is
parallel progress between Israel and the other Arab parties, including the
Palestinians.
Meanwhile, the PLO has pushed for the issue of a Jordanian-Palestinian
confederation to be considered sooner rather than later.
Senior members of Fatah, the mainstream PLO faction led by Mr Yasser Arafat,
the organisation's chairman, admit privately that they are anxious to
pre-empt possible violent opposition to an interim agreement with Israel
from radical Palestinian groups, such as Hamas, the Islamic fundamentalist
organisation. They see a firm link with the stable figure of King Hussein
and his security forces as a way to achieve this.
Jordan is not against the idea. King Hussein says the Jordanian-Palestinian
relationship is bound to be close. 'We are members of one family,' he is
fond of saying.
But he is hesitant. On the one hand, the King does not want to arouse
suspicions among many Palestinians that his long-held ambition is to bring
them fully under his rule.
On the other hand, so-called East Bankers - that is, the 40 per cent of the
population of Jordanians who do not originally come from west of the Jordan
River - fear being swallowed in a joint state which would have a heavy
Palestinian majority. King Hussein and his army fought a bloody war against
the PLO in 'Black September' 1970 when he feared the PLO was threatening to
take over Jordan and unseat him.
At present, East Bankers dominate the 150,000-strong armed forces and the
equivalent-sized bureaucracy. Only two out of 29 ministers are Palestinian.
Jordanians fear losing their big stake in the state - fears that were
exacerbated by the influx of 300,000 Palestinians from Kuwait and the Gulf
over the past year.
'The ties between the two people are so interwoven it is impossible to tear
the fabric,' says Mr Kemal Abu Jabbar, the foreign minister. 'But I honestly
don't believe this is the time to negotiate. When the Israelis withdraw,
when there is a Palestinian entity, when it is clear what the Palestinian
jurisdiction is - then we can start to talk of our future relationship.'

The Financial Times


London Page 35

921112

