FT921-381

FT  30 MAR 92 / Fears rise in Bosnia despite truce


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


THREE PEOPLE people were killed yesterday in Bosnia-Hercegovina despite a
truce called by leaders of the central Yugoslav republic, amid fears that
the fighting would engulf Bosnia's ethnically mixed population of 4.4m.
The ceasefire reached at the weekend by members of the republic's collective
presidency calls for a buffer zone of about 500 yards to divide the warring
sides in Bosanski Brod, northern Bosnia.
A joint commission comprising Moslems, Serbs and Croats - Bosnia's three
main ethnic groups - as well as police and European Community monitors will
arrive today to monitor the truce.
Dozens of people have been killed over the past week in mortar, artillery
and gunbattles in and around Bosanski Brod. Both sides yesterday expressed
doubts that the ceasefire would take hold.
Mr Anton Kljajic, a spokesman from the emergency council of Bosanski Brod,
said by telephone yesterday that Serb snipers shot dead a Croat man and a
Moslem man. Serbian media said one Serb was killed and several wounded in
fresh clashes in a nearby village.
Each side has accused the other of launching the attacks in incidents which
could not be independently confirmed.
Croatian and Serbian media also accuse each other of deploying tanks and
massing forces around Bosanski Brod, whose population of 34,000 is 41 per
cent Croat, 34 per cent Serb and 12 per cent Moslem.
The Serb-controlled federal army, which says it is remaining neutral in the
conflict, at the weekend warned that it would retaliate if Croat forces
continue to attack Bosnia. 'The army will be forced to react decisively to
any form of armed threat on the citizens and on their units,' an army
statement said.
Thousands of Croats and Serbs are fleeing Bosanski Brod and other ethnically
mixed towns in Bosnia. Long queues of people yesterday in Bosanski Brod
carrying blankets, pots and pans jammed the bridge over the River Sava,
which marks Bosnia's northern frontier with Croatia.
The emergency council has issued an order banning men aged 18-55 from
leaving the town.
Serbian media in Zvornik, 65 miles southeast of Bosanski Brod, at the
weekend appealed for Serbs to remain in the town after reports that Moslem
police had seized the local police station.
The fighting in Bosnia has sharply escalated since the begining of the month
and will most likely hamper European Community-brokered peace talks.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920330

