FT923-9775

FT  03 AUG 92 / Indonesian bank managers warned of loan crackdown


   By WILLIAM KEELING


   JAKARTA


MANAGERS of Indonesia's seven state-owned banks would be sacked if found
granting loans as personal favours, Mr JB Sumarlin, Indonesia's minister of
finance, warned at the weekend.
The state banks dominate the banking sector, accounting for about half the
sector's Rupiah 118,000bn (Pounds 29.8bn) of outstanding credits. The
government is undertaking a programme to restructure the banks, reduce bad
debts and improve management.
In April the government changed the status of the banks from state
enterprises to limited liability companies, a move designed to give the
banks greater autonomy. On Saturday Mr Sumarlin completed a reshuffle of the
banks' boards, swearing in 72 new directors and commissioners.
Mr Sumarlin stressed: 'Should any government bank be known to have
channelled its funds on the force of a mere personal memo 'from up above',
it would be the bank leaders who would be hanged, not the author of the
memo,' the state-owned Antara news agency reported.
Bankers say Mr Sumarlin's statement is a tacit acceptance that the problems
faced by state banks are partly the result of lending under pressure from
businessmen, often politically well connected, for schemes which are not
commercially viable.
His statement, however, appeared to stop short of directly criticising those
exerting pressure for unwarranted credit facilities. Years of poor credit
control have left the state commercial banks with bad and doubtful debts of
between 15 and 25 per cent of their portfolios, donor officials estimate.
The government's restructuring programme will include raising the state
banks' capital adequacy ratio to 8 per cent of performing assets, in line
with Bank for International Settlements guidelines, by the end of next year.
Bankers say this will require an injection of up to Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1bn)
of new capital.
The World Bank is expected to provide over Dollars 300m to assist the banks'
recapitalisation and to improve the supervisory capacity of Bank Indonesia,
the central bank. Government officials say once the restructuring is
complete, they intend to float a minority shareholding in each of the state
banks.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920803

