FT922-3934

FT  09 JUN 92 / Technology: Prejudice in the classroom - Technically
Speaking


   By ANDREW ADONIS


IT'S BACK to the drawing board for technology teaching in England and Wales.
The subject was made part of the national curriculum two years ago, which
means that all pupils up to the age of 16 must study technology in a form
determined by ministerial order.
Britain is the first country in Europe to enshrine the subject as a
compulsory part of the school timetable up to 16. Together with ventures
like the City Technology Colleges and the Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative, it was intended to redress the bias of the traditional
curriculum against the practical and applied, and give an entrepreneurial
edge to Britain's rising youth.
It may still do so - but not as currently taught in schools. A highly
critical report last week by the schools inspectorate led John Patten, the
education secretary, to set up an 'urgent inquiry' into the current regime,
with a view to producing a new curriculum and revised syllabuses for the
GCSE exam within three years.
The inspectorate found technology teaching to be poor in 40 per cent of
secondary schools. The most common problems were ill-prepared staff,
inadequate facilities and an over-complex curriculum framework with too
little emphasis on relating theory to practical skills.
First and foremost, schools were found to have had insufficient support in
getting technology up and running as a new subject. Lack of support staff
was found to be a weakness - in many cases a damaging side-effect of the
policy, supported by all political parties, of devolving more resources from
local education authorities (Leas) directly to schools.
'At a time when teachers need advice and support with the introduction of
technology,' said the inspectorate, 'many Leas have reduced the number of
advisory teachers and closed specialist in-service training centres, often
in order to reduce expenditure and to enable them to delegate more money to
schools.'
As to equipment: surprise, surprise, only half of all girls-only schools
have adequate facilities for teaching craft and design, and even fewer
boys-only schools cater for work with food and textiles. Yet more demands,
then, on hard-pressed capital budgets.
On the wider issue of teaching the subject, many schools were found simply
to be ignoring the rules. For the most part (in the jargon) they were
concentrating on 'artefacts' at the expense of 'systems' and 'environments'.
The Engineering Council is blunter: too much school technology, it says, is
'Blue Peter' stuff, a semi-serious break from 'real' work.
The inspectors noted one secondary school where pupils spent three weeks
trying to identify a need associated with the theme of 'communication'. By
the end of it several had become 'disillusioned' and in week four 'brought
in their own ingredients and made a pizza'. It may be that the training and
commitment of staff are more at fault than syllabuses, but the inquiry has
been asked to look at them again.
Integrating the component parts of the subject into a coherent whole is a
challenge many schools have yet to meet. 'Technology' is supposed to be more
than the sum of art, craft, design, home economics, business education and
information technology. Pre-1990, few schools offered all of those; many
taught only two or three.
The inspectorate divides schools into three: those taking a 'federated'
approach, with staff planning together but teaching only their specialism;
those who keep everything separated rigidly; and those adopting a fully
integrated approach. It likes the first approach best.
Underlying it all remains the problem of ingrained prejudice. Too often
schools still see technology as cooking and metalwork - pursuits to keep the
less able from wreaking havoc with the physics or Latin. Unsurprisingly, the
inspectorate found little worthwhile business education in technology
courses. That, after all, might even make Mastermind.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920609

