FT924-6047

FT  24 NOV 92 / Capital burden eased for financial advisers


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


INDEPENDENT financial advisers will not have to meet heavy EC demands to
hold a minimum level of capital, Community finance ministers agreed
yesterday.
Ministers exempted independent investment advisers from requirements to hold
Ecu50,000 (Pounds 40,650) of capital as part of a formal agreement on the
investment services directive.
But independent advisers will only be exempt if they simply pass clients'
orders and payments on to dealers, do not deal in shares directly on their
clients' behalf, and are subject to a proper ethical code.
The investment services directive will grant large investment firms a
'single passport' to deal in shares around the Community. Ministers reached
a broad agreement on the principal outstanding problems in June, but
yesterday they eradicated member states' final technical objections.
Sir Leon Brittan, EC financial services commissioner, described yesterday's
agreement as 'the crucial and culminating step in the creation of the
internal market in financial services'.
The directive, which will work in tandem with a measure on capital adequacy
requirements for banks and brokers, covers brokers, dealers, portfolio
managers and underwriters of large share issues.
The final obstacles included Britain's concern that thousands of independent
financial advisers would be crippled by the need to meet minimum capital
requirements. Most member states have not developed a similar network of
independent advisers, although Germany and Ireland will also benefit from
the exemption.
Safeguards will prevent independent advisers exploiting their exemption in
third countries, where they will still be covered by national restrictions.
Ministers also agreed that foreign exchange activities would benefit from
the directive as long as they were linked generally to other broking
activities. They rejected calls for individual transactions to be directly
linked to securities deals.
France and Belgium had argued that banks and brokers would be able to set up
foreign exchange operations in their countries independently of other
activities, but under the compromise agreed yesterday that would not be
possible.
Sir Leon also promised to bring forward legislation which would allow
information on banks, insurance companies and brokers to be passed between
supervisory authorities.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921124

