FT924-6492

FT  20 NOV 92 / London Stock Exchange: Share prices cling on to recent gains


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


THE latest statistics on the domestic economy helped the UK stock market to
hold on to the FT-SE 2,700 mark yesterday, although attempts to move further
ahead were not successful. A substantially greater increase than expected in
domestic lending by the banks and building societies during October raised
some hopes that the economic recession might be lifting at last. But this
was counter-balanced by the implications of the stagnant performance in UK
gross domestic product in the third quarter, also disclosed yesterday.
Equities opened higher, benefiting from a firmer performance from other
global markets overnight, but were soon restrained by softness in the US
dollar which held back the blue chip internationals. The FT-SE Index was
also held back by a fall in ICI on the reports that a leading UK securities
house was about to issue a somewhat cool appraisal of the planned merger of
the bio-science divisions.
However, the market found support again when the Footsie 2,700 area was
challenged and share prices then crept higher, with the announcement of the
UK money supply and bank lending data helpful. Also encouraging for the
equity market was the premium over the Footsie maintained by the December
stock index future contract.
The second half of the session was uneventful, although some comfort was
drawn from favourable reports from the talks in Washington aimed at securing
a settlement of the GATT problems. Cuts in base rates by the French banks
were not regarded as immediately significant.
The final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,706.2 for a net gain on the day
of 2.2 points. Seaq volume increased to 659.2m shares from Wednesday's 551m,
worth Pounds 1bn in retail business.
The turnover statistics bear out opinions among traders that the stock
market is 'fundamentally optimistic' and that the institutions are unwilling
to let share prices fall very far while they await further news on interest
rates and on the UK government's moves to stimulate the domestic economy.
The news on the industrial front remained negative, Blue Circle Industries,
Royal Bank of Scotland and British Rail all disclosing plans to reduce
staff. But the stock market takes the view that the depth of the recession
has been taken aboard by share prices and that only signs of a recovery in
the economy will have significantly fresh impact.
At Panmure Gordon, Mr Robin Aspinall commented that, in present
circumstances, investors were more likely to be attracted by high yielding
quality equities than by bank and similar deposits, on which returns had
fallen steadily this year and were expected to fall further.
Mr Trevor Laugharne at Kleinwort Benson Securities told clients that he
could see only weak bullish and bearish factors operating in London at
present, with 'preponderance just falling on the bearish side'; the market
is unlikely to move up in the near term unless it senses that another cut in
base rates is imminent.
The strategy team at Nikko Securities is slightly more optimistic than some
others in the marketplace in believing that the next 1 percentage point base
rate cut will come before Christmas.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

921120

