FT924-6233

FT  23 NOV 92 / Onus now on Brussels to square deal with CAP: How EC
partners will regard french protests


   By DAVID GARDNER


LAST Friday's settlement of the subsidised food export disputes between the
European Community and the US produced a collective sigh of relief. Now, all
eyes are on France.
French ministers say they will resist a deal they insist amounts to a
cave-in to US ambitions to dominate international food markets. They are
demanding that the European Commission, which clinched the agreement on
behalf of the 12, demonstrate that the EC's new international obligations
are compatible with this year's reform of the Common Agricultural Policy
(CAP).
They are adamant that this is not the case, so the debate on 'compatibility'
is set to be fierce, backed up by strong pressure from France's farmers and
parliament and the threat of a French veto. But France has been playing
uphill for at least six weeks. And there is little sign its partners are
prepared to accommodate Paris to the extent of putting a Uruguay Round deal
under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in jeopardy.
To begin with, the deal Mr Ray MacSharry, the EC agriculture commissioner,
brought back from Washington, is on certain points close to France's
maximalist demands. Mr MacSharry is aggressively confident in his
achievement and will not be shy about telling France that, in the end, it
was the Americans who caved in.
On Thursday night, with an agreement all but reached, Mr Ed Madigan, the US
agriculture secretary, pulled back, for the third time in five weeks, in the
face of intense lobbying from American farm organisations. This time, senior
EC officials say, Mr MacSharry gave the US until today to reply, or the
outline agreement would be withdrawn. He flew back to Brussels and, within
13 hours, President George Bush had overruled Mr Madigan and the deal was
finally done.
France has complained that the EC was negotiating with a gun to its head:
the punitive sanctions Washington had threatened for December 5. In the
event, Mr MacSharry gave the US an earlier deadline and got away with it. Mr
Jacques Delors, the French Commission president whom he had accused of
undermining the negotiations and siding with French interests, was the first
to congratulate him when the Commission assembled on Friday afternoon to
endorse the breakthrough. This was a far cry from events a week earlier.
Mr Delors had been forced to invite Mr MacSharry back to the negotiations
after he had angrily resigned this role, putting the Commission president
and Paris under intense pressure from EC member states. But then a paper
leaked from the Commission into French newspapers, implying that what Mr
MacSharry was negotiating would require EC farmers to 'set aside', or take
out of production, more than a third of their land.
That paper, followed by a formal French presentation using similar figures,
argued for an EC 'bottom line' on the oilseeds dispute which Mr MacSharry
has trumped. The paper argued for a tonnage ceiling on EC oilseeds output of
11m tonnes, with a limit to obligatory 'set-aside' of 15 per cent. In the
final deal there is no tonnage ceiling, only a sown area limit identical to
the 5.128m hectares envisaged by CAP reform; obligatory set-aside, moreover
is 10 per cent, below the 15 per cent set by CAP reform, and with a
dispensation to grow oilseeds for non-food use. France will still insist
that the 21 per cent cut in subsidised food exports in the deal cannot be
met, product by product.
But French officials were already shifting their argument towards
'rebalancing' - demanding US agreement to restrain their cheap cereals
substitutes coming in to the EC as quid pro quo for cuts in EC export
volume. The US has only agreed to monitor any 'surges' in exports of
products like corn-gluten. Nevertheless, EC officials say, the French guns
may be spiked because the 'rebalancing' wording was drafted by Germany which
has failed to support Paris in the last three weeks.
The momentum behind the deal is likely to increase until the December 11-12
summit of EC heads of government in Edinburgh - only after which farm
ministers will reassemble. Unless, of course, France is serious about using
its 'veto'. Legally, France can be outvoted on the package. But the veto in
question is the so-called 'Luxembourg compromise'. It can be invoked when
'very important interests' of a member state are at stake.
But even French officials admit that using the 'Luxembourg compromise' would
be equivalent to using France's nuclear force de frappe - a deterrent whose
only efficacy is if it is not used. Majority feeling in Brussels is that
President Francois Mitterrand will not risk the further, already
crisis-ridden stage of integration foreshadowed by the Maastricht treaty by
pressing this sort of veto now.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921123

