FT922-4157

FT  06 JUN 92 / Second Danish referendum possible, says minister


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER and HILARY BARNES


   OSLO, COPENHAGEN


THE Danish government has 'no plans' for a new referendum on the Maastricht
Treaty but it could not be ruled out as a future option following the Danish
people's rejection of the treaty this week, Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the
Danish foreign minister, said yesterday.
It would not be right to ignore the constitutional process which had led to
the rejection of the treaty, Mr Ellemann-Jensen said. But 'if circumstances
changed', the possibility of holding another referendum could be discussed
as one of a number of solutions to Denmark's predicament.
Mr Ellemann-Jensen, in Oslo for a meeting of Nato foreign ministers,
repeated what he told his European Community colleagues on Thursday, that
'all options' remained open. 'We will have to consider what we want to do
during the summer recess and take stock of the situation in the autumn. For
the moment, the time is not ripe for decisions.'
Denmark and its people still regarded themselves as an integral part of this
process, which was supported by all political parties.
Mr Ellemann-Jensen said the decision by the other European Community member
states to proceed with ratification of the Maastricht treaty did not come as
a surprise to the Danish government. 'We told the voters that that would be
the case and they voted with their eyes open.'
It was also made clear at Thursday's emergency meeting that Denmark's 11
partners were not ready to renegotiate the treaty, a fact that had been
noted by Denmark.
He was grateful to Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president, for
distancing himself personally from a Commission discussion paper which was
reported to have expressed the opinion that small countries would 'lose
influence' in the European union projected in the Maastricht treaty.
This report is said to have played an important role in persuading the
Danish electorate to reject the treaty, but Mr Ellemann-Jensen said he was
satisfied by Mr Delors' explanation that it had been prepared 'at a low
level' and did not represent his views.
'I certainly hope that Mr Delors will be reappointed,' he added.
While Danish politicians try to sort out the country's relationship with the
EC, ordinary Danes are astonished to find themselves in the spotlight,
Hilary Barnes reports from Copenhagen.
'It suddenly felt important to be a Dane,' said a university student
yesterday, a Yes-voter who was appalled at the EC crisis which his fellow
voters have brought about.
The vote contained a strong element of protest against the political
establishment. Some of the No-voters are having regrets. A waitress said she
voted No out of general dislike of Denmark's powers-that-be, feeling
confident that Yes votes would prevail. Enthusiastic opponents were
convinced they were striking a blow for national independence.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

