FT924-12165

FT  22 OCT 92 / Life insurers shed 22,000 agents in shake-out


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent and RICHARD LAPPER


THE LIFE insurance industry has lost 22,000 sales agents since the end of
June last year - a drop of roughly 12 per cent in 16 months - because of
tougher monitoring by regulators and the effects of the recession, according
to Lautro, the self-regulatory body for the industry.
Most of those were 'tied' sales agents who sell the products of one
insurance company exclusively but are not employed directly by it. Tied
agents have been identified most closely with sharp practice and have been
targeted for special oversight.
Lautro also said that in the year to June 30 it had experienced a 50 per
cent rise in consumer complaints to 1,999. Although the rise was dramatic,
it was less than the 69 per cent rise reported over the previous year.
Ms Julia Leisching, chief policy and administration officer at Lautro, said:
'People are looking at how much its costs to control these tied agents and
saying 'it's not worth it'.' She said that a further shake-out of sales
agents was likely as Lautro's new rules on training and competence took
effect.
The figures are contained in Lautro's annual report for the 12 months ended
June 30.
Over the year, Lautro conducted 73 period inspection visits - routine visits
to review members' compliance. Of those, 19 found compliance difficulties so
serious that a special investigation was launched. All of those involved the
activities of tied agents, Ms Leisching said.
The regulatory organisation said that just under half of the nearly 2,000
consumer complaints were still under consideration, while just under half of
those processed were resolved in favour of the complainant.
One area where Lautro's monitoring efforts have produced significant
improvements lies in uncovering breaches of advertising rules.
The stepped-up regulatory efforts have produced a 25 per cent rise in
Lautro's enforcement costs over the year, contributing to an operating loss
of Pounds 312,000.
The salary of Mr Barry Sherlock, the part-time chairman of Lautro, has more
than doubled from the previous year to Pounds 42,830.
Barder & Marsh, the Lloyd's agency, has reached agreement in principle with
Wendover Underwriting Agency, to take over the management of five syndicates
administered by Wendover, Richard Lapper writes.
The announcement is further evidence of the rationalisation among syndicates
and agencies at the insurance market, hard hit by recent losses.
At least 50 of the 279 syndicates trading in London are not expected to
survive into next year.
The combined Barder & Marsh and Wendover business will have a capacity (or
capital base) of about Pounds 200m next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921022

