FT924-11300

FT  27 OCT 92 / Ex-communists win Lithuanian poll


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


LITHUANIA'S nationalist leader, Mr Vytautas Landsbergis, has suffered a
serious electoral defeat at the hands of former Communists who have
politically exploited the small Baltic republic's severe economic
difficulties during its first year of independence.
Unofficial results of Sunday's parliamentary elections suggest big gains for
the Democratic Labour Party (DLP) of Mr Algirdas Brasauskas, a former
Communist Party leader who has pressed for a less brutal break with Moscow
and a gentler transition to a market economy.
Mr Brasauskas, a moderate nationalist who three years ago split from the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union to promote Lithuanian independence,
looks likely to form the next government and says that he will seek a broad
coalition.
'We will talk to other parties and do not want to usurp power,' he told
Reuters news agency. 'It is time to throw away ambitions and search for an
agreement.'
Although a second round of voting in two weeks time could still alter the
expected outcome of the elections, a separate referendum produced
overwhelming support for a new constitution which foresees presidential
elections early next year.
Mr Landsbergis, who has effectively ruled Lithuania as chairman of
parliament and may keep his post until presidential elections, appeared
yesterday to concede defeat for his radical Sajudis independence movement.
He said that the former communist DLP had conducted an effective electoral
campaign. However, he also accused Russia, which recently halted a troop
withdrawal from Lithuania and suspended oil deliveries, of interfering in
the election.
Although he did not substantiate the charges, Mr Saulius Cheltenis, a
Lithuanian magazine editor, said that for 'people to be cold in their flats
and wonder how they are going to cook their next meal' was enough 'for an
oil blockade to affect elections'.
However, the Russian suspension of deliveries was not the only factor to
prompt support for Mr Brasauskas, a moderate who has proved his loyalty to
an independent Lithuania.
Although recent elections in neighbouring Estonia produced a defeat for
former Communists, Mr Cheltenis pointed out that there had been a backlash
against the radical reforms in much of eastern Europe, including in Poland,
which, like Lithuania, is a largely rural Catholic country with obsolete
heavy industry inherited from its Soviet masters.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921027

