FT923-9567

FT  04 AUG 92 / Way is cleared for fly-in estate


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, Midlands Correspondent


PLANNING permission for the country's first fly-in community has been
granted by Wrekin District Council in Shropshire.
The plan for the old Bratton airfield, north-west of Telford, was drawn up
by directors of two private Midlands companies - LBE Group, a contract
tooling and engineering business, and London & Midland Developments, a
property company. Under the scheme, 65 upmarket homes will be built on plots
of up to 1.5 acres. Each will have its own hangar and be connected by
taxiway to an airstrip more than 1,000 yards long.
There are about 500 such estates in the US, but in Europe the practice of
flying for pleasure or to work is not common.
The council's decision was made amid local concern about noise and safety
and was taken on party political lines, with Labour in favour and the
Conservatives against. Shropshire County Council had recommended rejection
on the grounds that the development was against the county structure plan.
Mr Jack Turner, a Wrekin Labour councillor and chairman of the Telford
Development Authority, described fears about noise and safety as
'exaggerated'.
The council has promised that noise levels would be closely controlled. No
more than 25,000 landings and take-offs would be allowed a year, which means
that roughly half of the residents could use their aircraft every day.
The Telford Development Authority, whose task is to attract inward
investment, welcomed the plan as giving the area an extra edge in the
competition for new investment. The airstrip will be available for use by
local business as well as residents.
The developers, who call their plan Telford Skypark, expect to start
construction this year and to finish within three years. The completed value
is estimated to be about Pounds 20m.
The costs of constructing the airstrip, flight-control tower and the
infrastructure of the estate are about Pounds 3.5m. LBE and London & Midland
expect to create an early cashflow through contracts with building companies
wanting to build homes on the site.
The district council's planning permission is subject to formal approval by
Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary. The airfield also needs a
licence from the Civil Aviation Authority before it can begin operations.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920804

