FT921-1320

FT  25 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Greens may rely on economy's move from red to
black - The Issues, Environment


   By DAVID LASCELLES


THE environment is not exactly a burning issue in this election. The Tories
place it at the end of their manifesto; Labour assigns it to page 21 of its
28-page document; the Liberal Democrats put it higher up; but only the Green
party gives it pride of place.
At the last election, pollsters tracked every blip in the Green party's
fortunes; now they lump green voters in with 'others'. The recession is
largely to blame - the main parties have much more pressing social and
economic issues on their plate, and protecting the environment can look
expensive when times are hard.
However, while green issues may have lost some of their sharpness, they have
also moved into the political mainstream. Voters expect politicians to be
green these days; the question now is how they set about it.
The Tories are fighting on what they call their record of achievement. Their
manifesto stresses that their party is not one that makes wild promises and
fails to deliver.
The keystone of the Conservative strategy will be to set up a new
environment agency, a kind of super environmental watchdog that will combine
the functions of the National Rivers Authority, the Pollution Inspectorate
and local authority waste regulation. The body will have to produce an
annual state-of-the-environment report.
The Tories also say they will press the EC to introduce integrated pollution
controls on the UK model, something they are rather proud of.
If he wins, John Major will fly the green flag by going down to Rio for
June's earth summit; he was one of the first national leaders to agree to
attend.
However, the Tories look vulnerable on the environment. They may have lived
up to some of their promises, but many were modest. The UK lags the rest of
the EC, for example, in its plans to curb carbon dioxide and sewage
emissions.
The daily battles between motorway builders and conservationists on Twyford
Down in Hampshire coincide embarrassingly with the election campaign, and
give Mr Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, a distinctly
anti-green tinge.
The Tories' policies also need to be tested against promises they are making
in related areas, such as energy and transport. Can they curb the growth of
traffic? Can they curb carbon emissions and still make British Coal an
attractive privatisation prospect?
Labour will be targeting the Tories' 'laggardly and reluctant' green
policies. Their central pledge is to establish a legal right to a clean
environment, though the party has yet to spell out what this means.
There will also be greater freedom of green information, and EC-driven
environmental impact assessments. Labour wants to subject every policy to
environmental appraisal, co-ordinated by a newly created cabinet minister
for environmental protection. There will be an annual 'Green Book' on the
environmental impact of government policy.
Pollution rules will be enforced by an independent environmental protection
executive, and there will be more stress on curbing waste and on eco-audits
for business. Trade in toxic wastes will be banned. Mr Kinnock would also go
to Rio if he wins.
Labour's policies seem to tie in more logically with its plans to invest
heavily in public transport and curb traffic growth. However, its commitment
to the coal industry must raise questions about its ability to deal with
carbon dioxide unless it promotes an effective energy efficiency campaign.
The Liberal Democrats promise a far-reaching fiscal and regulatory package
to clean up the environment. There would be tough targets for cutting
pollution, backed up by measures such as an energy tax, emission licences
and the scrapping of the nuclear-power programme. Heavy investment would go
into public transport, and money would be spent on roads only where
necessary.
The Green party manifesto goes well beyond the symptoms of pollution to
tackle what it believes are the root causes: poverty, a tax system that
penalises work rather than use of resources, and a Gatt regime which
discourages environment-friendly rules.
There is a lot about cyclists, windmills and energy-efficient light bulbs,
yet the manifesto makes by far the most interesting reading of the four and
will cause some voters to wonder whether the main parties are only tinkering
with the problems.
The Greens are fielding 250 candidates. At the last election they polled 1.5
per cent of the vote, though they managed to get up to 15 per cent in the
1989 European elections. However, they may have to wait until the next
boom-time election to raise their showing.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920325

