FT921-11827

FT  30 JAN 92 / EC agrees legal safeguards for electronic databases


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


DRAFT legislation to provide EC-wide legal protection against the
international piracy of electronic databases was approved yesterday by the
European Commission.
The 'ground-breaking' draft directive - modelled on existing Scandinavian
legislation - adds to the growing body of agreed or draft EC legislation on
intellectual property, including last year's directive aimed at fighting
piracy of computer software.
Within the next fortnight the Commission is also likely to propose
harmonising copyright protection for original work. According to officials,
Brussels is considering fixing the duration of protection at 70 years, a
compromise between the widely different regimes in the 12 member states.
The directive approved yesterday would introduce a new type of intellectual
property right, protecting producers of databases - computerised lists of
addresses, for example - from unfair copying of the contents of their
databases for 10 years. The measure leaves aside the question of personal
data protection, which is the subject of a controversial draft directive now
being discussed by the European Parliament.
Database producers, which include large publishers and direct marketing
organisations, believe the directive may also help liberalise the Ecu2.5bn
(Pounds 1.75bn) European market. It would allow competitors wishing to
re-use such information commercially to obtain compulsory licences 'on fair
and non-discriminatory terms'.
Mr Tony Coad, managing director of the British group NDL International,
which holds databases for UK manufacturers and retailers, said yesterday: 'I
can see this could be a genuine attempt to break down data monopolies, which
can be very powerful.'
The World Intellectual Property Organisation is already considering amending
the Berne Convention on intellectual property to cover databases, which are
not considered original enough to qualify for normal copyright protection.
But EC officials said they were unsure how long such moves would take, and
in any case they needed to introduce harmonised measures before the
introduction of the single European market at the end of this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920130

