FT924-6064

FT  24 NOV 92 / Ernst & Young agrees Dollars 400m suit settlements


   By NIKKI TAIT


   NEW YORK


ERNST & YOUNG, one of the big six international accounting firms, has agreed
to pay Dollars 400m (Pounds 265m) to settle an array of lawsuits stemming
from its audit work for failed US savings and loan institutions.
The money will be paid to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp (FDIC) and
Resolution Trust Corp (RTC), the federal agencies charged with overseeing
the multi-billion-dollar thrift industry debacle.
The settlement is one of the largest arising from a mass of litigation which
followed the collapse of many S&Ls in the 1980s, and by far the biggest
involving an accounting firm. Mr Ray Groves, chairman of Ernst & Young, said
yesterday that although the agreement was costly it was 'the only realistic
solution to an endless stream of lawsuits that would have been even more
expensive to defend'.
The federal agencies had alleged that Ernst & Young failed to meet required
professional standards and had violated federal regulations in its work for
a variety of thrifts. Some of the S&Ls audited by the firm and involved in
the litigation were among the highest-profile casualties in the sector -
including Dallas-based Vernon Savings & Loan, Silverado Banking in Denver,
and California's Lincoln.
Under yesterday's deal Ernst & Young said the firm itself would pay Dollars
100m, with insurance covering the remainder. The firm will pay the Dollars
100m over four years and expects to fund the sum out of current earnings.
In addition to the cash settlement, Ernst & Young has agreed to a 'cease and
desist' order by the Office of Thrift Supervision, concerning its future
accounting practices. In the order the firm neither admitted nor denied
allegations of improper auditing practices. It did, however, agree to
additional training for auditors in relevant areas, external third-party
review of audit partners' work and various other operational changes.
Three individuals - two former partners and one current partner - signed
consent orders prohibiting them from working for insured financial
institutions, while seven other partners (six current and one former) signed
consent cease and desist orders, requiring additional training.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921124

