FT921-14075

FT  17 JAN 92 / Algerian leader warns fundamentalists: Boudiaf sworn in as
head of new ruling council


   By REUTER


   ALGIERS


ALGERIA'S new leader Mohamed Boudiaf gave a clear warning to Islamic
fundamentalists yesterday that no group would be allowed to use religion for
its own interests, Reuter reports from Algiers.
The 72-year-old veteran of Algeria's independence war issued the warning
just hours after being sworn in as head of the five-man High Council of
State set up to rule the country by the military. The council was created
following the resignation of President Chadli Bendjedid on Saturday and the
cancellation of a second round of elections.
Earlier yesterday Mr Boudiaf was given a hero's welcome at the airport after
returning from 27 years of exile. In 1964 he had been sentenced to death by
his own country for political activity. The first man to welcome him was Gen
Khaled Nezzar, the defence minister and the central figure in the new ruling
council.
'It is not permitted to anyone, individual or group, to monopolise religion
for unholy interests. Islam is sacred, and no one must abuse it,' Mr Boudiaf
said.
His statement was seen as a clear warning to the Islamic Salvation Front
(FIS) which planned to make Algeria an Islamic state after taking an
apparently unassailable lead in the general election.
President Bendjedid was forced out, according to diplomats, by military men
and senior officials angered at his determination to complete the poll. The
FIS has said it would pursue its goals and challenge the five-man
presidency.
'I have come to offer my hand to everyone without exception for
reconciliation, co-operation to build Algeria. . . an Algeria of fraternity,
tolerance and creative work,' said Mr Boudiaf.
Thursday should have seen the conclusive round of voting in Algeria's first
democratic general election. The FIS, which won 188 seats in December's
preliminary round, had seemed sure of the additional 28 seats it needed to
take power.
All three parties that won seats in the first round of the now aborted
elections - the FIS, the National Liberation Front and the Front des Forces
Socialistes - continue to describe the events of the past few days as
unconstitutional. However, none of them appears, to be prepared to risk
challenging those now ruling the country with more than words.
The FIS has accused the authorities of starting to arrest its members.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920117

