FT921-15379

FT  10 JAN 92 / World Trade News (GATT): EC unmoved by Dunkel doctrine -
David Gardner on dismay in Brussels at an obstacle to farm reform


   By DAVID GARDNER


MR ARTHUR Dunkel, director-general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (Gatt), is not a popular man in Brussels just now. The majority view
in the European Commission, and within the EC's 12 member states, is that
his doctrinaire attitude towards liberalising farm trade is putting a new
world trade order beyond reach - as well as queering the pitch for radical
reform of the Community's Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
On December 23, the 12 said Mr Dunkel's blueprint for farm trade 'is not
acceptable, and therefore has to be modified'. Little different can be
expected from today's EC council of foreign, farm and trade ministers,
called to pronounce on the Swiss diplomat's draft conclusions to the Uruguay
Round before the 'crunch' meeting in Geneva on Monday.
Then, all 108 participants in the five-year trade talks are to respond to a
package designed to liberalise trade not only, or even primarily, in
agriculture, but to set new rules in sectors such as services and
intellectual property rights. But the EC, to the frustration of most of its
members, looks trapped by the agriculture chapter.
Prospects of a farm trade breakthrough had brightened after six weeks of
hard, bilateral bargaining between the EC and the US, but on December 19,
when only 4m tonnes of EC wheat exports appeared to stand between a
Washington-Brussels deal, the negotiations imploded.
No cogent explanation has emerged as to why this happened. But Mr Ed
Madigan, the US agriculture secretary in charge of the horse-trading with Mr
Ray MacSharry, EC farm commissioner, seems to have been reined back from
concessions he was prepared to make. What detonated the failure was the
re-opening of the arcane but core 'green box' issue.
The EC's planned CAP reform envisages direct payments to farmers to
compensate for deep cuts in farm support prices. These cuts exceed Gatt
targets: cereals prices, for instance, would be cut by 35 per cent over
three years, rather than the 20 per cent over six years Mr Dunkel wrote into
his 'final act' of the Uruguay Round. The Gatt target would require the US
to cut internal subsidies by little more than envisaged in its current farm
bill.
Export subsidies, however, would under the Dunkel schema be cut by 36 per
cent, and the volume of subsidised food exported by 24 per cent. The EC
wants no formal volume restraints, but could in practice deliver them, on
cereals at least, the main commodity of the row. The EC compensation
payments are calculated on the area sown in a past reference period, made
contingent on land being taken out of production, and therefore cut the most
direct link between price support and ever-expanding output. The CAP plan
could take 17m tonnes of EC grain off world markets.
The absolute condition is that the direct compensation to farmers be
categorised as 'green box', that is subsidies that do not foment production
and therefore distort trade. Mr Dunkel's paper rules this out. The EC says
in that case it cannot make the cuts, much less sell them to farmers.
The Dunkel plan 'is asking us to crucify our farmers, for absolutely no
benefit at all to the world market for farm produce', complains one senior
Commission official.
EC officials regard any Gatt failure as a strategic setback for CAP reform.
Gatt has been one of the levers Mr MacSharry has used to prise assent to the
thrust of his reform from a council of farm ministers which a year ago was
unanimously opposed to it. But worse still, failure to enact the reform
could paralyse Community policy in other areas.
In mid-February, Brussels will present a new financial plan for 1993-97,
designed to increase resources and funnel more of them to laggard
member-states, to help them adapt to the single market and prepare for
currency union. No overall decision is possible without agreement on a
reformed, at first more expensive CAP, which without a Gatt deal would seem
to offer less of a pay-off.
Moreover, an unreformed CAP would complicate enlargement and any coherent
policy towards the post-communist democracies of eastern Europe requires
greater access into the EC for their agricultural produce. An unreformed CAP
blocks this.
The least bad outcome, one Brussels official argues, would be for the 12 to
restate their opposition to Mr Dunkel's agriculture proposals and to mandate
Mr MacSharry to try to get him and the US to budge on the crucial 'green
box' definition. The risk otherwise is that the package as a whole could be
re-opened.

The Financial Times


London Page 3 Illustration (Omitted).

920110

