FT922-13314

FT  13 APR 92 / Election 1992: Welfare lobbyists wary of Lilley


   By RALPH ATKINS


MR PETER Lilley's appointment as social security secretary puts a
right-winger in charge of Whitehall's biggest spending department - a
prospect likely to worry groups lobbying on behalf of welfare recipients and
the low paid.
Mr Lilley was not a political heavyweight in his past incarnation as trade
and industry secretary, but he had a reputation for ideological purity and
for defending the values of the Thatcherite No Turning Back group.
Looking younger than his 48 years, his experience as a junior Treasury
minister only convinced him of the necessity of controlling state
intervention and spending.
At the social security department he will have to reconcile gut convictions
with the political pitfalls of a high spending department. If he fails to
lobby hard for extra spending in what are always difficult negotiations with
the Treasury, he could quickly find himself resented by Conservatives as
well as by the opposition.
As his predecessor Mr Tony Newton found, the department usually only brings
a high profile when events are against you. And Mr Lilley's omens are not
good. At the DTI he was more concerned that his decisions should be
ideologically correct, rather than politically convenient. He was sometimes
indecisive and failed to strike a rapport with either Tory backbenchers or
industrialists.
As a Commons performer he lacks panache. At party conferences he is happier
with self-deprecating jokes rather than manufacturing the self-esteem and
confidence more usual of cabinet ministers. Protecting Mr Lilley will be the
prime minister's personal commitment to the social security system and the
explicit commitment in the Conservative manifesto to keep child benefit as
'the cornerstone' of Tory policy for families with children and to increase
the benefit in line with inflation.
A more immediate challenge for Mr Lilley will be to respond to the pressure
for reform of pension legislation in the wake of the late Mr Robert Maxwell
raiding pension funds of companies he controlled.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920413

