FT921-15447

FT  10 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Isosceles at Pounds 17m and outlines
strategy


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


ISOSCELES, the highly-geared management buy-out vehicle for the Gateway food
stores, outlined a three-pronged retailing strategy aimed at moving the
group towards reflotation, as it lifted pre-tax profits for the half year
ended November 9 to Pounds 17m against Pounds 700,000.
At his first results ann-ouncement, Mr Alistair Mitchell-Innes, who took
over as chief executive last September after the sudden resignation of Mr
David Smith, the man who engineered the unfortunate Pounds 2.1bn buy-out in
1989, said the objective remained 'to get to the stock market as fast as
possible.'
Reflotation could happen between one and three years from now, depending on
market and trading conditions, said Mr Ernest Sharp, chairman.
The group's retailing strategy is to target all sectors of the market
through its high street locations. To this end it will accelerate the
programme for increasing the up-market Somerfield stores while continuing to
develop middle market Gateway stores and gradually increasing the number of
outlets of Food Giant.
No new Gateway outlets are to be opened and it expects to have between 50
and 60 Somerfield stores by April of next year. The Food Giant stores were
profitable, while Somerfield had put in a better performance than Gateway.
The success of the strategy will be crucial to the longer-term viability of
the group, still burdened with borrowings of Pounds 1.3bn. Interest payments
totalled Pounds 85.3m (Pounds 99m) and were covered less than 1.5 times by
operating profits of Pounds 102.3m (Pounds 99.7m).
The group is confident that it will be able to meet a capital repayment of
about Pounds 100m due in April next year even without a sale of Herman's,
its loss-making sporting goods retailer in the US. Mr Sharp expressed
optimism for the sale as he expected substantial efforts would made to boost
the American economy in an election year.
Although pre-tax profits were up on the Pounds 3.6m made in the year to
April 27, turnover for the six months was down to Pounds 1.6bn (Pounds
1.67bn). After the below-the-line Pounds 13.1m loss mainly from Herman's,
there was attributable profit of Pounds 3.9m (Pounds 12.3m loss).

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920110

