FT924-11309

FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (18): Still a central element of the
economy - Agriculture


   By DAVID PILLING


FROM the air, much of Sri Lanka resembles a verdant, Miltonian paradise. On
the ground, even next to Colombo's airport road which is often choked with
traffic, plant life vies for space and monsoon rains drip off the coconut
palms.
For all the government's emphasis on industrialisation, agriculture remains
a central element of Sri Lanka's economy. The sector accounts for 24 per
cent of the nation's GDP and more than 30 per cent of exports. Some 2.2m
people are directly employed in agriculture which remains an important
source of income for 70 per cent of the population.
However, the picture is changing and the importance of agriculture has
declined significantly over recent years. In the early 1970s, the three
principal export crops of tea, rubber and coconut comprised about 70 per
cent of foreign earnings. But, as emphasis has shifted towards manufactured
exports, earnings from plantation produce dropped to below 30 per cent.
Textiles have overtaken tea as the island's principal export.
As Sri Lanka has moved towards an open economy and emphasised export-led
development, donors have expressed concern that the government does not have
a clear agricultural policy. The World Bank's latest country report says:
'Recently, the amount of attention agriculture, particularly the non-tree
crop sector, has received from policy makers has been limited to fragmented
and piecemeal discussions at project level.'
Some thought has been given to reform of the tea estates, which for too long
have been poorly managed and a burden on the treasury. But little has been
done to arrest the continued decline of the other two tree crops - rubber
and coconut. Exports of these have steadily fallen behind Sri Lanka's main
international competitors.
Last year production of rubber fell to 104m kg, the lowest level since 1962.
The area under cultivation has declined and replanting by estates and
smallholders alike has been at best sporadic. The performance of coconut has
varied with fluctuating prices and weather conditions, but insufficient
replanting has also affected yields.
In recent years, more emphasis has been placed on the development of minor
export crops. These are often cultivated as mixed crops on small patches of
land, thereby limiting the government's influence over production. Crops
such as coffee, cocoa, cinnamon, cardamom, mace, pepper, chilles, cloves and
citronella are grown on a relatively small scale, but together account for
some 4 per cent of total exports.
There has also been a move to encourage the export of cut flowers and
perishable fruits and vegetables, especially to the Maldives and the Middle
East. Sales of cut flowers have been impressive, but the island's
infrastructure has proved inadequate to cope with the large-scale export of
fruit and vegetables. Traders report that produce, battered about in
unrefrigerated lorries on poor-quality roads, often arrives in Colombo in a
damaged state. As much as 40 per cent may be unfit for sale.
Development of agro-industry has been hampered by similar constraints as
well as by laws forbidding private ownership of more than 50 acres of land.
Exporters often cannot meet bulk orders and attempts to combine disparate
smallholdings into co-operative suppliers have met with limited success. The
varying quality of produce has proved a particular stumbling block.
Nonetheless, the government is keen to exploit the potential of
non-traditional crops and there is a general desire, as one local landowner
puts it, to 'move from the bazaar trade to an industrial scale'. He singles
out the growth of the canned fruit and fruit juice industry but cautions:
'They're not making a dent in the international market in terms of the Del
Montes.'
In the non-export sector, food crops are dominated by Sri Lanka's staple,
paddy. Rice production has risen dramatically over the past 30 years thanks
largely to a range of incentives offered under the Jayawardene government of
1977-88, and to the increasing availability of fertiliser.
Output rose from 600,000 tons in 1960 to a peak of 2.7m tons in 1985, a
level just short of self-sufficiency. Since then paddy production has fallen
away slightly, owing mainly to the impact of the separatist war in the north
and east. Production last year was 2.4m tons.
The reduction of land under effective cultivation has been partly offset by
the accelerated Mahaweli diversion programme, a large-scale project
comprising dams, reservoirs, power stations and a network of irrigation
channels. The scheme, now complete, will provide irrigation to more than
250,000 ha.
Overall, donor officials say the government should be doing more to give a
clear lead in agricultural policy. They fear that dialogue between farmers
and the central administration has broken down, particularly since the
recent phasing out of extension workers.
There should, they say, be clearer direction given to farmers in the
agro-export business. The process of putting smallholders in touch with
appropriate markets needs to be greatly improved.
'Agriculture is not a sexy subject,' says one donor official. 'In their push
to become the Singapore of South Asia, they may be in danger of forgetting
where their roots are.'

The Financial Times


London Page X

921027

