FT924-6308

FT  21 NOV 92 / Christmas Food and Drink: Top-class venues on the cheap -
How to take advantage of expensive hotels


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


AT CHRISTMAS large hotels can call on certain built-in advantages to cater
for parties - space, extra staff to make you, the customer, feel special and
financial resources, evident for example in impressive flower displays,
beyond the reach of individual restaurateurs.
In keeping with the straitened circumstances of the 1990s, Weekend FT sent
Nicholas Lander around the less expensive dining rooms of some of London's
top hotels.
Le Meridien, The Terrace Restaurant, Piccadilly, W1V OB8 (Tel:
071-734-8000).
This hotel faces some of the most imposing architecture on Piccadilly,
including St James' Church. Such views, however, are not on offer in the Oak
Room, the hotel's main dining room - dark wood panelling and chandeliers -
but they are freely available in the Terrace on the second floor. The
Terrace is all windows and ceiling with hanging plants and can offer welcome
sunshine.
Its menu has drawn on the cooking of Jacques Maniere for its inspiration. He
pioneered the philosophy that French cooking could excel without lashings of
butter or cream.
Dishes which are vegetarian are marked with an asterisk. A double asterisk
denotes lightly cooked, calorie-controlled dishes. In the former category, a
lasagne with spinach pasta, or a Mediterranean sandwich with fetta cheese,
are included. In the latter, white tuna on a bed of couscous, and chicken
with a spicy Thai sauce. The wine list smacks of a big hotel but the service
is attentive and friendly.
There are three pre-Christmas party menus, Pounds 20.50, Pounds 25 and
Pounds 28.50.
The Savoy, The Upstairs Bar, WC2. Tel: 071-836 4343.
If your company outing is for no more than four this is the place to go. The
Upstairs Bar looks down on the hotel's main entrance which can provide
better visual entertainment than television. After the theatre one night we
watched as a horde of photographers pursued first Princess Margaret and
then, in even greater numbers, the actress Joan Collins.
The Upstairs Bar's specialities are seafood and shellfish - oysters, lobster
and king prawns - and caviar should you choose. But the highlight of my last
meal, only spoiled by vegetables straight out of first-year catering
college, were the soups on offer. Served from tureens, they are sufficient
for at least two healthy portions and my barley, potato and clam soup showed
just how big hotel kitchens, with their continuous production of all the
necessary stocks, can offer dishes no longer to be found in most smaller
restaurants.
The bar's other major attraction is a well stocked Cruvinet which dispenses
large glasses of 10 well-chosen wines. We drank two glasses of different
1989 Chablis from Durup. Price of lunch and dinner from Pounds 25.
The Lanesborough, The Conservatory, 1 Lanesborough Place, SW1. Tel:
071-259-5599.
If you want to explore what was St George's Hospital, and is now the newest
London luxury hotel, the Conservatory Restaurant is the place to do it.
To get there you will have to walk through the lobby of the hotel past a
dull and misplaced dining room. The conservatory is light, airy and full of
greenery. My major reservation about the design is that if your table is
close to the piano and the waterfall, conversation can be a little
difficult.
The conservatory also seems to excite Paul Gaylor, the Lanesborough's chef,
more than the restaurant and the menu would certainly appeal to those who
want to leave meat, and in particular turkey, well alone.
There is a strong emphasis on fish - Thai mussels with minted peanut sauce,
sea bream with basil and tuna with balsamic vinegar - and a noticeable
influence from the East in dishes such as a first course of Cantonese
steamed quail and a main course of Chinese-style duckling with cumin
noodles. Gaylor has also gone out of his way to excite the taste buds of of
vegetarians with specialities from which an oriental black mushroom risotto
with coriander was excellent.
Service is formal and efficient and the wine list enterprising with some
very good selections from France, Lebanon, Israel, the US and New Zealand.
Pre-Christmas lunch, December 1-24, Pounds 21.50, Dinner Pounds 27.50.
Hotel Inter-Continental, Hyde Park Corner, W1. Tel: 071-409-3131, Coffee
House.
The first American style coffee shop when it opened in the early 1970s. It
still has an American bias with a range of big sandwiches, burgers and pasta
and an extensive buffet. Lunch Pounds 19, dinner Pounds 22.50 .
Claridges, The Causerie, Brook Street, W1. Tel: 071-629-8860.
One of this stylish hotel's best kept secrets is the smorgasbord at
lunchtime. Priced to include the first drink, from Pounds 16 with a Dubonnet
to Pounds 18.50 with a Manhattan.
The Park Lane Hotel, Brasserie on the Park, London W1. Tel: 071-499-6321.
A bright, airy room that takes full advantage of its position directly
opposite Green Park. Here, and in the hotel's more expensive Bracewell's
restaurant, it aims to promote the best of British produce. Pre-Christmas
lunch Pounds 19.75, dinner Pounds 23.75.
Hyatt Carlton Tower, The Rib Room, Cadogan Place, SW1. Tel: 071-235-5411.
This used to be the place to eat Scottish beef and although carnivores are
not neglected (roast rib of Aberdeen Angus Pounds 14.50), the menu now
includes a large shellfish and fish section. Pre-Christmas lunch Pounds 21,
dinner Pounds 29.
Grosvenor House, The Pavilion, Park Lane, W1. Tel: 071-499-6363.
Newly refurbished in a light, airy and, for a large hotel, most
unpretentious style. The food has an Italian emphasis and the wine list is
an international one with unusual, keenly-priced bottles from Long Island,
US, and Australia. Pre-Christmas lunch and dinner Pounds 19.50.
Inn on the Park, The Lanes, W1. Tel: 071-499-0888.
A windowless room that could be in any international hotel but this
restaurant's distinguishing features are very prompt service, an array of
different menus from Pounds 17 - buffets, specials and an a la carte - and
eight different house wines by the glass.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921121

