FT922-7178

FT  20 MAY 92 / Personal View: Bring back apprentices


   By MALCOLM CRAIG


Reports of skill shortages, although inconsistent across the UK, do have
some substance. In particular, the skills required by manufacturing
companies and by users of information technology have become a focus of
attention.
There have been various theories about causes. One of the most common is
Britain's failure to invest in training. But little consideration has been
given to a possible relationship between skill shortages and the decline in
apprenticeships. This decline shows signs of slowing; ICI and British Steel
have significantly increased the number of apprentices being recruited.
There is little evidence, however, that this has become a national trend. It
can be argued that neglect of apprentice provision has damaged the UK's
industrial base.
Critics of the old apprentice system claimed that it was rigid and nurtured
prejudices about skills and how they should be taught. Apprenticeships, they
said, had become too closely identified with restrictive craft practices, in
particular the strict demarcation of work.
Changes were needed in the design, timing and presentation of
apprenticeships. But the response - to put them into decline - has proved to
be a mistake, and is a good example of throwing the baby out with the bath
water.
The 'baby' is job-specific training and education. Too much training today
is in the form of short courses, isolated from actual jobs. Fundamental to
the concept of apprenticeship is the aim of introducing a person to a
specific area of employment to learn essential skills and knowledge. This is
in sharp contrast to teaching someone skills and knowledge that, it is
claimed, can be transferred to different jobs.
An apprentice joins a group of like-minded people who wish to follow a
particular occupation, and to reach a predetermined goal; in other words,
learning is both directed and purposeful. The professions - medicine, law,
accountancy - have retained the concept of apprenticing. Practitioners serve
what can be recognised as an apprenticeship for an agreed period to reach
agreed goals. The professions recognise that learning needs to be grounded
in a context that makes it meaningful.
People in non-professional roles have had a hotch-potch of programmes
imposed on them by training providers. These programmes, particularly in
construction, engineering and the service sector, rarely have a direct link
to specific occupations and contain only bits of skill.
This approach to vocational training has failed to meet current and future
demands for a skilled workforce. There is a need to develop a new
apprenticeship system in the UK to provide the skill mix required for
changing technology - for example, the introduction of computer numerically
controlled machine tools. Greater flexibility is required in combining the
types of skill taught, such as the practice adopted recently by a consortium
of companies and Wearside College in the north-east for the training and
education of electro/mechanical technicians. There is also a need for
flexibility in the allocation of time, currently between one and three years
depending upon the occupation.
In addition to time allocation, time of life should be considered. There is
no reason why someone should not complete more than one apprenticeship in a
working life as part of on-going learning.
While many significant changes are needed, there is a strong case for
keeping the concept of apprenticing intact. This has been done in Germany
where almost 2m apprenticeship places are filled, the highest take-up in
Europe. This is part of a dual system: in-company training places are
supported by technical education in vocational schools (Berufsschule).
Training continues to be strongly work-related, and adaption to the needs of
developing technology takes place within the framework of this system.
By contrast, training in the UK is a mess. It lacks structure, coherence and
purpose. The quantity and quality of training is low. With few exceptions,
this is true in absolute terms, as well as in comparison with overseas
competitors.
Government expenditure on training is considerable, as ministers point out
repeatedly. But it is being dissipated among a wide range of administrative
bodies responsible for the training and its measurement. These bodies
include the Department of Employment, the Department of Trade and Industry
and the Training and Enterprise Councils.
The resources are being misdirected. A strategy for apprenticeship renewal
must involve fewer agencies and government departments. The funding for
regenerating apprenticeships should continue to flow through the TECs, but
be more narrowly focused. Employers and unions can provide the necessary
instruction while ensuring that training is work-related.
The author is an independent consultant on training.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920520

