FT921-15474

FT  10 JAN 92 / Bush in Japan: No policy change, says Hills


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


MRS Carla Hills, the US trade representative, yesterday insisted that
President George Bush's trade mission to Japan had not changed US free trade
policy 'one iota'.
Defending the president's controversial trip, Mrs Hills said the US policy
had been 'to expand exports and create jobs. We have been quite consistent.
There has never been any deviation.'
However, the president is being widely criticised in the US press for
embracing the 'fair trade' rhetoric of his opposition and the numerical
goals of 'managed trade' in response to his declining popularity. On Capitol
Hill economists yesterday were testifying against the new US-Japan 'action
plan' which Mr Bush insisted would 'translate into jobs for American
workers'.
'The likelihood is that the real economic impact will be negligible and that
it will do little to create jobs in the US of A,' said Mr Jesper Koll, an
economist at SG Warburg Securities (Japan).
Mr Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for International Economics,
said that in the long run US trade gains 'will depend on sharply improving
the underlying competitiveness of our economy'. To boost US exports to
Japan, Mr Bush should have sought an agreement to boost the Japanese
currency against the dollar, he said.
Mrs Hills denied that the president had resorted to 'managed trade'.
Specific numbers had been agreed on Japanese purchases of US motor parts not
to guarantee market share but 'to identify problems and as a benchmark to
correct those problems.
'To name a number would undercut an industry,' she said. 'It is better to
remove the barrier. We would much rather open markets than reduce our own
imports.'
Mrs Hills said she had not not accompanied the president to Japan because
'this was an export enhancement trip. The Secretary of Commerce went and
that is his portfolio.' However, negotiations on the trip had been conducted
by Mr Michael Moscow, her deputy, and she had been in hourly touch with him.
The administration's trade policy has been a success, she said. It has
boosted exports to Japan by 45 per cent and to the rest of the world by 30
per cent. 'Our jobs connected to exports are on the increase. Exports have
halved the rigours of the economic slowdown,' she said.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920110

