FT924-890

FT  22 DEC 92 / Ofgas threatens British Gas with legal action over 'silence'


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


BRITISH GAS and its regulator, Ofgas, were heading for another row yesterday
when the regulator threatened to take legal action to extract information
from the company if it is not forthcoming by the middle of January.
British Gas and Ofgas were due to publish a joint report this week on the
implications of hiving off British Gas's pipelines business into a separate
subsidiary. Ofgas has raised several issues with the company but has been
awaiting a response for at least six weeks.
Mr John Dorkin, deputy director-general of Ofgas, said: 'If the situation is
not resolved before mid January, we will start having to issue legal
directives - which we don't want to do.'
Last week, Sir James McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, called for British
Gas's pipelines to be divested to introduce true competition to the UK gas
market. British Gas called his suggestions 'inappropriate'.
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission is reviewing the structure of British
Gas and the UK gas market. But as part of an earlier commitment to the
Office of Fair Trading, British Gas is to place its pipelines and storage
arm - more than 85 per cent of its assets - into a subsidiary within the
company by next October.
'Whatever the MMC decides, we still have to work together with the company
to achieve a new transportation regime by October,' said Mr Dorkin. 'We've
agreed a timetable, but now that's been knocked off course and I'm not sure
if they're still co-operating.'
Ofgas fears that because of British Gas's irritation over Ofgas's public
statements on the future shape of the company, it might refuse to co-operate
altogether.
'I would have thought they'd be bending over backwards to show the MMC
they're co-operating with us,' Mr Dorkin said, 'instead we've met with blank
silence for five to six weeks.'
The joint document to be issued by the company and its regulator should lay
out how British Gas intends to operate its pipelines at arm's length from
the rest of its business.
Ofgas also said yesterday that British Gas should appoint an organisation to
conduct a six-month review of its procedures for handling complaints from
its 18m customers. The regulator said British Gas must appoint an
organisation to undertake a six-month review of its complaints handling
operation.
British Gas was unavail-able for comment last night. North Sea contractors
warned yesterday that Pounds 5bn in investment and more than 30,000 jobs
might be at risk if the government imposed any restriction on gas as part of
its energy review. The group said uncertainty over the future of gas was
beginning to affect investment decisions.
Letters, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921222

