FT924-11380

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (8): Hint of
disillusion - Europe


   By TIM DICKSON


THE cause of European integration may have suffered a severe setback with
political doubts over Maastricht and the ignominious departure of the pound
and lira from the exchange rate mechanism (ERM). But with just a few weeks
to go before the official starting gun is fired, most of the building blocks
for a single European market in financial services are in place.
The regulatory changes have altered the outlook for fund managers across the
EC, though it would be a mistake to exaggerate Brussels's achievement. While
the essential measures in Lord Cockfield's White Paper had been approved by
the end of June compromises and delays in implementation mean full
liberalisation will be frustrated until the next century.
Two important bits of legislation giving banks and stockbrokers free access
to the EC, for example, will not be in place until early 1995, though at one
stage it looked touch and go whether effective investment services and
capital adequacy directives would ever be adopted. The recent
re-introduction of exchange controls by Spain and Ireland in the cause of
defending their currency parities was an awkward reminder that the long,
hard battle to remove controls on capital movements has not been completely
secured.
Cultural and market realities, moreover, suggest that national attitudes
will persist. But most of all there is just a hint of Euro-disillusion in
the air - detectable in this month's decision by the French Bank Societe
Generale to sell its UK investment management subsidiary Touche Remnant to
Henderson Administration and rumours that Credit Commercial de France is
seeking a buyer for Framlington.
For UK fund managers, of course, September's breakdown of the ERM and the
consequent check to the ambitions of monetary union enthusiasts may prompt a
fundamental re-think. Many had bought the argument that funds should look at
the European Community as their true home market - given the EC's apparent
framework for a single currency - and adjust portfolio weightings
accordingly. Though there will have been an obvious bonus on Black Wednesday
for the many fund managers overweight in continental equities, asset
allocation models in the new world of the floating pound will surely come
under review.
In the same way that it was foolish to believe that currency risk had been
eliminated by the ERM straitjacket, it would be a mistake to think that the
process of European convergence has gone into reverse. Recent figures
demonstrate that the correlation in performance of the eight leading EC
stock markets has in every case increased over the past 10 years. The
declining influence of the US in the trade patterns of the UK and the
Netherlands - and the proportionately greater volume of intra-European
transactions - also suggest that convergence continues to accelerate.
Hopes, meanwhile, that Europe's pension fund industry would quickly move
towards integration have had to be scaled back. Pension funds represent more
than Ecu700bn in the EC, of which 86 per cent are in the UK and the
Netherlands. Switzerland is another mouth-watering prospect with an
estimated Pounds 100bn of funds under management and a system recognisable
to the Anglo-Saxon eye. Efforts by the sales arms of the big London-based
investment management firms to prise away from local control even a small
proportion of this wealth have generally proved disappointing. 'The major
Dutch pension funds are no doubt getting sick of us knocking on their
doors,' observes the director of one substantial UK-based group.
The different structure of pension provision across the EC, of course,
remains a hurdle. Only in the UK and in the Netherlands, for example, are
pensions provided for and managed in separately pooled pension funds. The
French and the Italians are among those who operate a pay-as-you-go system,
whereby the present generation of workers essentially pays for its
predecessors. In Germany there is some use of tax exempt special funds but
generally pensions are paid out of a company's own assets (provided for in
the balance sheet under a special reserve).
An intriguing question for the 1990s is whether the big international groups
will be able to make headway in the more difficult markets. Fleming
Investment Management is 'looking hard' at what is required to produce the
right structure for a pensions business in France. 'We reckon that for legal
reasons it will probably have to involve an insurance dimension, though we
are still thinking about just what sort of relationship will be required
between the fund manager and the insurer,' says Mr Patrick Gifford, director
and head of marketing.
In practice it is hard to see the EC's draft pension fund directive having
more than a psychological effect. The draft stipulates that member states
will not be allowed to require pension funds to invest in particular
categories of assets, or to localise their assets in particular member
states. Member states will not be allowed to restrict the freedom of pension
funds to choose an investment manager or asset custodian established in
another member state. In practice, though, this is unlikely to alter present
practice; in most countries funds would have to increase the exposure of
most asset classes before they were up against national limits.
The proposed directive, moreover, fails to liberalise the cross-border
membership of pension funds. This may happen in time, but negotiations on
minimum vesting and funding requirements, employee representation and tax
harmonisation were thought likely to be too delicate and time-consuming. It
is significant, though, that some multinationals (notably IBM) have moved to
centralise the investment management of their various European pension
funds.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921026

