FT923-9507

FT  05 AUG 92 / Director well-known in Bruges Group: Wallace Smith Trust
liquidation


   By RICHARD DONKIN and DAVID OWEN


   MR WALLACE Duncan Smith


Duncan to his friends - lives a wealthy though private lifestyle with an
address in Chelsea, west London, and a property at Lyford Key, a well-known
tycoon's playground near Nassau in the Bahamas.
Mr Smith, 58, born in Edmonton, Canada, is described as a friendly family
man, and his business acquaintances say he has firm political views.
He is well known among the Bruges Group of anti-European federalists who
number Lady Thatcher, the former prime minister, among their supporters.
Lord Harris of High Cross, a former chairman of the Bruges Group, said
yesterday that Mr Smith was in no sense high-living.
'He struck me as an extremely gentle, extremely decent and straightforward
man,' he said.
He added: 'He was extremely interested in the whole idea of the market
economy. He has taken an alert and scholarly interest in economic argument.
He is a student of these things in a quiet way.'
Mr Smith is known to have paid the rent on the Bruges Group's one-room
office in Jermyn Street, central London, for nearly two years, and to have
made the same level of contribution to its bigger rent bill after the group
moved to Whitehall.
According to an individual familiar with the Bruges Group Mr Smith
contributed 'a small percentage' of the ongoing cost of the group's
campaigning without taking a public role in its affairs. Like other
contributors, he took no part in the group's internal decision-making
process.
Outside politics, however, Mr Smith was recognised as a dealer in trade
finance. During the 1960s he was a broker with Nesbitt Thompson, a Canadian
broking firm.
He is known to have approached at least one large conglomerate seeking to
handle its treasury funds.
A banker who knew him said: 'He said he was dealing in fixed-interest
securities to get a return above the rate that could be achieved by putting
the funds into bills.
'I think the process was called riding the square and involved interpreting
the interest curve.'
During the late 1970s Mr Smith worked in east Africa, handling Canadian
export finance in countries such as Kenya and Uganda.
His bank maintained a balance of between Pounds 300m and Pounds 400m which
enabled it to carry out sophisticated trades in swaps and deals in various
commercial paper such as certificates of deposit.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920805

