FT924-8163

FT  12 NOV 92 / Clearers accused of cover-up over loan write-offs


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Correspondent


HIGH STREET banks were yesterday accused of covering up alleged
mismanagement of small-business accounts by writing off loans on condition
that customers sign agreements not to disclose details of their cases.
The accusation was made by Struggle Against Financial Exploitation (Safe), a
new pressure group founded by two owners of small businesses who are locked
in long-running disputes with Barclays Bank.
Safe is the latest of a number of groups formed by business people to
campaign against the practices of the big banks.
A separate group known as the Bank Action Group (Bag) has been formed by
dis-gruntled clients of Lloyds Bank.
Mr Brian Jones, one of Safe's founding members, has gained notoriety by
letting off 400 stink bombs in 67 Barclays' branches and parking a van
towing an advertising hoarding with details of his case outside its head
office.
He claims Barclays has offered to write off all but Pounds 35,000 of a
Pounds 393,000 overdraft in exchange for an end to his campaign. He said
high street banks were secretly offering thousands of such 'settlement
agreements'.
Barclays said yesterday that settlement agreements of the kind Safe was
complaining about were standard commercial practice.
It said it had offered to sign a deal with Mr Jones that removed the
confidentiality clause.
Mr Chris Joseph, the group's other founder, is embroiled in a row with
Barclays over his former advertising agency, Hook Advertising.
Safe said it had details of many cases in which banks had withdrawn
overdraft facilities from small-business customers with little or no notice.
It said the banks had unfairly turned on their vulnerable small-business
customers.
The group, which claims 2,000 members, is establishing clubs of 200 members
with shares in each of the four large clearing banks.
These will try to force inquiries into the settlement agreements under the
1989 Companies Act.
Mr Joseph said the group also intended to call a 'day of solvency' on which
it would ask customers to withdraw their money from high street banks to
test their solvency. This would turn the banks' own tactics against them.
The group argues that banks have acted wrongly by asking small-business
customers who are potentially in default of loans to sign settlement
agreements, and subsequently listing them as bad risks on credit control
networks.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921112

