FT922-4439

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (2): Struggle for power -
Monarchists, nationalists and communists negotiate


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


IT'S BEEN called South Africa's first multiracial parliament, and its
deliberations are shaping the country's constitutional future.
Since last December, the World Trade Centre on the outskirts of
Johannesburg, has been home to Codesa - the Convention for a Democratic
South Africa.
Apprehensive about the outcome, often baffled by the complexities of the
debate, the whole of South Africa seems absorbed by an extraordinary
spectacle: Zulu monarchists and Afrikaner nationalists, Tswana secessionists
and white communists, all searching for a peaceful solution to their
country's problems.
In principle, power continues to rest in the country's tricameral assembly
in Cape Town from which blacks are excluded.
In practice, the assembly concentrates on routine administration, suspending
innovative functions, becoming what one commentator called 'a kind of
legislative handmaiden' to Codesa, an assembly of 19 political parties
undertaking an exercise without precedent in Africa.
The ultimate objective is a constitution which reconciles minority rights
and majority rule, and which ensures an appropriate limit to the power of a
central executive over regional and local authorities.
Nearly all the leading political players are in attendance, the notable
exceptions being the extreme right Conservative Party and two radical black
parties, the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC) and the Azanian People's
Organisation (Azapo).
Separate delegations represent the South African government and the
country's ruling National Party, and the African National Congress (ANC) and
the South African Communist Party (SACP). It is a curious arrangement. The
first two are one and the same, and the latter are the Siamese twins of
South African politics, proclaiming a common cause and bonded by a
long-standing alliance - but the arrangement suits the heavyweights at the
negotiating table.
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party is also at the
conference - but not the chief, who has stayed away in protest at the
refusal of Codesa to give a separate seat to Chief Goodwill Zwelithini in
his capacity as monarch of the Zulu nation.
The predominantly white, liberal Democratic Party led by Dr Zach de Beer,
one of the country's elder statesmen, plays a mediating role. The Indian
community, the smallest of South Africa's race groups, has no fewer than
three representatives at Codesa: the conservative Solidarity and National
People's parties, and a joint delegation from the anti-apartheid Natal and
Transvaal Indian Congresses. Delegates of the Coloured (mixed race) Labour
party look on while leaders of the nominally independent homelands -
collectively termed the TBVC states - contemplate their options.
Transkei has thrown in its lot with the ANC; Bophuthatswana nurtures hopes
of independence, or at least autonomy in a federal South Africa; Venda and
Ciskei will probably opt for re-incorporation.
Decisions are by consensus. But if that proves impossible, by 'sufficient
consensus' - a splendid example of South Africa's coded political
vocabulary, which at Codesa generally means 'when the government and ANC
agree'.
Last month, however, saw confrontation rather than consensus. Delegates
re-assembled for Codesa's second plenary session to consider reports from
five working groups, appointed at the opening round last December. They
dealt with five key issues:
Creating a climate conducive to negotiations or 'levelling the political
playing field', as it has become known.
Constitutional principles, and a constitution-making body.
Agreeing on arrangements for the transition.
Determining the future of the homelands.
Working out the timetable for change.
Four of the committees were able to reach broad agreement and present their
reports, although some serious differences were papered over.
However, Codesa failed to clear what may prove to be its most important
hurdle: an agreement on how decisions are to be taken in the
constitution-making body, paving the way for installation of a transitional
executive and elections to the constituent assembly, which will also act as
an interim legislature.
Underlying the proposals and counter-proposals about the percentages
required for decision-making in the constituent assembly is the fundamental
issue: where will power lie in a post-apartheid South Africa?
Or to put it another way: Will whites, in alliance with minority black
parties, have a veto on change?
Codesa ended in deadlock. The working groups were suspended, and the
management committee - comprising senior members of all main parties - was
charged with finding a way out of the most serious hold-up in the
negotiating process since Mr Nelson Mandela's release in February 1990.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920605

