FT921-461

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: True blue shires on defensive as tide
threatens to turn


   By DAVID MARSH


BESET BY the recession, Tory candidates have been forced on to the defensive
across a swathe of true blue England.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats remain vulnerable to Conservative charges
that their plans for increased spending would require higher tax rises than
they admit.
Yet the Conservative runners in three highly disparate Tory constituencies -
John Biffen in the safe seat of North Shropshire, David Amess in Basildon
and John Taylor in Cheltenham - are aware that the electoral tide may be
turning.
Mr Biffen, chief secretary to the Treasury in Margaret Thatcher's first
government, is the only member of the 1979 cabinet standing for re-election.
He has been MP for the constituency since 1961.
Ensconced in his comfortable house near Offa's Dyke, Mr Biffen speaks with
the frankness of an iconoclastic elder statesman defending an impregnable
14,415 majority.
He senses a swing away from the Tories, especially in the commuter towns
closer to the industrial outcrops of the Midlands to the east of his
constituency. 'I suspect the polls are right in assessing a revival of
Labour fortunes.'
The government has 'blotted its copybook' over the economy, health,
education, crime and, above all, the community charge, says Mr Biffen, who
was among about 30 Conservative MPs who voted against the poll tax in the
Commons. In the eyes of constituents, he says, 'this has done me no harm'.
He expresses mild surprise that Labour is not farther ahead in the opinion
polls.
Cutting the figure of a Victorian parson, Mr Biffen tours his patch of 60
villages with his wife and shooting-stick. He avoids asking householders
their voting intentions as this would be 'an intrusion'.
In Essex, the campaigning style is more brusque. Mr Amess, who won Basildon
in 1983 and had a 2,649 majority in 1987, travels round his constituency
with a team of clipboard-carrying canvassers. His motorised caravan blares
out the jingle 'David is the man for you'.
Basildon, a new town which at 42 is two years older than Mr Amess, has
suffered a sharp downturn in the local economy, both in manufacturing and
services. Unemployment stands at 10.2 per cent, more than double the level
of two years ago.
Lionel Webber, vicar of St Martin's Church in the town centre, who helps run
the local unemployment advice office, says that the hopes of many have been
'knocked flat' by the downturn. But many Tory voters who achieved prosperity
during the 1980s will stick to the Conservatives 'even though it's beginning
to crumble all around them', he says.
Pressed about the effects of the recession, Mr Amess says he is happy to be
the 'underdog' in the tussle with the Labour candidate, John Potter, a
former computer manager in Ford's nearby research centre.
Ragged Tory nerves are also on display in Cheltenham, a Conservative fiefdom
for most of the post-war period, where Mr Taylor, a barrister of Jamaican
origin chosen as Tory candidate following the retirement of the long-serving
MP Sir Charles Irving, faces a struggle to hold on to the 4,896 majority.
The principal challenge comes from the Liberal Democrats, who run the
borough council.
Mr Taylor tours the shops telling voters that the downturn in the local
economy - where many jobs in companies such as Smith's Industries and Dowty
are defence-related - has been caused by the world recession and 'the end of
the Cold War'. He accuses Nigel Jones, the Liberal Democrat candidate, of
being 'a socialist'.
Mr Taylor has made an impressive effort to put down roots in Cheltenham, but
the national mood and some Conservatives' antagonism towards a black
candidate may count against him.
General elections are frequently lost by governments rather than won by
oppositions. The contest on April 9 looks likely to be decided not by the
persuasiveness of opposition policies, but by the government's tarnished
record.
If there are signs of fraying nerves among the Tories in the shires, it may
be because they are starting to ponder how to allocate the blame.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920328

