FT922-4154

FT  06 JUN 92 / Danes' Maastricht vote 'will jolt Irish': Prime minister
seeks to rally liberals to Yes-vote by re-establishing link with freer
access to abortion


   By DAVID GARDNER


   DUBLIN


IRISH voters will be jolted into giving greater support to the Maastricht
treaty in the wake of its rejection by Denmark, according to Mr Albert
Reynolds, Ireland's prime minister.
Yet the Irish leader revealed some uncertainty about the outcome of the June
18 referendum on Maastricht by simultaneously seeking to rally liberals in
favour of freer access to abortions abroad - an issue the government has
struggled to disentangle from the European debate.
Mr Reynolds made what appeared to be a pitch for the liberal vote by saying
that a 'yes' vote on June 18 would mean Ireland had pronounced on the
controversial issue of whether Irish women had the right to information on
abortion and the right to travel abroad to terminate pregnancies, in line
with EC law on freedom of information and movement.
'On the 18th of June, a 'yes' vote ensures your right to travel,' Mr
Reynolds said, and 'the law officers can see that Irish people will have
spoken on travel and information.'
His judgment is that on June 18 the Irish will weigh the risk of isolation
revealed by Denmark's stance. 'There was a certain element of complacency
building in the (pro-Maastricht) campaign. But this will get us a better
result than had the Danes voted 'yes',' Mr Reynolds said yesterday.
'The eyes of Europe will be upon us on the 18th of June and Ireland will
respond to that challenge. Ireland will raise the flag for Europe,' the
prime minister insisted. As the first country to make a decision on
Maastricht after the Danish debacle, and the only other country apart from
France which will hold a referendum on the treaty, Ireland has become the
unwitting repository of the European Community's hopes for the beginings of
a way out of the Dane-provoked crisis.
EC foreign ministers decided in Oslo on Thursday that rapid ratification of
the treaty was the only way to stop the European Union project buckling.
The issue of abortion - proscribed by the Irish constitution - entered the
European debate when the previous government inserted a protocol in the
Maastricht treaty declaring that nothing in it overrode this constitutional
clause. The Reynolds government, however, opted for a separate referendum on
abortion this year.
Even without the Irish leader's surprising re-linking of the two issues, EC
and Irish lawyers reckon that even a 'yes' vote on June 18 might be open to
legal challenge if Maastricht - which as drafted requires approval by all 12
EC states - is altered by a single comma. This might risk a new referendum
on the treaty colliding outright with the abortion issue.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

