FT921-451

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Thatcher flagship about to enter breaker's
yard - The Issues: Local Government


   By ANDREW ADONIS


WITH POLL tax demands landing on doormats this week and next, Mrs Thatcher's
flagship is set to make a last blazing appearance on its way to the
breaker's yard. This is ironic because the parties are less divided on local
taxation than on most other aspects of local government.
By next April, local taxation will return to a system of property rates,
whoever wins. The Liberal Democrats are campaigning on a local income tax,
but in a hung parliament they would be in a weak position to demand a third
change to local taxation in as many years.
The argument is about the form the rates should take. Mr Michael Heseltine's
banded council tax keeps down the cost for more expensive houses, with
single-person discounts to safeguard those who, he argues, were penalised by
the old rates.
Mr Bryan Gould, his Labour shadow, intends to retain neither banding nor
discounts in his 'fair rates', and is also threatening to go back to 1973
valuations, which would yield a peculiar crop of winners and losers. There
is also broad underlying agreement on the other local-government issue in
the election limelight - the move towards single-tier authorities. All three
parties favour a unitary system based largely on existing district councils.
Whoever wins, next year's county council elections will probably be the last
for most of England and Wales.
The manifestos offer starkly different visions of the role of town halls. If
the Tories win, it will be more of the same - tendering, annual
rate-capping, efforts to reduce spending, erosion of powers - with schools
clearly the next target for removal from council control.
Under Labour, capping and compulsory competitive tendering would go, the
business rate would be returned to local control, councils would once more
become housebuilders, they would keep their schools - although devolved
budgets and local management would continue - and would be given a general
power of competence to take on other functions as they wish. The Tories
oppose the all of this.
Labour's packaging and many of its policies are radically different to
pre-1979, let alone the 1980s. To counter the London and Liverpool 'loony
left' image which used to dominate Labour's local-government profile, the
party has been successfully marketing the likes of Oxford, Manchester, York
and Islington in north London as studiously progressive authorities.
York is Labour's model council, boasting a Citizen's Charter years before
John Major thought of the idea. Launched in 1989, York's charter comes
complete with a tenants' charter and customer contracts for refuse
collection and street-cleaning, making the staid minster city a plausible
Labour riposte to Wandsworth, the Conservatives' showpiece borough in south
London.
It brings in the votes, too. The council, run by the Tories until 1983, now
has a crushing Labour majority which the party's candidate Mr Hugh Bayley, a
former Camden councillor, is confident will help eradicate the 147-vote
majority of the sitting Tory, Mr Conal Gregory.
Mr Gregory derides York's charter as PR glitz with no teeth, and points to
this year's 33 per cent rise in the poll tax as the 'real face of York's
hard left'. Yet few buyers could be found for that bogey: the parties
broadly agreed on spending plans, and the decision about the level of the
poll tax came down to a complex argument about the use of reserves. As to
glitz, Labour counters with opinion surveys which show that more than three
quarters of voters are satisfied with cleaning and collection services.
Ms Karen Anderson, the Liberal Democrat candidate, said:'Yes, the bin men
have improved, but most people still think it's all too glossy.'
Glossy or not Mr Rod Hills, the council leader, plans to extend customer
contracts across the range of services, and to give neighbourhoods a greater
say in their management. 'We already have four area committees, but we want
to get down much further than that,' he says.
Tendering of local services is another source of local dispute. The council
was forced to re-tender for its street cleaning after refusing to accept a
private-sector offer lower than that of its direct labour force. Mr Gregory
wants a future Tory government to shift control of the tendering process
from the council to the district auditor. Mr Hills insists he acted in good
faith, but is unenthusiastic about competitive tendering and would not
continue it 'as a matter of course' if Labour were to win.
Council housing produces a less clear-cut division. Mr Gould would release
part of the council's accumulated receipts for housebuilding, although the
exact amounts are not clear. Nationally, the Conservatives are opposed. But
Mr Peter Brown, leader of the city's Tories, would favour it for York. 'It
would benefit housing here - the restrictions are only there because of a
small minority of extremist councils.' So much for the hard left.
Both sides agree that councils should not be the sole providers of social
housing. Mr Brown wants nothing other than sheltered accommodation for the
elderly built by the council itself, and believes that the rest should be
done in partnership with housing associations. Mr Bayley would let the
council take the lead, but says he is 'open-minded' about joint schemes with
private developers.
Both sides also want to end the dominion of Tory-controlled North Yorkshire
county council and restore the city's county borough status. As Mr Brown
says: 'When all's said and done, the county council is foreign.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920328

