FT923-9695

FT  04 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Tilting at Cadbury


NOW THAT the responses to the Cadbury committee's report on the financial
aspects of corporate governance are in, it is clear that they amount to
something less than a ringing endorsement for a worthy but unconvincing
document. They also pose a dilemma for a committee that now has to consider
possible amendments to the report before its voluntary code of best practice
comes into effect for financial years ending on December 31 1992. This is
because the report, which seeks to strengthen the role of auditors and
non-executive directors and to improve standards of corporate reporting, has
been powerfully attacked from both ends of the spectrum.
One group, including institutional fund managers and the press, argues that
Cadbury's form of voluntarism is inadequate and that the code's approach to
enforcement via the stock exchange listing agreement and pressure from
institutional investors is unlikely to work. Significantly, the
Confederation of British Industry, while welcoming in principle a code of
best practice, has also expressed worries about enforcement.
At the other extreme some leading industrialists argue in private that the
report is so much bureaucratic nonsense. In public many support the line of
the Institute of Directors, to the effect that Cadbury's desire to impose
special functions on non-executive directors undermines the principle of the
unitary board.
Common sense
The problem for the committee is that while these lines of attack are
ostensibly at odds with each other, they both contain grains of sound common
sense.
The Cadbury report's origins lay in the spate of corporate scandals that
followed the Thatcher boom. Many company collapses appeared to have been
precipitated by dominant entrepreneurs who were not subject to adequate
checks and balances. Neither the institutional investors, the auditors nor
the non-executive directors appear to have exerted a sufficient restraining
influence. For want of proper accountability, companies were driven off the
rails.
Effective tool
A voluntary code of conduct is hardly the most effective tool for holding
dominant entrepreneurs in check. It will, admittedly, provide a useful
yardstick against which standards of boardroom behaviour and disclosure can
be measured. But where entrepreneurs choose to ignore the code, the Stock
Exchange's ultimate sanction of suspending the quotation will damage the
very shareholders that the code was intended to protect.
As far as Cadbury's proposals on auditors and non-executive directors are
concerned, there is much that is constructive in them. But they do not
address sufficiently squarely the conflict in the position of auditors who
are, in effect, hired and fired by the directors whom they are required to
monitor. And by asking non-executive directors to combine an increased
monitoring role with their existing managerial function, they demand too
much. As long as the legal definition of the duties of non-executives is the
same as that of the executive directors, they will tend to identify with the
executive camp.
In the absence of more effective proprietorial control, the answer must be a
separate legal definition of responsibilities for non-executive directors,
including clearly defined monitoring obligations. But it will take many more
scandals for the present government to accept that case. The corporate
sector will thus muddle on with Cadbury, more or less; and the scandals will
continue to come, too.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920804

