FT921-15499

FT  09 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Glaxo at new peak


   By PETER JOHN, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and STEVE THOMPSON


THE 1991 star of the FT-SE 100 index, Glaxo, was once again outstanding in a
very weak market yesterday as US investors went on a spending spree. The
shares were among the strongest in the Footsie list. The share price broke
through the previous all-time peak, achieved in November, and gained 15 to
885p on unusually high turnover of 8.6m.
Any sellers in London were immediately matched by US buyers who, enthused by
bullish press reports and an earnings forecast upgrade on Tuesday, ensured
that the pharmaceuticals group was able to hold up in the morning.
The shares were further helped by a report that US pharmaceuticals group
Bristol-Myers Squibb said it would charge the US federal government less for
drugs.
Analyst Mr James Culverwell of Hoare Govett said fears that the US would
impose price restrictions on pharmaceutical companies was 'the one black
cloud on the horizon', and a feeling that the industry was becoming
self-regulating would be a fillip to sentiment.
Dixons higher
Interim figures from Dixons, the electrical goods retailer, although around
a third lower than the same period last year, were very well received by the
market and gave a shot in the arm to a troubled retailing sector.
Dixons shares, good performers in the run-up to Christmas but which had
fallen sharply in the past few days, staged a strong rally to close 15
higher at 205p. It was the third most heavily traded stock in the London
market yesterday with 9.4m shares changing hands.
Dealers said the improvement reflected a strong performance in the UK, where
the group enjoyed much better than expected sales at its Dixons and Currys
outlets. But analysts said Dixons was not a good barometer of the UK
retailing sector generally.
Mr Tony Cooper at Carr Kitcat & Aitken said he 'remained a long term bull of
the sector but expected that in the short term the sector would remain
choppy'.
He added that there were still 'massive uncertainties with no signs of a
recovery in spending' and that 'worries about unemployment and property
values mean the public is still not putting its hands in its pockets'.
BAe rebounds
Good news from several quarters drove British Aerospace 11 higher to 311p,
recovering the losses following the negative weekend press comment. Most
significant was the belief in the market that Kleinwort Benson Securities
had turned positive on the stock and would become a buyer shortly.
BAe had suffered from press reports that reiterated criticisms in a private
note by Nomura, the Japanese broking house, which cast doubts on the
likelihood of BAe winning the second phase of the Pounds 2.5bn Al Yamamah
defence contract. Most other analysts felt the criticism was overdone; this
week Nomura circulated a second, less-bearish, note, expressing regret to
BAe for any embarrassment caused.
The stock was also cheered by news of BAe's participation in the new Orion
satellite venture and improved Rover car sales in the UK for December. The
shares also found sentiment favourable ahead of a series of meetings next
week between BAe and institutions. Turnover was a moderate 4.5m.
Guinness change
A number of securities houses changed forecasts and stances on Guinness and
the shares ended a strong run. Following a jump of more than 50 points since
Christmas, the shares fell 12 yesterday to 539p with 3.2m traded.
UBS Phillips & Drew moved from being a buyer to a holder. It lowered its
1991 estimate by Pounds 5m to Pounds 955m and its 1992 figure to Pounds
1.08bn from Pounds 1.1bn, citing recent tough trading conditions.
Among other houses said to have reduced their estimates was Cazenove,
Guinness's broker. Cazenove never comments on market speculation but
analysts believed that the house had cut its estimate to Pounds 1.08bn from
Pounds 1.11bn.
Cable and Wireless came under more pressure, ending 17 off at 577p on
relatively heavy turnover of 6m, with dealers citing worries of increased
competition in UK telecoms from US group Sprint as the reason for the latest
slide in the shares.
Midland Bank outpaced the rest of a troubled banks sector, responding to
what most dealers described as 'unlikely' tales of a bid from Hongkong &
Shanghai Banking, which already holds a near 15 per cent stake in Midland.
The bid rumours followed hints that HK Bank could be lining up a substantial
rights issue. HK Bank built up its stake around two years ago with the
ultimate intention of a full merger with Midland. But the departure of Sir
Kit McMahon, the previous Midland chairman, and problems at HK Bank, and
Midland's never-ending problems with third world debt and now UK bad debt
provisions, put paid to the merger hopes.
Midland ended 3 up at 212p on moderate turnover of 2.6m. NatWest, heavily
sold in recent sessions after profits downgrades from, among others, James
Capel, managed a minor gain to 264p, with Kleinwort Benson said to have been
a keen supporter of the shares.
Financing anxieties hit Greycoat Properties, which has been trying to raise
money to cover the cost of its Embankment Place development at London's
Charing Cross station. The shares dropped 22 to 76p as fears emerged that
the group's attempt to replace its original Pounds 110m financing with a
Pounds 130m deep discount bond issue was not going well. County NatWest will
today downgrade Greycoat's net asset value from 7.3p to 6.5p.
Oil shares, buffeted by the recent spate of profits downgrades, were again
heavily traded but closed well above the day's lowest levels as a number of
analysts took the view the sector may be oversold. Kleinwort Benson said:
'Earnings downgrades on BP and Shell have been discounted and both are a
buy.' It added that it preferred BP, given its high prospective yield of
over 8 per cent.
Strauss Turnbull, one of the leading bears of the oil sector for more than a
year shifted its stance on the sector from 'sell' to 'hold', 'because of the
20 per cent underperformance over the period'. But Strauss remains extremely
bearish of Shell, which dipped 7 more to 475p on heavy turnover of 9.1m. BP
rallied from 270p to close only 2 off at 274p with a hefty 13m shares
traded.
Grand Metropolitan rose 5 to 919p on news that its US subsidiary Pillsbury
is buying the frozen products division of Minneapolis-based McGlynn
Bakeries.
Worries about profits downgrades continued to overhang Body Shop shares,
which retreated 9 more to 328p. Ratners bounced up to 24p before closing a
net 2 firmer at 23p awaiting the crucial statement on Christmas trading.
Suggestions that a line of 5m Burton shares was on offer depressed the
Burton share price, which slipped 1 1/2 to 35 1/2 p. Closing turnover of
2.4m in Burton indicated the shares were still kicking around as the market
closed.
The recently somewhat amazing performance of Reed International was checked
yesterday. The shares had risen more than 50p since mid-December, but
yesterday they fell 23 before closing 10 off at 528p. There were suggestions
that one securities house had cut its profits estimate, and that other cuts
were in the wind.
Holiday groups again slipped back on fears of a price war, Airtours losing
14 to 813p and Owners Abroad 5 to 98p. However, many in the market feel the
war is a phoney one and that the sector remains fundamentally strong.
Smith New Court yesterday upgraded Airtours, forecasting profits of Pounds
36.5m for 1992.
A buy note on Granada Group from broker Carr Kitcat & Aitken sent the shares
ahead 7 to 204p.
A tight market in Rank Organisation left the shares 9 up at 613p. Confidence
that the group would pay its final dividend at the end of the month helped
sentiment.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1991/92
NEW HIGHS (44).
BRITISH FUNDS (11) Fd. 6pc 1993, Tr. 9 3/4 pc 2002, Tr. 10pc 2003, Cv. 9 1/2
pc 2004, Do. A, Cv. 9 1/2 pc 2005, Tr. 12 1/2 pc '03-05, Tr. 8pc '02-06, Tr.
8 1/2 pc 2007 A, Tr. 8pc 2009, Cv. 9pc 2011 B, OTHER FIXED INTEREST (4)
African Dev., Asian Dev., Intl-Amer. 9 3/4 pc 2015, Sth. Rhodesia '87-92,
AMERICANS (1) Amdahl, CANADIANS (2) Brascan, Can. Pacific, BUSINESS SERVICES
(1) Serco, CHEMICALS (1) Yule Catto, ELECTRICALS (2) Ericsson (LM), Philips
Elects., ELECTRONICS (4) ACT, Kewill Systems, Norsk Data A, Radamec, FOOD
RETAILING (1) Iceland Frozen, HEALTH & HOUSEHOLD (6) Amersham Intl.,
Hafslund Nycomed A, Do. B, Glaxo, Novo Nordisk B, Seton Healthcare, HOTELS &
LEISURE (2) Granada 7.5p Prf., Stanley Leis., INSURANCE COMPOSITE (1) FBD,
INVESTMENT TRUSTS (1) Murray Split Cap. Zero Prf., MEDIA (1) LWT 3.9375p
Prfd., MISCELLANEOUS (1) Platignum, OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (2) ECC,
Harris (Ph), PACKAGING, PAPER & PRINTING (1) Repola, TRANSPORT (2) BAA, Sea
Containers.
NEW LOWS (80).
AMERICANS (1) Hasbro, BUILDING MATERIALS (3) Ibstock Johnsen, Marshalls,
Starmin, BUSINESS SERVICES (1) Corporate Services, CONTRACTING &
CONSTRUCTION (3) Dean & Bowes, Laing (J) A, Ward, ELECTRONICS (2) AB Elect.,
Pressac, ENGINEERING AEROSPACE (1) Brit. Aerospace 7.75p Prf., ENGINEERING
GENERAL (1) Hadleigh Inds., FOOD MANUFACTURING (1) Acatos & Hutcheson,
HEALTH & HOUSEHOLD (1) JS Pathology, HOTELS & LEISURE (4) Buckingham Intl.,
Pickwick, Principal Hotels, Wembley, INSURANCE BROKERS (1) Willis Corroon,
INSURANCE COMPOSITE (1) Hafnia, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (17) Castle Cairn Wrrnts.,
City of Oxford Wrrnts., Danae Cap., English Natl. Prfd., French Property,
Gartmore Scotland Cap., Do. Units, Henderson Highland Wrrnts., M & G 2nd
Dual Inc., Melville Street Wrrnts., North Amer. Gas., River & Merc. Cap.,
Do. Wrrnts., Scottish Natl. Cap., Siam Selective Growth Wrrnts., Sphere Inv.
Wrrnts., TR Property, MISCELLANEOUS (3) Abbeycrest, Cresta, Excalibur, OIL &
GAS (8) Blackland Oil, BP, Cairn Energy, Enterprise Oil, Goal Petrlm., Hardy
Oil, Richmond Oil, Sceptre Res., OTHER FINANCIAL (2) King & Shaxson, Smith
New Court, PROPERTY (17) Bolton, Bucknall, Chesterfield, Danbury, Debenham
Tewson & C, Derwent Valley, Greycoat, Hammerson A, Lon. Merchant, Lon. &
Metropolitan, Merivale Moore, Mountleigh, Ossory Ests., Regalian, Rosehaugh,
Savills, Stanhope, STORES (3) Clinton Cards, Goldsmiths, Ratners 6 7/8 pc
Prf., TEXTILES (2) Alexandra Workwear, Jerome, TRANSPORT (1) Bergesen d-y A,
MINES (7) Anglovaal, Cluff Res., De Beers Linked Units, Mount Martin Gold,
Plateau Mining, Winklehaak, Western & Pacific Res.
Other market statistics, including the FT-Actuaries Share Indices and London
Traded Options,
Page 24.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

920109

