FT923-15604

FT  01 JUL 92 / Rao says ministers linked to scam will go


   By DAVID HOUSEGO and SHIRAZ SIDHVA


   NEW DELHI, BOMBAY


MR P V Narasimha Rao, the Indian prime minister, said yesterday that he
would dismiss any member of his government found implicated in the Bombay
financial scandal.
Addressing his first press conference in Delhi since taking over power a
year ago, he said that any minister found to have been involved in the
securities scandal 'will not remain in the ministry'.
Senior officials say privately that they know of no evidence to incriminate
ministers. Opposition leaders claim, however, that two or three ministers
are implicated and plan to make this the main plank of their attack on the
government when parliament reconvenes next week.
The prime minister defended the government's handling of the still widening
fraud case that has cost financial institutions more than Rs30bn (Pounds
576m) by saying that it had acted speedily when irregularities had been
uncovered.
Four of Bombay's leading stockmarket brokers and eight others, including two
managers of the Standard Chartered Bank Bombay were yesterday remanded in
custody by a special judge of the Bombay High Court.
Commenting on the enormity of the amount involved, the judge stressed that
the scandal 'was not a stray incident but a matter of extreme national
importance, the subversion of the banking and financial institutions as well
as the system'.
Officials argue that the onus of proof against ministers and senior
officials now lies with the opposition. If the opposition is unable next
week to substantiate allegations against ministers now widely circulating in
Delhi, the government will emerge the stronger.
Mr Rao also defended his government against charges that it was moving too
slowly over economic reform.
He said that over-rapid change could 'catapult' the country into further
difficulties. He said that what was needed was 'quick but steady change'.
Reaffirming his belief in increasing liberalisation, he said there would be
no change in the content or direction of policy.
Editorial comment, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

