FT924-12010

FT  22 OCT 92 / Four German groups announce cuts as business climate worsens


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


THE wave of cost-cutting measures sweeping through German industry yesterday
hit white-collar and production workers in four leading companies.
AEG, the appliance and electrical engineering arm of Daimler-Benz, said it
would cut its 940-strong headquarters workforce in Frankfurt to less than
200. Only 120 jobs would be lost in the attempt to improve efficiency and
devolve decision-making; the other staff would be found work elsewhere in
the group.
ANT Nachrichtentechnik, an electronics company in the Robert Bosch group,
announced 800 job losses.
Diesel engine and plant maker Klockner-Humboldt-Deutz, which has already
announced 1,000 job losses, is to put 2,000 workers on short-time, and
Continental, the tyre manufacturer, announced plans to reduce output by
extending the Christmas holiday.
The rapid deterioration in German business conditions was further underlined
by news from MAN Gutehoffnungshutte, an engineering division of the MAN
group, that losses had increased this year to DM23.5m (Pounds 9.5m) after a
DM6m deficit in 1991.
There were also further warnings that the country could be on the verge of
recession. Economists at the BHF Bank said the pattern of rising prices and
falling demand was reminiscent of previous slumps.
However, they added, the prospects for avoiding recession were better than
in the past. Favourable indicators included the relatively early easing of
interest rates coupled with the lower import prices stemming from the
D-Mark's appreciation.
The difficulties at MAN and KHD reflect a downturn in foreign and domestic
engineering demand which will lead to industry-wide production falling by 5
per cent this year.
The slow-down at Continental has been prompted by a sharp fall in incoming
orders from the motor industry, which has said it needs to shed 200,000
workers to remain competitive.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921022

