FT924-7983

FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement - Details: Industry stops short of
complete approval


   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent


INDUSTRY last night withheld unqualified approval for the chancellor's
package, although it was widely welcomed as an encouraging starting point
for economic recovery.
Doubts remained over whether confidence, the one factor beyond the
chancellor's control, would now improve significantly.
There was some disappointment among industrialists that today's
interest-rate reduction will be limited to 1 percentage point and concern
about whether the measures would provide a coherent strategy in the longer
term for sustained investment and recovery.
Other business leaders suggested that the cheapest borrowing rates for 15
years, combined with what was in effect a 14 per cent devaluation of
sterling, would provide a needed boost to the economy.
Mr Lamont's short-term plan for reviving industry with a blend of measures
to stimulate investment, expand production and increase sales met many of
the demands on industry's shopping list.
Even so, Mrs Ann Robinson, head of policy at the Institute of Directors,
said she was only 'partially satisfied' with the package. She was concerned
about the government's longer-term spending plans, given the danger that
insufficient revenues would boost public-sector borrowing and again raise
interest rates.
The Engineering Employers' Federation, which has been increasingly critical
of Mr Lamont's policies, said the package represented 'a great improvement'.
Mr Neil Johnson, federation director-general, welcomed the short-term
elements of the package, but added: 'Rebuilding the UK industrial base is a
job which demands much longer-term policies.'
The least impressed were smaller companies. Their Forum of Private Business
 -representing 20,000 businesses - claimed the chancellor had offered 'only
crumbs of comfort'.
The emphasis on maintaining capital investment at the expense of current
spending and the signalling of a new regime for encouraging joint ventures
between the public and private sectors were well received by big business.
The Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors said the priority given to
big infrastructure projects would be good for the construction sector.
The modest but short-lived measures for investment in plant, machinery and
industrial buildings, along with Mr Lamont's direct intervention to help the
housing and motor industries, also won approval. The Society of Motor
Manufacturers and Traders said the abolition of the special car tax would
boost sales.
Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the Confederation of British Industry,
said the improved investment allowances would benefit industry. 'No one can
be sure these measures will be sufficient to bring us out of recession,' he
said. 'But they will begin to rebuild industry's confidence in itself and in
the government.'
Mr David Mann, managing director of Logica, the UK's largest independent
computing services company, said the increase in capital allowances would
encourage its customers to undertake computer hardware and software
projects. The extra Pounds 700m cover for exporters available through the
Export Credits Guarantee Department was generally welcomed, although it is
the high cost of ECGD premiums which has raised most recent objections by
exporters.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921113

