FT922-7246

FT  20 MAY 92 / (CORRECTED) UK Company News: ICS's Pounds 15m share
placement is 'comfortably oversubscribed'


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


Correction (Published 21st May 1992) appended to this article.
INTERNATIONAL Control Services, the electronic safety systems manufacturer
which is seeking a full listing on the London stock market, said yesterday
its Pounds 15m share placement had been 'comfortably oversubscribed'.
At the placing price of 110p, the company will have a market capitalisation
of Pounds 43.9m. Dealing will start on Thursday, May 28.
ICS Group claims around 12 per cent of its targeted market for safety
systems for the oil, gas and petrochemical industry.
Worldwide, the safety market is estimated at around Dollars 750m, and
expected to grow by up to 12 per cent a year in the next three years.
The company made pre-tax profits of Pounds 3.6m for the year to May 1991, on
turnover of Pounds 51.4m.
This year the directors forecast profits before tax of at least Pounds 4.5m,
putting earnings per share at not less than 8.9p.
Founded in 1966 as a maker of electronic alarm systems for industry, the
company was quick to spot the potential in the North Sea market, and in the
words of chief executive Mr Peter Hall has 'grown up together with the North
Sea fields'.
It was, however, tougher safety requirements in the North Sea in the wake of
the Piper Alpha disaster, enshrined in the Offshore Safety Act, that led to
a four-fold growth in profits in the past four years. The group has built up
a client network including BP, Shell, British Gas, Agip, Total, and Chevron.
The company specialises in integrated safety and control systems for
industrial processes which detect hazards, and automatically take corrective
action, including shutdown where necessary.
While considerable retro-fitting work remains in the North Sea fields, with
the provision of safety systems for the new generation of highly-automated
offshore platforms, the company is looking for growth in the overseas
market, which already accounts for around 30 per cent of turnover.
'The North Sea, and the kind of systems we have developed there, are setting
the standards for the rest of the world,' Mr Hall said.
ICS is already working in Saudi Arabia, where an extensive retro-fitting
programme is under way, and in Kuwait. It has also supplied Singapore,
Indonesia and Korea, and has four overseas sales offices.
The placing will raise around Pounds 6.6m, net of expenses, to be used to
reduce current bank borrowings - leaving the company with gearing at around
25-30 per cent - to repay a Pounds 1m loan from 3i, and to redeem certain
preference shares held by 3i, the venture capital group.
The directors will control 53.8 per cent of the enlarged share capital; 3i
will control 11.99 per cent.
Correction (Published 21st May 1992)
Industrial Control Services Group, the electronic safety systems
manufacturer, was wrongly referred to as International Control Services in
yesterday's Financial Times.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920520

