FT924-6159

FT  23 NOV 92 / Deal on Russian reforms near


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


A DEAL to modify Russian economic reforms and defuse political attacks on
the government is near to agreement between Mr Boris Yeltsin, the president,
and centrist opposition leaders.
An agreement would allow the government to retain much of its reform team,
while industrialists would secure the centrally-directed slower pace of
economic change they have long sought, say sources close to the talks.
The deal would concentrate on improving as rapidly as possible the
extraction of oil, gas and precious minerals. In these sectors, and in oil
in particular, lack of investment and the disintegration of industrial links
have wreaked havoc in the past few years. Privatisation of large companies
would be narrowed to about 30 large companies, mainly in the defence field,
with the emphasis on switching to the production of oil drilling equipment
and other related technology.
Mass unemployment would be avoided by continuing subsidies to heavy
industrial plants and a high budget deficit would continue to be run,
perhaps amounting to as much as 20 per cent of gross national product a
year. However, as export earnings rose, a new Russian rouble would be
introduced, probably within two years.
The plan would destroy much of what is left of the government's 'shock
therapy' programme. However, this is almost at a standstill and the new plan
with its focus on energy, which is of most interest to foreign companies,
would probably receive outside support.
The International Monetary Fund and western countries will have little
choice but to continue to support Russian reform. However, there will be
limits to the IMF's continued backing for a programme which departs
radically from its recommendations.
The compromise programme is under discussion between the government and
Civic Union, the main centrist group.
The deal will mean cabinet changes, although it is not expected at present
to include Mr Yegor Gaidar, the acting prime minister.
Managing divorce between Moscow and Kiev, Page 4
Fears on CIS security, Page 5

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921123

