FT921-14138

FT  17 JAN 92 / International Company News: Minol sold to Franco-German
consortium


   By LESLIE COLITT


   BERLIN


THE Treuhand German privatisation agency, in one of its biggest deals, is to
sell eastern Germany's Minol filling station company and the Leuna refinery
to a French-German consortium of Elf-Aquitaine, Thyssen and SB Kauf.
The consortium plans to invest DM5bn (Dollars 3.1bn) to build Europe's most
modern refinery at Leuna with a capacity of between 10m and 12.5m tons as
well as a new pipeline linking it to a Baltic port. It will also modernise
Minol's more than 900 filling stations.
Elf, France's largest company and partly state-owned, is to take a majority
stake in both Minol and the refinery.
British Petroleum, heading a consortium of Total, Statoil, Agip and OMV, was
the other main bidder.
Mr Wolf Schode, the Treuhand spokesman, hailed the decision as a milestone
toward rescuing the antiquated east German chemicals industry. The
Treuhand's managing board is expected to approve the recommendation, and a
final contract is to be signed next June.
Mr Schode said the sale would save more than 7,000 jobs in the east German
chemicals industry by making the loss-making Leuna chemical site attractive
for western investors.
The winning consortium agreed to provide the Leuna chemical plant with
competitively-priced feedstock and to accept as partners in the refinery
other investors in the petro-chemicals site.
Originally, the Treuhand wanted to sell Minol, which is highly profitable,
individually, but then decided to add it as a sweetener to the obsolescent,
loss-making Leuna refinery.
Minol is to be kept as an independent brand and is also to be introduced
into west Germany. The German Cartel Office approved the sale on condition
that a fixed number of Minol's filling stations be sold to medium-sized
operators. The present Leuna refinery, with a capacity of 7m tons, is
inter-connected with the chemicals plant which had sales of DM2.1bn last
year and losses of DM360m.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920117

