FT922-4009

FT  08 JUN 92 / Experts deny royal reports threaten Crown


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


REPORTS in the British media of difficulties in the marriage of the Prince
and Princess of Wales do not pose any constitutional crisis for the
monarchy, constitutional experts said yesterday.
Lord St John of Fawsley, the former Conservative cabinet minister, said that
the allegations published in The Sunday Times about the marriage, based on
Diana: Her True Story, a book by Andrew Morton, 'cast a shadow over the
monarchy and must be very upsetting for the Queen'. But, he added, 'they
have no effect on the role of the Queen or the role of the Prince of Wales'.
Lord St John said that if the prince and princess divorced, it would have no
effect on the succession. Other constitutional experts agreed.
Lord St John said: 'The role of the royal family as exemplar of family life
and values would be diminished, but there would be no practical effect on
the succession. Divorce is very widespread and accepted.'
In his book Mr Morton claims that Princess Diana attempted to commit suicide
during the 1980s. The book details conversations with friends of the
princess who say her marriage is a sham and that she is convinced she will
never become queen.
Buckingham Palace would not comment on the allegations yesterday.
A spokesman said yesterday that the Princess of Wales had not co-operated
over Mr Morton's book 'in any way whatsoever' and she had not seen the
proofs.
'As far as we are concer-ned it's business as usual. They both have official
engagements today which they will be fulfilling.'
He denied that, in the wake of the divorce of the Princess Royal and the
recent separation of the Duke and Duchess of York, the Palace's failure to
refute the allegations was fuelling a constitutional crisis.
'What constitutional crisis? There is no constitutional crisis,' he said.
He added that it was pointless to speculate about the effect of a divorce of
the Prince and Princess of Wales, because that was a purely hypothetical
situation.
Mr Brian Hanson, legal officer of the General Synod of the Church of
England, confirmed that the Prince of Wales could divorce and still succeed
to the throne with the title of Supreme Governor of the Church. He said:
'The only fetter on the heir to the throne is becoming a Roman Catholic or
marrying a Roman Catholic. In theory a divorce would be possible.'
Lord St John said damage to the monarchy caused by the book would be
limited.
Most of the events described in it and reported by the weekend press took
place in the early 1980s and were out of date. The feeling of the British
people was mostly against the press and not against the royal family.
'I am not worried about the future of the monarchy as a result of this,'
Lord St John said. 'Perhaps it will lead people to take a more realistic
view of the monarchy as ordinary people with ordinary problems.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920608

