FT923-10875

FT  28 JUL 92 / Peru comes to terms with creeping civil war: Moves toward
martial law have met popular approval


   By SALLY BOWEN


AFTER 12 years of violence which has cost 26,000 lives and Dollars 20bn
(Pounds 10.4bn) in damage, Peruvians seem ready for the first time to admit
they are witnessing a civil war.
President Alberto Fujimori's announcement last week that those accused of
terrorism are to be tried under martial law - with the prospect of the death
penalty for treason - has met popular approval.
In the run-up to today's Independence Day celebrations, Peru's
fundamentalist Maoist guerrilla group Sendero Luminoso spread panic among
the capital's still-affluent middle classes. Twelve days and nights of
bombing left 35 people dead, hundreds injured and buildings wrecked.
For the first time Sendero hit civilians, including schoolchildren,
indiscriminately.
The onslaught forced Mr Fujimori to cancel his trip to last week's
Ibero-American summit in Madrid. In a long-delayed and terse televised
message on Friday he vowed that 'those who are bleeding Peru to death,
killing our children, destroying what they did not create, will be
eliminated. Them and their poison.'
Sendero is thought to have brought up to 1,000 guerrillas into Lima for the
current campaign, which analysts predict will continue for a further two
weeks. Fifteen car bombs exploded while a similar number were disarmed. A
two-day 'armed strike', enforced with menaces and killings, paralysed the
capital's public transport system and led to substantial lost production.
The government's counter-subversive strategy has again prompted heavy
criticism. Despite some successes against subversion in recent weeks -
notably the capture of leaders of the Tupac Amaru revolutionary movement
(MRTA), Peru's second guerrilla group, and the dismantling of its extortion
racket - Sendero's strength has been little affected.
The recent meticulously-planned actions in Lima suggest the much-publicised
capture last month of Sendero's 'logistics chief' was less significant than
the government had claimed.
Mr Carlos Tapia, a sociologist and expert on Sendero, says: 'It is not true
that Sendero is entering Lima because it has been routed in the highlands.
The government thinks that by announcing imminent defeat and twisting the
truth, they really will make that defeat happen - but it's not so.'
Mr Fujimori has often said his counter-subversive strategy depends on
improved intelligence gathering. Yet analysts say there has never been such
a dearth of warnings on big attacks.
Once again they blame disarray in the intelligence services on Mr Vladimiro
Montesinos, the powerful presidential adviser. The former army captain has
given top military posts to friends, eliminating the normal armed forces'
promotion structure and causing deep resentment.
Also alarming is the threat of Sendero's influence spreading to the rest of
the continent. Recent Sendero-linked attacks have been reported in Chile,
Bolivia, Ecuador and Mexico.
Mr Enrique Bernales, the now-deposed senator responsible for the most
reliable statistics on violence and subversion in Peru, says: 'Of all
possible scenarios, this prospect of Peru being ringed by a
political/military cordon sanitaire is the worst.'
Sendero poses far more than the threat of brute violence. Now entering what
it calls its 'fourth campaign', the organisation is passing from 'strategic
equilibrium' to 'strategic offensive'. Unusually sophisticated leaflets
widely distributed before last week's armed strike offer a 22-point
political programme with broad popular appeal - amid familiar Marxist
rhetoric were calls for cuts in taxes, public service tariffs and fares,
higher wages and pensions, homes for the homeless, improved health and
education services and no privatisation.
'The Fujimori coup has done Sendero a favour,' says Mr Hernando de Soto,
former presidential adviser and think-tank chief. 'By destroying the
credibility and legitimacy of government, he's left a political vacuum which
Sendero is ready to fill. This requires a political, not a purely military,
response.'
Despite a second devastating bomb attack on his Lima institute, Mr de Soto
is continuing to visit a series of Lima universities - known to harbour
cells of Sendero sympathisers - to press his proposals for a return to
democracy in November.
But in the present climate of violence and uncertainty, electing a
constituent Congress to pave the way for a return to democracy is the last
thing on most Peruvians' minds.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920728

