FT924-6465

FT  20 NOV 92 / UK accused of holding up TV deal


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


BRITAIN was yesterday accused of abusing its position as European Community
president and hampering progress towards an agreement on European
high-definition television.
At a meeting of EC telecommunications ministers, the UK refused to issue a
statement backed by its 11 EC partners calling for another meeting after the
Edinburgh summit to discuss funding for an EC HDTV strategy.
Instead, Mr Edward Leigh, the British industry minister chairing yesterday's
meeting, said the UK would 'reflect' on the demand and decide after next
month's summit.
Britain has several times been accused of putting its national interests
above those of the EC during the six-month presidency. In particular, other
EC members have attacked the UK's insistence on a detailed reexamination of
the EC budget proposals for 1993-97.
Mr Leigh's stance incensed the European Commission and other ministers. Mrs
Hanja May-Weggen, the Dutch transport and communications minister, told
journalists Britain was 'sabotaging' progress towards an accord.
Britain opposes the Commission proposal to pump Ecu850m (Dollars 1bn) of EC
funding into the promotion of wide-screen HDTV over five years.
Yesterday 10 member states - all except Britain and Denmark - agreed to back
the substance of the Commission's HDTV action plan, conditional on later
budget decisions.
Sitting alongside Mr Leigh at a press conference afterwards, an angry Mr
Filippo Maria Pandolfi, EC telecoms commissioner, said: 'In my judgment
everything is ready for an agreement except the financial position.'
Formal agreement on the action plan, which would fund consortia wanting to
provide wide-screen TV services in Europe, has to be unanimous.
Britain said its hardline position on the vital cash element of the plan was
backed by six other member states. They include poorer EC members, worried
that the five-year project might cut into budget proposals to help economic
convergence in the Community.
Sceptical member states are also concerned that rival digital technology may
overtake the standards for European HDTV, agreed last year.
European television manufacturers - notably Philips of the Netherlands and
Thomson of France - have invested heavily in HDTV technology.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921120

