FT923-6419

FT  25 AUG 92 / Arabs detect positive Israeli stance as talks resume


   By ROGER MATTHEWS and TONY WALKER


   WASHINGTON, CAIRO


ARAB delegations to the Middle East peace talks said there was a new and
positive atmosphere in yesterday's session of negotiations in Washington,
the first to be held since general elections in Israel brought a Labour
government to power, headed by Mr Yitzhak Rabin. The delegations
representing Israel, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and the Palestinians have agreed
to spend a month in Washington in the hope of a breakthrough.
Israel helped to improve the atmosphere by announcing shortly before the
delegates arrived at the State Department that an expulsion order against 11
Palestinians made by the previous Israeli government had been revoked.
Ms Bushra Kanafani, the Syrian spokeswoman, said that she had detected a
'different tone, a different style and a different approach' from the
Israeli delegation. Israel had tabled a document containing both procedural
ideas and substantive proposals on the future of the Golan Heights which is
the key bilateral issue for the two delegations.
Mr Marwan Mouasher, the Jordanian spokesman, said he had also found a new
tone in Israeli statements and a new terminology 'more consistent with
international law'. Israel had put forward an agenda for discussion which
incorporated ideas introduced previously by Jordan, an indication of a more
constructive approach, he said.
He added that the Israeli delegation had committed itself to negotiate on
the basis of UN Resolution 242 and all its aspects. The resolution calls on
Israel to withdraw from the territory it occupied in 1967 in return for a
full and comprehensive peace.
The change in tone could not disguise, however, the huge differences that
continue to separate the delegations on matters of substance.
Mr Yossi Gal, the Israeli spokesman, said yesterday that his government
would be making a series of specific proposals to the Palestinian delegation
when they hold their first session later today, relating particularly to the
powers of an interim self-governing authority for the West Bank and Gaza.
He warned the Palestinians that this elected body would have strictly
administrative functions. The Palestinians are insisting that it must have a
legislative function, which Mr Gal said yesterday would invest it with the
symbol of statehood and would not be accepted by Israel.
Mr Gal added that Israel had embarked on a series of confidence building
measures to which he hoped the Arab delegations would respond. He cited the
decision to withdraw the expulsion orders against 11 Palestinians.
Dozens of Palestinians have been expelled since the uprising, or intifada,
began in late 1987. The expulsions have been condemned as a violation of
international law.
The announcement came 24 hours after Israel had eased some restrictions on
Palestinians living under occupation in the West Bank and Gaza and prepared
to release 800 Arab prisoners from jail.
Hopes of a breakthrough at the Washington talks were initially raised by the
change of government in Israel which brought Mr Yitzhak Rabin to power,
replacing the hardline Mr Yitzhak Shamir who was ideologically committed to
retaining control of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Mr Rabin has said that he
would like to negotiate a form of autonomy for the Palestinians and to reach
agreement the creation of an interim self-governing authority within nine
months.
There have also been indications that Israel has prepared ideas to be put to
the Syrians on the future of the Golan Heights, including a partial Israeli
withdrawal and demilitarisation. Syria is demanding an unqualified Israeli
withdrawal citing UN resolution 242 which calls for the return of occupied
territories.
Mr Muwaffiq al-Allaf, the head of the Syrian delegation, said yesterday as
he went into the talks: 'We are here for a comprehensive and total peace,
not for a partial peace. The only way to reach a comprehensive peace is to
return all the territories occupied in 1967.'
Many of its members had been delayed by a dispute at the weekend with
Israeli border officials. The Lebanese and Jordanian delegations were also
at the State Department. Mr Soheil Shammas, the senior Lebanese delegate,
said he was keen to see what the new attitudes in Israel meant in practice.
'We are happy to be back where the action is", he added.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920825

