FT921-1462

FT  24 MAR 92 / Survey of Employee Ownership (4): Value of free shares / A
look at the problems being caused by privatisation in eastern Europe


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


IN THEORY, the workers used to own everything in the so-called worker-states
of eastern Europe. In practice, the absence of clearly defined property
rights proved to be one of the greatest obstacles to rational economic
development.
Over the past two years, the collapse of communist regimes throughout the
region has made privatisation a key element of economic reform. Inevitably,
this has revealed the need for new forms of ownership, including a
redefinition of employee ownership.
The quickest and most complete transformation to employee ownership has
followed the rapid privatisation of trade and retail outlets, especially in
the three central European 'fast track' reforming economies of
Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland. Czechoslovakia has been particularly
concerned either to compensate, or restore to whatever previous owners can
still be traced, small shops and restaurants which were privately owned
until the various waves of nationalisation which followed the post-war
imposition of a Soviet-style regime.
In some cases, state property has simply been auctioned off to the highest
bidder, a satisfactorily quick and cheap process. Often such small
enterprises and retail outlets have been leased to their new proprietors,
especially where property rights are disputed by former owners or unclear.
Lack of clarity about original ownership has been a major difficulty
bedevilling transfers of property in many cases.
Poland began first and has proceeded fastest with this so-called 'small
privatisation'. Alone in eastern Europe, Poland managed to retain 80 per
cent of the land in peasant proprietorship throughout the communist period
and this helped to keep alive both the concept of private property and the
basic institutions needed to assert property rights and transfer property,
at least in country areas.
Poland passed its first privatisation law in July 1990 and within a few
months more than 100,000 small and medium-sized retail outlets owned mainly
by local authorities were sold off or leased. By the end of last year, well
over 80 per cent of retail trade was in private hands as well as over 40 per
cent of the building industry and 60 per cent of road transport.
With extraordinary speed a privatised wholesale network also sprung up in
Poland to replace the former centralised state system whose legendary
inefficiency had made queueing and shortages part of the country's way of
life. Last year over 46 per cent of Poland's Dollars 14bn import trade was
carried out by privatised companies.
It is a similar story in Hungary and Czechoslovakia where privatisation of
small firms began in January 1991. Over the next year 17,000 small
businesses were privatised, of which 2,000 were returned to their former
owners. Unfortunately, there are no clear statistics for the number of
employee buyouts but these are believed to have been a substantial
proportion. A further 30,000 small companies are due to be sold or leased in
the next nine months.
Progress with small-scale privatisation has been closely watched by the
so-called 'southern tier' countries of Romania, Bulgaria and Albania,
although Yugoslavia, which used to boast of its own special form of worker
self-management, has been distracted by the inter-republican fighting which
has thrown most of the republics into economic disarray.
Bulgaria began to privatise small shops, service stations and restaurants
only in the second half of 1991 while Romania is planning to auction small
enterprises later this year. The government in Bucharest, the Romanian
capital, has also drawn up plans for privatising 6,000 fully state-owned
industrial and other enterprises under the Privatisation Law promulgated
last August. The law transfers all state property, apart from utility
companies, into joint stock companies. The shares will then be held by five
private ownership funds.
Some 30 per cent of the shares in these funds are intended to be transferred
free to Romanian citizens as certificates of ownership. The remaining 70 per
cent will be held in a state ownership fund until they can be sold to
foreign or Romanian investors.
Given the shortage of capital in the region, and the need for time and
expertise to rebuild the legal and institutional framework for the effective
transfer of ownership and control, it clearly made sense for the governments
to transform as many employees as possible into owners or leaseholders of
small businesses.
But the real debate over shares for workers and employee ownership schemes
has surfaced in the second, far more difficult stage of privatisation. This
is the transformation of the thousands of large and medium-sized industrial
enterprises which remain the basis of the former centrally planned
economies.
Over the past two years, an enormous amount of intellectual effort and
specialised advice from western bankers, accountants and lawyers has been
devoted to working out complex mass privatisation schemes. All include some
form of free or preferential transfer of shares to workers in the various
enterprises.
However, the free element has been sharply reduced as the various drafts
succeeded each other. This is partly because pro-market governments have
argued with increasing strength that free distribution of shares resembles
too closely old socialist attitudes. It also reflects the cost of such
complex schemes and the need to make them as self-financing as possible.
Czechoslovakia hopes to return half of the remaining 4,000 state-owned
enterprises to private ownership through a so-called 'coupon privatisation'
programme which is due to start in March. Over 8m Czech and Slovak citizens
have paid a nominal sum for voucher booklets which will entitle them to
choose which shares they want to hold.
Poland has an equally complex system of 'mass privatisation' under which
shares in 200-400 of Poland's 8,000 state or municipally-owned enterprises
will be transferred into Polish and foreign-managed investment funds this
year. For a nominal fee, Polish citizens will be offered shares in the
closed end funds, but not in the companies themselves.
Employees will be given up to 10 per cent of the shares in the enterprises
taking part in the mass privatisation scheme. As an added incentive, they
will also be relieved from the strictures of the so-called popiwek tax. This
punitive tax on wage increases which exceed a below-inflation norm set by
the government is levied only on state-owned enterprises as a brake on the
power of the workers' councils.
Once companies are privatised, either by foreign investment, liquidation or
through the mass privatisation scheme, workers receive up to 10 per cent of
shares in the enterprise. But they lose the protection of the workers
councils. They are also freed from the restrictions of popiwek and are
allowed free wage bargaining.
The real problem is that the vast majority of enterprises in this part of
the world are under-capitalised, overmanned and technologically obsolescent.
Creating real value for the shares given to employees or obtained cheaply
through various mass privatisation schemes poses a daunting challenge for
years ahead.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920324

