FT922-7366

FT  19 MAY 92 / International Capital Markets: Foster's hesitates to seize
merger 'lifeline' - The terms of a rescue deal proposed by SA Brewing


   By KEVIN BROWN


Shares in Foster's Brewing Group rose nine cents to ADollars 1.99 yesterday
as investors digested the details which offers a lifeline to Mr John
Elliott, Foster's embattled former chairman.
The shares were also buoyed by a spate of rumours suggesting that every
important international brewer from Guinness to Anheuser Busch was building
a stake in Foster's in the event that deal collapses.
SA Brewing shares fell six cents to ADollars 3.01, a reaction which suggests
that the market believes the deal offers more to Mr Elliott and SA Brewing
management than to shareholders.
The merger plan would transform SA Brewing from a medium-sized drinks and
manufacturing group capitalised at ADollars 1.5bn (USDollars 1.1bn) to the
controlling partner in a merged group valued at more than ADollars 5.9bn.
Its chief attraction is that it would virtually end Mr Elliott's involvement
with Foster's, which has turned into a nightmare since a mishandled buy-out
left International Brewing Holdings (IBH), Mr Elliott's private company,
with unmanageable debts.
After two years of deal making, IBH has cut its shareholding in Foster's
from 56 per cent to 38 per cent, and Mr Elliott has stepped down from
executive chairman to deputy chief executive. However, IBH faces liquidation
in November unless it finds a way to repay debts of ADollars 2.5bn secured
against Foster's shares worth only ADollars 1.6bn.
Mr Ross Wilson, SA Brewing chief executive, says that the merger offer is
the only way to remove the IBH problem from Foster's, and give the group
time to reap the full benefit of its investments in Courage in the UK and
half of Molson Breweries in Canada.
Mr Wilson insists that the merger is a friendly offer which would be
achieved with the consent of directors and shareholders of both companies.
The mechanism would be a non-cash exchange of shareholdings for shares in
the merged group.
From Foster's headquarters in Melbourne, the offer looks like a replay of Mr
Elliott's 1984 takeover of CUB, especially since it is a condition of the
offer that Mr Wilson would be chief executive, and SA Brewing would name the
chairman.
There is no doubt that Mr Elliott would be a significant winner if the deal
goes through. The chief feature is the underwritten sale by IBH of about 6
per cent of its entitlement in the merged group.
Most of the balance of its Foster's shareholding would be swapped for
convertible notes exchangeable for shares in between two and 10 years,
leaving IBH with an initial shareholding in the new company of 7.5 per cent.
IBH's creditors would have to agree to accept the company's convertible
notes and shares as security against its debt, effectively giving Mr Elliott
an immediate cash injection to pay overdue interest bills, and a two-year
breathing space on the remaining debt.
The advantages for other shareholders are less clear-cut. Based on last
night's closing prices, shares in the merged group would open at ADollars
2.99, valuing Foster's shares at ADollars 1.99, equivalent to the market
valuation. SA Brewing shares would be exchanged at ADollars 2.99, compared
with ADollars 3.19 when the offer was announced on Friday.
The incentive being offered to both sets of shareholders is that the
reduction of IBH's role would trigger a re-rating of the shares. SA Brewing
says the merged group would trade at ADollars 3.92, capitalising it at about
ADollars 7.8bn, and valuing Foster's shares at ADollars 2.61 - sufficient
for IBH to repay its main creditors. On that basis, SA Brewing shares would
be worth ADollars 3.92.
However, the offer must overcome several hurdles. The most difficult will be
obtaining the approval of the board of Foster's, which is understood to have
rejected a similar proposal in March.
Mr Nobby Clark, chairman, opposes the merger plan, as does Mr Ted Kunkel,
the former chief executive of Molson Breweries, who took over as chief
executive of Foster's only two weeks ago.
Asahi Breweries of Japan, which owns 20 per cent of Foster's, is also
believed to oppose any deal which would dilute its shareholding.
Foster's argues that the merger would destroy the group's
shareholder-approved strategy of selling non-core financial, pastoral, and
property assets to become a pure brewing company.
The group has found the asset disposal programme difficult, and has been
unable to sell non-core assets worth about ADollars 2.8bn because of an
18-month recession. Directors believe, however, that the assets can be sold
at fair prices as the economy recovers.
They say there is no synergy between Foster's core operations and SA
Brewing, which derives only 30 per cent of profits from food and drinks,
much of which is contributed by its wine division.
The balance comes from packaging and manufacturing domestic appliances.
The merger proposal will also be investigated by the Trade Practices
Commission, which is concerned about further concentration of brewing in a
market which is about 90 per cent controlled by Foster's and National
Brewing, owned by Lion Nathan of New Zealand.
The outcome will depend on SA Brewing's success in convincing shareholders
and IBH creditors that the offer would give Foster's time to recover from
the IBH debacle, and avoid a fire sale of its non-core assets.
If Mr Wilson succeeds, SA Brewing will emerge in control of a company three
times its size.
If he fails, the banks will have to decide whether to give IBH a further
lease of life, or put it into liquidation, with unpredictable consequences.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920519

