FT924-1055

FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: Barnum walks the tightrope - Not the greatest show on
earth


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


THE STORY of Phineas Taylor Barnum, the man who brought the circus to town,
is so extraordinary that it must be almost impossible to tell it badly. The
musical version at the Dominion does not quite do that, but except for a
spectacular 15 minute finale, it is curiously lacking in style.
Barnum (1810-91) was a remarkable man by any standards. He called himself
the Prince of Humbugs, yet managed to continue to take people in for most of
his life. His specialisation in show business was exceptions to the rule,
like the midget who never grew more than 25 inches tall whom he called
General Tom Thumb. He also acquired Jumbo, the biggest known elephant in the
world, from the London Zoo and put him in his circus. At the same time, he
dabbled in politics, was on speaking terms with US presidents and had tea
with Queen Victoria.
But it is not the greatest show on earth that has arrived in London. Barnum
looks slightly amateur, precarious and under-rehearsed. Possibly this is a
very clever device, designed to show the fragility and hit-or-miss nature of
show business. If so, some of us would prefer professionalism.
There are opportunities galore. One of Barnum's first successes was to
discover an ancient black slave called Joice Heth, whom he passed off as
George Washington's 160-year-old nurse. Here the exhibit looks just like
another shabby side show. The production does not do a great deal better
with Tom Thumb, though it does allow another of Barnum's discoveries, a
Swedish opera singer called Jenny Lind, to demonstrate what can be done with
a confident voice and attractive looks. Played by Clara Miller, she is in a
higher league than most of the rest of the cast.
This teasing division between what is really good and what you can get away
with runs through the show. There is a striking example when Paul Nicholas,
playing Barnum, walks a tight rope. True, it is not much more than six feet
high and the rope is not the thinnest you have ever seen, but it is a very
long walk and there are no visible means of support. At the opening on
Thursday, he made it and let out a huge whoop of 'yes'. Perhaps it is part
of the suspense that he may not make it every night.
One part of the plot is bewilderingly obscure. After a touching scene with
his wife on the steps of the town hall where Barnum has been elected mayor,
it is not clear whether she goes off and leaves him or simply goes off and
dies. Either way, that is the last we see of Charity Barnum played by Carol
Duffy. Perhaps the subtlety is that, whatever happened, the show goes on.
The music is by Cy Coleman. Its weakness is that there is only one passably
good song, 'The Colours of My Life', and not enough is made of it. Yet just
when you are thinking what an uneven show this is comes the dazzling finale:
acrobatics all over the place, Barnum arriving on a rope from the gallery,
the circus at its best. Indeed there is so much simultaneous spectacle in
the last few minutes that it is hard to take it all in. One wonder why some
of it had not come before.
I do not want to disparage. Barnum is fun. Nowadays, however, when you put
on a musical in the West End you have to compete with the technical
excellence of the Royal National Theatre doing Carousel. Put the RNT on to
Barnum and it might be a different story. The show is directed and staged by
Buddy Schwab and will run for a six week season.
Dominion Theatre. (071) 580 9562

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

921219

