FT921-14324

FT  16 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Labour says 23 apply for each
Jobcentre vacancy - Employment


   By ALISON SMITH


EACH Jobcentre vacancy is being chased by 23 unemployed people, according to
the latest estimates, Labour said yesterday.
Labour renewed its attack on the government's economic record by publishing
a study of the economic performance of every constituency.
In London, it said, there were 60 unemployed people for every vacancy.
The paper, compiled by Mr Henry McLeish, an opposition employment spokesman,
points up particular pressures arising from youth unemployment and long-term
unemployment in southern England. It also illustrates the continuing
economic difficulties in the north of England, Scotland and Wales.
It gives a warning especially that London is taking on some of the
characteristics of long-term decline seen in the north of England.
The launch of the report was intended to highlight employment in advance of
today's monthly unemployment figures.
That aim was shared by the Liberal Democrats, who yesterday pledged to
intensify campaigning in the regions on the basis of their Pounds 3.3bn
scheme to increase jobs.
Labour's study uses employment and unemployment indicators to reflect
overall rates of unemployment and the changes brought by the recession. It
ranks the performance of 80 critical constituencies for Labour against
national averages.
Of the 200 constituencies performing better than average in fewer than three
of the eight indicators, 143 are held by the Tories, with almost 60 of them
likely to be key battleground seats in the election.
Mr Tony Blair, the shadow employment secretary, said the government's
emergency initiative, Employment Action, which was launched more than six
months ago, had dismally failed to live up to expectations.
Mr Michael Howard, the employment secretary, said youth unemployment in
Britain was below the EC average and long-term unemployment was at less than
half its 1986 level.
Mr John Cunningham, Labour's campaigns co-ordinator, emphasised the report's
value as a campaigning tool in bringing home the Tories' record to people
'many of whom are the bedrock of Tory support and who now feel betrayed by
what happened to them and their families'.

The Financial Times


London Page 12 Photograph Tony Blair, the government initiative has
'dismally failed' (Omitted).

920116

