FT921-11834

FT  30 JAN 92 / CSCE to gain up to ten new members


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER, Diplomatic Editor


THE Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe is expected to expand
its membership significantly following the break-up of the Soviet Union.
However, the admission of Croatia and Slovenia has been blocked by the
Yugoslav federal government under the CSCE's unanimity rule. Their entry
should have been a formality following their recognition by the European
Community. For the moment, the two states will be given observer status,
with the possibility of becoming full members later.
The foreign ministers of the security forum - which groups 36 European
states and the US and Canada - are meeting in Prague today and tomorrow.
They are due to approve the entry of up to 10 members from the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS).
Russia has already taken over the Soviet Union's seat and the three Baltic
states have been admitted. In addition to Ukraine and Belarus, the new
members are expected to include several former Soviet republics in central
Asia. Kazakhstan, where substantial numbers of nuclear weapons formerly
controlled by the central government in Moscow are stationed, had not
applied for membership at the beginning of the week, but was expected to do
so before the Prague meeting started.
Officials from the other member states were particularly keen to bring
Kazakhstan under the CSCE umbrella, even though it has said it wants to
become a non-nuclear state. Within the organisation, it would be subject to
all the CSCE's arms control and conflict prevention commitments.
Some member states, however, have reservations about letting in some former
Soviet republics because they do not yet meet the CSCE's human rights and
military confidence-building criteria. Georgia, in the grip of a civil
conflict and not in the CIS, and Armenia and Azerbaijan, which are fighting
over the Nagorno-Karabakh enclave, fall into this category.
The expansion of the organisation to 48 members has underlined the
constraints placed on it by the consensus principle which governs all its
decision-making.
With the CSCE's impotence in the Yugoslav civil war in mind, the ministers
are expected to discuss how the unanimity rule could be amended to give the
organisation a more constructive role in preventing conflicts and ensuring
the security needs of its members.
They will also discuss ways of strengthening the Vienna-based Conflict
Prevention Centre, set up at the end of 1990, but which has not yet managed
to play a significant role.
It is symptomatic of the CSCE's disappointing record so far that the new
eastern European democracies such as Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia have
shown more interest in forging closer ties with their former western
adversaries within the new Nato Co-operation Council than in the further
development of the CSCE. Though Nato has not offered them full membership,
let alone mutual security guarantees, it appears to be seen as a more
effective guarantor of European peace than the CSCE.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920130

