FT924-11530

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (2): Main parties in trouble - The
Political Scene


   By QUENTIN PEEL


THEY call it politikverdrossenheit: it means being fed up with politicians.
It is of course by no means an exclusively German disease. But Germany
thinks it has got it so badly, it has invented a word for it.
The opinion polls suggest that all the major political parties are in
trouble. If there were an election tomorrow, none of the obvious
combinations would be able to form a majority government.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union (CDU), along with its
Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), is bumping along
with support at around 35 per cent.
The opposition Social Democrats (SPD), who should be profiting from their
disarray, are on just about the same. The Free Democrats, junior partners in
the ruling coalition, are stuck at around eight per cent, no more than the
environmentalist Greens.
In local elections over the past year, the largest percentage belonged to
those who did not vote at all. There is certainly a malaise in and with the
political establishment. In part it has been expressed in the rise of the
extreme right-wing, led by the Republicans, who have pushed their national
support above the five per cent cut-off point, which would allow them seats
in the Bundestag at the next elections. That is far below the sort of
support Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front enjoys in France, but in
Germany, any drift to the right instantly arouses fears of a Nazi revival.
The other expression of discontent showed up in the latest Berlin city
elections, where the PDS, the successors to East Germany's corrupt old
Communist party, pushed up their support to almost 30 per cent of the poll
in eastern districts: a clear reflection of eastern dissatisfaction with the
other 'western' parties. The CDU scored a miserable 14 per cent.
As yet, it is not as serious as some of the more angst-ridden commentators
(in Germany and abroad) would have us believe. It is a function both of the
profound social and economic upheavals related to German unification, and of
the mid-term blues of a parliament half-way through its electoral life. It
is a reflection, too, of the often apparently rudderless German coalition
system, which drifts towards consensus, aggravated by the style of
Chancellor Kohl, who tends to lead from behind.
The worry, however, is that the challenges of unification will put an
unprecedented strain on the still relatively youthful German post-war
democratic system. It almost certainly faces its greatest challenge yet to
cope with the divide that has opened up right through the newly united
country.
All the polls reveal dramatically different priorities between the citizens
of east and west, differences which the established parties are finding it
extremely difficult to bridge. Thus by far the most important issue for
easterners is unemployment: 66 per cent say so, as against just 17 per cent
in the west. As for the wealthy westerners, their greatest concern is the
influx of foreigners and asylum-seekers - the top worry for almost 50 per
cent, whereas the issue barely even figures in the east.
Mr Kohl's CDU has suffered most from the disillusion in the east. He won the
unification elections largely thanks to his optimism that the process would
be relatively swift and painless. Now he admits he got it wrong, but the
party is paying the penalty.
The SPD is paying the price for confusion on the asylum issue, albeit an
understandable confusion. Whatever the public propaganda says, Germany has
never welcomed would-be immigrants. Migrant workers were all right, and
former German emigrants to eastern Europe coming home are tolerated.
A handful of asylum-seekers fleeing genuine political persecution was
acceptable, but now the handful has turned to a flood of refugees from
poverty in the east and south. The numbers could reach 500,000 this year.
The SPD is terribly torn between its moral conscience, and the political
unpopularity of immigration at a time when housing is already short, taxes
have risen to pay for unification, and the economy is turning down.
The asylum issue is probably the one question which has caused most chaos
and confusion in the political establishment, and has certainly helped boost
the fortunes of the far right.
The coalition has been divided between the hard-line anti-immigration CSU
(which faces the most serious right-wing threat in Bavaria), and the liberal
FDP, which resisted calls for a change in the German constitution until the
last few weeks.
The political debate on asylum has run for months, if not years, inching
towards a suitable consensus, and leaving the common voter confused and
clearly alienated.
There have been equally interminable discussions on old age care (should it
be financed by universal contributions, or voluntarily?), on abortion
(because of the need to reconcile the excessively liberal East German law
with the illiberal western one), on state subsidies in all parts of the
German economy, and on whether German soldiers should serve outside the Nato
area (and if so, in a peace-keeping capacity, or also allowed to be
peace-making?).
Only now is the real debate coming to a head: how can and will Germany
finance the costs of unification, which could mean transferring up to
DM150bn a year to eastern Germany for a decade or more?
Even that has visibly split the ruling coalition in three ways, ranging from
the eastern CDU, which would raise taxes, through the CSU (led by Mr Theo
Waigel, the Finance Minister), which would fudge the issue through a
tax-free bond, to the FDP, which would let market forces rule (give or take
a little interest-rate subsidy).
No wonder the old ghost of a grand coalition between CDU and SPD suddenly
crept out of the closet during the summer. Key confidants of the
Chancellor's, like Mr Wolfgang Schauble, the parliamentary leader, and Mr
Volker Ruhe, the Defence Minister, appeared to be actively wooing the
opposition. But the Chancellor would, and will, have none of it. It would
only encourage the drift of voters to the political extremes, he believes.
Instead, he is looking for a next best alternative: a 'solidarity pact'
between German industry and trade unions, the government and opposition
(including all the SPD-ruled Lander).
In doing so, he is actually accepting an idea floated by Germany's five
economic institutes, and accepted by the SPD, a year ago. He has let the
situation deteriorate to a point where perhaps all sides will be forced to
accept a compromise - like a real wage freeze in exchange for higher
taxation - which might have been unthinkable one year ago.
That would be a classic Kohl manoeuvre to push forward the political
process. The risk is that he may have left it too late to stop the
disaffection of his voters, and too late to revive the east German economy
in time for the 1994 elections - and save his own political neck.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921026

