FT924-11545

FT  24 OCT 92 / Arts: Cop out on sex - It's all a con, Madonna


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


MADONNA has done it again. Louise Ciccone from Rochester, Michigan, a dumpy
drummer in a punk band, who from the first was determined to have more than
her alloted 15 minutes of fame, can add another notch to her game plan to
take over the world. Whatever you may think of her book Sex, published (and
sold out) this week is irrelevant. It has fulfilled the only two objectives
that matter: it has made a lot of money and it has kept the Madonna myth
spinning.
One day there will be a movie, something on the lines of Citizen Cane, or a
novel, a latter day The Great Gatsby, which attempts to get to grips with
Madonna. She has already projected herself out of the judgment of this age.
What other star would promote herself with photographs showing her
masturbating, participating in troilism, or walking naked down a Miami
freeway. Would Marlene have done it, or Marilyn?
Until now showbiz icons had always been careful to maintain a veil of
mystery, a modicum of self-respect. Madonna sets her own agenda, marketing
herself ever more outrageously. First the name - take that, Catholics. Then
the first hit, 'Like a Virgin' - role over, romantics. Then the early stage
act, when she tossed her knickers to the audience; then the latest, when she
became the untouchable harlot, despising the dropped jaws of her fans as she
writhed on a bed to synchronised orgasms. Now no one is really shocked by
her antics. We marvel away and wait for her to decide what will become
socially, artistically, and culturally acceptable.
The great achievement of Madonna is that she unites as fans so many die-hard
opposites. As a Woman on Top she appeals to feminists; as a free spirit who
seems to enjoy life she draws in young women who admire her chutzpah; as an
outrageous theatrical figure she satisfies gays; as a blonde she wraps up
the middle-aged men who dream nostalgically of Monroe; and the brown Mac
brigade for once feel that they are part of the human race. You appear odd
if you disdain Sex.
And yet it is all a con. In Sex Madonna dodges the issues. The neatly
packaged, loose-leafed, album basically consists of around 150 soft core
photographs, dressed up with Madonna's naive, somehow innocent, views on
sex. But she is reluctant to expose herself intellectually and pretends that
the words are those of a mythical swinger called Dita. In the end we can
wake up and find it was all a dream. That's a cop out, Madonna.
She also ducks the condom issue. Her preface contains a testimonial for safe
sex. Turn the page and you are back in a pre-AIDS world of unbridled instant
accessibility.
And then the photographs. Once you get past the frisson of surprise they are
really quite decorous. For all the provocation in the text the poses are
fudged. It is as simulated as a prostitute's 'hello, darling', as phoney as
the smile on a Sun Page Three girl. The scenarios are fantasy S & M, or gay,
or voyeuristic. The shot of her being gang raped by two skinheads on a
baseball court says it all: Madonna is giggling. There is no sweat, no pain,
no despair, no real privacy outraged.
The famous friends who have stripped for Madonna, like Naomi Campbell and
Vanilla Ice, look suitably embarrassed. Damn it, Vanilla Ice is actually
wearing his Y-fronts as he falteringly gropes the Lady. This is the Helmut
Newton school of photography, glamour shots for jaded sophisticates. It is
as sensual and as arousing as the Bluebell Girls.
And yet for millions of people what had been kept under the counter,
banished into the more closeted parts of the psyche, comes into the light,
into media respectability. Madonna is a DH Lawrence type figure, proclaiming
the sheer joy of sex. Some of her text is quite sensible. 'This book is
about sex' she begins. 'Sex is not love. Love is not sex. But the best of
both worlds is created when they come together'. After that love is given
its marching orders. She makes some sort of case for sado-masochism. 'The
definition of S & M is that you let someone hurt you who you know would
never hurt you.' Simplistic but worth discussing. Such insights are rare.
Much of the text is facile pornography designed to excite those parts not
reached by the pictures.
Sex is just another stage in Madonna's rather sad search to be sat upon. As
the public gives way before her ever more outrageous behaviour you can
almost sense her craving for discipline. It is a pity that such a talented
performer, such an intelligent art connoisseur, such a rich and potentially
philanthropic woman, should pursue such transient and ultimately specious
gratifications. There is only one way for Madonna to go; like many a
medieval libertine she will no doubt end up in some religious cloister,
finally living up up to her name.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

921024

