FT924-6281

FT  21 NOV 92 / Chicken Kiev comes home to roost: Dominic Lawson asks why
politicians are so reluctant to recognise what is going on in the world


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


A YEAR ago, the Ukraine seceded from the former Soviet Union. No one was
very surprised. Yet, barely three months before that President Bush had
travelled to the Ukrainian capital, Kiev, and announced publicly: 'God Bless
the Soviet Union.' He went on to deny the viability of independence for the
states of the USSR, calling it 'suicidal nationalism.' This is now known to
students of modern history as the 'Chicken Kiev' speech.
Perhaps Bush was being chicken, but it seems harsh to lumber him with sole
responsibility. He was, after all, only echoing the established view of the
State Department and, for that matter, that of Britain's Foreign Office.
Yet, almost every journalist who had spent time in the Ukraine and in other
parts of the Soviet Union had realised (and had written) that the empire was
on the verge of disintegration. And still the leader of the western world
called on God's support for the USSR; a doomed and artificial construction
of godless Bolshevism.
Psychiatrists would call this condition 'denial' - the tendency to refuse to
admit, even to yourself, something which deep down you know is happening. It
is all too common in the governing classes. In 1984 and 1985, I covered
conferences of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries for the FT.
It was obvious even to the inexperienced observer, which I was, that OPEC
had ceased to exist as an effective cartel. The oil market had become
deregulated and over-supplied, with the price set by traders speculating
daily on a vast scale. Yet, the British government continued to authorise
the British National Oil Corporation to buy North Sea crude at the defunct
Opec price. The result was that the British taxpayer lost about Pounds 100m.
This, admittedly, was a far smaller sum than the Treasury and the Bank of
England lost last summer in an attempt to prop up sterling against the
D-mark - something which, once again, almost every trader and outside
commentator knew was hopeless.
Now, we are going through the same nonsense over the Maastricht treaty. Last
week, the government made available to every home in the land a
well-produced little booklet called Britain in Europe, designed to persuade
us that it is right to sign our names to the treaty. This is, of course, a
misleading bit of flummery which omits to quote from those parts of the
accord which speak of 'a common foreign and security policy' for the EC. Nor
does it quote the bit about 'the eventual framing of a common defence
policy' (anyone for national service?)
But none of that matters any more. All this sophistry, and postage is a
waste of effort. Everybody knows that the Maastricht treaty is dead. Not
just technically dead because it has been rejected by one of the member
states, Denmark. But dead in spirit because the tide of opinion in western
Europe has turned against Brussels federalism in much the same way that
public opinion in the Ukraine turned against Muscovite federalism.
It is not just the people of France, the country most wedded to the European
ideal, who are divided deeply on the treaty. The German people do not want
monetary union, least of all at the price the European Commission's
president, Jacques Delors, wants them to pay through the euphemistically
named cohesion fund. And what the German people do not want, the EC does not
do.
Maastricht is, as comedian John Cleese would say, an ex-treaty. Dead.
Deceased. It is no more. And yet, the politicians cannot admit the obvious.
They are still in denial over Maastricht.
It is perhaps worth guessing the reasons for this damaging and recurring
condition among politicians. I blame the civil servants, who are supposed to
be the experts. Like all experts, they have studied their subjects for many
years. Over those years, they have built up a wonderful network of contacts
who tell them what is going on.
In the former Soviet Union, of course, the contacts would have been members
of the Communist party. In Brussels, the contacts will be long-time
apparatchiks of the Commission. What do such people stand for? The status
quo, long after the ante has been upped. The received wisdom, long after it
has ceased to become wise.
What do bureaucrats hate? Change, which renders their knowledge
anachronistic, their contact books useless. What they love above all is
order. Now they have invented something called the New World Order.
Eventually they even told George Bush. Too late, as usual.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

921121

