FT923-15612

FT  01 JUL 92 / US backs Israeli stance on peace talks


   By HUGH CARNEGY


MR James Baker, the US secretary of state, last night gave immediate and
enthusiastic backing to a call by Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime
minister-elect, for Israel and the Arabs to start continuous negotiations in
Middle East peace talks originally launched last October.
'We were very pleased to see the statement by Mr Rabin saying let's engage
and let's stay engaged and let's get something done. We were very pleased to
see that and we would like to do what we can to assist in that effort,' Mr
Baker said in Washington.
His comments, made within a few hours of Mr Rabin's statement, were the
clearest expression yet by the Bush administration of its satisfaction over
the result of last week's general election.
They followed remarks by President George Bush on Monday saying he looked
forward to working with the new government, expected to be in place by
mid-July.
Washington had grown increasingly frustrated by Mr Yitzhak Shamir's
footdragging approach to the Arab-Israeli talks, which had gone through five
rounds of stop-start negotiations without achieving significant progress.
'We must move now to have a continuous negotiation. Let's sit down, not
every four, five or six weeks. Let's find out, can it be achieved or not,'
Mr Rabin said in Jerusalem.
The main talks involve separate negotiations between Israel and Syria,
Israel and Lebanon, Israel and Jordan and Israel and the Palestinians.
Mr Rabin wants to concentrate on the latter, aiming to reach an interim
agreement on Palestinian self-rule - which will precede talks on the final
status of the occupied territories - within nine months.
Palestinians have welcomed Mr Rabin's approach. But they are likely to be
unsettled by the prospect of the US and Israel, having mended their
differences, moving closely together on the peace talks.
Mr Rabin's offer of significant self-rule under the interim agreement will
test their preparedness to accept less than complete independence.
'We expect to find out to what extent the Palestinian delegation from the
territories is ready to negotiate seriously,' Mr Rabin said.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

