FT924-5987

FT  24 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Heseltine hopeful on trade deal


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


FRANCE is likely to acquiesce to a wider agreement further liberalising
world trade although it objects to the deal reached by the European
Community and the US on subsidised food exports, Mr Michael Heseltine, the
trade and industry secretary, suggested in the Commons yesterday.
In an optimistic assessment of the prospects for concluding a fresh
agreement under Gatt (general agreement on tariffs and trade) he said: 'I
believe it is possible to complete the negotiations this year.'
Mr Heseltine maintained that, in the round, France stood to gain as much as
the other members of the EC from new trading opportunities likely to result
from world output increasing by perhaps Dollars 200bn (Pounds 131.5bn) a
year.
He cast doubt on whether a situation could arise in which the veto provided
by the EC's so-called Luxembourg compromise would be available to France.
Mr Heseltine confirmed that it was for the European Commission, headed by Mr
Jacques Delors, to conduct any discussions within the EC on whether it had
held to its negotiating remit in agreeing to new limits on agricultural
production.
He emphasised that the Commission believed it had discharged its remit, and
insisted: 'It is not for individual countries within the Community to
frustrate that position.'
Mr Paul Channon, Tory MP for Southend West and a former trade secretary,
asked if a final agreement achieved through Gatt would be subject to
majority voting by the EC council of ministers. He also claimed that the
Luxembourg compromise was abolished in 1983.
Mr Heseltine replied that the European Commission was empowered to take up
negotiations with the Gatt authorities in Geneva.
If and when a satisfactory outcome was achieved, it would be for the council
of ministers to decide 'whether or not that agreement, taken in the round,
is acceptable'.
He added: 'It is much to be questioned whether the Luxembourg compromise
would be relevant in such circumstances.'
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, emphasised that
France would be a net beneficiary of any new Gatt agreement.
French industry stood to gain more than the amount its farmers stood to
lose, and the French government should be urged not to base its judgment on
the single issue of farm subsidies.
Mr Heseltine told MPs concerned about the position of the textile industry
that it was anticipated that there would be some form of a 'carry-over
agreement' for the Multi-Fibre Arrangement due to expire at the end of the
year. A draft Gatt agreement envisaged a 10-year transitional period before
the MFA was phased out.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921124

