FT921-11752

FT  30 JAN 92 / International Company News: A shake-out for S African
banking - The planned merger of ABSA with Bankorp


   By PHILIP GAWITH


THE decision by ABSA and Bankorp to merge, forming a giant South African
bank with assets of over R80bn (Dollars 28.7bn), brings to a head an
important shake-out in the country's banking sector, whose ramifications
will affect the entire sector and perhaps beyond.
The deal has been welcomed because it removes Bankorp, the weakest of the
big five banks in South Africa, from the sector without making ABSA
excessively powerful.
However, ABSA is only 10 months old, the product of a complicated merger
last year between United, Allied, Volkskas and part of the Sage group, and
there are question marks over whether this earlier deal has settled down
well enough to justify taking over Bankorp, a banking group with its fair
share of troubles.
For instance, Mr Alan McConnochie, banking analyst at Ed Hern, Rudolph, the
stockbroker, says he believes that Allied's operations have been well
integrated into ABSA. But he questions whether the rationalisation of
Volkskas's operations into the group has has even started.
However, he notes three reasons which explain the timing of the deal: the
availability of a large assessed tax loss at Bankorp; a better product mix
which the deal gives; and the fact that it takes the pressure off volume
growth at a time when slow South African money supply growth is putting
banks under pressure.
While the latest deal may cause ABSA difficulties in absorbing all its
disparate parts, there is no doubt it leaves the industry in a healthier
state. Volkskas and Bankorp were always lame ducks in the sector, ripe for
the picking when stricter capital adequacy requirements and the need to make
expensive computer hardware pay through high volumes brought pressures for
rationalisation.
Further rationalisation in the South African banking sector among the larger
players, at least in the short term, is seen as now unlikely.
While competitors will comfort themselves with the thought that ABSA will be
heavily weighed down in the short term by merger baggage, they will not be
so happy about the longer term. Mr McConnochie says that if ABSA succeeds in
achieving cost rationalisation through economies of scale, then it will be
able to put a lot of pressure on competitors to get their costs down.
Particularly upset by the merger will be Stanbic, which can no longer claim
it is the country's top bank. When ABSA was formed, it overtook Stanbic in
terms of assets - R53bn against Stanbic's R48bn. But Stanbic was still able
to claim that it was larger in terms of shareholders' funds and by market
capitalisation.
This has now changed. ABSA's shareholders' funds are R4.4bn, against R3.3bn
at Stanbic, while its market capitalisation of R6.5bn compares with
Stanbic's R5.9bn.
There were rumours in the market earlier this week that when Stanbic got
wind of the deal, it went to the Reserve Bank of South Africa and sought to
have it stopped. The Competition Board, however, has given the deal the
go-ahead, and there does not seem much reason to dispute its reasoning.
Mr Richard Jesse, banking analyst at Martin and Co, the stockbroker, says
that the main effects of the deal, in terms of market share, are that it
lifts ABSA from 15 to 32 per cent of the hire purchase market and from 11 to
31 per cent of the leasing market. It already had 32 per cent of the home
loans market. He notes that none of these figures could be described as
excessive market concentration.
The parties which have most to be pleased about are Sanlam and Sankorp which
have ploughed large sums into Bankorp, often by way of accepting scrip
dividends in lieu of cash to help the bank through its difficulties.
Another market rumour was that an investigation of the Bankorp balance
sheet, to coincide with the release of its December results, would reveal
that the bank may have needed a further R1bn capital injection. This would
have been an unacceptable prospect for Sankorp, the industrial arm of the
Sanlam group, which already held 86 per cent of Bankorp's equity. As a
result of the ABSA/Bankorp merger, Sanlam's stake drops to 21 per cent of
the enlarged ABSA.
Mr Jesse says the benefits ABSA receives from the deal are clear: not only
has it increased market share in the important leasing and hire purchase
areas, where it was underweighted relative to its size, but the sheer size
of the new group will confer considerable economies of scale.
Against this must be weighed the prospect of ABSA buckling under the strain
of a second merger, not to mention possible problems it is picking up at
Trust Bank, Bankorp's retail arm. Although Mr Piet Liebenberg, Bankorp's
chairman, has been sweeping a new broom through the group for 18 months,
analysts believe there remain numerous bad apples to be discovered.
Mr Liebenberg lent support to this view in his most recent chairman's
statement when he commented pessimistically: 'Fully restoring the
profitability and professional management capabilities at all levels within
the group. . . will still take several years to complete.'
ABSA is to some extent protected here by a clause which says the R1.3bn
price ABSA is paying for all of Bankorp's equity is subject to a due
diligence investigation still to be completed.
One non-banking side of the deal raises the question, as yet unanswered, as
to the co-operation between Sanlam and Rembrandt, the two giants of
Afrikaans business which have not always been best of friends. Together they
wield financial clout to rival the giant Anglo American group.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920130

