FT924-909

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (12): A decade of
changes - Food industry


   By RAY BASHFORD


STROLL around any of Tokyo's supermarkets for a taste of the changes which
have reshaped the Japanese food industry during the past decade. On display
along the wide aisles are the product, packaging and marketing styles that
reflect the need for less complicated foods in a nation of busy urban
dwellers.
The key social change which has altered the country's food-buying habits is
the growth of the female workforce. Its members find less time to look after
the house and children as well as prepare the family dinner which, 10 years
ago, would have typically consisted of four or five dishes.
In their pursuit of time-saving convenience food, Japanese shoppers have
not, however, forsaken traditional delicacies. But they have become more
flexible in their eating habits, with western and Asian cuisines finding
increasing favour - albeit often in the frozen or pre-prepared form.
McDonald's hamburgers and Kentucky Fried Chicken outlets proliferate.
However, as several international food companies which have tried to muscle
in with a distinctive European or US brand have learned to their cost, there
can be strong resistance to foreign tastes.
The Seiyu group's FamilyMart branch in the bustling Ikebukuro district is a
prime example of how traditional Japanese eating habits can be wed with the
need for pre-prepared, easy-to-carry and easy-to-prepare food.
To the side of the store's main shopping floor are three rooms separately
preparing raw fish, meats and vegetables. These can be bought individually
in cellophane-covered plastic trays or in a pre-prepared lunch box which
brings together all three elements.
It is this kind of merchandising which has sponsored a sharp decline in the
importance of small food retailers. Supermarkets take more than 50 per cent
of food and beverage sales - almost double the figure of a decade ago -
while small retailers have registered a corresponding decline.
The rise of the supermarket concept is contributing to an expected
rationalisation in the highly-fragmented food industry in Japan. The
supermarkets' concentrated buying power is forcing many small food
manufacturers to cut prices which in turn is reducing already tight profit
margins. The recession is also making the going tougher.
Although there are several notable exceptions, the Japanese food company
typically relies heavily on one area of the market and perhaps even one
product. Such examples are Kikkoman in the soy sauce area, Snow Brand in the
milk products sector, and Nipponham and Taiyo Fisheries.
Many people in the industry expect to see a progressive move towards the
creation of food conglomerates possessing broader product ranges and a
stronger emphasis on brands.
'I would expect to see a gradual consolidation of the industry over the next
10 years,' says Anne Wall-Smith, an analyst at Schroders Securities in
Tokyo. 'Many companies are just too small to survive, especially if times
become tougher.'
Ajinomoto has, during its 82-year history, plotted a different course to
most and today it is very similar to a European or US brand-orientated
processed and frozen foods company. Its structure has been built on joint
ventures with several leading US foods groups including CPC, Kraft General
Foods and Kellogg.
Ajinomoto and Calpis Food Industry, another Japanese group, earlier this
month announced the formation of a joint venture with BSN, the big French
food company, to make and sell cheese yoghurt and desserts - an expanding
area of the market. The joint venture, capitalised at Y1.4bn, aims for
annual sales of Y15bn next year.
Most leading foreign food companies have found that the only way to break
into the Japanese market is through joint ventures such as this. An
exception is Nestle, which is rated by most analysts as the second-biggest
foods group in Japan, in terms of sales. Its breakthrough came with the
launch several decades ago of the instant coffee. Nestle still controls 80
per cent of this market but has branched out into a wide range of products.
In recent years the local companies have altered their product mix with
consistent regularity to keep pace with swings in consumer preferences.
Although they are a long way from adopting a western diet, the Japanese will
happily eat bread rather than rice for breakfast. Another important change
is the rise in the importance of meat which has accompanied greater
affluence and tighter pricing. This development has kept the rate of fish
consumption flat.
Meat consumption has been on a steep incline for the past 30 years. The
average annual per capita consumption of meat in 1990 was 28.6kg. This was
up 6kg from the same figure a decade ago and compares with 9.2kg in 1965.
According to 1990 figures from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), US consumption was 120kg, followed by France
(109.4kg) and Germany (104kg).
To cope with this growing demand for meat, imports have risen sharply under
incessant pressure from the US and Australia for greater access to the
market. Tariffs are set to fall by a further 10 percentage points to 50 per
cent in April next year which could help to restrain prices.
It may come too late, however, for many of the 40 companies involved in raw
meat packaging and distribution. A Tokyo food analyst forecasts that only 10
groups will survive, with the small groups which jumped in as the process of
deregulation of the industry began, the main casualties.
As well as flat demand for fish, Japan is having increasing difficulty
roaming the world's main fishing areas as concern mounts about over-fishing.
In 1990, per capita consumption stood at 37.1kg; up only 1.3kg over the
decade.
A more telling example of how eating habits have changed comes from figures
on rice consumption. After a steady decline over the past 30 years, the
Japanese in 1990 ate an average 70kg of rice a head against 78.9kg in 1980.
A growing fondness for bread - and meals less based around a bowl of rice -
account for this change.
Frozen foods have met strong acceptance from Japanese consumers despite some
mild concern, within a nation that for a long time has placed great store in
the importance of natural food, that they may not not carry the same
nutritional value.
Much of the frozen food advertising stresses its high quality food values.
Housewives, according to two female Tokyo food company analysts, initially
felt 'guilty' about giving their family frozen foods because they felt they
were falling down on their responsibility of cooking for the family.
These concerns have subsided and this is reflected in the sales growth of
frozen foods. During the 1980s, the frozen foods market had a compound
growth rate of 6.2 per cent and judging by indications in the past 18
months, this rate will accelerate. In the 10 years to the end of 1990, total
consumption of frozen foods increased by 71 per cent to slightly over 1bn
tonnes.
Nichirei Corporation, a leading frozen and processed foods group, is
encouraged by international comparisons. France, which has one of the lower
European rates, consumed an average of 23.7kg a head in 1990, compared with
10.8kg in Japan. The company forecasts that local consumption will reach the
1990 French level in five to six years.
The sector is dominated by four groups; Nichirei (19 per cent of the
market), Nippon Fishery (11 per cent), Katokichi (10.6 per cent) and
Ajinomoto (9.6 per cent).
The Japanese beverages market has also undergone a period of rapid change as
new products enter the market to meet changing consumer tastes and
purchasing strengths.
The soft drinks market has had a compound growth rate of almost 7 per cent
over the past decade with fruit and coffee drinks leading the way.
Reflecting growing health awareness, mineral waters have become an
outstanding segment of the beverages market. In 1990, sales rose 48.5 per
cent and in 1991 by 62.7 per cent as local brands battled with the arrival
of French imports for shares in what is potentially a huge market.
Beer sales show a steady rise while sake sales in the four years to the end
of 1990 were marginally down. Whisky consumption has been cut by the
generally tighter economic situation and international imports have been
especially hit by the narrowing in the difference between their product and
the local equivalent.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921221

