FT922-13267

FT  13 APR 92 / Japanese Bonds: Fears eased as Nikkei bounces back


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


FEARS of a 'flight from Tokyo', triggered by the recent downswing in
Japanese share prices, were eased by last week's 7 per cent rebound of the
Nikkei stock average.
Japanese bond prices, which were previously depressed by the turmoil in the
Tokyo stock market and rumours of leading overseas investors pulling funds
from Tokyo's financial markets, finally rebounded, ending the week on a
positive note.
After an uneventful March, when financial markets waited for the Bank of
Japan to cut the official discount rate, the bond market saw volatile
movements on low volumes.
Markets tumbled as dealers and investors dismissed the emergency economic
stimulus package, announced on March 31, as ineffective. The yield on the
10-year benchmark bond surged by 39 basis points during the week, the
largest since the Gulf war in August 1990.
The rate cut at the beginning of this month by 75 basis points to 3.75 per
cent, was seen as too late. Some market participants were discouraged, as
the size of the cut suggested the Bank would not consider a further cut
shortly.
However, the gloom and doom in the market seems to have been overdone. 'The
sell-off was a bizarre blip,' said Mr Robert Feldman of Salomon Brothers in
Tokyo. With continued declines in inflation and a slowing economy, Mr
Feldman believes simple long-term government bond yields will fall to around
4.85 per cent in the next few months.
With the government's economic emergency package, which includes
frontloading of 75 per cent of the government's public works projects for
this fiscal year ending March 1993 into the first half of the financial
year, and frontloading capital investments of power companies and other
public utilities, some Y3,000bn of fiscal spending has been moved up into
the first half. As with previous economic stimulus packages, a supplementary
public spending package of around Y5,000bn is expected by the middle of the
year.
Fiscal stimulus could support the bond market, giving participants
confidence in a recovery, allowing companies facing financial difficulties
to solve problems through earnings growth, rather than asset liquidation.
Additional bond issues to fund the supplementary budget is expected to be
minimal. Mr Marshall Gittler at UBS Phillips & Drew in Tokyo reckons the
government would need to issue Y1,700bn in bonds.
However, a long queue of companies waiting to issue straight bond issues
will be an adverse factor. With financing through equity-linked issues
virtually impossible due to the stock market decline, corporations, which in
the next 18 months face redemptions of up to Dollars 111bn in equity-linked
paper raised through Euro markets, are desperate for funds.
With the government ready to allow companies to issue short-term bonds of
under five years, and floating-rate bonds, an increasing number of
corporations are expected to dip into the straight bond market.
Some of the over-supply concerns will be alleviated by an expected increase
in demand. Institutional investors will avert risks by shifting funds into
the bond market.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920413

