FT922-7290

FT  19 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Privatisation plus for BR


IT IS a small step towards the privatisation of British Rail, but last
week's introduction of privately-operated carriages on BR's night trains
between London and Aberdeen is significant in at least two respects.
The obvious one is that this is the first time since the nationalisation of
the railways in 1948 that a private company has been allowed to break BR's
monopoly on the operation of regular passenger services.
But perhaps more important, it exposes the fallacy of the argument that
privatisation necessarily implies reductions in railway services as
private-sector companies trim back loss-making operations to a profitable
core.
In this case, the reverse has happened. BR had been about to axe the
seat-only carriages on its London-Aberdeen sleeper trains because not enough
people were using them. Now, a private bus company called Stagecoach,
convinced that it can fill the empty seats, is backing its hunch by
investing Pounds 1m a year in taking over the operation of the carriages.
Result: the provision of a rail service which, under state ownership, would
have ceased to exist.
Sometime before parliament breaks up for the summer, this hesitant start
should be followed by a white paper setting out the government's plans for
stimulating private sector involvement in the railways on a far larger
scale.
Details are still hazy, but the framework is clear. After months of
embarrassing bickering in the run-up to the general election, ministers have
at last settled on a cautious approach: a form of creeping denationalisation
rather than any 'big bang' break-up and sale of the network.
Franchised trains
Although the freight and parcels operations are to be sold off, along with
the commercially attractive stations, the track network and all the
passenger services will stay in BR's ownership. But private companies will
be allowed to run their own trains on BR's tracks, and the operation of BR's
passenger trains will gradually be franchised to the private sector.
Eventually, those franchises may be converted to outright sales, reducing
BR's role to that of a state-owned track authority.
Insofar as the first priority of privatisation should be to give Britons a
better railway, this formula represents a triumph of sanity over dogma. BR
is so vast, so complex, and above all, so unprofitable that any 'big bang'
break-up and sale of the railways would have been fraught with risks of
chaos and possible cuts. It is by no means clear, in any case, that the
government would have found any buyers.
Reduced risk
Under the current, less ambitious proposals, the risks are vastly reduced.
The private sector has so far shown little enthusiasm for assuming the
massive costs involved in the ownership and operation of track
infrastructure. The government's decision to leave responsibility for the
tracks with BR has resulted in private sector companies like Stagecoach
exploring opportunities to providenew train services or to take over and
improve existing ones.
Conceivably, the result might be that rail plays a far more prominent role
in feeding the nation's insatiable demand for more and better transport, to
the greater benefit of all. But if that desirable objective is to be
achieved, one crucial condition will need to be satisfied: that the price
charged to private sector operators for the use of the tracks is competitive
with that charged to private sector users of the roads.
At present, the two modes are in disequilibrium because users of the
railways have to pay for the use of the track infrastructure while roads are
free at the point of use. The result is that rail can rarely compete with
road on price.
If the rail privatisation process is to achieve its full potential, this
disequilibrium must be redressed. Privatisation will never succeed if users
of state-owned railway tracks endure charges while users of state-owned
roads go free. The government must either face the need for a system of
charging road users the full social costs of road use, perhaps through some
kind of electronic pay-as-you-go system, or make the use of the railway
tracks free. If it does neither, railway privatisation will be an
opportunity missed.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920519

