FT921-652

FT  27 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Chelsea chief buys Cabra stake


   By JANE FULLER


MR KEN BATES, chairman of Chelsea Football Club, has bought a 27 per cent
stake in Cabra Estates, the club's heavily indebted landlord.
The purchase, for about Pounds 3m, from Mr Ashraf Marwan, an Egyptian
financier, is Mr Bates's latest line of attack as Chelsea struggles to avoid
eviction from Stamford Bridge, its London ground.
Mr Bates is now the largest shareholder in Cabra Estates, with which he has
been in dispute for most of the three years since Cabra took over Marler
Estates.
He is understood to have paid between 11p and 12p a share for the stake,
valuing Cabra at about Pounds 11m, less than half the Pounds 22.85m price
recently put on Stamford Bridge by an independent valuer.
Cabra also owns Fulham FC's Craven Cottage ground and a construction company
in the Republic of Ireland, but its debts have grown to more than Pounds 50m
 -something of a deterrent to a bid. The shares jumped 2p to 9p yesterday.
The property company reiterated yesterday that it was still determined to
force Chelsea to pay the Pounds 22.85m for the ground, or evict it. It
recently won a High Court order saying that Chelsea should fulfil a contract
to pay the sum. This has gone to appeal.
Mr Bates is using his new position as a major shareholder to call for an
extraordinary meeting. The agenda will probably include the suggestion that
Mr John Duggan be ousted as Cabra's chairman, as well as a question about
the future of Stamford Bridge. Mr Duggan said the board would probably meet
Mr Bates, who had requested a seat on it.
Mr Marwan said yesterday he had tried to encourage the two sides to find an
amicable solution. 'But this was difficult, so I decided to sell Mr Bates
the shares.'
The recorded message on Chelsea's Clubcall telephone line described the
purchase of the stake as 'the biggest transfer of all'. It also got the
decimal point in the wrong place over the amount spent, saying it was Pounds
29m.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920327

