FT921-14271

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Company News: AMR signals better year for
airlines


   By NIKKI TAIT


   NEW YORK


AMERICAN Airlines, one of the largest US carriers, yesterday sparked a rally
in US airline stocks when its parent company, AMR, accompanied news of a net
Dollars 239.9m loss in 1991 with suggestions that ticket prices and yields
are finally firming.
Mr Michael Durham, finance director, said that bookings so far this year had
been 'a bit softer than expected', but that domestic yields were currently
'a bit better' than AMR had anticipated. He added that the mix of lower
interest rates and lower fuel prices should help significantly. AMR is
currently paying around 60 cents a gallon for jet fuel, compared with 82.5
cents a year ago.
The carrier, which traditionally kicks off the US industry's reporting
season, had warned that it would probably make losses in the fourth quarter
and 1991 overall, and analysts' expectations had been pitched accordingly.
In the event, AMR's after-tax deficit for the final three months totalled
Dollars 124.9m, or Dollars 1.83 a share.
This figure, however, included an aggregate Dollars 59.6m charge for the
write-down in value of certain Boeing 737 and 747SP jets, which are to be
retired soon, plus some commuter aircraft. At the operating level, AMR
showed a much smaller fourth-quarter loss of Dollars 41.4m, and a tiny
Dollars 5m profit for the year. Operating revenues were Dollars 3.4bn in the
final three months and Dollars 12.9bn for 1991 overall.
Mr Durham suggested that the figures were at the upper end of market
expectations - largely thanks to a sharper-than-expected fall in fuel prices
in December and a strong Christmas week. He added that, in the balance
between yields and load factor, American had tended to push for the former.
The fourth-quarter yield rose 2.3 per cent to 13.37 cents, while the load
factor edged down from 60 per cent to 59.3 per cent.
Comparisons with the previous year are heavily distorted by the impact of
the Gulf war and the associated rise in fuel prices. This savaged airline
profits in late-1990, and AMR itself made a fourth-quarter operating loss of
Dollars 245.1m.
Mr Bob Crandall, AMR chairman and one of most gloomy voices in the industry
over the 18 months, made no excuses for the 1991 figures, describing them as
'terrible'. 'The best thing you can say about last year is that it's over,'
he said.
But even he sounded a much more optimistic note about current trends. 'In
recent weeks, we have been encouraged by the downward trend in fuel prices
and by some modest indications that some semblance of rationality may be
returning to the airline pricing environment,' he said.
Many of the US airline industry's problems have stemmed from cut-throat
discounting in the domestic market, with financially-troubled carriers
proving particularly aggressive. During 1991, however, three big carriers
ceased operations and, although some bankrupt or defaulting airlines remain
in business, industry observers have noted some firming of domestic prices
recently.
On Wall Street, AMR's own shares rallied by Dollars 2 3/8 at Dollars 74 1/4.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920116

