FT922-462

FT  27 JUN 92 / Finance & the Family: Pension purchase fears - Company
pension managers are becoming worried by the sales of inappropriate personal
schemes


   By BARBARA ELLIS


Pension fund managers fear that evidence of Robert Maxwell's raids on
pension schemes of companies under his control is being used to induce
people, particularly those who have just been made redundant, into mistaken
purchases of personal pensions.
Company scheme managers feel frustrated by the present rules which prevent
them from advising members but have allowed thousands of inappropriate sales
to take place.
The harm done may not be apparent for some years, but they say that
disciplinary action by Lautro (Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory
Organisation) now under way will not address this basic flaw.
Paul Trickett, head of pensions at the Mineworkers' Pension Scheme, said
some 12,000 of the 16,000 miners leaving the industry last year had
transferred into personal pensions. The scheme had paid out Pounds 400m in
transfers, implying around Pounds 30m worth of sales commission.
Trickett said a number of insurance companies had recruited former miners as
salesmen, sending them to sell pensions to former workmates after just two
weeks' training.
'We get relatively elderly men - some over 55 - who would have had a
guaranteed indexed pension for life and for their widows with the Miners'
Pension Scheme. They transfer out, and that has got to be poor advice,' he
said.
Trickett added that in some cases miners still working had left the scheme
to take out rebate-only pensions without life insurance cover.
'It cannot be best advice for someone in the mining industry to have no
death-in-service or disability benefits,' he said.
Barred by the Financial Services Act from giving advice to members on
transfers, the miners' scheme is considering arranging free access to
independent advice on a non-commission basis.
The scheme provides all leavers with a leaflet setting out questions that
pension salesmen should be asked.
Until recently, the leaflet included a statement which, the scheme
suggested, salesmen should be asked to sign, confirming that in respect of
the cash equivalent transfer value from the MPS, the pension plan supplied
would provide 'no less benefit than you would have been entitled to had you
kept your benefits with the Miners Pension Scheme.'
'No personal pension provider could sign that,' said Steve Conley, pension
product manager at Refuge, who acknowledged that salesmen's failure to sign
had put a brake on sales to former miners. However, the Miners' Pension
Scheme had dropped the statement from its latest leaflet, partly because
nobody ever signed it.
Mark Adams, of Rank Xerox pensions, said that the group had published a
booklet specifically dealing with pension transfers after becoming concerned
at seeing members with deferred pensions withdrawing substantial amounts of
capital when this was really not appropriate.
The Rank Xerox booklet explains that the group cannot give advice on
transfer decisions. It suggests that scheme members should 'if necessary
consult a financial adviser who will be able to give . . . objective
advice'. But Adams expressed doubts about some brokers claiming to be
independent but apparently putting 99 per cent of their business through one
company.
'There are very few cases you can salvage,' he said. 'It seems when people
talk to brokers all we get is the request when the member has already signed
a transfer form.'
At Pilkington, Robert Neate, the group pensions manager, said that
salesmen's attempts to persuade early leavers out of the scheme seemed
particularly cut-throat.
He recalled a battle with a large assurance company over an advertisement
run earlier this year in the legal and public notices sections of local St
Helens papers.
'ATTENTION All past employees of Pilkingtons, UG Glass, Cromptons, Bury
Times, NHS, Fords, Marks & Spencer and any other major company whether you
are currently employed or unemployed,' read the advertisement. 'Call Eric,
it could be to your financial advantage.'
Requests for transfers into the personal pensions scheme resulted, but quite
a few were from people already receiving Pilkington pensions, while other
were from former employees who had taken cash refunds in the days before
preservation of benefits.
Neate pointed out that under the Financial Services Act, although he could
give generic advice, he would be committing an offence to recommend the
products of A over B.
'It seems some of the big pensions companies do not see themselves as bound
in this way when perhaps they should,' he said. 'They do not allow lack of
knowledge of our schemes to stand in their way when they trawl for
business.'
'Whatever the theory underlying the financial services legislation, too
often the fact is that the member's or former member's interests are
forgotten when there are commissions to be had,' said Neate, who succeeded
in getting the advertisement withdrawn only after threatening to inform both
Lautro and the FT.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920627

