FT923-6615

FT  22 AUG 92 / Golf: It's time to quit, Jack - The terminal decline of a
sporting legend


   By JOHN HOPKINS


IT WAS sad to watch Jack Nicklaus trudging up the 18th fairway in the second
round of the US PGA championship in St Louis. Shoulders hunched slightly,
head forward, plucking at the front of his shirt in that distinctive way of
his, he raised his right arm to acknowledge the applause of his supporters.
But he had missed the cut - the guillotine that falls after 36 holes to
halve the number of competitors. It meant that, for the first time, he had
bowed out at the halfway stage in three of a season's four major
championships. He looked a shadow of the golfer he was. It was one major
tournament too many.
It was not unexpected, though. One reporter wrote off Nicklaus nearly 15
years ago. When taxed about it, he replied, blithely: 'I was right. I just
beat the embargo, that's all.'
After his stunning victory in the 1986 US Masters, Nicklaus himself said:
'If I was smart, I would stop now. The trouble is, I am not smart.'
So he played on. The man relished the thrill of winning a major title at the
age of 46. But that was the moment he should have called it a day. He should
have said then that he no longer considered himself competitive and was
going to concentrate on preparing for the seniors' tour, for which he became
eligible in 1990, as well as on his family and his golf course design
business.
It is hard to know when to stop. Golf makes relatively few physical demands
but it does require a high degree of competitiveness. Nicklaus no longer has
that; nor can he devote the time required to achieve it.
Arnold Palmer did not know when to stop. He played in the PGA in St Louis as
well, looking - frankly - an old man. But then, he is 62 and has a hearing
aid in each ear.
His 83 was his worst round in any of the 35 consecutive PGA championships in
which he has competed since the late 1950s. After two rounds, Palmer was 20
over par.
Even now, Nicklaus on a golf course is a far more acceptable sporting sight
than was boxer Muhammad Ali at the end as he struggled towards one more big
pay-day; or Bjorn Borg, imagining he could make a comeback in the tennis
big-time. But even Nicklaus is mortal. He cannot see very far. He hardly
practises. He plays rarely.
Besides, by devoting almost all his time to his business interests he has,
effectively, announced his retirement. Two years ago, he admitted as much as
a black limousine sped through the Scottish dusk, whisking him from one of
his golf courses to another.
'I have got 73 courses in play around the world,' he told me then. 'I have
more than 200 employees I am responsible for. I cannot carry on much longer
playing golf, being a father and doing all this. I have to decide.'
I want to remember Nicklaus as the thrilling player he was: one of the
longest, straightest hitters the game has seen; a man meticulous in his
attention to detail; and one who not only won 20 major titles but came
second in 19 more, including seven Opens.
His arrival in the game was startling. He stood a hair less than 6 ft and
weighed 15 1/2 stone. As a result, he was nicknamed Blob-O.
He had a high-pitched voice and a crew-cut and hit the ball great distances
 -as long as John Daly now. He was a wonderful putter. As an amateur in the
1960 US Open, Nicklaus led after 66 holes before being overtaken by Palmer.
It was the start of a career that has been unmatched. No one else has played
so well for so long - not Harry Vardon at the turn of the century, Bobby
Jones in the 1920s, Ben Hogan, Sam Snead or Palmer. Frankly, I doubt if
anyone will ever play as well for so long, and I am sure no one will ever
get close to matching his record.
The Open championship next year is to be held at Royal St George's,
Sandwich, Kent. Nicklaus dislikes this course more than any other of those
that make up the roster of Open venues. It could be a good one for him to
miss. Farewell, Jack. Spare us further embarrassment.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920822

