FT923-9705

FT  04 AUG 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Learning lessons from the
Olympics - Diane Summers reports on new initiatives in local economic
development


   By DIANE SUMMERS


It is almost impossible to run a business without tripping over countless
agencies intent on stimulating local economic development and providing
business support.
The government's Urban Regeneration Agency is the latest body to join the
list of statutory, voluntary and private sector organisations attempting to
get in on the act. The problem is that there is often little co-ordination
between these bodies and, on occasions, there is even hostility and wasteful
competition.
Michael Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade, highlighted the problem
when he addressed a conference of Training and Enterprise Council leaders.
The country could no longer afford 'turf battles' between the bodies, he
said.
Heseltine then promptly announced another addition to the scene - a network
of 'first-stop shops', eventually to be 200-strong, which will provide
business support. The first shops are not likely to be in business until
next year. Even if they are successful, there remains the problem of
co-ordinating the wider strategic questions of local economic development.
Here the government is likely to look closely at a report by Coopers &
Lybrand, the accountants, and published this week by the business-led
voluntary organisation, Business in the Community.*
The study examines four European regions - Catalonia in Spain, Lombardia in
Italy, Limburg in the Netherlands and Hamburg in Germany - and compares
their local economic development records with the UK's. The report's main
conclusion is that current initiatives in the UK are too fragmented and lack
the necessary 'critical mass' to be effective. Consequently, individual
geographical areas in the UK are unable to compete with regions in the rest
of Europe.
One topical example is Barcelona's achievement in winning the staging of the
Olympic games against stiff worldwide competition. Barcelona and Catalonia
have detailed, interrelated plans for the future development of the region,
backed by investment programmes under local control.
The study finds strategies are based consistently on Barcelona's role as the
capital of a leading 'Euro-region' spanning the French-Spanish border. The
machinery was in place for city, regional and national government to work
together to capture the Olympics, in spite of political differences.
Catalonia's historical and political development as a region cannot be
mimicked overnight but the report suggests ways in which UK co-operation can
be stimulated and the necessary 'critical mass' - economic strategies
covering populations between 1m and 9m - can be achieved.
The initiative to set up pilot projects, building on the work of partnership
experiments already under way in Birmingham and Nottinghamshire, should be
'bottom up', says the report. Central government's role is principally to
spread the message of co-operation and provide some financial incentives,
perhaps along the lines of the City Challenge programme.
*Growing business in the UK - lessons from continental Europe. Contact:
Oriama Pound, Coopers & Lybrand, Plumtree court, London EC4a 4HT. Free.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920804

