FT924-6502

FT  20 NOV 92 / MMC inquiry into sales of perfume


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, Consumer Industries Editor


ALLEGATIONS that perfume manufacturers are illegally restricting supplies of
fine fragrances in order to maintain high retail prices are to be
investigated by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission at the request of the
Office of Fair Trading.
The decision marks a victory for Superdrug, the cosmetics and toiletries
chain, which sells leading fragrances at discounts of up to 30 per cent on
the normal retail price at 15 of its 670 stores.
Superdrug, part of the Kingfisher retail group, has complained to the OFT
that leading manufacturers such as Givenchy and Yves Saint Laurent have
refused to supply it directly, forcing it to obtain their products more
expensively on the 'grey' market.
The investigation will focus on whether manufacturers have denied supplies
to cut-price shops by applying unfairly standards governing the stocking,
presentation and sale of their products in retail outlets.
The MMC, which has nine months to report, will also examine complaints by
Superdrug that national magazines and newspapers have refused to accept
advertisements for its range of discount perfumes.
Superdrug says it has been unable to obtain perfumes directly even though it
has sought to meet the manufacturers' standards by investing in special
counters staffed by trained sales assistants.
The OFT has studied the case for almost a year. It was unsure until recently
whether it could act, because the European Commission has exempted from EC
competition rules some restrictions imposed by perfume manufacturers on
distribution.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading, said yesterday that he
was not seeking to negate the EC exemptions. However, some of the supply
restrictions were not covered by the exemptions and could violate Article 85
(1) of the Rome Treaty, which outlaws anti-competitive trade practices.
According to the OFT, UK sales of fine fragrances total about Pounds 180m a
year.
As well as Givenchy and Yves Saint Laurent, leading suppliers include Chanel
and Christian Dior. None of the companies would comment yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921120

