FT923-9869

FT  03 AUG 92 / Management: Stick to your knitting - After ICI's plan to
split in two, Andrew Campbell cautions companies against
over-diversification


   By ANDREW CAMPBELL


Imperial Chemical Industries' plan to divide its business into two is the
strongest evidence yet that big, diversified corporations have had their
day.
By cutting itself up, ICI is following an increasingly popular path. Racal,
Courtaulds, and USX (the old US Steel) have all successfully created value
for shareholders in this way.
Although their motivation may have been to avoid the attentions of corporate
raiders, they have acknowledged that their companies were previously
over-diversified.
The past 12 months have been littered with examples of the dangers of
companies diversifying into too many different areas. British Aerospace
plunged into cars, property, construction and munitions - with such bad
results that the chairman and finance director quit. British Petroleum has
been reversing its unhappy moves into minerals and nutrition in an attempt
to bring some stability to its oil and chemicals businesses. The three most
recent big hostile bids - Ultramar, Hawker Siddeley and Dowty - have also
been examples of excessive diversification.
Managers are constantly being warned against diversifying. The best read
management book - 'In Search of Excellence' by Tom Peters and Robert
Waterman - devotes a chapter to the topic, entitled 'Stick to Your
Knitting'. Peters is not a lonely voice. Most management textbooks, articles
and researchers conclude that diversification is to be treated with caution.
The danger is not diversification in itself, but over-diversification:
managers getting into businesses they do not fully understand.
So why do companies do it? Why do well-intentioned managers risk their own
reputation and the independence of their companies by acquiring businesses
that they do not understand?
The first reason is to spread risk - which often means getting into
businesses that are unfamiliar. Managers are concerned to avoid excessive
focus. 'We mustn't be too dependent on the UK economy.' Or, 'We mustn't have
more than 40 per cent of our portfolio exposed to the building cycle'. Or,
'We are too reliant on sales to Marks & Spencer'.
The desire for a spread of interests is very strong. But for whose benefit
is the manager seeking to spread risks? The shareholder is unlikely to
benefit because fund managers are able to spread risks much more efficiently
than corporate managers.
Neither are the employees likely to gain, because their skills are not
easily transferred from one business to another.
The main beneficiary is the corporate manager who can see greater job
security. If one leg of the business collapses he is still needed to look
after the other legs.
Yet this additional security is a fallacy. By getting into unfamiliar
businesses managers make their jobs less secure. They could protect their
future better by out-performing competitors at businesses they know, rather
than by hedging their bets.
The second cause of over-diversification comes from managers' deeply held
belief in growth. As the board member of one big company said recently: 'If
you don't want to grow your business, you should become a civil servant.'
Growth thinking is not wrong. Shareholders want growth in their investments
and employees like it because it provides career security and advancement
opportunities.
If the prospects for the industry are low growth, managers start looking for
higher growth opportunities.
Unfortunately, when low growth is the motivation for diversification, the
prospects for success are particularly low. Managers of maturing businesses
usually have little experience of other industries; when they are aware of
opportunities elsewhere, those opportunities have often been fully
exploited.
This causes managers to take risks in less familiar areas - the classic
over-diversification problem. It is not surprising, therefore, that the
failure rate is high. Take the oil industry.
Every big oil company lost confidence in the oil industry in the 1970s and
set out to find other, ideally high growth, businesses to exploit. The
record of success, based on 15 years' experience, has been very poor.
If the biggest and best companies in the world, able to attract the best
management talent, hire the best advisers, and spend billions of dollars,
are not able to succeed, it is unreasonable to expect lesser companies to do
better.
So what is the solution? Should managers in mature businesses focus on
managing their own decline? The answer, frequently, is yes. Focusing on
maturity can be far preferable to risking all in unfamiliar areas.
Unless there are growth areas where the company has or could create some
clear advantage, managers should avoid the macho of high-growth objectives.
Investors can be just as content with stable performance and high dividend
yields.
There is no reason why a company should not be ambitious to produce a
performance similar to an undated government bond (ie low growth but secure
returns). Moreover, so long as managers run their businesses better than
other management teams, there is no 'under performance' and hence no room
for a takeover bid. Managing in a stable environment can be attractive to
all stake-holders.
One of the best examples is Crown, Cork & Seal. Spotted as a Harvard
Business School case in the 1970s, it has been a model for others to follow.
Unlike its competitors, Crown did not diversify away from the mature canning
business into higher growth packaging. Instead, Crown focused on becoming
the most flexible and most service-orientated canning company. It invested
in developing countries where canning operations still provided small growth
potential. Excess cash flow was used to pay attractive dividends and buy
back shares. During the 1980s the company bought back more than half its
total issued share capital.
The sense of Crown's strategy was underlined in the late I980s when most of
its US competitors decided to separate their canning operations from their
other packaging businesses through demergers and leveraged buy-outs. This
proved something that Crown managers had known all along  - that canning and
plastic packing do not fit comfortably in one portfolio: the skills needed
in the two businesses are different.
The distaste managers have for managing decline is widespread, and has
provided companies such as Hanson and BTR with easy stepping-stones to the
top of British industry. If the average manager's ego was less tied to
growth we would not need Hanson, Williams Holdings, or KKR to do other
people's dirty work.
Taken together, the fear of excessive focus and the desire for growth are
likely to continue to lead the unwary board of directors into trouble. It is
only by rooting out the woolly thinking that surrounds risk spreading and
growth objectives that directors can keep their companies safe from one of
industry's most deadly diseases.
The author is a director of Ashridge Strategic Management Centre

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920803

