FT922-4349

FT  05 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Lords war trials defeat for
government


   By ALISON SMITH and IVOR OWEN


THE government suffered its first defeat of the parliamentary session
yesterday as peers voted to ensure that televised overseas evidence could
not be used in war crimes trials in Scotland.
By 121 votes to 80, the Lords supported a move led by Lord Campbell of
Alloway to put war crimes trials outside the scope of the clause in a
Scottish legal bill enabling live television links to be authorised as
evidence.
The defeat is the first one since Lord Wakeham became leader of the Lords.
With its majority in the Commons cut to 21, the government may now find that
overturning defeats from the Lords is not the largely straightforward
business that it was in the previous parliament.
Lord Campbell, a Tory, was the leader of the Lords revolt last year against
the legislation allowing war crimes trials to be held in the UK. It led to
the Commons having to impose its will on the Lords in the rarely used
procedure in the parliament acts 1919 and 1949, after the upper House had
twice refused to accept the bill.
He said it would be 'impossible' for someone accused of war crimes to get a
fair trial if television links from abroad were used, because there would be
no proper cross-examination before a jury.
Live television links can be used in England and Wales.
In the Commons yesterday Mr John Major, the prime minister, denied that the
delay in reintroducing the Asylum Bill showed that its original purpose had
been to 'legitimise' scare stories about immigration during the general
election, Ivor Owen writes.
The charge was made by Mr Roy Hattersley, the deputy Labour leader, who
recalled an undertaking by the government that the bill would be among the
first measures in the new parliament.
He pressed the prime minister to explain why the bill was so urgently needed
before the election but not so urgently needed afterwards.
When Mr Major promised that the bill would be reintroduced 'before too
long', Mr Hattersley accused him of 'characteristically evading' the
question because he was ashamed to give the real answer.
The prime minister also reaffirmed that MPs would soon be asked to approve
the bill. 'We intend to resist the misuse of asylum procedures and also
intend to ensure genuine refugees are properly protected,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920605

