FT921-15321

FT  10 JAN 92 / Bush seeks to dispel anxieties about his health


   By LIONEL BARBER, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT George Bush yesterday dismissed fears about his health and
predicted he would be re-elected this year.
At the end of an Asian tour overshadowed by his collapse at a state banquet
in Tokyo on Wednesday, Mr Bush blamed a severe bout of gastric 'flu and
pronounced himself on the road to recovery.
Still looking queasy, he appeared at a news conference with Mr Kiichi
Miyazawa, the Japanese prime minister. Mr Bush sought to dispel fears that
ill-health might force him to withdraw from the election campaign, and came
close to making his candidacy for the Republican nomination official.
Brushing aside his recent slump in the opinion polls, he expressed
confidence that the US economy would recover.
'I believe I have been a good president . . . and I think we have a strong
case to take to the American people. I believe I am going to win,' he said.
Mr Bush, 67, was hospitalised last year after suffering an irregular
heartbeat diagnosed later as a thyroid complaint.
After the shock of watching televised pictures of Mr Bush lying stricken on
the floor in Tokyo, most Americans appeared to have been reassured by the
president's rapid reappearance in public. Having cancelled breakfast and
lunch appointments, Mr Bush last night had dinner with Emperor Akihito.
Mr Bush intends to portray his 10-day Asian tour as a successful effort to
open export markets and create jobs for American workers when he returns to
Washington today.
In the US, assessments of his trip were mixed. Gloomy comments by car
industry executives from Ford, General Motors and Chrysler may fuel
congressional sentiment towards trade retaliation against Japan.
Mr Richard Gephardt, the Democrat who is the House majority leader, was
quick to attack Mr Bush's performance.
Speaking at the North American Auto Show in Detroit, he said: 'The only
thing that counts is action. Promises are not sufficient.' Mr Gephardt has
introduced a bill that would retaliate against Japanese imports if Japan
failed to eliminate its deficit with the US over the next five years.
Mr Richard Holbrooke, a former State Department official responsible for
Asian affairs, said that Mr Bush had made progress in reducing the trade
imbalance, but at the cost of appearing to blame Japan for the US recession.
Mr Clyde Prestowitz, a former US trade official and advocate of tougher
dealings with Japan, criticised the president for over-emphasising the
importance of car exports and underplaying new technology.
Conservative analysts said Mr Bush had compromised his previous support of
free trade to protect his flanks against the 'America first' rhetoric of Mr
Pat Buchanan, the TV commentator whom he faces in the New Hampshire primary
next month.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920110

