FT924-8079

FT  13 NOV 92 / OECD blames cartels for high prices: There is no free market
in nearly half Swiss goods and services


   By IAN RODGER


EVERY visitor to Switzerland winces at its extraordinarily high prices for
everything from a cup of coffee to a hotel room to a train ride.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has confirmed
that prices of goods and services for private consumption in Switzerland are
40 per cent higher than the OECD average, on a purchasing power parity
basis. Prices of goods and services for capital investment are 30 per cent
higher.
In a special study in its annual examination of the Swiss economy, the OECD
attributes these huge discrepancies to the pervasive presence of cartels and
other curbs on free competition in Swiss markets.
Cartels are said to exist in 90 per cent of 72 industrial activities,
usually involving price-fixing and/or market sharing agreements.
Concentration is also high in several segments of the wholesale trade, and
the market share of the five largest retail traders is nearly 80 per cent,
'more than in any other European country'.
The study suggests that high prices cause 'high economy-wide static welfare
losses' as well as 'significant dynamic efficiency losses'. The rigidity of
prices may contribute to the persistence of inflation over a long period.
Although most Swiss companies tend to be small to medium-sized,
concentration is high in most business sectors. 'Oligopolistic structures
have been established in several industries, like tobacco, leather and
footwear, chemicals, electricaland electronic equipment, food processing,
textile, paper, machines and vehicles.'
The strength and persistence of collusive practices may seem paradoxical,
given the openness of the country's trade. By 1985, the share of
manufactured imports in the domestic market was 42 per cent, well above the
OECD average. But the role of imports in enforcing competitive discipline is
undermined because most importers participate in the highly lucrative
domestic distribution cartels.
Other factors are the highly protected status of food products and the fact
that non-tradeable services represent a predominant share in the Swiss
economy, 48 per cent of private sector GDP, if construction is included.
Many Swiss laws and regulations contribute to restraint of trade. Laws
permit Swiss companies to protect themselves from takeovers by hostile or
foreign interests, and the report shows that Swiss firms tend to maintain
their market positions for an extraordinarily long time.
Arcane norms and technical standards, business regulations and blatantly
protectionist procurement policies, especially by cantonal governments, all
keep out competitors. Swiss authorities charge twice as much as those in
neighbouring countries to approve imported telephone sets. Swiss retailers
are prohibited from using many sales promotion tactics that are common
elsewhere.
As a result, the OECD estimates that the prices of goods and services
accounting for nearly 45 per cent of the weighting in the consumer price
index are 'administered or more or less strongly regulated at at least one
stage of the way to the consumer'.
It also observes that while Swiss inflation is not high, it is relatively
persistent, suggesting that 'inflationary shocks in Swiss consumer prices
peter out very slowly'. This persistence stems mainly from domestically
produced items.
Swiss competition law is 'probably among the most permissive of collusive
behaviour and restrictive practices.' the OECD says. It accepts that private
interests may exert an influence on third parties through the concerted
acquisition of economic power, but as long as there is no abuse, private
market order may be as good as, or better than, a free market.
Thus, the original law calls on the authorities only to counteract the
harmful economic effects of cartels. Revisions in the 1980s clarified that
cartels were harmful if they eliminated 'effective competition' or if their
negative effects outweighed positive ones. They also were accompanied by a
marked strengthening in enforcement, leading notably to the dismantling of
cartels in banking and brewing.
However, the OECD claims that Swiss rules remain 'in stark contrast' with
common practices in other OECD countries and particularly in the EC.
Moreover, the number of enforcement staff is 'very low by international
standards'.
It is sceptical of the view among some Swiss that most cartels will
spontaneously collapse as domestic markets are subjected to more import
competition. 'The collapse of cartels does not necessarily lead to more
competitive markets. Indeed, increased concentration is an often observed
outcome.'
It argues that only further toughening of competition law and its
enforcement will lead to greater competition.
If Swiss voters ratify the European Economic Area (EEA) treaty in a
referendum next month, then Switzerland will take on EC competition rules.
These prohibit cartels, the abuse of dominant positions and provide for
examination of proposed mergers. Other EC rules will force Switzerland to
align its norms and technical requirements, migration policy and public
procurement practices up to a point.
However, the OECD calls for a fundamentally revised Swiss competition law in
which 'the protection of the competition process per se should be
established as an overriding objective'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921113

