FT923-6472

FT  24 AUG 92 / US Money and Credit: Caught unawares by a plummeting dollar


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


JUST when the bond market thought it was safe from President George Bush's
appetite for vote-catching tax cuts, it was caught unawares last week by, of
all things, a plummeting dollar.
Normally, the dollar does not figure in the bond market's daily
calculations, but so unnerving was the currency's decline on Friday (it fell
to its lowest ever value against the D-Mark of DM1.4310 in spite of
concerted attempts by world central banks to prop it up) that treasury
investors turned tail and ran.
What had been a solid half a point rally in 30-year bonds was turned into a
half a point decline in barely an hour. The initial rally on Friday morning
had been a response to President Bush's acceptance speech at the Republican
convention.
Those early gains in bond prices, however, were not an unconditionally
positive response to the president's rhetoric or his economic battle-plan,
but rather an expression of relief that Mr Bush had not announced a
deficit-widening package of tax cuts. He did propose to cut taxes, but only
on condition that Congress agreed to some balancing reductions in spending.
Explaining why the bond market took fright at the dollar's decline is not
easy. Typically, there are two main reasons why bonds do not like a falling
dollar.
First, the lower the currency goes, the less room the Federal Reserve has to
cut interest rates.
The last thing the dollar needs is a further widening in the differentials
between US and German interest rates. Second, a falling dollar can lead to
higher inflation over the long term by raising the cost of imported goods.
However, neither were particularly convincing explanations for why bonds
fell so sharply last week. Insiders suggest the Fed would be prepared to cut
rates again no matter what the consequences for the dollar. And inflation,
currently hovering around 3 per cent, is likely to remain unthreatening for
at least another year or two, even with higher import prices.
The most likely cause for the decline on Friday was a combination of the
weak dollar and a dawning realisation in the wake of the president's speech
that neither the Republican nor the Democratic candidates are willing to
bite the budget deficit bullet.
As Mr Joe Taylor, foreign exchange analyst at Technical Data in Boston, said
when asked about the fall in the dollar and bond prices: 'I think what we
are getting here is global capital calling for a mandate to cut the Federal
budget deficit.'
Given that President Bush and Governor Clinton's deficit-cutting plans are
both highly unconvincing - one has promised to cut taxes and spending, the
other to raise taxes and spending - those calls are likely to go unheeded.
*****
Is it Salomon revisited?
The Federal Reserve has confirmed that it is taking a closer than usual look
at what is happening to the market in five-year notes maturing in July 1997.
In the past week, there has been a severe shortage of the five-years, the
result of a squeeze by a few institutions that control a large amount of the
issue.
Traders who sold the issue short in anticipation of a drop in five-year
prices have had to borrow the five-years from the few institutions that hold
them.
Because they need the five-years so desperately, the short sellers have been
forced to lend money at effective annual interest rates of under 1 per cent
in repurchase agreements to get hold of the five-year notes.
While squeezes of various kinds happen all the time in the bond markets, the
severity and length of the five-year squeeze has attracted special attention
from the Fed. So far, however, there is no suggestion that the Fed will
follow its new policy unveiled in the wake of last year's Salomon scandal
and issue extra five-year notes to ease the shortage of supply.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920824

