FT921-14056

FT  17 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Apex to apply for an administrator


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


THE BOARD of the Apex Trust, the organisation that provides training for
ex-offenders, last night announced that it would apply for a court order to
appoint an administrator. The move came after the government ruled out any
financial help for Apex.
The board said it had decided to apply for an administrator from Coopers &
Lybrand Deloitte 'in the absence of a positive response from the
government'. Yesterday the Labour party released figures showing that
specialist provision for offender training fell by 57 per cent last year.
Mr Barry Sheerman, a Labour home affairs spokesman, said yesterday that at
the beginning of last year Apex Trust and Nacro, the two main providers of
specialist training for offenders, ran 95 centres for 15,000 trainees. Since
April, cuts in the employment training budget and a revised system of fund
allocation through Training and Enterprise Councils had resulted in the
number of centres being reduced to 48 and the number of trainee places to
6,400.
Mr Sherman said Apex Trust research had shown that ex-offenders in
employment were three times less likely to re-offend than those unemployed.
Mr Michael Howard, employment secretary, said on BBC Radio yesterday: 'We
can't write blank cheques, and we can't keep writing cheques for money when
an organisation keeps coming back for more.'
He added that there were other bodies providing training for ex-offenders
and that training would still be available if the trust collapsed.
Twelve companies which have sponsored Apex in recent years are meeting today
at BT's London headquarters in an effort to save the charity. Several
leading employers and customers in the construction industry have expressed
concern that self-employment is leading to a decline in the number of
adequately trained people, according to a report from the National Economic
Development Council's construction group.
The report recommends a qualifications-based operative registration scheme.
It expects skill shortages to re-emerge when the recession ends and also
suggests poor training is a cause of the industry's poor safety record.
Registration in the Construction Industry, Nedo Books, Millbank Tower,
London. SW1P 4QX. Pounds 17.50

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920117

