FT922-4399

FT  05 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: D-Mark gathers strength from
financial market nervousness


   By EMMA TUCKER, SARA WEBB and TRACY CORRIGAN


CALM RETURNED to Europe's financial markets yesterday as investors digested
the implications of Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht treaty in
Tuesday's referendum.
The D-Mark continued to benefit from nervousness that other European
countries might renege on the financial disciplines of monetary convergence,
while sterling and the Italian lira slipped closer to the bottom of the
European monetary system grid.
To defend the lira, the Bank of Italy was compelled to raise by a quarter
point to 13 per cent the rate at which it gives emergency funding to credit
institutions. But its discount rate was unchanged at 12 per cent.
In the European government bond market high-yielding securities, including
stocks issued by the Italian and Spanish governments, continued to tumble as
the Japanese joined Europeans investors in the rush to sell.
However, as some dealers took advantage of cheaper prices, some government
bonds ended the day off their lows. German bonds remained the main
beneficiary.
Ecu bonds, dogged by fears about their future in the wake of the uncertainty
about monetary union, bore the brunt of the selling pressure. French bonds
and UK gilt-edged securities held their ground.
'The worst is probably over now. We've seen the shake-out and we should see
some recovery now, barring no other disastrous news,' said a trader from a
US bank.
Although the D-Mark continued to edge higher against other European
currencies, it was with less momentum than on Wednesday.
After a two pfennig decline on Wednesday, sterling gained a quarter of a
pfennig, closing in London at DM2.9175. Against the D-Mark the Italian lira
closed down, at L756.6, compared with Wednesday's close of L756.1.
The Dutch guilder and the Belgian franc remained steady alongside Germany's
currency.
Mr Steve Hannah, head of research at IBJ International, the securities arm
of Industrial Bank of Japan, said the quieter markets stemmed partly from a
better understanding among investors of what the Danes were voting against.
'They were voting against political centralisation and the institutional
aspects of the union more than the economic and exchange rate aspects of the
system,' he said.
European stock markets were mostly quiet although Italian shares were driven
lower over worries that the Italian economy would lose the benefits of
con-vergence between European interest and inflation rates should monetary
union un-ravel.
Spanish shares also continued to slide but prices are expected to stabilise
in the short-term.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920605

