FT921-15497

FT  09 JAN 92 / International Bonds: Two long-dated Ecu deals help to push
down prices


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


TWO long-dated deals in the Ecu bond market, coupled with rumours of further
supply, overstretched existing demand in the sector, pushing secondary
market prices down slightly.
An Ecu750m, 15-year deal for Finland, via UBS Phillips & Drew, suffered from
concern about the borrower's credit rating, currently under review by
Moody's.
The country's economic problems are pushing its funding needs higher.
However, the deal was considered fairly priced.
Societe Nationale des Chemins de fer Francais, the French national railway,
issued Ecu400m of 15-year bonds, priced to yield 8.49 per cent, which was
considered rather aggressive.
The launch spread tightened from 6 basis points to 5 basis points above the
French Treasury's comparable Ecu OAT.
The deals were both unswapped; there is virtually no Ecu swap market beyond
10 years.
Dealers had reported strong demand at the longer end, but rumours of more
supply at 10 years induced fears that the market would become clogged.
Last summer, the market effectively closed for several months after it
failed to absorb a deluge of new issues in the spring. The total supply so
far this year is still relatively small.
In the event, Belgium, which was rumoured to be looking at the Ecu market,
is likely to access the D-Mark sector later this month instead, with a
DM500m five to 10-year deal. However, Norway and Italy are also said to be
eyeing the sector.
In the dollar sector, demand for the World Bank's Dollars 1.5bn 10-year
global offering, officially launched yesterday, continued to outstrip
supply.
Dealers expect the deal to be priced at the low end of the indicated range
of 15 basis points to 17 basis points, the tightest pricing to date for a
global offering.
The dollar sector is proving an attractive source of fixed-rate funding for
borrowers keen to lock in historically low interest rates. However, most US
companies can still raise funds more cheaply in the US market.
Phillip Morris Capital Corporation and BOC raised Dollars 200m and Dollars
150m respectively of five-year bonds, both via CSFB.
Meanwhile, two UK companies, Tesco, the retailer, and Southern Electric, the
utility, raised Pounds 200m and Pounds 150m respectively in 10-year bonds.
The Tesco deal was considered aggressively priced at 80 basis points above
the curve, while the Southern Electric offering was considered more
attractively priced at 70 basis points over the curve.
Swaps opportunities into floating rate sterling are proving relatively
attractive, but demand for bonds could be curtailed by concern about the
weakness of sterling, which is bumping on the bottom of its exchange rate
mechanism band.
Late in the day, the Leeds Permanent Building Society launched a Pounds 100m
two-year deal via NatWest Capital Markets.
Elsewhere, CIA Hering, a Brazilian textiles and food company, brought a
Dollars 50m private placement of two-year bonds, priced to yield 835 basis
points over the comparable US Treasury market. The deal was arranged by ABN
Amro.
Turnover on the Amsterdam-based European Options Exchange (EOE), this year
was likely to be roughly the same as last year, said Mr Tjerk Westerterp,
the exchange's president, Reuter reports.
The volume of options contracts was likely to fall slightly, but this would
be offset by an expected rise in the number of futures contracts, Mr
Westerterp said.
Last year, the exchange handled a total of 11.2m options and futures
contracts.

The Financial Times


London Page 24 Table (Omitted).

920109

