FT921-12058

FT  29 JAN 92 / Jobs: A challenge to give some practical help - Redundancy
victim proposes sponsored market for unemployed to sell their skills


   By MICHAEL DIXON


A bit of help is worth a lot of pity.' The Jobs column had shamefully let
those wise words slip from mind since first learning them from its
Lancashire grandmother. But they've just been recalled by a challenge to act
on them in a highly topical context.
The challenger is reader Peter Laurence currently writing his dissertation
for a master's degree in business administration at Warwick University,
where I gather he is studying part-time. For he says that his choice of
subject for the dissertation - 'Recruitment in a recession' - has rebounded
on him. Soon after he chose it, his employer made him redundant.
Which has focused his mind sharply on one particular aim of his studies: to
find ways of re-harnessing the skills of capable people who've lost their
jobs. The personnel chiefs he interviewed had various views on who could
best help. Many predictably, named the government. Several felt the
unemployed could do a better job on their own behalf. But a lot also thought
the media could play a more positive part.
Mr Laurence has therefore made a proposal. It is that the Financial Times
should invite employers to join in sponsoring - say - half the cost of a
regular space in our recruitment advertising pages, in which unemployed
job-seekers could offer their services at a commensurately reduced price.
'Provided both sides of the recruitment fence responded,' he says, 'names
could be selected at random once or twice a week as beneficiaries.'
So what about it?
Well, I'm glad to say the FT's classified advertisement director Brian
Powell shares my view that the idea is worth a try. Indeed, he says that if
it comes off, he'll join in the sponsorship by giving the enterprise a
special rate.
Even so, much preliminary work is still required. The next step of course is
to test support from employers, and I'd be grateful to hear from any willing
in principle to contribute some given sum to costs. Depending on the
answers, we'd then have to decide the amount of space that could be
provided, and how much of it to allow to each job-seeker at what price.
In other words, the last thing I need at the moment is any self-advertising
copy. But never fear, as soon as I do, I'll make it known.
NOW to the table below which offers some partial answers, at least, to a
question the Jobs column is often asked by people who've been offered a post
abroad. It is: if I went to work in such and such a country, how much would
it cost me to keep up the standard of living I have here at home?
As on previous occasions, the figures have been kindly supplied by the
Employment Conditions Abroad consultancy, which acts as a trade association
advising its 700 subscriber-organisations on pay, perks and suchlike in
various parts of the world. Anyone wanting to know more about ECA's
activities should contact Barry Rodin at 15 Britten St, London SW3 3TY; tel
071-351 7151, fax 071 351 9396.
The question of living-costs overseas is complicated because expatriates'
spending patterns tend to vary not only with the country they have gone to,
but with the one they came from in the first place. So the table takes
executives from nine different home countries, and shows their typical
annual outlays when working in each others' lands. They are in all cases
doing the same kind of job at similar rank, characterised by the head of a
function such as marketing in a company of medium size. Other currencies are
expressed in sterling at the exchange rates prevailing in early December.
The first column of figures shows their typical gross salary in the native
country. Then come the sums which, according to ECA's most recent surveys,
the executives would have to fork out to maintain their habitual pattern of
spending both at home and in the other eight lands.
Unfortunately, since expatriates' accommodation is often subsidised to
varying degrees by their employer, no account is taken of housing costs. The
figures cover only consumer goods and services, including durables, as well
as the standard utilities.
FINALLY to a couple of jobs in the City of London offered by headhunter Theo
Stegers of Recruitment Matters on behalf of separate banks, both European,
which he may not identify. He therefore promises to abide by applicants'
requests not to be named to his clients at this stage of the proceedings.
Both of the jobs are in the foreign-exchange field, the first being at the
head of a sales and marketing team, ranked as at least assistant director.
The bank in question has a high credit rating with strengths in FX, money
markets and their option-based derivatives, the headhunter says. And while
it is particularly keen to improve its corporate coverage in Britain, it
would gladly consider other countries and market sectors.
Candidates need a minimum of five years success in corporate sales, plus the
management ability to lead a 14-strong team.
Salary range Pounds 70,000-Pounds 85,000, plus bonus on results, and usual
City-banking perks including car and mortgage-assistance.
Mr Stegers's second offer is a strategic trading post specialising in
high-yielding non-standard currencies, nowadays including those of former
Soviet countries as well as Thai baht and the like. Somewhat unusually.
however, the recruit will not only be striking deals with other traders, but
also selling the bank's FX expertise to corporate customers such as large
companies with holdings of the so-called exotic currencies that they wish to
have exchanged.
Provided that candidates have thorough knowledge of markets for such
currencies, they could either be traders seeking to add corporate sales
experience to their armoury, or vice versa. Salary again up to Pounds
85,000, with similar perks.
Inquiries to 15 Great Eastern St, London EC2A 3EJ; tel 071-377 1600, fax
071-377 1801.

The Financial Times


London Page 13 Table (Omitted).

920129

