FT923-9861

FT  03 AUG 92 / People: Laporte loses another director


Laporte, the specialty chemicals group, has lost another director; Keith
Sansom, who had been in charge of strategic planning, resigned last Friday.
'I enjoy running things,' says Sansom, 48, who headed Laporte's Australian
operation for seven years. He is off to explore the possibilities of setting
up his own venture capital chemicals business.
While he claims the parting is 'amicable', chief executive Ken Minton has
seen three resignations from his board in the past 18 months, which leads
analysts to suggest that his management style may have played a role. Hans
Seidl left the board recently, though he is still running Laporte's German
operations; Mike Fearfield left at the beginning of 1991.
Minton strongly denies any pattern. 'When you bring in a new chief operating
officer, you must expect that some directors will look to their future.'
David Wilbraham joined from ICI in April.
Sansom, who joined Laporte in 1968, was sent to Australia in 1980, and
promoted three years later to regional managing director. While there, he
says, he and his family became 'legally and spiritually' Australian
citizens.
Returning to England in 1990 he was put in charge of strategic planning for
the group as well as becoming operational head of metals and electronic
chemicals, and other areas. Asked whether he had regarded himself as a
candidate for Wilbraham's post he commented, 'Yes, two years ago, but
probably no as time went by'. He puts that down to 'style, through to the
shape of the company'.
Bringing in Wilbraham has meant that Minton himself has more time to devote
to strategic planning.
While the company said Sansom was 'returning to Australia in due course',
Sansom explains that might well be ten years off, if his venture capital
business takes off in the UK.
*****
Brian Richards, co-founder of British Bio-technology, has been appointed a
member of the steering group responsible for overseeing LINK - the
government-wide initiative for supporting collaborative R&D between UK
industry and the research base.
Richards, 59, spent his early career as an academic. As reader in biology at
King's College, London, he organised the first School of Biology in the UK.
He left to found the world's first molecular biology-based industrial
research laboratory for GD Searle before going on to set up British
Bio-technology in 1986.
His company, whose aim is to develop an entrepreneurial approach to R&D for
new pharmaceuticals, is an active participant in several LINK projects,
The first LINK programmes were announced in February 1988 and the government
has committed itself to provide through LINK up to Pounds 210m support for
collaborative R&D programmes, with industry providing matching support on a
project-by-project basis.
The LINK steering group is responsible for endorsing new programmes
submitted to LINK, and for reviewing progress on existing programmes. It is
chaired by Robert Malpas, a former director of ICI.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920803

