FT922-448

FT  27 JUN 92 / Travel: Old England behind the Celtic burglar bars -
Nicholas Woodsworth was charmed by West Dorset in the rain


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


MORE than 2,000 years ago, a Celtic tribe called the Durotriges moved into a
hill-top home not far from the coast of southern England. Invasion and
pillage of country homes was even more a threat then than today, but
although the Durotriges were an Iron Age people, basic burglar bars, let
alone electronic alarms and home insurance policies, were somewhat beyond
them.
Feeling exposed, they set about building the finest complex of defensive
earthworks in Britain - a flattened hill-top surrounded by concentric rings
of 60-ft ditches and 90-ft earthen breastworks two miles in circumference.
Strongly defended, Maiden Castle, as the hill is called, was at one time
home to 5,000 tribespeople; it withstood attack for centuries, and even held
out a good while against more advanced invaders from the east, the armies of
imperial Rome.
After centuries of battering by wind, storms and rain, the warrior-haunted
defences of Maiden Castle still look daunting enough to keep eastern
invaders away from its rural hinterland. And perhaps, in some mystical
Celtic way, they continue to do just that.
The land to the east of Dorchester, the county town just two miles from the
hill, is increasingly the domain of long-distance London commuters. The land
to the west, Devon and Cornwall, has long suffered annual invasion by
frantic hordes of holiday-makers from all over Britain.
But, in a small triangle of west Dorset, in countryside bounded by the
peculiarly-formed Chesil Beach, the old abbey town of Sherborne and the
seaside resort of Lyme Regis, strange forces seem to operate. Against all
the odds, this is an old-fashioned, scenic and peacefully rural place that
the developers have left largely to itself.
Although it is less than five miles away, I could not see the sea on the
spring day I bent into the wind and trudged to the summit of Maiden Castle.
Blustery and cold, it brought with it low, obscuring cloud and showers that
spat down on anyone foolish enough to be outside looking for signs of a new
and gentler season.
Perhaps, though, the sea is not visible from here even in the most clement
weather. West Dorset is a country of hills, smooth, green and sheep-dotted,
that rise bank upon bank to the horizon. In good weather they are like an
exercise in the art of Italian renaissance perspective. In bad weather they
are an exercise in exposure. I felt sorry for the Iron Age tribes who
throughout west Dorset spent their time shivering in hill-top ring forts,
and decided to see if things were any more sheltered and spring-like down at
the seaside.
They were. Not far from Abbotsbury, an old village overlooking one of the
strangest geographical features in Britain, I met a flock of some of the
most fortunate swans around. The inhabitants of the Swannery, more than 500
of them, live in a bird's paradise, a brackish, eight-mile-long lagoon known
as the Fleet where they are protected from the winds and storms of the open
sea by Chesil Beach, a bank of pebbles 50 ft high and 200 yards wide lying,
as if sulking after some terrific spat with the mainland, some distance
off-shore.
Not only are they happily sheltered from the elements, but the birds are
also the only colony of swans in the world to be managed by humans.
Originally raised by medieval Benedictine monks for their meat, the swans
here remain wild but are provided with an environment in which nesting and
hatching can be overseen. Between the sea and the hills, in a setting of
lush reeds and feathery pampas grasses, I strolled among hundreds of the
birds as they brooded over eggs in their nests, bickered over territorial
rights, and splashed down by the shores of the Fleet like parachute-born
water-skiers.
But the swans had an advantage over me; when a late afternoon shower
arrived, their down kept them warm and dry. I made a dash for it, and drove
not far up the coast to west Bay, a little port of tackle shops and fishing
boats. There in the snug Riverside Restaurant, advised by amiable owner
Arthur Watson and his wife Jan, I consoled myself with a magnificent fish
dinner of home-made seafood soup and fillets of John Dory.
One of the great pleasures of west Dorset is being able to get away from it
all - city life, crowds and commercialism - and escape to the heart of the
country. So, instead of booking myself into a hotel in a seaside town, I
drove up through hills and mist in the falling dusk to the tiny village of
Netherbury. Here I found Heritage, a bed-and-breakfast establishment run by
a Frenchwoman named Michelle Seymour.
Michelle knows what escape from the fast track is all about. A former
airline hostess, she has chosen one of the loveliest villages in Dorset to
settle in. Sitting on the banks of the little River Brit not far from the
market town of Beaminster, it is a vision of English rural peace, a place
whose most ambitious activity is cider-making. The rain had stopped and
lights were burning in cottage windows by the time I went out to stretch my
legs.
In neatly-kept gardens water dripped from every tree, bush and newly-bloomed
spring flower. In twilight and the distant hill-side baa-ing of new-born
lambs, I walked through the mossy, tilted gravestones of Netherbury's
church-yard. An owl hooted in a copse nearby and the hour rang from the
tower of the old grey stone church. Scented odours wafted from damp lilacs.
I had forgotten what tranquility was.
Villages like Netherbury, and there are lots within a 10-mile radius of
Beaminster, are wonderful places from which to explore some of the most
unspoilt country in southern England. Much of the charm here is man-made and
has to do with a long and rich rural past that has not yet been obliterated;
it takes the form of thatched cottages, stone-built houses, or the abbeys,
manors, priories and churches lying around the corner of hedgerow-lined
country roads.
The other part of the charm comes from the land itself. Steep and rolling,
the hills of west Dorset do not lend themselves to modern agriculture. In
parts they are wild and forested; in others, where sheep have grazed vast
hillside pastures to a uniform smoothness, they take on a park-like quality.
The whole - village and countryside - leaves one with the feeling that Old
England is not yet wholly out of reach.
Even in Old England the merry month of May - to say nothing of entire
summers - must have often been wet. But there can be few places left in the
country pretty enough that rain does not dampen the weekend explorer's
enthusiasm: after three soggy days of roaming around west Dorset I was still
enjoying it.
Under a torrential downpour I strolled past the mermaid pond, the ha ha and
the bog garden of Forde Abbey, a glorious 12th century Cistercian monastery
now turned stately home. Through drizzle and drifting fog I gazed at the
Naked Giant, priapic magnificence from Roman times etched with chalk into a
hillside at Cerne Abbas. In Sherborne I ducked into another even greater
abbey to avoid a heavy shower; there I met an elderly lady who wheeled over
to me a strange, mirrored trolley so I might look at the fan-vaulted ceiling
without getting a crick in my neck. I am afraid I dripped water all over it.
But on the third day, when I least expected it, the weather turned. As I was
hunting around under the sea cliffs of the Black Ven at Charmouth, the sun
came out and glinted on burnished ammonites hiding in the sand, one of the
treasures that makes the coast around Lyme Regis so popular with fossil
hunters. And, in the town of Lyme itself, I saw a new season come suddenly
into bloom.
Along the now sunny water-front promenade the deck-chairs were out. The
first ice-creams of the year appeared. Their romantic fancy stirred by the
warm spring air, retired accountants from Birmingham gazed out to sea
through 20p-in-the-slot telescopes. Down on the Cobbe, their wives were
imitating Meryl Streep with long sighs and waiting for their own French
Lieutenant to come sailing in.
Who would not be happy with a day like this? Moon-faced teenaged lovers
wandered the promenade, hand in hand. Children splashing in the water, in
spite of the evidence of blue legs, had persuaded themselves that summer was
not far away.
On the other side of west Dorset the sun shone even on Maiden Castle. It was
a day that would have convinced the shivering Durotriges themselves that a
new age had at last arrived.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920627

