FT922-13473

FT  11 APR 92 / International Company News: Hafnia shareholders to resist
Skandia takeover


   By XUELING LIN and SARA WEBB


   COPENHAGEN, STOCKHOLM


SHAREHOLDERS in Hafnia, the Danish insurance group, will attempt to block
the takeover offer by Skandia, the Swedish insurer. The offer was announced
on Thursday.
The deal would create a group with premium income of SKr22bn (Dollars 3.6bn)
and assets of SKr176m.
Mr Flemming Skov Jensen, director of the Wage Earners' Supplementary Pension
Fund, which holds 2 per cent of the Hafnia capital, said yesterday that the
offer of nine Skandia shares for four of the Danish insurance group was too
low.
He plans to call an extraordinary general meeting to muster the necessary
support from shareholders to block the Skandia bid.
Meanwhile, Uni Storebrand, which is Norway's largest insurance group, said
that it would more than double its premium income as a result of the deal
between Skandia and Hafnia.
Uni Storebrand agreed to take over Skandia's reinsurance operations outside
North America in exchange for most of Uni's shareholding in Skandia,
according to a preliminary agreement announced on Thursday.
Skandia's share price climbed SKr6 to SKr136 in above-average volume when
trading in its shares resumed yesterday.
The share price had closed at SKr130 on Wednesday before activity in
Skandia's shares was suspended on Thursday ahead of the announcement.
Traders in Stockholm said investors looked favourably on Skandia's deal.
Skandia would become the largest insurer in Denmark, as well as succeeding
in divesting itself of most of its reinsurance operations, which have made
heavy losses recently.
Hafnia and Uni Storebrand saw their share prices fall yesterday when trading
opened. Traders said the fall in Hafnia's A shares - from DKr358 (Dollars
56.55) a week ago to DKr325 yesterday - had stemmed mainly from Hafnia's
announcement that it had suffered heavy losses last year.
Uni's shares dropped back NKr5 to NKr54 (Dollars 8.42) when trading started
yesterday afternoon.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920411

