FT924-12180

FT  22 OCT 92 / Major's confused economic policy shifts in emphasis


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


QUESTION: When is a U-turn not a U-turn?
Answer: When it is a change of emphasis.
That, at any rate, was how the Treasury attempted yesterday to explain the
latest twist in UK economic policy since sterling's abrupt departure from
the European exchange rate mechanism on September 16.
According to Treasury officials, the disclosure by Mr John Major, the prime
minister, in a series of television interviews on Tuesday night that the
government intended to build 'a strategy for growth' with further declines
in the cost of borrowing and a shielding of capital spending projects from
this year's tough public-spending round was not a new departure in economic
policy.
Low inflation - and the recently announced target of keeping underlying
inflation in a 1 per cent to 4 per cent annual range during this parliament
 -remained at the heart of economic strategy.
Where the Treasury did depart from past policy guidance was in saying that
the government will attach particular importance to the interests of
industry in the current public-spending round. Efforts will be made to
sustain capital spending projects with the aim of boosting business and
consumer confidence while holding public spending within the Pounds 244.5bn
total planned for 1993-94. The offset will be fierce pressure to keep
public-sector pay rises under tight control.
Treasury officials indicated that, barring upsets, the future path of UK
interest rates will be downwards from the 8 per cent base rate level set
last Friday. They emphasised, though, that interest rate decisions would be
made by Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, after weighing carefully all the
financial indicators, including money supply growth, asset prices and the
exchange rate, that currently determine UK monetary policy.
Although the Treasury's public-relations team was able in that way to
explain how a government apparently determined to bear down on inflation two
weeks ago had now made stimulating growth its main priority, there was
little doubt that the tone of Mr Major's remarks had unsettled some Treasury
officials.
While the emphasis on growth won support in the City in view of the weak
state of the UK economy, some economists expressed concern that the UK might
be reverting to the old pattern of rapid expansion followed by sudden
clampdown in economic policy-making.
'We are back on some sort of rollercoaster,' said Professor Geoffrey Dicks
of the London Business School's economics department.
Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist at Salomon Brothers in London, said the
economy needed lower interest rates in particular given the weakness of
private-sector demand in the economy. But the government would have to be
prepared to tighten policy to curb inflationary pressures once there are
signs that the economy is moving ahead at a steady pace.
The UK, Mr Saunders explained, seems to suffer from a structural imbalance
that can be addressed only through higher taxes or lower public spending.
When the economy achieves sufficient growth to bring the public-sector
finances into balance, it overheats and begins to suffer from accelerating
inflation. Conversely, the economy can operate with low inflation, but only
at the cost of running a large fiscal deficit.
Mr Simon Briscoe, a UK economist at Midland Montagu, welcomed the new
emphasis in policy and the prospect of a further fall in bank base rates
from 8 per cent. 'A week ago, we were bewildered at the absence of rate cuts
and had foreign clients ringing up asking why the government was not cutting
rates,' he said. He believed that an Autumn Statement announcing a tight
fiscal policy would provide an appropriate opportunity for a further
lowering of interest rates. Such action would be justified by the depressed
state of the economy.
According to Mr Briscoe, the government's measure of underlying inflation -
the retail prices index excluding mortgage interest payments - might show
year-on-year growth of above 4 per cent at times in the months ahead as
sterling's devaluation affected the prices of imported goods. But beyond the
next six months, weak economic conditions meant little danger of underlying
inflation breaking upwards out of a 3 per cent-4 per cent range.
A similar judgment probably underlay Mr Major's decision on Tuesday to
highlight the need to end the recession. The Treasury, though, was anxious
to point out positive signs such as stronger-than-expected retail sales in
the third quarter and low unit labour costs.
Confusion about UK economic policy remains. Its future course will have to
be judged by the actions, rather than the words, of policymakers.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921022

