FT922-7375

FT  19 MAY 92 / International Company News: Using family ties to take on IBM
 -Alan Cane on the developing relationship between Fujitsu and ICL, one of
its global network of associates, as they battle flagging profitability and
market changes


   By ALAN CANE


Collaboration between Fujitsu and its global 'family' of associate companies
is intensifying as Japan's leading computer manufacturer seeks to revive
profitability and stalk International Business Machines (IBM) for leadership
of the worldwide computer business.
The list of projects includes a development with ICL which could lead to the
UK company challenging IBM's mainframe superiority; research into computers
which recognise handwriting with the US-based company Poquet; and
developments in computer communications with Amdahl, the US-based large
computer supplier.
Fujitsu, like other Japanese mainframe computer-makers, has seen a steep
decline in profitability this year as Japanese banks and securities houses,
traditionally heavy spenders on large computer systems, cut back on orders
and information technology investment.
Mr Toshio Hiraguri, managing director of Fujitsu Ltd., which has
responsibility for all Fujitsu's computer families, said the Japanese market
was also being affected by the structural changes which were western
computer manufacturers. Customers, he said, were moving to common standards
and smaller, less expensive computers, a phenomenon known as 'down-sizing'.
Mr Hiraguri said Fujitsu was keen to increase the share of revenues coming
from software and services compared with hardware.
It is determined to develop software products which can be used on Fujitsu
computers and those of its competitors. An example was 'Graphicwriting
particular kinds of programs easier, and which was developed jointly by
Fujitsu's artificial intelligence centre in Kawasaki and an ICL group in
Dublin.
Technological links between Fujitsu and ICL, which began in the early 1980s,
are now being cemented by exchange of research staff between London and
Tokyo, and frequent video conferences. Mr Hiraguri confirmed that ICL
engineers were helping Fujitsu to design fibre optic communications systems
to be incorporated into the company's large mainframe computers, which
operate in the same way as IBM's large systems.
He said, however, that the system could also be incorporated into ICL's
mainframes - which are not compatible with IBM's - making it possible for
them to act as the heart of an IBM data processing system. Such a
development would give ICL new credibility among companies which use IBM
hardware exclusively.
Business links between the two companies have also been strengthened through
a reorganisation this year which placed parts of Fujitsu's operations in the
US and Europe under ICL's control. In the US, for example, where both ICL
and Fujitsu market systems for the retail trade, a single company under ICL
management has been formed.
Not all Fujitsu's overseas investments have proved instantly successful.
Poquet developed a pocket-sized computer compatible with IBM's personal
computer, but manufacturing and technical glitches meant weak sales. An
improved version, which can recognise handwritten characters, is expected to
do better.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920519

