FT923-15572

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, State of the Union: Uphill all the way in drive from
Portsmouth to Madrid - Richard Donkin takes to the road to climb the EC's
paper mountain


   By RICHARD DONKIN


THE 38-ton lorry swept through another French village riven in two by the
N138 highway. Traffic was queueing ahead and Gerard Gibeaux, the driver,
relaxed his grip on the steering wheel and gave a shrug as he pulled to a
halt.
'Farmers,' he said. The southbound long-distance lorry drivers had been
warned before leaving Portsmouth for Le Havre that French farmers were once
more on the warpath with roadblocks around Paris. Today it appeared that
some were converging on Le Mans. A tractor could be seen moving slowly at
the head of the snake a mile or so up the road. Just six months from the
advent of the single market the movement of goods across borders appears as
fraught as ever to the lorry drivers.
Our load was 154 cases of office furniture made by Herman Miller, of Bath.
The customer was the savings bank, Caja de Madrid. The freight haulage
company was Cave Wood Transport of High Wycombe and the driver was French -
open borders at least have arrived in the trucking business itself. We
caught the final night crossing from Portsmouth. At Le Havre Gerard extended
his bottom lip as only a Frenchman can and looked depressed. 'We loose much
time. Plenty traffic,' he said in his best broken English.
We turned out of the traffic queue to by-pass Le Mans and made Bordeaux by
nightfall. Trucks crowded into the lorry park just outside the city and the
drivers made a bee-line for the adjoining hotel and a meal that puts the
British transport cafe to shame. The drivers entertain each other with
travellers' tales spiced with Chaucerian bawdiness.
Only the names have changed over the centuries. The lorry driver sees
himself as the verray, parfit gentil knyght bedevilled by police and customs
officers. Asked how the movement of goods had improved in 1992, Nigel
Hainsworth, a British driver, said: 'It hasn't changed one bit. No one has
yet come up with a solution to the VAT problem. As long as every country has
different rates we are going to have pay duty and that will mean paperwork.'
The main difference for drivers after next January should be the
disappearance of documents such as the T2 which needs to be stamped by
customs. And VAT will be dealt with by deferred accounting.
In the northern European countries the customs clearances are now being
carried out increasingly at the point of delivery. But customs clearance by
agents in Spain, Italy and Portugal can still take a full day and at best
takes several hours.
We approached the Spanish border town of Irun around 11am and Gerard, one of
Cave Wood's most experienced drivers, was worried. 'We might be waiting
until six-o-clock tonight,' he said.
Drivers who come to Irun discuss one of the most taxing questions. 'If the
customs controls are going to disappear as we are told,' said Nigel
Hainsworth, 'why are the Spanish building another big lorry park and customs
offices on the border?' It was a question to which no-one had an answer.
Gerard was surprised. At 3.30pm his documents were back in his hands. The
goods were not physically examined. We never saw a customs officer. They
only deal with the agents.
The freight agents and customs officers have most to lose from open borders
and have staged strikes in France and Portugal this year.
The red-capped Basque police were out in force beyond the border but they
were not stopping lorries today. One driver spoke of a convoy of three
British lorries carrying a consignment of computers a few weeks ago whose
drivers could not produce their permits when stopped by the Basque police.
The supplying company was forced to pay Pounds 28,000. 'The Basque fines are
like telephone numbers,' he said.
In France the fines are lower but seem more frequent. 'I had two FFr900 and
one FFr600 fines for tachograph offences in the same month,' said Steve
Jones, a British driver.
We reached Madrid at 2.30am. Lorry drivers sleep in their cabins. There is a
pull-down shelf for co-drivers behind the front seats that provides a
sleeping space not much larger than a coffin. It was hot in the cabin and
Gerard did not lower the windows. There was too much risk, he said, and he
drew his finger from ear to ear.
By mid-morning we were heading for Coslada, the customs clearance park for
Madrid in the hope of finding some freight for the return journey.
Coslada is a truckers' graveyard. They come, they hand in their papers and
they wait.
A British driver parked his refrigerated lorry and walked into the customs
offices. His peaches were ruined. Would anyone help him? No one moved. He
swore and left. Brussels seemed a long way from Coslada.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920701

