FT923-6379

FT  25 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Waiting for the French


BLUFF WORKS only so far in the tussle of wills between central banks and the
money markets. From time to time, the authorities have to put their monetary
policies where their mouths are. For Mr John Major, that time could be nigh.
The prime minister has repeatedly said that he is prepared to do whatever
may be necessary to maintain sterling's position within the ERM. With
sterling only a fraction above DM2.80 last night, he may have to prove it.
If market intervention were to be unsuccessful, proof could require a large
interest rate increase. Such an increase might, if sustained, turn recession
into slump.
Why might Mr Major have to punish the UK economy in this way? The reason is
simply that a fixed exchange rate means abiding by the actions of those who
care little for him or his country. The Bundesbank is set whole-heartedly on
disinflation; the Federal Reserve is little less enthusiastic about
reflation. With a small chance of any early reduction in the three-month
interest rate differential between the dollar and the D-Mark, now some 6 1/2
percentage points, selling dollars has appeared to be a one-way bet. The
result: the US currency touched an all-time low of DM1.3985 yesterday.
Treaty referendum
This leaves Mr Major and the hapless Mr Lamont in considerable difficulties.
But they will have to hold on, at least until after the September 20 French
referendum on the Maastricht treaty. Unfortunately, the French may then
deliver the worst possible result: an exiguous majority in favour of the
treaty. That would undermine the plausibility of the European Community's
planned journey to economic and monetary union, but not terminate it.
Moreover, the only sensible alternative to current European monetary
policies  - a D-Mark appreciation against most of the other European
currencies  - still seems unlikely, whatever the result.
The UK will remain with its lonely choice: in or out, with no compromise in
between. Mr Major insists that the UK will remain in, regardless. But
insistence cannot be enough on its own. The UK is locked in a vicious cycle
characteristic of imperfectly credible fixed exchange rate regimes: the more
adverse the economic circumstances, the more questionable the government's
commitment; the more questionable the commitment, the more the government
must reinforce it; and the more the government has to reinforce it, the more
adverse become the economic circumstances.
The effect of high interest rates in the short to medium term is not the
sole reason for the questioning. It may well be argued that persistent
current account deficits should not matter. If economic activity does not
matter, this is certainly true. But for electorates it normally does matter.
Trade deficit fears
Yesterday's balance of payments figures show that the volume of imports,
excluding oil and the erratic items, grew by 8 per cent in the year to the
three months ending in July, despite the recession. Over the same period
export volumes rose only 3 1/2 per cent. Worse, the growth of imports was
high across all categories of manufactures, with capital and intermediate
goods showing the smallest increase. The current account deficit, now a
little below 2 per cent of gross domestic product, could explode when growth
restarts.
The UK's trade performance raises questions about the chances for sustained
recovery. What is needed is a long period of improving competitiveness to
offset the reduced competitiveness against important trading partners
suffered by the UK between 1987 and 1991. Given the low rates of inflation
elsewhere, however, improved competitiveness will come slowly. Worse, the
low inflation needed for improved competitiveness will tend to raise real
interest rates and constrain domestic demand.
The government will, and must, abide by the rules it has embraced. But the
durability of its policy will be secured only by the acceptability of the
consequences. So far the consequences have been far more adverse, at least
for economic activity, than the government originally supposed. Yet what
makes any policy credible is not assertions by governments, however oft
repeated, but acceptability to electorates. The British electorate has been
forgiving once. It may not be a second time.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920825

