FT924-910

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (10): A tougher year
than expected - Small businesses


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


Japan's dense industrial undergrowth of small businesses knew that 1992
would be a tough year. But they did not know quite how tough it would be.
A survey of 12,615 small companies by the Japan Finance Corporation in the
spring found that the number expecting sales to fall this autumn compared
with a year before outweighed those expecting an increase by a balance of
17.6 percentage points. When they were surveyed again in the summer, a
balance of 33 per cent were expecting sales to fall in the third quarter of
the year.
Having underestimated the scale and spread of the downturn, there is little
doubt how severe it has become. Small business confidence about the outlook
for their sales and profits is close to the all-time low it reached in the
depths of the 1975 recession prompted by the rise in oil prices.
Everything is turning down. Prices are softening, sales are falling,
employment is being cut while it is becoming increasingly difficult for
small companies to raise long-term capital.
The downturn started to affect automobile parts manufacturers first in the
middle of 1991. It then spread rapidly through rubber producers, chemicals,
ceramics and iron and steel in the following six months before hitting
virtually every industrial sector by the start of this year.
The gathering slowdown has been fairly evenly spread across the country.
Only small companies in one region, the southern island of Kyushu, were able
to stave off the downturn this year.
The rate of bankruptcies among small companies is rising; by 38 per cent in
the first 10 months of the year, compared with a 4 per cent growth among
large companies.
Employment in small companies is already contracting, while large companies
are attempting to keep it stable. In August the number of workers in small
family enterprises fell by 8.7 per cent while the number of salaried
employees at large companies rose by 2.5 per cent.
Small companies in Japan - generally defined as companies which employ less
than 300 people with the exception of retailing where the threshold is 50
and wholesaling where it is 150 - were not the engines of employment growth
that they were in the UK and the US during the 1980s. However they still
account for about 79 per cent of employment outside the primary sector of
mining and agriculture.
Over the next year they will bear an increasing share of the burden as Japan
adjusts to slower growth. Small companies are coming under particular
pressure from several factors which do not hurt large companies as much.
There are mounting concerns that small companies may be facing a credit
crunch because they are finding it more difficult to borrow from banks.
Small companies get about 60 per cent of their finance from bank lending.
They are far more dependent upon the banks for finance than large companies.
Small business pressure has led the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry to talk to the commercial banks about their lending policies.
The decline in real estate values has made it more difficult for family
businesses to offer collateral for loans, while the banks are imposing much
tighter restrictions on credit after the easy money of the bubble economy.
However, small businesses borrowed heavily in the late 1980s to finance
investment programmes. The burden of paying off those loans has become
increasingly heavy as the economy has become depressed.
The government is attempting to help prevent such a credit crunch
developing. The budgets for publicly-funded small business finance
corporations has been expanded in the hope that the sharp fall in commercial
bank lending will be offset by the public sector.
An emergency Y10,700bn economic package unveiled in August was partly
targeted at the small business sector by increasing the budgets for the
Japan Finance Corporation and the People's Finance corporation.
Small and medium-sized businesses have largely escaped the direct
consequences of the collapse in stock and real estate prices following the
collapse of the bubble economy. However they are now being hit by the slump
in domestic demand which has followed in its wake.
But it is not simply the slump in final domestic consumer demand which is
hitting small businesses. Small companies which are sub-contractors to large
manufacturers such as the automotive manufacturers are being hit by moves by
their customers to further cut costs by reducing the number of their
suppliers. Throughout Japanese manufacturing there is a move to extend
product cycles, simplify products and reduce the range of products. This in
turn is reducing the number of suppliers which large manufacturers need.
The decline in employment in small businesses reflects the severity of their
position because small companies are loath to lay off workers. Small
companies find it extremely difficult to compete against the wages, terms
and conditions offered by larger groups. For example, about 90 per cent of
small businesses still work a six-day week.
Despite slower economic growth, Japan still faces the prospect of a labour
shortage over the course of the decade. So small businesses are reluctant to
lay off workers now, only to face a fierce competition to recruit them again
once the economy recovers. This means they are covering heavy fixed costs at
a time of declining demand.
Finally, Japan's small companies are the most exposed to international
competition from low-wage economies in the rest of Asia such as Taiwan and
Singapore supplying commodity components to large Japanese groups. Japan's
small companies find it much more difficult to compete with foreign
competition through upgrading their production systems or their design to
create higher value-added products.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921221

