FT924-11443

FT  26 OCT 92 / Clinton's lead over Bush dips sharply: Increased support for
Perot is main factor in narrowing of gap


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


GOVERNOR Bill Clinton's prev-iously commanding lead in the US presidential
election has dropped sharply over the past week, according to polls released
yesterday.
A resurgence of support for Mr Ross Perot, the maverick independent
candidate, is the main factor behind Mr Clinton's decline, which has
considerably narrowed the gap between the Arkansas governor and President
George Bush, the two principal candidates.
Mr Perot's impact on the contest varied from poll to poll, but most showed
Mr Clinton's lead over Mr Bush dropping to single figures, the first time it
has appeared so consistently nar-row since before the Democratic party
convention in July.
On average, polling data showed Mr Clinton's support at around 41 per cent,
with Mr Bush at around 32 per cent and Mr Perot at around 18 per cent. A
week ago, Mr Clinton led Mr Bush by an average of 18 points.
The spirits of the Bush campaign were rekindled by one poll, conducted by
CBS and the New York Times, which showed the president just 5 percentage
points behind Mr Clinton.
Mr Perot has gained ground steadily since the three televised debates. This
has caused mounting anxiety in the Clinton camp.
However, Mr Mickey Kantor, campaign chairman, said yesterday he saw 'some
kind of lid on Ross Perot's vote', and Mr Ron Brown, chairman of the
Democratic National Committee, said the Clinton campaign was not worried by
the latest polls.
Mr Bush has appeared revitalised since the last debate, in which he gave his
most spirited definition so far of his differences with Mr Clinton.
He flew yesterday to Michigan, South Dakota and Montana. Campaign officials
said he will not spend another night in Washington until the election on
November 3.
Yet Mr Clinton still holds a commanding lead in state by state polls, a far
more significant indicator of the outcome of the balloting because of the US
electoral college system, in which almost all states allot their votes on a
winner takes all system.
State polls compiled last week by Hotline, a Washington newsletter, showed
the Democrat ahead by more than the poll's margin of error in 24 states,
including electoral college heavyweights such as California, New York,
Illinois and Pennsylvania. That would be enough to give him a comfortable
victory.
But Mr Robert Teeter, the Bush campaign chairman, said yesterday his polls
showed the president ahead in 12 to 14 states.
Mr Perot yesterday made his first official campaign appearance, in
Flemington, New Jersey, since re-entering the presidential race.
He also threw one of his customary hand grenades into the ring, saying he
had suspended his campaign in July because of a Republican party 'dirty
tricks' plan to disrupt his daughter's wedding and bug his Dallas office.
A Bush campaign spokesman described the story as 'total and complete
nonsense'.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921026

