FT924-8271

FT  12 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Go-ahead expected for S African
aluminium project


   By PHILIP GAWITH


   JOHANNESBURG


ALUSAF, THE aluminium producer in South Africa's Gencor group, looks set
today to give the go-ahead to the development of a 466,000 tonnes-a-year
smelter that will catapult it into fifth place in the world primary
aluminium production league.
Analysts in Johannesburg yesterday agreed that the project would be given
the go-ahead following a tough struggle to raise the necessary finance.
There is speculation, however, that the company will not, as originally
planned, be listed on the stock exchange, because of the poor market
sentiment currently prevailing.
The financial plan is for a total of R6.7bn (Pounds 940m) of new capital to
be raised, the equity portion of this representing R3.1bn. Gencor and the
Industrial Development Corporation will be putting up R1bn and R800m
respectively, while Alusaf was seeking the balance of R1.3bn from local
institutions.
Mr Dave Russell, analyst at stockbrokers Irish & Menell Rosenberg, said he
believed that Escom, the electricity supply utility, would be contributing a
portion of the equity funding following reluctance on the part of smaller
institutions to commit themselves to funding a project where there will be a
delay of about four years before returns are received. That difficulties
were encountered in raising funds is evident from the fact that the share
placing with institutions was originally supposed to close on October 28,
with listing of the company set by the sponsoring brokers for November 4.
The existing Alusaf smelter, with its capacity of 170,000 tonnes a year, is
a small and uncompetitive producer with only a 0.9 per cent global market
share. With the new capacity in place on the likely completion date in
October 1996, Alusaf's ultimate tonnage will be equivalent to 3.6 per cent
of present global production.
Mr Mike Wuth, mining analyst at stockbrokers Rice Rinaldi said yesterday
that the timing of the project was excellent, coming as it did with the
aluminium market at or near the bottom of a downturn. Although the industry
is at present experiencing difficult times with low metal prices rendering a
considerable portion of world production uneconomic, there is a view that
the industry will be facing a shortage of aluminium by the middle of the
decade.
Sumitomo Corporation of Japan, one of the world's largest metal trading
groups, recently estimated that by 1995 annual demand for aluminium would
outpace supply by 1.23m tonnes.
Alusaf has obtained favourable long-term contracts for the supply of alumina
and power which will shift it towards the bottom of the cost curve when
world aluminium prices are low.
At the London Metal Exchange yesterday the cash aluminium price rose by
Dollars 16 to Dollars 1,163 a tonne, but that was only about Dollars 80
above the life-of contract low reached last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921112

