FT922-4493

FT  05 JUN 92 / O&Y reveals list of leading creditors


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


HONGKONG & Shanghai Banking Corporation, which is bidding to take over
Midland Bank, was revealed yesterday as Olympia & York's biggest creditor,
with a total exposure of at least USDollars 780m (Pounds 433m) and
collateral worth far less than the principal amount.
A bulky document filed by the debt-ridden Canadian property developer with
the Ontario Court of Justice also identifies several Japanese banks among
O&Y's most generous lenders. Six Japanese institutions are the biggest
participants in a USDollars 500m term loan led by Citibank of the US and
secured by O&Y's shareholding in Carena Properties, a property holding
company which itself is in financial trouble.
The document details all borrowings by Olympia & York Developments (the main
holding company of the owners, the Reichmann family) and the 28 Canadian
subsidiaries which sought court protection on May 14.
The debt of these companies totals about two thirds of O&Y's total debt of
CDollars 13.5bn (Pounds 6.2bn) but does not include direct loans to Canary
Wharf in London's Docklands or to the company's 20 or so buildings in the
US. Two British banks, Barclays and Lloyds, have a substantial direct
exposure to Canary Wharf.
O&Y's biggest lender was previously assumed to be Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce, which last week disclosed an exposure of CDollars 860m. HSBC
provided USDollars 750m (CDollars 903m) of a Dollars 2.5bn loan negotiated
in 1989. In addition, Hongkong Bank of Canada, a wholly-owned subsidiary,
advanced CDollars 32m in demand loans.
The security for the jumbo loan consists of O&Y's stakes in Abitibi-Price
and Gulf Canada Resources. Mr Alain Tuchmaier of McLean McCarthy in Toronto
calculates the current market value of the shares pledged to HSBC at only
CDollars 588m.
The most heavily exposed Japanese banks are Tokai and Dai-Ichi Kangyo. Tokai
provided half of the Citibank-led Dollars 500m term facility. Dai-Ichi
Kangyo put Dollars 180m towards the jumbo loan.
According to Mr Tuchmaier, the security provided for the Citibank loan is
now worth CDollars 173m, less than a third of the principal amount. Japanese
institutions are also known to have lent heavily to several O&Y properties
in New York.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920605

