FT923-6387

FT  25 AUG 92 / ERM 'may have to be scrapped': National Institute of
Economic and Social Research Quarterly Review


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


THE EUROPEAN exchange rate mechanism may have to be scrapped if progress
towards economic and monetary union breaks down, the National Institute of
Economic and Social Research says in its quarterly review published
yesterday.
If moves to achieve Emu by the century's end falter  - perhaps after a 'no'
vote in next month's French referendum on Maastricht  - serious financial
instability could result, leading to higher inflation and interest rates
across Europe.
The institute says the arguments for Emu  - involving a single European
currency presided over by a single central bank  - remain strong in spite of
doubts about ratification of the Maastricht treaty.
It warns: 'If the prospect of Emu were to recede into the indefinite future,
then (ERM) realignments would become larger and more frequent.
'Continuing with the ERM as it now is cannot be seen as an alternative to
Emu . . . The only lasting alternative to Emu may be a return to floating
exchange rates within Europe.'
A French vote in favour of the Maastricht treaty is a 'necessary although
not a sufficient' condition for Emu taking place as planned, it says.
If Europe were to give up on Emu, signifying an end to the goal of
permanently fixed exchange rates across Europe, the outcome would affect
countries in different ways.
'The outcome (of Emu's abandonment) in each member state would then depend
on the priorities and the reputation of national monetary authorities,' says
the institute. 'Even if the form of the (exchange rate mechanism of the)
European Monetary System was maintained, the result would probably be higher
inflation and higher nominal exchange rates for most of the member states,
including the UK.'
The institute points out that, under Emu, pan-European borrowing costs would
be set according to economic conditions across the continent. That would be
preferable to the ERM arrangements, whereby rates are in practice determined
by German events.
Other arguments for Emu were the reduction in transaction costs that would
follow the introduction of a single currency and the poor record of many
European countries in delivering low inflation and stable growth by national
economic policies alone.
Observer, Page 13
Lex, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920825

