FT923-6443

FT  25 AUG 92 / Bonn defends Bundesbank over Dollars: German interest rates
'only one factor' in collapse of US currency


   By ANDREW FISHER and CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT, BONN


THE GERMAN government yesterday closed ranks with the Bundesbank and
rejected charges that high interest rates set in Frankfurt lay behind the
collapse of the dollar.
The independent central bank's interest rate policy might have been a
factor, but US rates had been 'uncoupled' with the aim of helping American
exports, the finance ministry said yesterday. 'You cannot make the
Bundesbank solely responsible for what has happened.'
Mr Rudiger Pohl, one of the group of five leading independent economic
advisers to the government, said that central banks' intervention in the
market was helpful only as a means of hampering 'overdone speculation'. It
could have no effect on the basic situation while the gap between US and
German interest rates remained so wide.
The ministry accepted that the dollar's slump might hit exports, but not all
the effects were negative, it said. The D-Mark's relative strength would
reduce the costs of oil and other industrial imports, helping dampen
domestic price rises, the ministry added.
Meanwhile, the Bundesbank remained tight-lipped. Other than confirming that
it had intervened to help stabilise markets, and repeating earlier
declarations that it had 'no interest' in a weak dollar, it refused comment.
However, it has made clear in recent weeks that while it is uncomfortable
with chaotic conditions in foreign exchange markets, it has no short-term
plans to change its policy. A strong D-Mark supports the bank's aim of
controlling inflation and attracts funds to help with reconstruction in the
east.
Even though German ministers expect to come under pressure to use their
influence with the Bundesbank, notably at the planned G7 meeting in
Washington in mid-September, the finance ministry stuck to its established
position.
Rebutting reports that relations between Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister,
and the central bank were under strain, a spokesman said 'this ministry has
always supported the Bundesbank's independence'.
Meanwhile, the BDI federation of German industry, warned of possible damage
to the country's main export industries, notably vehicle manufacture, plant
and engineering and aerospace.
The federation said companies would have to make special price arrangements
with potential customers if they did not want to lose market share.
However, the German pharmaceutical industry yesterday reported a 6.7 per
cent rise in turnover to DM13.9bn in the first half of this year, mostly
thanks to exports.
Forecasting 'moderate growth' for the year as a whole, BPI, the federal
drugs makers' association, said exports had increased by 13.5 per cent to
DM5.5bn. Sales for the whole of last year were DM31bn.
Early indications of steadying west German inflation emerged yesterday in
figures from North Rhine Westphalia, which reported prices up 0.1 per cent
on the month to mid-August.
The year-on-year rate of inflation in the most populous state stood at 3.4
per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920825

