FT924-12050

FT  22 OCT 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Miners urged to prepare for
'green' onslaught


   By KENNETH GOODING


   LAS VEGAS


THE MINING industry's environmental performance was under increasingly
intense scrutiny following the Rio Earth Summit, Mr George Littlewood,
vice-president, external affairs, for CRA, the Australian natural resources
group warned yesterday. 'The world has changed for the mining industry and
we ignore those changes at our economic cost.'
He suggested that the environmental movement had used Rio to enhance its
international networks. A follow-up paper by the Washington-based Worldwatch
Institute think-tank showed a 'shift and intensification in the
environmental movement's interest in the mining industry'.
The Worldwatch paper moved the anti-mining argument one step further by
suggesting the world could not afford the ecological price of satisfying its
present appetite for minerals. It also claimed mining had a big adverse
impact on the environment because it was a profligate user of energy and
therefore contributed to all the adverse aspects of energy use, including
potential climate change.
Mr Littlewood told a conference held as part of the American Mining
Congress's MinExpo exhibition: 'It is the environmental movement - not the
industry - which now has the tools at its disposal to pursue that argument.
The momentum and political sanction created by the Rio summit and public
opinion in sections of the developed world are on its side. Its capacity to
organise and inspire and its record of past success should caution any view
that Rio was the end rather than the beginning of even closer scrutiny of
our industry'.
He called for more support for the International Council for Mining, set up
by some of the big companies two years ago, as a start towards ensuring the
mining industry got its own international networks working better.
The mining industry should balance the debate about ethical issues, he said.
'It is no more ethical for this generation to pass on to succeeding
generations a degraded economy than it is to pass on a degraded
environment.'
Mr Littlewood pointed out: 'Development creates infrastructure, finances
education, enables cultural advancement and allows economic surpluses to be
used to look after the less well off in developed societies. No wonder large
parts of the world, which currently do not enjoy such benefits, become
rightfully irritated when they are told to cease and desist in the pursuit
of economic growth by those who enjoy the benefits of growth.
'Morality is on the side of development as well as on the side of those who
genuinely care for the protection of the environment.'
About 200 delegates from the CIS and other parts of the former eastern bloc
are at the AMC exhibition, looking for mining technology equipment and joint
ventures. The number of exhibitors at MinExpo, which is held every four
years, is a record 880 and attendance, forecast to be about 30,000 before
the show started, is exceeding expectations. Foreign visitors account for
nearly 20 per cent of those attending.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921022

