FT923-9800

FT  03 AUG 92 / Monday Interview: Herald of market reform - Jacob Frenkel,
governor of the Bank of Israel


   By HUGH CARNEGY


Mr Jacob Frenkel is an Israeli who made a name for himself as an economist
on the international stage. But a year ago, he decided to trade in the world
for the more limited confines of home.
As economic counsellor and director of research at the International
Monetary Fund, Prof Frenkel could count himself as one of the world's most
influential economists. He rose from Jerusalem's Hebrew University to a
professorship of international economics at the University of Chicago and
later to the pinnacle of his profession at the IMF.
Then in mid-1991, Mr Frenkel accepted an offer from Mr Yitzhak Shamir, then
prime minister, to return home to serve as governor of the Bank of Israel,
the country's central bank. An important job, no doubt, but somewhat
parochial after the heady heights of the IMF, not to mention rather less
well paid. He now probably nets less than 20 per cent of the Dollars 150,000
tax-free salary he enjoyed in Washington.
Mr Frenkel, however, clearly seems to be enjoying the change. 'Very often
you feel happier driving your own little car than driving a huge Mercedes
that is rented,' he says. 'That's what it boils down to.'
His appointment did not meet with universal approval in Israel. A right-wing
cabinet minister objected to bringing in a man who had been abroad for 18
years and had not shared the military reserve duties of his fellow-citizens
during his exile. To be an emigrant from the Jewish state carries a stigma -
the Hebrew word for emigrant, yored, literally means 'one who is going
down'.
Mr Frenkel's arrival at the central bank was meant to be a signal of change
in Israel at a time when the country was experiencing a tide of mass
immigration from what was then still the Soviet Union. Although the flow has
sharply declined in recent months, it has to date brought some 400,000
newcomers. The national aim is to attract some 1m immigrants by 1995,
swelling the population by a fifth.
Mr Shamir's government said that in order to cope with the economic
challenges posed by immigration, market reforms had to be unleashed to
revitalise a long-stagnant economy. As Bank of Israel governor, Mr Frenkel
was billed as a key player in the reform process, with his statutory role as
chief economic adviser to the government.
It was clearly this challenge that attracted him to the job. Mr Frenkel
calls it 'one of the most exciting periods in Israel's economic history'.
But a year into his tenure, it seems legitimate to ask whether Israel's
economy really can be reformed and revived.
Mr Shamir's right-wing coalition government, which was defeated in last
month's general election, failed to match its economic promises. In fact,
huge state spending on housing, both in Israel and on Jewish settlements in
the occupied territories, and a stalled privatisation programme have
resulted in a big increase in the government's share of the economy, not a
decrease. Government spending rose from 50 per cent of GDP in 1988 to 68 per
cent in 1991.
Now the Labour party, under Mr Yitzhak Rabin, is back in power.
Historically, Labour, with its roots in east European collectivism, is the
party which put the country's socialist structures in place in the early
days of the state. Indeed, it is tempting to conclude that Zionism, with its
emphasis on the welfare of the Jewish people, is eternally at odds with the
notion of a market economy. But Jacob Frenkel sees no ideological reasons
why Labour cannot succeed where Mr Shamir failed.
'When you speak about the goals of Zionism, those are the goals of providing
a homeland for the Jewish people here in Israel - which is viable
economically. Those are general political objectives. When it comes to the
instruments by which those objectives are achieved, here it is a purely
professional question. It is not an ideological issue any more.'
Mr Frenkel makes no secret of his high hopes for Mr Rabin's new coalition,
which has espoused the need for reform. He says he is convinced of Labour's
commitment to a market economy, remarking that it may indeed take the Labour
party to grasp the nettle of recasting a system it set up in the first
place.
The task facing the new government is certainly great. Immigration has
pushed up unemployment to a record 11.5 per cent. Inflation, though falling,
is predicted to be at 10 per cent for the year. Exports have declined in the
past 18 months. As a result of immigration, the country has a surplus of
doctors, dentists, musicians, engineers and academics for whom there are no
opportunities. 'We now have mining engineers in a country with no mines,'
says Mr Frenkel.
Most of all, he argues, Israel needs time to cope with the economic problems
created by the influx of newcomers. 'Look at the unification of Germany,' he
says. 'Multiply (the difficulties) several times and you get the elements of
the task Israel has to face.'
Somehow Israel has to produce unprecedented, sustained growth that will
provide employment for the immigrants and prevent the state sinking under
the burden of providing for them. This year, GNP is expected to grow by
about 5 per cent, slightly less than last year. That looks impressive. But
when population growth is accounted for, and a non-recurring housing boom is
stripped out, even these levels of growth are well short of what is
required.
Mr Frenkel's prescription is for a radical programme of reform, investment
and cuts in social spending. Above all, he wants market reforms -
privatisation of the big state industrial holdings, lower taxation for
business, open trade policies, foreign exchange liberalisation and a
dismantling of the hold on labour markets held by the Labour-affiliated
Histadrut trade union federation. 'There is no way out from structural
reform,' he says.
Controversially, perhaps, Mr Frenkel also backs a drive by the government to
raise Dollars 20bn in foreign borrowing over the next five years. The key to
this is winning US loan guarantees for Dollars 10bn which Mr Rabin is hoping
to secure from President Bush later this month. Such borrowing will
dramatically reverse a downward trend in its foreign debt burden. In recent
years, Israel reduced the ratio of its foreign debt to GNP to 27 per cent
from about 80 per cent. Meanwhile, there is also a domestic debt burden of
more than 100 per cent of GNP.
A big government borrowing binge appears to be the exact opposite of the
reversal of the state's role in the economy that Israel is supposed to be
achieving. But Mr Frenkel defends the borrowing plan, saying it is essential
for the government to fund infrastructural investment.
'The logic of this is that the immigrants bring with them a lot of human
capital but no physical or financial capital. We have to make sure the
physical and financial capital grows at a very fast rate to complement the
human capital that is coming to us in a massive flow.'
Labour's plans to pump billions of shekels into projects such as
communications have the governor's support. 'Even I, who thinks that the
government should be smaller and should step out of the market place, think
this kind of investment is blessed because it does not crowd out private
investment, but rather crowds in private investment.'
It is here that the real test will come. Will Mr Rabin's Labour-led
government also carry out the structural reforms and the cuts in Israel's
big welfare programmes that Mr Frenkel says are essential for getting the
economy off the ground? As an insurance policy, the governor has worked
closely with US officials to frame economic conditions for the loan
guarantees designed to try to ensure such reform takes place.
But Mr Frenkel's faith in the new government is such that he says it does
not need outside prodding to do the job. 'The issue is not philosophical,
the issue is the political capacity to implement (the correct policies). The
jury is still out. But I am optimistic.'
PERSONAL FILE
1943     Born in Tel Aviv.
1960-63  Served in Israeli Defence Forces chaplaincy corps.
1963-68  Studied economics and political science, Hebrew University.
1968-71  MA, PhD in economics, University of Chicago.
1971-73  Taught economics, Tel Aviv University.
1973-90  Taught economics, University of Chicago.
1987-91  Economic counsellor, director of research, IMF.
1991-    Governor, Bank of Israel, and head of Israeli delegation to
Middle East multilateral negotiations on regional economic co-operation.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920803

