FT924-1068

FT  19 DEC 92 / Books: Press baron of honour - The rise of the Berry
brothers of Merthyr Tydfil


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


WILLIAM CAMROSE, GIANT OF FLEET STREET by his son, Lord Hartwell Weidenfeld
& Nicolson Pounds 17.99, 362 pages
THE NAMES Beaverbrook and Rothermere will live for ever, if only because
their daft ideas and political scheming provoked Stanley Baldwin into the
immortal piece of invective against the press lords: 'power without
responsibility, the prerogative of the harlot throughout the ages'.
Much less is known today about their contemporary, Lord Camrose, perhaps
because villains are so much more agreeable to write about than a man who
was wise and honourable and built sound businesses.
Yet a strong case can be made out that of the three, Camrose's achievements
were the greatest. He not only saved two great newspapers from likely
oblivion - the Sunday Times and the Daily Telegraph - but also gave a
platform for Winston Churchill when Churchill found himself 'without an
office, without a seat, without a party and without an appendix'. To Lord
Camrose's accomplishments must also be added the ownership of the Financial
Times for a significant period and the creation of the 'Men and Matters'
column, for some reason now called 'Observer'.
The biography of William Camrose by his son Lord Hartwell, former chairman
of the Daily Telegraph, should serve to bring into focus for those not born
at the time how one of the great newspaper empires was created in a single
generation by the three Berry brothers from Merthyr Tydfil.
Of course there is a danger in sons writing about fathers that the account
will either be too fulsome or too bitter. 'It is a filial but not I think a
sycophantic book' says Lord Hartwell, who adds that he hopes it will seem to
be the sort of book an independent author would have written had he had
access to all Hartwell's sources.
That is exactly what has been achieved.
For example, after Chamberlain told the House of Commons he had been happy
to receive assurances from the German government of its desire for a
peaceful solution to the Czechosolovakian dispute, Hartwell has this to say
of Camrose: 'the following day Chamberlain saw William and gave him the same
'sunny-Jim' story for which William, like the House of Commons, seems to
have fallen'.
The book will be of interest to many constituencies. It is fascinating as a
personal story of adventure, coincidence and achievement. When he was 13,
William was entered by his school in a competition to precis a lecture on
pessimism. The judge, the editor of the Merthyr Times, said: 'this boy
should take up journalism'. Many years later Camrose was in a position to
appoint the precis judge, William Hadley, editor of the Sunday Times.
Then there is the world of advertising at the turn of the century, and
William's first business venture - the launch of a trade publication, the
Advertising World. William and his brother Gomer went after ads at Pounds 6
a page, wearing overcoat s with a special large inside pocket to keep the
specimen copy of the magazine clean and flat - and make sure that it
'doesn't give us away as canvassers when we go into an office'.
His handwritten memoranda to his editors revealed a proprietor who cared
about every word that appears in his papers - and was clearly a sub-editor
of genius. 'A house is not a mansion nowadays even when it belongs to the
Marquis of Londonderry' he wrote. And rather more significantly, he attacked
a leader that appeared to be like a Conservative Central Office statement:
'What the leader does . . . is to say in the most unctuous way that we will
agree with whatever the government may do', Camrose wrote pointedly.
The biography also has a great deal to say on the abdication crisis - and no
less than five chapters on appeasement, plus several appendices.
And this, however, is the main problem. While the book begins at the
beginning and ends properly with the death of William Camrose, in between it
is not easy to read. Chronology is abandoned and there are many detailed
descriptions of the politics and the politicians of the period without the
book's hero managing to get much of a look in. But just when there seems to
be a danger of the reader coming to the end without really knowing enough
about the man, the final chapter reverts to the personal. When Camrose died,
Harold Nicolson wrote in his diary of the flags at half-mast in Fleet
Street, and added: 'he was a staunch friend and wise counsellor. He showed
that one could be a press lord and a gentleman'.
There is one final point that has to be made. It is a point that the book
does not state, but is nonetheless implicit: it is that there seems to be
cycles of decline and renaissance in newspapers and, as William Berry and
Conrad Black proved conclusively, it usually takes an outsider to end a
cycle of decline.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

921219

