FT924-1076

FT  19 DEC 92 / Sport: Casey at the bat in the US Senate - Baseball / Jurek
Martin looks at the US national game's continuing troubles with politics,
race and money


   By JUREK MARTIN


ON JULY 9 1958, a Senate judiciary sub-committee convened to investigate the
exemption of baseball from the nation's anti-trust laws. The star witness
was Casey Stengel, then manager of the New York Yankees, whose contributions
to the English language make those of the fictional Mrs Malaprop
insignificant.
It was an immortal display of Stengelese. After one extraordinary
digression, Senator Estes Kefauver declared, in frustration: 'Mr Stengel, I
am not sure I made my question clear,' to which the great Casey replied:
'Yes sir, well, that is all right. I am not sure I am going to answer yours
perfectly, either."
There was one moment of clarity. 'An owner,' Stengel said, 'gets most of the
money at home and it is up to him and his staff to do better or they ought
to be discharged.'
Plus ca change. On December 10 1992, the same sub-committee reconvened with
the same purpose. Its star witness was Fay Vincent, dismissed summarily last
summer as the commissioner of baseball by the owners for failing
sufficiently to heed their bidding.
Vincent speaks no Stengelese, but he loves the sport as much. He described
himself as just 'another former bureaucrat without formal standing in
baseball.' On balance, he thought baseball still warranted anti-trust
exemption but should have to prove continuously that it does.
Gently, but pointedly, he said one condition should be the existence of a
truly independent commissioner who represented all the sport's component
parts. He told Senator Howard Metzenbaum: 'I said one time that the business
of baseball is like the sun: you can't look at it for very long without
turning away.'
The problem for baseball is that the indispensable public might be turning
away from it, not in legalistic confusion but in disgust.
The big off-season story has been the case of Marge Schott, owner of the
Cincinnati Reds. It is most charitable to describe Schott, whose fortune is
derived from used cars, as silly, even eccentric, in the indulgence she
allows her pet Saint Bernard, Schottzie Two.
Her arbitrary treatment of her employees on the field and off it is
legendary. Lou Piniella quit as Reds' manager in October, less than two
years after bringing a World Series crown to Cincinnati, because he could
stand her no longer.
As owners go she was not exceptional; and with George Steinbrenner, the
ultimate autocrat, returning to the helm of the Yankees next year, she might
have attracted minimal attention outside Cincinnati. That was until her
fondness for racist and anti-Semitic epithets became public knowledge.
Four years ago, Al Campanis, of the Los Angeles Dodgers' front office,
opened baseball's hidden can of worms when he remarked that he did not think
blacks were up the demands of managing baseball clubs. Schott's references
to two of her players as 'million-dollar niggers' were equally offensive and
in no way mitigated by the fact that she then hired a former Red, Tony
Perez, a black Cuban-American, to succeed Piniella.
Of course, the Rev Jesse Jackson intervened and, of course, Schott
apologised, as had Campanis. But the public outcry was enough to induce the
owners to form a committee to investigate how she should be 'disciplined'
(although how poachers bring gamekeepers to heel is not easy to imagine. An
independent commissioner might).
If all this were not bad enough, baseball then nearly countenanced the
ultimate sin of sacrilege on its own history. Nobody disputed the San
Francisco Giants' right to pay Barry Bonds, of the Pittsburgh Pirates,
Dollars 43.75m (Pounds 29m) for the next six years. For a player who has
never hit much in post-season play, the contract seemed high; and for a team
that would have moved to Florida, had the other owners agreed, because it
could not make money in the Bay Area, there seemed a lack of financial
sense. The Yankees, bidding furiously but offering only the same annual
salary over five years, had the gall to complain that the Giants were
distorting the salary market.
What upset the purists was Bonds' demand that the Giants allow him to wear
the number 24. That number belonged to Willie Mays, not merely the best ever
to wear a Giants uniform but, beyond all reasonable doubt, the greatest
player of the last 50 years.
Mays is Bonds' godfather, and is said to have given him permission to use
the number, but even that was insufficient explanation. Fortunately, Bonds
relented and said he would wear 25, the number sported by his father Bobby
in the days when he and Willie patrolled the outfield together.
The other trades showed how much clubs with money are willing to pay for the
right free-agent talent (although, with 18 of the 26 major league teams
operating at a loss, not all have the resources).
The dismemberment of the Pirates, probably the best National League team
over the past five years but not the richest, proceeded apace. They lost not
only Bonds but also Doug Drabek, a fine pitcher, to Atlanta, which is
stuffed with fine pitchers already.
David Cone, transferred from the New York Mets to help pitch the Toronto
Blue Jays to the World Series title in the last month of last season, is off
to Kansas City for a Dollars 9m signing bonus. The Blue Jays also lost Jimmy
Key, a good left-hander, to the Yankees and are letting the venerable Dave
Winfield go, replacing him with the medium-in-the-tooth Paul Molitor from
Milwaukee.
The Yankees also signed Wade Boggs, who had spent all his career with the
Boston Red Sox compiling a gaudy .339 batting average but hit only to .260
last seaon. The Mets and the Red Sox, coming off anni horribiles,
respectively picked up admirable ancients, Frank Tanana and Andre Dawson.
But the ultimate question is whether there will be a next season. By a
narrow margin at their winter meeting, the owners voted to re-open contract
talks with the players' union in the weeks ahead. It had been thought they
would wait a year and enjoy the Dollars 4bn-plus television revenues
guaranteed next year, but not thereafter.
Trouble looms and there is no commissioner. Perhaps the call will go out to
another great mangler of the English language. After all, George Bush is
about to become a free agent himself.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

921219

