FT922-13408

FT  11 APR 92 / As they say in Europe: The old order grumbles


   By JAMES MORGAN


'THE RESULTS are a bitter protest against the policies of the big parties.'
That was Die Welt writing about the outcome of the regional polls in Germany
last weekend. The French papers had said the same thing about their local
elections. 'The protest votes reached almost half the total. They punished
the socialists without helping the right,' Liberation noted.
In Italy the headline in Tuesday's La Repubblica was 'The Christian
Democratic wall collapses and the voters punish the Socialists.' The Vatican
paper, L'Osservatore Romano, wrote: 'The rule of the patricians of the
ancien regime has collapsed. Italians have had enough of the rituals of an
ageing court behind closed doors, never heeding the cries of the populace
pressing against the palace gate.' Before the election the bishops had
ordered Catholics to vote Christian Democrat, so it seems the Vatican plans
to ditch its ally, prime minister Giulio Andreotti.
The German view of the British election implied that it too should have
ended in the disaster that fell on continental establishments. While the
French found the campaign entertaining, worth several hundred words of
cheery comment, to the Germans press it was unedifying. But Die Zeit and the
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung would find Mother Theresa unedifying.
Bernhard Heimrich of FAZ may have seemed to think highly of the Liberal
Democrat leader, Paddy Ashdown - 'Next to Major and Kinnock, Ashdown will
always look the youthful hero' ran his headline. But the piece put Paddy in
his place: 'This time the Captain felt good before the battle, he came out
with the words of Bismarck that no German now could mouth: he was grabbing
the hem of the coat of the fast moving events of history - 'But was it
really God?''
You do not follow this? Nor did the Germans I asked, but then in the FAZ it
is normal to kick off with a complex reference to Bismarck. Heimrich
continued, 'He (Ashdown) was also one of those who, under the pressure of
competition, made the inevitable comparison with the demagogy of Goebbels.
But he got the first name mixed up: 'Hermann Goebbels.' Anyway the fault
betrays the fact that today even in Britain, the post-war generation runs
the election campaign.'
Jurgen Kronig ran a 'Tories Panic' piece in Die Zeit that saw Ashdown as
something of a beacon in a campaign dominated by insularity and the Tory
tabloids' unsuccessful attempts to blacken the reputation of the Labour
leader, Neil Kinnock. 'Labour and Conservatives almost created the
impression that the rest of the world did not exist.'
That was before two states voted in a way to make the rest of the world
wonder about Germany. But the rise of parties reminiscent of the
not-so-distant German past did not generate the anxiety that might have been
expected. Bild shouted: 'Is there a threat of a new Hitler?' but most
concluded it was part of the great European protest. The Neue Osnabrucker
Zeitung wrote: 'One understands those fears which arise from the past but
when an Israeli paper recalls 1933 and comes to the conclusion, 'Now it's
all starting again,' that is false and unjust. There are other sounds from
abroad which are all too shrill and dissonant - not least from our French
neighbours in their glasshouse.'
The leading resident of the glasshouse, Le Monde, replied: 'When a small
far-right grouping shows up east of the Rhine, when a wave of violence
against immigrants develops, the warnings erupt against the resurgence of
neo-nazism among our neighbours. In recent years, the Germans, taking things
calmly, have made much of the fact that the extreme right was making greater
progress in France than over there . . .' So Le Monde threw no stones.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

920411

