FT922-7183

FT  20 MAY 92 / FT Law Report: Bank rescue is tax deductible


   By RACHEL DAVIES, Barrister


LAWSON (HM Inspector of Taxes) v JOHNSON MATTHEY PLC
House of Lords (Lord Keith of Kinkel, Lord Emslie, Lord Templeman, Lord Goff
of Chieveley, Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle): May 14 1992
MONEY contributed to the resources of an insolvent subsidiary by its parent
company as a term of the sale of all its shares to the Bank of England to
remove the threat posed by the insolvency to the parent's business, is a
payment to preserve the parent from collapse, not to procure the transfer of
shares, and is therefore a revenue, not capital, expense deductible from
profits for corporation tax purposes.
The House of Lords so held when allowing an appeal by the taxpayer, Johnson
Matthey plc, from a Court of Appeal decision that its Pounds 50m injection
into an insolvent subsidiary was a capital expenditure.
LORD TEMPLEMAN said Johnson Matthey traded in platinum.
In 1984, it owned all the shares in Johnson Matthey Bankers (JMB), a banking
company which assisted the financing of its trade.
On September 30 1984, JMB and Johnson Matthey realised JMB was unable to pay
its debts and that without further capital it could not open for business
the following day.
Johnson Matthey also realised that if JMB ceased business as a result of
being unable to meet its debts, creditors of Johnson Matthey, particularly
those who were also creditors of JMB, would demand immediate repayment and
withdraw credit facilities.
If JMB could not open for business the following day, Johnson Matthey could
not continue to trade.
In those circumstances, Johnson Matthey agreed to sell the JMB shares to the
Bank of England for Pounds 1 and to contribute Pounds 50m to JMB's
resources.
The Bank of England agreed to buy the shares on those terms.
The Pounds 50m repayment was necessary and was made to enable Johnson
Matthey to continue to trade. The objects were achieved and Johnson Matthey
continued to trade.
Section 74 of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 provided that in
computing profits of a trade, no sum should be deducted for expenses 'not
being money wholly and exclusively laid out or expended for the purposes of
the trade'.
The General Commissioners found, and it was not disputed, that the Pounds
50m was wholly and exclusively laid out for the purposes of Johnson
Matthey's trade. It was made for the purpose of preserving that trade and
for no other purpose.
But that finding did not automatically enable Johnson Matthey to deduct
Pounds 50m in the computation of its profits. The deduction could only be
made if the Pounds 50m was a revenue, and not a capital expenditure.
The General Commissioners held that as a payment to preserve an existing
business, the Pounds 50m was of a revenue nature.
Mr Justice Vinelott and the Court of Appeal concluded the Pounds 50m was
paid to get rid of the shares. They held it was a capital expenditure.
In British Insulated and Helsby Cables v Atherton (1926) AC 205, Viscount
Cave said 'where an expenditure is made, not only once and for all, but with
a view to bringing into existence an asset or an advantage for the enduring
benefit of the trade . . . there is very good reason . . . for treating such
an expenditure as properly attributable not to revenue but to capital'.
In the present case the Pounds 50m payment did not bring an asset into
existence, and did not procure an advantage for the enduring benefit of the
trade.
So unless the payment was made for the transfer of an existing asset, namely
the shares in JMB, the Pounds 50m was not capital expenditure.
In Mitchell v Noble (1927) 1 KB 719, 737 Lord Hanworth MR, holding the
relevant payment to be an income expense, said 'a payment made in the course
of business with reference to a particular difficulty . . . was made not to
secure an actual asset to the company, but to enable the company to continue
to carry on'.
In the present case, the Pounds 50m was made in the course of business,
dealing with the particular difficulty which arose on September 30 1984 as a
result of JMB's insolvency; and it was made to enable Johnson Matthey to
continue to carry on business unimperilled by its association with JMB.
In Anglo-Persian Oil (1932) 1 KB 124, Lord Justice Romer pointed out that in
applying the test in Atherton 'enduring' meant 'enduring in the way that
fixed capital endures'. The advantage did not need to be positive, but might
consist in getting rid of fixed capital of an onerous character.
The item of fixed capital which was got rid of, the JMB shares, were not
themselves of an onerous character. The Pounds 50m payment had no enduring
effect on Johnson Matthey's capital. It prevented the whole of Johnson
Matthey's business from being brought to a grinding halt.
In Southern v Borax (1941) 1 KB 111, Mr Justice Lawrence, holding that
payments were revenue, said 'if no alteration is made in the fixed capital
asset by the payment, then it is properly attributable to revenue, being in
substance a matter of maintenance'.
By 'maintenance' he was taken to mean 'preservation'. In the present case
the expenditure preserved the whole business, though it did not preserve any
particular asset.
In Associated Portland Cement (1946) 1 ALL ER 68, a payment was held to be a
capital asset because the company had thereby improved the value of its
goodwill and brought into existence an advantage for the enduring benefit of
the trade.
In the present case, goodwill was not improved, but saved from extinction.
In CIR v Carron (1967) 45 TC 18 the expense of a new charter which
facilitated administration and management of the company was held to be a
revenue expense because the object was to remove obstacles to profitable
trading.
The Johnson Matthey/JMB association was a formidable obstacle to trading at
all.
In Tucker (1979) 1 WLR 683, Lord Wilberforce said it was logical to start
with the assumption that money spent on acquisition of an asset was capital
expenditure. He said: 'Extensions from this are first, to regard money spent
on getting rid of a disadvantageous asset as capital expenditure and,
secondly, to regard money spent on improving the asset, or making it more
advantageous, as capital expenditure.'
In the light of the authorities, it seemed that if the Pounds 50m was paid
to procure the transfer of shares it was attributable to capital. If paid to
remove the threat posed by JMB's insolvency to Johnson Matthey's
continuation in business, it was attributable to revenue.
The Pounds 50m was paid solely to enable Johnson Matthey to be able to
continue in business. The shares were fully paid and worthless. They did not
constitute a threat to anybody.
JMB's insolvency was a threat to Johnson Matthey, and the Pounds 50m was
paid to remove that threat.
The Pounds 50m was not paid to persuade the Bank to take the shares. It was
paid to persuade the bank to rescue JMB.
The appeal was allowed.
LORD GOFF agreeing, said the payment did not become a revenue payment simply
because Johnson Matthey paid with the purpose of preserving its trade from
collapse.
The question was rather, whether on a true analysis of the transaction, the
payment was to be characterised as a payment of a capital nature.
That characterisation did not depend on motive or purpose.
It depended on whether the sum was paid for the disposal of a capital asset.
On a true analysis, the sum was not paid for the shares. It was paid as a
contribution towards the rescue of JMB.
It was a revenue payment.
Their Lordships agreed with both judgments.
For the Crown: Alan Moses QC and Launcelot Henderson (Inland Revenue
solicitor).
For Johnson Matthey: Andrew Park QC and Thomas Ivory (Taylor Joynson
Garrett).

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920520

