FT923-10681

FT  29 JUL 92 / Stronger exports prompt rise in Japanese output


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


STRONGER export demand caused Japanese industrial production to rise 2.1 per
cent in June, compared with a month earlier, but the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry (Miti) said there was no sign of domestic
economic recovery.
Meanwhile, the Economic Planning Agency (EPA) released an annual white paper
on the economy in which it predicted that a recovery was likely late this
year or early next year, but warned that the upturn would be 'modest'.
The EPA is officially forecasting 3.5 per cent economic growth for the year
to the end of March 1993, but has unofficially accepted that this is out of
reach and that 2.5 per cent growth is more likely. Private forecasts suggest
growth will be 2 per cent or less.
In arguing that Japanese banks do not face a crisis in covering problem
loans estimated modestly at Y7,000bn to Y8,000bn (Pounds 28.6bn-Pounds
32.7bn), the EPA admitted that 'it is likely that the settlement of these
bad loans may take several years in the medium-run' and, meanwhile, 'profits
may be somewhat depressed'.
The EPA also released a monthly report in which it said personal consumption
growth was slowing, contradicting the white paper in which it said
consumption would remain steady, if not expand.
Miti said the seasonally-adjusted production index in June for the mining
and manufacturing sectors was at 120.9, compared to a 1985 base of 100,
while the shipment index rose 1.9 per cent to 123.2 and the inventory index
increased 0.8 per cent to 123.5
Confirmation that Japanese manufacturers are increasing their exports to
compensate for a slow domestic market came from the Japan Foreign Trade
Council, which said the 19 largest trading houses reported a 26.2 per cent
increase in June export contracts, com-pared to a year earlier.
The surge in export contracts suggests that Japan's trade surplus, a record
Dollars 49bn (Pounds 25.6bn) in the first half, will continue to expand,
exacerbating friction with the US and the European Community.
Meanwhile, Japanese government officials were relieved that Tokyo stock
prices rose slightly yesterday.
The Nikkei index was up about a further 150 points in initial trading early
today.
Mr Tsutomu Hata, the finance minister, said a supplementary budget due to be
finalised early next month should be enough to turn the stock market around.
However, Mr Michio Watanabe, deputy prime minister, said companies should be
allowed to buy their own shares to bolster Tokyo prices. As a means of
supporting the ailing property market, he suggested local governments should
increase their land purchases and land taxes be cut.
World stock markets, Page 35

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920729

