FT922-7154

FT  20 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Staying aloft amid a stream of approaches -
Paul Betts on British Airways' strategy to stay ahead in a
highly-competitive market


   By PAUL BETTS


GLOBALISATION remains the buzz-word at British Airways. But the airline,
which impressively more than doubled pre-tax profits for the year to
end-March, said yesterday it was in no hurry to find a partner.
'We want to be the global leader in our industry and we firmly believe we
need to find strong partnerships for the future,' explained Sir Colin
Marshall, BA's chief executive. 'But we feel no urgency to rush into
anything: we are a strong, financially solid company that can withstand
competition', he added.
The carrier was clearly disappointed by the collapse in February of its
efforts to merge with KLM Royal Dutch Airlines: a partnership which would
have strengthened its position in continental Europe and other international
markets. It would also have had significant implications on the airline
industry as a whole, accelerating the trend towards greater airline
concentration.
It was also the third unsuccessful attempt by BA in barely three years to
forge an equity partnership with another carrier following the failure of
earlier efforts to link-up with United Airlines of the US and Sabena of
Belgium.
But with its strong recovery last year, and one of the healthiest balance
sheets in the airline industry, BA has clearly become wary of entering into
any deal which risks undermining its turnaround. Lord King, the chairman,
put it bluntly yesterday when he said: 'We don't want to consolidate someone
else's losses'.
However, he added that finding a partner remained high on BA's agenda but
'in the meantime bachelorhood continues to be both agreeable and
profitable'. Indeed, BA is not looking just for one partner but strong
allies in its three leading markets: Europe, North America and Asia.
Although BA is not now talking to KLM, contacts between the two carriers
could conceivably resume at some later stage. In the Asia-Pacific area, the
airline is understood to be interested in taking a stake in Qantas, the
Australian international carrier, as well as in Australian Airlines, the
domestic carrier. But it is facing competition from Singapore Airlines and
Japan Air Lines. BA is also scouting the US for a possible deal.
Sir Colin indicated the airline received a steady flow of approaches from
other carriers. 'We get two a week on average', he said.
But while BA, in the standard pilot's jargon at the beginning of every
flight, sits back and relaxes as it waits for a partnership opportunity of
its liking, it has taken comfort at its success in coming out of the
industry's worst-ever recession with improvements in all of its principal
markets.
In Europe, where the airline lost Pounds 10m last year, BA made an operating
surplus of Pounds 20m, despite difficult trading conditions in the UK and a
big reversal in Germany following the impact of re-unification.
In America, BA saw only a small decline in operating profits from Pounds
123m to Pounds 119m, although it faced acute competition across the North
Atlantic with the arrival of new US carriers such as United and American
Airlines at Heathrow, its London home base.
The UK government's decision last year to open up Heathrow to new
competition put pressure on BA, with 17 new carriers moving into the
airport. But BA still managed to increase its market share.
The biggest boost came from the strong recovery in the Middle Eastern,
African and Indian subcontinent routes, which earned an operating surplus of
Pounds 119m last year compared to only Pounds 13m previously. This largely
reflected the recovery from the dramatic effects of the Gulf war on
business.
There was continued growth in Asia-Pacific, with BA's operating profits more
than doubling from Pounds 41m to Pounds 86m despite slower growth in Japan.
Continued improvements in traffic are expected this year as business
recovers from last year's slump caused by the combined effects of the Gulf
war and the recession. In the near-term, Sir Colin expected to see traffic
rising by some 10 per cent in each of the coming two to three months over
the levels of two years ago before the Gulf war started.
But BA is likely to face even fiercer competition this year as US carriers
launch a new offensive on the North Atlantic routes and as liberalisation
spreads in Europe and other markets. Sir Colin acknowledged BA would need
partners to cope with the new era of deregulation. But Lord King added that
the company, for the time being at least, had no intention to 'act in haste
and repent at leisure'.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920520

