FT921-15292

FT  10 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Footsie challenges 2,500 mark again


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


A STRONG performance from the US dollar in the wake of the US and Japanese
initiative on economic strategy drove the UK stock market ahead yesterday.
London advanced slowly at first but the second half of the session saw the
Footsie briefly regain the 2,500 mark as stock markets across Europe
responded to firmness in the US currency and equities.
At the close the FT-SE Index was 30.8 up at 2,497.9 on increased trading
volume described as 'solid and two-way, rather than dramatic'. The day's
Seaq total jumped to 715.6m shares, significantly higher than Wednesday's
505.3m although still behind the 815.3m-share session of December 19.
Stock Exchange statistics show that retail, or customer, business in London
equities has averaged just below Pounds 1bn daily over the past week,
confirming reports that the institutions have been reshaping portfolios
rather than increasing them.
Yesterday's rise in the stock market also reflected a rapid expansion in the
premium on the March futures contract on the Footsie; the March contract was
trading around the 2,540 level at mid-afternoon.
Traders again stressed that the advance in the London market was directly
based on Wall Street, where the Dow Industrial Average challenged its
intraday peak to show a gain of 12 points in UK hours.
International blue chips, with dollar-based sales, moved smartly higher as
the US currency broke through a significant resistance point against the
D-Mark. Although sterling remained a hazard, worries over domestic base
rates slackened as London money market rates eased.
The Footsie benefited from renewed demand for selected stocks in the
pharmaceutical sector which, after outperforming last year, has been widely
recommended as an attractive sector for the 1990s. The shares are regarded
as a safe haven against the domestic recession, as well as well placed to
benefit from economic recovery in whichever national sector it first shows
itself.
The Glaxo share price broke through to a new high as both US and European
investors continued to seek stock, and both SmithKline Beecham and Wellcome
attracted international buyers.
There was a good recovery in some oil issues as several of the UK brokers
who have been sellers decided that the falls in share prices had gone far
enough to offer bargain hunting opportunities. Banks also continued to edge
back into favour after their period in the market's sell lists.
However, gains in the building and retail shares, which have been under
renewed pressure from interest rate worries, were modest. There were a
number of large share deals in some of the non-Footsie stocks, which boosted
share volume without involving significant amounts of institutional money.
Some equity strategists continued to take a cautious view of the outlook for
the UK market. Mr Nicholas Knight, the bearish strategist at Nomura Research
Institute Europe, warned yesterday that the intraday FT-SE 100 level of
2,540.1 reached on Monday could prove to be the high point for 1992.
Analysts at Smith New Court, the London securities house, however, believe
that a Footsie index target of 2,800 at the year-end 'is not unreasonable'.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920110

