FT922-582

FT  26 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Oftel probes cellular market


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO and DAVID LASCELLES


OFTEL, the telecommunications regulator, has launched an investigation into
alleged unfair practices, including the possible abuse of monopoly power, by
leading cellular phone network operators Cellnet and Vodafone.
The investigation follows a complaint by Talkland International, an
independent cellular phone service provider which is 51 per cent owned by
Compagnie Generale des Eaux, the French water company.
The complaint highlights concerns about the lack of competition in the UK
cellular phone market where there are only two network companies - Cellnet
and Vodafone. BT has a majority shareholding in Cellnet and Securicor has a
minority stake.
The network operators are not allowed to offer their services directly to
consumers but are required to do so through service providers. Many service
providers have faced financial difficulties and operators have set up their
own network of service providers.
Talkland claims that the network operators cross-subsidise their own service
providers, which retail their handsets.
It also accuses the network operators of abusing their market position by
giving undue preference to their own 'tied' service providers and imposing
unfair contract terms on independent providers.
Oftel said that it was investigating the operators in accordance with its
duty to consider representations about telecommunications matters.
The investigation does not include - but might affect - Mercury
Communications and Hutchison Telecommunications, which also provide a
cellular service.
Sir James McKinnon, the gas regulator, accused British Gas yesterday of
dragging its feet over negotiations to open up its pipeline system to
competitors. British Gas immediately rejected the accusation, David
Lascelles writes.
This latest move in the long-running gas industry dispute follows agreement
this year by British Gas to yield its dominant share of the UK wholesale gas
market to stave off a monopoly inquiry.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920626

