FT924-812

FT  22 DEC 92 / Arts: 'Orfeo' lacks drama


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


Much of the background to the composition and first performances of
Monteverdi's three surviving operatic masterpieces remains obscure almost
four centuries later. The first of them, L'Orfeo, at least has the
validation of a printed score, which appeared in Mantua in 1609, two years
after the first performance, but even that definitive text leaves plenty of
room for conjecture and dispute, and for interpreters to find their own
solutions.
The latest to offer his own performing version is Philip Pickett, whose
recording with the New London Consort has been released by L'Oiseau-Lyre
(433 545-2, two CDs); on Friday in the Queen Elizabeth Hall he directed a
concert performance with the same cast.
In the booklet accompanying his recording and the programme notes for the
concert Pickett details the results of his research into the circumstances
of the premiere of L'Orfeo. The musical content of the opera may not be
disputed, but it is the forces involved and the instrumentation that
intrigue him most, and his conclusions give a distinctive tang to the
performance.
His solutions are generally minimalist ones: the chorus is reduced to a
group of seven reinforced by the subsidiary members of the cast; there is as
little instrumental doubling of the vocal lines as possible, and just one
instrument to a part in the continuo and string bands.
What is absent in this lean, potentially flexible approach is any
consideration of the dramatic aspects of the work and how this intimate
group of performers would have been deployed theatrically. In a work in
which drama and music are so miraculously interwoven it seems a strange
omission. Even on disc, the playing and singing seem inert and precious. In
concert the lack of dramatic spark was even more significant.
Something inescapably English coloured the whole performance, not just in
the irredeemably un-Italianate rendering of the text (for an object lesson
in bringing Monteverdi's words to life, hear the new recording of Ulisse
from Rene Jacobs) but in the sound world itself. Even such a fine singer as
John Mark Ainsley seemed curiously inert as Orfeo, although Julia Gooding's
Euridice and especially Tessa Bonner's Ninfa revealed more character. The
assorted shepherds seemed to have been recruited straight out of King's
College Chapel Choir. The passion that drives Monteverdi's vocal lines, that
makes his operas the supreme achievements they are, had been drained away.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921222

