FT922-4224

FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and the Family: Squeeze on non-UK accounts /
Examining the Revenue's latest crackdown


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


OVERSEAS residents with accounts at some building societies in the UK face
having them closed following a clamp-down by the Inland Revenue.
Cheltenham & Gloucester and Nationwide have written to these residents - who
do not have to pay UK income tax - advising them to switch to another
account.
In January, the Revenue placed new conditions on the operation of
international accounts opened by people claiming to be resident abroad but
living in the United Kingdom. Tougher regulations now oblige banks and
building societies to monitor the accounts more closely.
The Revenue's measures include giving itself the right to audit non-UK
accounts if it is not unsatisfied with the way banks and societies are
dealing with them.
Cheltenham & Gloucester said this week: 'We felt that the cost of
implementing the rulings - monitoring the accounts and the auditing
requirements - was not justified by the number of accounts held.'
From June 30, C&G will be closing its international accounts and
transferring non-UK residents to its Gold account, which does not pay gross
interest. The account-holders will have to reclaim the tax.
Nationwide has also written to its international account-holders advising
them to transfer their accounts offshore, where the matter of whether they
are UK residents will not be at issue. It, too, will be closing its
international accounts from July 1.
Non-UK residents should, therefore, use this opportunity to consider
offshore accounts - other than that of their own building society - to find
which pays most.
Someone who was moved by C&G into its Cheltenham Gold account would receive
8.3 per cent gross on Pounds 25,000 compared with 9.6 per cent on its
Guernsey Gold account. But there are better rates available elsewhere
offshore.
Bradford & Bingley, for instance, is paying 10.35 per cent gross on Pounds
25,000 at its subsidiary on the Isle of Man.
David Tucker, of Chase de Vere, the independent financial advisers, says:
'It is crucial that investors are made aware of the wide range of accounts
available offshore. But they must make sure that the offshore account they
are being offered is paying the optimum interest rate.'
One drawback is that investors who move their accounts offshore no longer
get the protection offered by a UK building society, which will cover up to
90 per cent of the first Pounds 20,000 invested.
The Isle of Man has legislation similar to that in the UK and covers up to
75 per cent of the first Pounds 20,000 invested. However, the liabilities of
an offshore subsidiary of a UK building society are still protected by the
1986 Building Societies Act.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920606

