FT923-9854

FT  03 AUG 92 / Arts: Three premieres - Music


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


A sense of place can create a potent spell in music. To take English
composers alone, it is difficult not to hear in Elgar's music the rolling
expanses of the Malvern Hills, in Vaughan Williams the pastoral English
countryside, or in Britten's more abrasive style the wind-swept, open vistas
of the Suffolk coast.
In John Casken's music the place is the North of England, the mood
invariably grey and chill. In the works that introduced him to Promenade
audiences in 1986 it was Northumberland that set the scene. This year he has
returned to the North and chosen a disused mine in Weardale as the setting
for his song-cycle Still mine, a BBC commission which had its first
performance at the Royal Albert Hall on Friday.
At best, it is an evocative work, as so much of Casken's music has proved to
be. There are four poems by different authors, but under the influence of an
atmospheric score they combine to make a plausibly unified theme. A man
leaves home to work as a miner in the North and, subsequently exiled for
striking, writes to his wife of hisdreams of returning - a palpable feeling
of remembrance and yearning runs through the cycle.
That emanates from the orchestra, as does most of what is good about this
piece.
The orchestral textures are complex and alluring. The strings form the basic
richness and density of sound; then wind, vibraphone and bells are overlaid
to add brilliance to the surface. But the orchestra is large for a work of
this kind and Casken is not sparing in his use of it, with the result that
the score often sounded overwritten.
The voice simply did not dominate as it should, although that was not the
only reason why. Despite trying to suggest some of the images in the poetry,
the vocal part lacks a strong profile and Thomas Allen's mellifluous singing
of its winding lines gave it none of the punch or variety that might have
created one. The final impression was of a lovely sound-world, but vague,
somewhat monotonous, without any live contact with the poems.
The orchestral part was in the care of Matthias Bamert and the BBC Symphony
Orchestra, who had already given a carefully-detailed performance of
Debussy's La Mer, and the evening ended with an above average account of
Sibelius's Fifth Symphony, which kept its concentration through to a
splendid final peroration.
On Saturday night the BBC Concert Orchestra under Barry Wordsworth
celebrated its 40th birthday with a generous programme of Tchaikovsky,
Milhaud, Gershwin and two new works by Richard Rodney Bennett.
The first, another BBC commission, was unabashed entertainment in the
composer's easy listening mode: Variations on the nursery rhyme 'Over the
hills and far away", served in a sugary sauce and orchestrated with not so
much a nod, as a deep bow to Ravel.
The other was a Concerto for Stan Getz, the saxophone player, who died last
year before he could perform it. The soloist here was John Harle, a virtuoso
and artistic personality equal to the flamboyant music - one foot in jazz,
one in classical - that Bennett has provided. What sounds like American
urban aggression propels the outer movements along vigorously, while the
elegiac centre brings bluesy improvisation. It is a concerto strong on
impact, well crafted to show off its soloist, professional writing in the
best sense.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920803

