FT921-1124

FT  25 MAR 92 / International Capital Markets: IBM launches laptop in colour


   By LOUISE KEHOE and ROBERT GIBBENS


   SAN FRANCISCO, MONTREAL


INTERNATIONAL Business Machines (IBM) has introduced a laptop computer with
colour screen. It has also launched two lower-priced notebook computers.
IBM's colour laptop incorporates a 10.4-inch flat active matrix colour
display, jointly developed by IBM and Toshiba in Japan.
It will be manufactured in Japan to avoid dumping duties imposed by the US
government last year on Japanese-built active matrix displays. Such duties
are not imposed on assembled units.
The notebook-sized computers, called PS Notes, have monochrome screens and
weigh just over six pounds.
With these product announcements, IBM aims to shrug off a series of mistakes
in the rapidly growing market for portable personal computers, where it has
trailed competitors.
The PS/2 Color Laptop is based on a 386SX microprocessor and incorporates an
80MB hard drive. It is priced in the US at Dollars 5,995. Bigger and heavier
than the notebook computers, the colour laptop weighs 11 pounds, due
primarily to the screen technology.
The PS/2 Model N51 SLC is built around IBM's own version of the 386
microprocessor, which the company claims is up to 80 per cent faster than
standard versions. It also comes with an 80MB hard drive. The US price is
Dollars 3,295.
The PS/2 Model N51 SX is aimed at price-sensitive customers and is based on
a standard 386SX microprocessor with a 40MB hard drive.
It is priced at Dollars 2,250 in the US, placing it in direct competition
with a myriad of IBM-compatible notebook models.
Sun Microsystems Computer, the leading US computer workstation manufacturer,
yesterday cut by nearly 30 per cent the prices of its high-end workstations
for three-dimensional imaging.
The move is expected to step up pressure on such competitors as
Hewlett-Packard, Digital Equipment, IBM and Silicon Graphics to make similar
price adjustments.
Sun also cut prices on 19-inch monitors for all its workstations. Pacific
Bell, one of the largest regional telephone companies in the US, has formed
an alliance with IBM and Northern Telecom to develop and field test
'multimedia' telecommunications network services.
The goal of the alliance is to create services that would enable telephone
customers to communicate with data, video, images and voice as easily as
they can now place a phone call.
Focusing initially on expanding applications of existing network technology,
the companies are also planning a second phase of joint research on making
use of new broadband network technologies.
As envisioned, multimedia services would allow users simply to dial others
on their PCs. The parties could, for example, see images of each other on
their screens and use a shared computer screen 'window' to edit documents
jointly.
In a separate move, Northern Telecom - Canada's biggest telecommunications
equipment producer - has formed a joint venture, Northern Telecom de Espana,
to sell telephones, switching equipment, business communications systems and
data networks in Spain, writes Robert Gibbens in Montreal.
NT owns 50 per cent of the new company; Agroman Inversiones owns 37.5 per
cent; and Radiotronica 12.5 per cent. Both Spanish partners are members of
the Banesto group.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920325

