FT924-6531

FT  20 NOV 92 / Arts: Therese Raquin - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


One of the appalling effects of Stalinism upon the Soviet Union was the
doctrine of Socialist Realism, whereby art had to reflect the ideals of
socialism on the most blatant populist terms. The creative subterfuges that
sought to find ways out of this prison were fascinating, but experiment and
adventure were reduced to the very margins of the arts. The shadow of these
prison bars fell across ballet well into the 1970s and the catalogue of
choreographers whose work was rejected, or dismissed to the depths of the
Union includes the venerable Kasyan Goleizovsky, and such interesting
figures as Leonid Jacobson and Igor Chernichov.
That an art thus thrown in upon itself, and upon its most traditional
procedures, flourished at all is a marvel. The work of Yury Grigorovich at
the Bolshoy has brilliantly exemplified the vigour that an imaginative
choreographer could bring to the well-defined conventions of state ballet.
Not only was Soviet ballet a creative prisoner, it was not allowed many
visiting ideas from abroad. Thus the 'modern' ballet that has evolved is
blinkered, obsessed with what are supposedly 'modern themes': a franker
sexuality than that allowed by the diktats of Mme Furtseva, and a need to
expose the tensions of a state undergoing monumental change. Of true
modernism - the evolution of post-Balanchinian classic language (or even a
Balanchinian language); experiment that examined means rather than message -
I have seen no trace. Hence such awful things as Vinogradov's Revizor and
his up-dated Petrushka. Hence the banalities of many other works which
propose modernity and look as if they were conceived (as they were) by
Inexperience out of Deep Feelings  - that most dangerous artistic parentage.
And hence, too, Boris Eifman and his St. Petersburg Ballet Theatre which is
at Sadler's Wells this week. Mr Eifman started to make his dance pieces in
the late 1970s as a gesture of defiance against the Leningrad establishment.
Of his sincerity there can be no doubt - it is only latterly that he has
been granted any formal recognition - but about his creative procedures I
have every doubt in the world. He offers two works. Therese Raquin begins on
a high note of hysteria and contrives by some dire alchemy to increase the
nervous pressure and diminish the drama. It is reportedly a tragedy. I found
it rather more of a laugh than Figaro's Intrigues that completes this
desperate programme, a leaden romp on which I reported some three years ago
when it was staged by the Ballets de Monte Carlo.
Therese Raquin caricatures Zola's novel, reducing it to awkward grapplings
between Therese and her lover which are played against a frieze of posturing
corps de ballet members who don black cloaks, a variety of confusing
outfits, and at one moment burst on stage like a team of gymnasts on a day's
outing. They do a lot of unison emoting, which is no help at all. Therese's
mother-in-law has a hell of a time in and out of a wheel-chair. The piece
goes on for an eternity, and maltreats gems from Bach for its first part,
then sinks its teeth into Schnittke's gritty piano concerto. Of
choreographic interest I could discern no trace.
Figaro's Intrigues (the chief of which is against Beaumarchais) is set to
Rossini in less than appealing arrangements, and is Very Vivacious Indeed.
It is also inconsequential as drama and hugely predictable as dance -
Massine on a bad day. The casts of both works give of their all in
peculiarly exhausting fashion. The evening is not recommended.
St. Petersburg Ballet Theatre is at Sadler's Wells until November 21. The
season is supported by LBC News Talk.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921120

