FT921-3956

FT  12 MAR 92 / West takes steps to plug Soviet brain drain


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS and DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS, BRUSSELS


LEADING industrialised nations yesterday agreed to boost scientific
co-operation with central and eastern European countries to reduce the risk
of top civil scientists leaving eastern Europe for better conditions in the
west.
The accord, reached at a meeting in Paris of the 24 technology ministers of
the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), was
welcomed by Mr Boris Saltykov, the Russian minister for science and
technology.
At the same time, a conference in Brussels agreed to launch a centre for
former Soviet nuclear experts, with pledges of money from the US, the EC,
Japan and Canada, and with an offer of facilities from Russia.
Mr Saltykov, the first Russian minister to attend an OECD meeting at this
level, said yesterday it was impossible to measure the full extent of the
brain drain but that 600 members of the Soviet Academy of Sciences alone had
already signed contracts with mainly US research institutions.
The OECD agreed to encourage more joint projects between western and eastern
European researchers and to promote research opportunities in the east.
Dr Allan Bromley, science assistant to the US president said strong science
and technology enterprises would contribute to economic and political
stability.
Mr Saltykov argued that the possible brain drain of nuclear military
scientists was 'not a big deal' compared with the potential loss of civilian
skills. One Russian civilian project in urgent need of investment was an 80
per cent completed particle accelerator near Moscow, which could in return
be made available to foreign researchers, he said.
OECD members also agreed on the need for a fund to back up the centre for
former Soviet nuclear experts.
The Brussels conference yesterday was attended by ministers from the US,
Canada Japan, the EC and some other members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). It was called to discuss the centre's
organisation. A joint team is to visit Russia later this month, with a view
to opening the centre, near Moscow, by early summer.
Mr James Baker, the US secretary of state, stressed the need for speed.
Listening to scientists at the Chelyabinsk-70 nuclear weapons laboratory in
the Urals last month, he said he had 'heard concern that economic and
political conditions (in Russia) could deteriorate to the point where even
highly patriotic and responsible specialists might be tempted to market
their skills to unscrupulous regimes'.
By plugging a possible leak of nuclear weapons technology through promotion
of civil nuclear co-operation, a potential brain drain could be converted
into a 'brain gain', Mr Baker said.
The idea of the centre was first mooted by Germany in January, and the EC
yesterday confirmed it will match the US contribution of Dollars 25m (Pounds
14.2m). Mr Koichiro Matsura, deputy Japanese foreign minister, said his
country would make 'substantial contributions' and urged all CIS states to
sign the non-proliferation treaty.
In addition, the EC plans to hire Russian nuclear experts to improve safety
in Russian-designed power reactors in eastern Europe, Mr Frans Andriessen,
the EC external affairs commissioner, said yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920312

