FT923-15452

FT  02 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Retail chief's departure adds to worries
about Asda performance


   By JOHN THORNHILL


MR RICHARD Harker resigned yesterday as retail director of Asda, the
Leeds-based grocery chain.
The company said the appointment of an external replacement would be
announced shortly.
Mr Harker's departure came as little surprise to the City. Analysts said he
had long been associated with Asda's now-discredited 'old guard' and did not
fit in well with the new team of retailers being assembled by Mr Archie
Norman, who became chief executive at the end of last year.
Nevertheless, Mr Harker's resignation compounded recent worries about Asda's
performance and sent its share price down 2p to 29p yesterday. Concerns have
also been raised about the pending flotation of MFI, in which Asda has a 25
per cent stake. The pricing will be announced today.
Asda, which is still struggling under a high level of debt, is due to
announce its annual results on Monday when it is expected to report weak
trading and to take a substantial write-down on the book value of the 60
stores it acquired from Gateway for Pounds 705m in 1989.
Some institutional shareholders are believed to be dissatisfied with Asda's
performance following last year's Pounds 357m rights issue.
At the time, Cazenove persuaded half a dozen big institutional fund managers
to support the fund-raising by highlighting its turnround potential, but
Asda's shares have languished ever since and still stand below the 35p issue
price.
Mr Patrick Gillam, Asda's chairman, will meet several leading institutional
shareholders next week 'as a matter of routine'. Institutional shareholders
will be keen to hear about the progress the company has made over the past
six months and its future strategy.
Last month, Asda unveiled the first of its Dales supermarkets, which offer a
range of 7,000 discounted goods in a smart superstore setting.
Asda also announced yesterday that it was restructuring its administration
by contracting-out much of its legal, insurance and employee-savings work.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920702

