FT923-15703

FT  01 JUL 92 / Arts: Eos - Concert


   By PAUL DRIVER


Eos is a young ensemble in the senses that it is recently formed, comprises
young (talented) players, and has a young-hearted, cobweb-sweeping attitude
to concert presentation. To its concert on Sunday evening in the unusual
venue of the Royal Court Theatre, it attracted a sizeable, young audience
which was not made up of London classical music regulars and had an above
average quota of children. The latter would have been roundly entertained by
the colourful staging (by Adam Spiegel) of Stravinsky's Soldier's Tale which
formed the programme's second half; while conductor Charles Hazlewood' s
enthusiastic, knowledgeable spoken introductions to the items were designed
to win over all age-groups.
The first item was unconducted. Amid the toppled potted plants of the
Stravinsky set, some of the string players, violins and violas standing in
'camerata' fashion, nicely intoned the opening instrumental sextet from
Strauss's opera Capriccio. The theatre's intimate acoustics were perfect for
the piece, and the performance was led with quiet strength by first violin
Philip Dukes, who used portamento judiciously and often. Then came Frank
Bridge's exquisite 1908 Suite for Strings, conducted by Hazlewood in bare
feet (several of the players went similarly and seasonally unshod, and one
of the girls seemed to have forgotten to put on her dress). There was a
different lighting plan for each of the four movements. The third of these,
a deeply touching Nocturne, was beautifully brought off. The finale was
slightly warped by wrong intonation.
Philip Dukes impressively switched to viola to play the solo part in
Britten's 1976 orchestration for strings of his ruminative, astringent
Lachrymae on a song by Dowland (1950), and played it superbly. As his
all-important violin contributions to The Soldier's Tale confirmed, he is a
wonderful natural musician. The world premiere planned for this evening
having been postponed, we were left with the Stravinsky, about which Mr
Hazlewood's chat told us much of interest but not who had devised the slick
rhyming doggerel couplets of this English translation. The seven-piece band
sounded keen and fresh, and the actors were spirited if under-rehearsed.
They lived dangerously - the absence of a dancer-Princess towards the end of
the work had the honey-voiced narrator Samuel West hopelessly fumbling to
fill the gap; but a bit of dangerous living is what Eos is all about.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920701

