FT921-15222

FT  11 JAN 92 / Finance & The Family: It may be time to fix the rates on
investments - How to . . . lock in high returns / The various packages which
offer guaranteed income


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


SAVERS may be content with interest rates of 11 per cent or so and inflation
at 4 per cent. But could this be the time to lock in to rates while they are
still in double figures?
The pound's current difficulties mean that the next move in interest rates
may be up rather than down. But the whole idea of joining the Exchange Rate
Mechanism was that its discipline would help both interest rates and
inflation fall over the longer term. It is hard to imagine that interest
rates will still be in double figures in 1995 if inflation does not rise
from current levels.
What options are there for those who would like to fix the rates on their
investments?
Guaranteed income bonds: You invest your money with an insurance company for
a fixed period of time and in return you are paid a fixed interest rate
during that period. The company guarantees to repay you the capital when the
bond matures. Payment of income is usually made annually, though some
insurance companies will pay on a monthly basis.
The returns are paid net of basic rate income tax, which cannot be
reclaimed. They are thus unlikely to be suitable for non-taxpayers. Higher
rate taxpayers will face a further charge when the bonds are cashed in. This
should be slightly less than they would have paid had they held the money in
a conventional building society account.
Baronworth Investment Services recommends Providence Capitol as its best buy
for a five year guaranteed annual income bond of Pounds 10,000 or more. It
is paying out 9.4 per cent on Pounds 10,000 to just under Pounds 25,000 and
9.5 per cent on amounts of Pounds 25,000 or above.
Baronworth's best buy three year bond is from Prosperity. Rates are 9.15 per
cent on Pounds 5,000 to Pounds 25,000 and 9.2 per cent on Pounds 25,000 or
above.
Annuities: You pay an insurance company a lump sum in exchange for a fixed
sum of money paid to you at regular intervals. The annuity will pay you a
high return, sometimes over a specified period (a temporary annuity) or more
usually, until death (an immediate annuity). Effectively, a large part of
the return is the repayment of your capital. This has some tax advantages
but the consequence is that when you die, your estate will have lost the
value of the initial annuity investment.
The nature of annuities is that the insurance company does badly out of
those who live on to a ripe old age. As a consequence, the older you are,
the higher the income an insurance company is prepared to pay. The rule of
thumb is that immediate annuities are not good investments for people under
70.
Rates on annuities vary so it is important to look around insurance
companies for the best deals. The best temporary annuities (nine years) for
a man aged 70 with a down payment of Pounds 10,000, according to Baronworth,
come from Sun Life of Canada with Pounds 2,044 a year and Equitable Life
with Pounds 2,025.40. Best immediate annuities (on the same assumptions) are
also from Sun Life of Canada with Pounds 1,563.24 per year and Co-op
Insurance with Pounds 1,530.40.
The above rates relate to annuities bought 'voluntarily' and not to the
compulsory purchase annuities, which must be acquired with the proceeds of a
personal pension.
There are also more complicated contracts which provide a measure of
inflation-proofing - index-linked annuities increase in line with the retail
prices index, and increasing annuities guarantee to increase their pay-out
by a fixed amount (normally 5 per cent) each year. Both provide lower
initial income as a result.
Gilts: British government stocks may not be the most exciting form of
investment but economic uncertainties have made them popular with some
experts at the moment.
Conventional gilts provide a fixed rate of interest over a specified period,
paid at half-yearly intervals. There are a variety of issues, paying
different interest rates with different redemption dates. The government
repays them at their face value on maturity. As a result, when you buy them,
you are certain of their return provided you are able to hold them till
redemption. This return, called the gross redemption yield, currently varies
between 9.5 and 10 per cent.
Since gilts are bought and sold on the stock market until their redemption
date, their price can rise and fall after you buy them. The price normally
varies in inverse relation to interest rates. As interest rates rise, the
price tends to fall; and vice versa.
If you think that interest rates will fall and that the price of gilts will
go up, then you could buy gilts in the hope of making a capital gain in the
short term. There is no capital gains tax to pay on gilts, though you will
have to pay income tax on the interest.
If you are a non-taxpayer, buy gilts through the National Savings Stock
Register at the Post Office, where the income is paid without tax being
first deducted. Otherwise gilts can be bought from stockbrokers and through
the larger banks.
The type of gilt that you choose depends essentially on whether you want to
make a capital gain or are more interested in the income. If you buy gilts
at prices below face value, a greater proportion of the return will be in
the form of tax-free capital gain, but the annual income will be lower.
Gilts priced above face value will pay a higher income but could face
investors with a capital loss.
National Savings: Apart from gilts, other National Savings products that
offer fixed interest are Savings Certificates, the Yearly Plan and Capital
Bonds.
The 36th issue of Savings Certificates pays 8.5 per cent if held for five
years, equal to 14.17 per cent for a higher rate taxpayer. Each unit costs
Pounds 25 and the limit is Pounds 10,000 per issue. In addition, husband and
wife can each hold the maximum Pounds 10,000 worth of certificates in trust
for each other, and issues can also be held in trust for children. There is
no income or capital gains tax to pay.
The Yearly Plan is a scheme for saving once a month for a year to buy a
Savings Certificate at the end of the year. Savers pay a fixed amount
between Pounds 20 to Pounds 200, by monthly standing order. This means that
the maximum value Savings Certificate that you can obtain through the Yearly
Plan is Pounds 2,400. The certificate must be held for a further four years
to earn the full current return of 8.5 per cent. Savers can hold Pounds
10,000 in National Savings certificates and have the Yearly Plan.
Non-taxpayers may be particularly attracted by Capital Bonds which pay
gross, rather than tax-free, interest which is given automatically to
non-taxpayers. The bonds must be held for five years in order to obtain
guaranteed growth.
Debentures and Convertibles: This is a riskier way of fixing your income.
Debentures are issued by companies wanting to raise money, and are secured
on an asset (typically property). They operate in a similar way to gilts in
that they pay a fixed rate of interest and are repaid at the end of a
specified term.
Convertible bonds can be exchanged into shares of a company at a future
date. This potential for profit means that the bonds tend to carry a lower
interest rate, and the price is more volatile. There are accordingly two
risks.
If the share price of the company never reaches a level which makes
conversion worthwhile, you will almost certainly have been better off
investing in gilts. And if the company goes bankrupt, you are likely to lose
your investment completely; this is an area where it is important to get
good advice.

The Financial Times


London Page V Illustration (Omitted).

920111

