FT923-10671

FT  29 JUL 92 / Cleared defendant attacks prosecution: In his first
interview since his conviction was quashed, Jonathan Cohen concedes that
behind the fraud trial lay a serious error of judgment but not a criminal
one


   By JOHN MASON


MR JONATHAN COHEN, the former County NatWest chief executive who is now out
of work, is strongly critical of the way the Blue Arrow case was brought by
the prosecution. He described his arrest at 7am in front of his wife and
young daughter as shattering and humiliating. Being placed in a police cell
and relieved of his wallet, belt and shoelaces, he found scarcely
believable.
He said: 'From there on it was a matter of trying to keep one's head up
whatever happened. In the early days that was not easy. A QC friend told me
it would be like being told you had a terminal illness, with friends unsure
how to react and your life taken out of your control. That's how it turned
out.'
The trial, he agreed, demonstrated that institutional investors felt they
had been misled by County and Phillips & Drew buying their own shares in the
issue to increase the take-up level announced to the markets and so to
enhance the issue's chances of success.
'At the heart of the Blue Arrow transaction there was a very serious error
of judgment, but it was an error of judgment based on honest motives and
intent,' he said.
That error was a failure to think through the consequences of 'late take-up'
of shares and the reliance the markets would place upon the announcements
then made.
Even today, he claimed, many people in the City were still not clear about
what was proper and right over Blue Arrow and what areas were covered by
questionable judgment.
'If you ask people now what went wrong with Blue Arrow, how many would say
the judgment on late take-up, or the use of the market maker's exemption in
not disclosing shares? What is it they actually point their fingers at?'
Mr Cohen does not accept that the City should never be subject to criminal
law or that misdemeanours should be left to the traditional disciplinary
sanctions of the old City 'club'. However, he pointed out that strong
measures, resulting in people losing their jobs, had already been taken by
the Bank of England in the case before the trial began.
He said: 'Obviously, where there is clear evidence of criminal activity, the
criminal law should apply. I don't want to say this was all a nonsense.
There was an issue, but I don't think it was ever a criminal one.'
Mr Cohen criticises the prosecution for failing to 'do its homework'. Its
decision not to interview the defendants before their arrests rankles.
He said: 'I would have been more than happy to be interviewed, without the
compulsion of the Section 2 powers, to give background information on the
transaction.' Had the Serious Fraud Office conducted those inquiries, many
of its allegations, such as misleading Blue Arrow, NatWest Bank and the Bank
of England, would never have been made.
He claimed that the trial showed that the SFO's argument that it could,
instead, rely on evidence given to the DTI was misconceived, as defendants
were acquitted and allegations fell by the wayside.
During the trial, some of the prosecution's assumptions about market
practice had been 'gobbledegook', he said. They included suggestions that
market makers did not take large amounts of stock or that advisers could not
buy shares in the placing after a rights issue.
Mr Cohen, who is trying to find work in the City, has found sympathy in many
parts of it but that has yet to translate into job offers.
His mood is rueful. 'Looking back over the last three years, I found the
experience by turns terrifying and bemusing, at times uplifting and, when it
came to the jury's verdict, truly devastating,' he said.
'I don't argue with the SFO having draconian powers to root out fraud, but
the corollary is that they must take the utmost care before enmeshing people
in the legal process. They really do risk destituting people and crushing
their lives.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920729

