FT924-8272

FT  12 NOV 92 / Survey of Jordan (1): King strikes sombre note - The
Hashemite Kingdom is emerging from the political, economic and diplomatic
straits caused by the Gulf War. But King Hussein's health problems and the
challenges of the Middle East peace talks raise some difficult questions


   By HUGH CARNEGY


JUST as Jordan had begun to rise out of the economic and political trough
into which it plunged during the Gulf crisis of 1990-91, a new and deep
worry has arisen over the health of King Hussein who for 40 years has
anchored the nation through countless emergencies.
Surgery for cancer that the King underwent in the US in August sent a
shudder of fear through Jordanians over how long he may have to live and
what might follow his reign.
The deeply unsettling prospect of his death was addressed by the King
himself earlier this month in a sombre television speech. Telling his
subjects that he did not yet know whether he was cured, the monarch, who
will be 57 on November 14, appeared to be preparing the nation for the
worst. 'I wish to say to you that the life of an enlightened people and a
vibrant nation cannot be measured by the life of an individual,' he said.
The King's illness has struck at a time when Jordanians have looked to him
as perhaps never before to chart them through formidable challenges.
Although the economy has undergone a dramatic upturn this year, and the
international isolation that Jordan underwent in the Gulf crisis has eased,
complex issues confront the kingdom.
The surge in the economy must be sustained if the country is to cope with
the burden of a sudden 10 per cent population increase caused by the arrival
over the past year of some 300,000 Palestinians expelled from Kuwait and
other Gulf states.
In the Middle East peace negotiations, Jordan must not only try to make
peace with Israel on its own account, but will also have to work out a
future relationship with the Palestinians of the West Bank and Gaza.
Meanwhile, the King has been the key figure in the management of a gradual
process of democratisation that has allowed Islamic fundamentalists a
political voice beyond the limits permitted in most Arab countries.
The irony of the King's illness is that it has emerged when he appears more
secure and in command of his kingdom than ever. Since his grandfather
Abdullah established - with British backing - his family's rule over Jordan
in 1921, the Hashemites have struggled to entrench their hold over a
resource-starved country carved more or less arbitrarily out of the desert
and latterly peopled mostly by Palestinians originally from west of the
Jordan River.
Now King Hussein is more popular than at any time since he succeeded his
father in 1952. The acclaim he won at home for his refusal to back his Gulf
neighbours and the US against Baghdad in the war to oust Iraq from Kuwait
has not waned. His reward was a triumphal welcome home on September 24 when
he returned from the US.
In an interview for this survey, conducted in his office behind doors
guarded by sword-wielding, black-coated Circassian sentries, the King said
he had never expected to experience 'that kind of warmth and feeling and
concern in my lifetime. I was deeply moved.'
To the layman's eye, the King seemed well and in good spirits. For the
moment at least, he and his government, led by Sharif Zeid Bin Shaker, the
prime minister, can take satisfaction from the evident improvements in the
past year.
In the economy, an inflow of capital in the form of aid from western
countries and money brought in by the Palestinian 'returnees' has more than
compensated for the loss of Gulf aid and remittances. Much of the
Palestinian money has been invested in a private-sector construction boom
that has driven up real GDP growth this year to 11 per cent.
This has eased the pressure of the heavy cost of coping with the population
increase. Exporters have proved adroit at finding substitutes for the
once-dominant Iraqi market and tourism has bounced back to 1989 levels,
easing the current account deficit.
The government was expected this week to conclude a new standby agreement
with the IMF, its third since the economy lurched into a debt crisis in
1989. Jordan's Dollars 8bn foreign debt has been brought under tight
management, with a rescheduling agreement struck earlier this year with the
Paris Club of sovereign borrowers and a buy-back deal secured with Moscow
for a big tranche of Russian debt.
The worrying side of the economy is high unemployment and historically high
poverty levels. These could help stir political discontent. But the
improving economy has provided a helpful backdrop to the delicate task
facing King Hussein of rebuilding international relations sorely damaged by
the Gulf crisis.
A toughening of Jordan's policing of UN sanctions against Iraq earlier this
year has solidified links with Washington. Cool relations with Egypt were
warmed by a visit that the King paid to President Hosni Mubarak immediately
after the Cairo earthquake in October. Next on the list that the King would
like to visit is Saudi Arabia.
The King has also begun publicly to distance himself from the Iraqi regime
of Saddam Hussein. In his FT interview, he did so in the plainest terms he
has used so far. Speaking of his concern that Iraq may fragment, with
consequences for the region 'too horrible to imagine', he said:
'I would like to be absolutely clear that I am not, nor was I ever, ready to
link Jordan, or myself, or my House to the possibility of an association
with a group in power that might eventually go down in history as partially
responsible, if not totally responsible, for the destruction of Iraq.'
He called for 'respect for human rights, pluralism, democracy' in Iraq.
'There has to be change,' he said.
Pluralism and democracy are the King's constant themes for Jordan also. In
the past three years, he has allowed elections to the lower house of
parliament, legalised political parties and promulgated a National Charter
guaranteeing political freedoms, while upholding the supremacy of the
monarchy.
The chief result has been a surge to prominence of Islamic fundamentalists
who form the biggest parliamentary bloc. Tensions between the Palace and
parliament have been highlighted recently by the trial of two Islamic MPs
who this week were jailed for 20 years for plotting to overthrow the state
with Iranian help.
Many see the case as a clear signal that the limits of democracy in Jordan
will be tightly circumscribed by the King, particularly if the main
beneficiaries are Moslem radicals. There may be seeds of discontent here
which could grow into political problems. But the King insists: 'I don't
think anyone should worry. We are totally committed to democracy, to
pluralism, to respect for human rights.'
Most Jordanians see the King as the best guarantee the country has of
stability; hence the concern over his health. In his television address,
King Hussein stressed that continuity would prevail after his demise. His
designated successor is his younger brother.
Crown Prince Hassan, 45, has long experience of state affairs. But concern
about his ability to cope with pressure is widely expressed in private in
Amman. 'Constitutionally, it is not an issue,' says a former prime minister.
'Nor should it be. But people are talking.'
Part of the uncertainty stems from the strains anticipated if there is a
peace settlement with Israel. In that case, some kind of confederation with
a Palestinian entity on the West Bank will have to be worked out. This is
likely to cause difficulties both within the Palestinian community and
between Palestinians and East Bank Jordanians.
By no means all Palestinians accept the idea of such a dual state being
presided over ultimately by a Hashemite. Supporters of an Islamic republic
also object. But very many Palestinians and probably the vast majority of
Jordanians have come to regard King Hussein as being the only figure capable
of ensuring stability both on the West and East Banks. Without him, there
are fears for the outcome.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

921112

