FT924-8288

FT  12 NOV 92 / World Stock Markets: Taiwan searches for way back to the
golden days - Simon Davies on the problems depressing Taipei


   By SIMON DAVIES


In the golden days of 1989, average daily turnover on the Taiwan Stock
Exchange used to exceed TDollars 150bn (USDollars 5.8bn). By Tuesday this
week it hit a three-year low of TDollars 5.7bn, underlining the extent to
which the Taiwanese have lost confidence in their stock market.
Around 70 per cent of investment capital in Taiwan comes from individuals,
rather than institutions, and they have found better homes for their excess
cash in Hong Kong and southern China.
The Taiwanese economy remains robust (7 per cent growth is still achievable
for the full year), inflation is easing and corporate earnings growth should
pick up next year; but in spite of this seemingly positive scenario, the
stock market looks unlikely to show any substantial recovery in the near
term.
Yesterday the weighted index ended 36.36 higher at 3,570.89 after the
Finance Ministry announced late on Tuesday a long-awaited package of
measures to boost the market, and turnover recovered slightly to TDollars
7.7bn. Nevertheless, the index is still languishing 71 per cent below its
all-time peak of 12,425 reached in February 1990.
The banking sector has suffered a decline in profits because of a
competitive squeeze on interest rate spreads, while the steel and textile
sectors have felt the impact of the global recession and increasing
production costs. Analysts say the net result will be minimal corporate
earnings growth this year.
It is the stance of the government which appears to be occupying the minds
of investors. Government plays a powerful role in regulating overseas
activity, but it also exerts a strong influence on local institutions.
This week's package included a Finance Ministry pledge to ask the postal
system and labour pension funds to buy shares, and a promise to encourage
foreign investment in the stock market. But investors are also looking for a
more liberal approach to investment and travel links with mainland China.
At present, the pattern of investment in China is for leading businessmen to
reduce their family stakes in listed companies in order to raise capital for
private investment in China. This creates an overhang of stock at a time
when listed companies are not participating in the boom across the Straits
of Taiwan.
It is estimated that Taiwanese corporations have indirectly invested more
than USDollars 4bn in China. With GNP per capita in Taiwan of around 30
times the figure in China, the benefits from relocating the island's
low-margin, export-oriented businesses could be enormous. But until the
government relaxes policy towards the mainland, the stock market will not
benefit directly.
The likely devaluation of the Taiwanese dollar could provide a short-term
boost to export industries, and some economists suggest that further cuts in
interest rates are likely, providing another boost to stock market
liquidity.
However, it is likely to take more than that to bring the investors back.
Uncertainty ahead of the December 19 elections for the legislative Yuan, or
parliament, is depressing business confidence, due to concern over the
fragmentation of the ruling Kuomintang party. A poor showing by the
supporters of President Lee Teng-hui could be damaging for the business
community.
The jailing of the leading stock market player, Oung Da Ming, and the
subsequent scandal over more than TDollars 7bn in stock payment defaults has
also damaged the market's credibility. In addition, it has taken away the
last of the 'big hands' who used to make up the bulk of turnover, but who
have been scared off by the apparent government clamp-down on speculation.
Mr David Hsu, president of Jardine Fleming Taiwan Investment Management,
says: 'We are cautious from now until next Chinese New Year (late in
January). But we hope that after the elections the situation will become
clearer.'
It is impossible to exaggerate the impact of a change in stock market
sentiment on Taiwan's cash-rich individual investors. But for the moment,
there is little sign of a return to the casino days of old.

The Financial Times


London Page 43

921112

