FT922-7271

FT  19 MAY 92 / International Company News: Goldman, Sachs buys Omni's stake
in Sulzer


   By IAN RODGER and ANGUS FOSTER


   ZURICH, LONDON


GOLDMAN, Sachs, the US investment bank, has acquired the 20 per cent stake
in Sulzer Brothers, the Swiss engineering group, formerly held by Omni, the
collapsed Swiss investment group.
Goldman paid about Dollars 180m for the shareholding, which will be broken
up and placed through the market.
The transaction marks a victory for Sulzer in a long, but discreet, tussle
with the Omni administrators over disposition of the shares.
The administrators, Coopers & Lybrand, wanted a quick sale and thought they
could get a premium price by finding an industrial partner who would be
interested in participating in Sulzer's business.
Sulzer directors agreed in principle, but were unable to come to terms with
any of the candidates brought forward. In particular, it turned out that
they were determined to remain independent and were unwilling to concede a
significant share of decision-making in the group with the shares.
Although the block constituted 20 per cent of the shares, Sulzer has a
clause in its bylaws enabling it to restrict the proportion of shares voted
by any one shareholder to 2 per cent.
In March, the directors said the failure to reach an agreement was due to
the insistence of interested parties in a majority holding in Sulzer or in
domination of certain business sectors. Privately, they said it was not
their problem, and the best solution would be to sell the shares in the
market.
Goldman acquired 44,000 shares in Sulzer yesterday morning. The transaction
was completed before a 10-for-one share split, separately designed by Sulzer
to make its shares more marketable.
Goldman said it would place the shares in blocks 'not to exceed' 2 per cent
with Swiss and international investors. A spokeswoman for the investment
bank said last night the placing was going well.
While no terms for the sale were revealed, a guide for the value of the
block was established in early March with the sale of another 5 per cent
block associated with the Omni bankruptcy.
At the time, Sulzer Brothers and Ebara, the leading Japanese pump maker,
agreed to take 5 per cent share stakes in each other. The Sulzer shares for
the transaction were valued at SFr66m (Dollars 43.40m).

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920519

