FT923-9618

FT  04 AUG 92 / Heat is turned up on debate over pay freeze: The British
government is facing pressure to limit public sector salary increases


   By MICHAEL SMITH and PETER NORMAN


The UK government appears increasingly like an embattled firefighter as it
fends off critics of its economic policy.
For much of last week it was pouring cold water on advice for it either to
devalue sterling in the European exchange rate mechanism or quit the system
altogether. Now it is having to turn its hoses on suggestions that it freeze
public sector pay or at least peg it to inflation.
Such ideas - which could affect up to 5.1m employees of central government,
local authorities and nationalised industry - have suddenly gained a
powerful head of steam.
Last week, Mr Howard Davies, the newly appointed director general of the
Confederation of British Industry, set the ball rolling by proposing that
public sector pay should bear the brunt of the government's efforts to hold
its 1993-94 public expenditure planning total at the Pounds 244.5bn level
agreed last November. Pleading for the government to channel resources into
investment and infrastructure he said: 'The government pay bill should not
increase at all in cash terms. Any increases in rates of pay should be
financed through improvements in efficiency or reductions in government
activity.'
At the weekend, another recent appointee, Mr John Townend, chairman of the
Conservative finance committee, suggested a public sector pay freeze and
cutting Pounds 500m from overseas aid to activate the housing market and
bring on economic recovery.
By yesterday, the bandwagon was running sufficiently strongly for Downing
Street to have to deny reports that Mr John Major was planning to veto
public sector pay increases higher than the rate of inflation.
At first glance, the idea of limiting public sector pay has certain
attractions. The government's finances are under serious pressure with the
public sector borrowing requirement expected to exceed its Pounds 28bn
target for this financial year. Such a move might also mollify Britain's
increasingly worried business community by showing that the government is
prepared to add teeth to its counter-inflation policy and shoulder some of
the burden of maintaining sterling's ERM parity of DM2.95.
But pay determination in the public sector is no easy matter. Different
categories of workers have differently structured arrangements and
bargaining procedures. Also, the Treasury, which negotiates with public
sector unions, is guided primarily by a need to recruit, retain and motivate
suitable staff. Heavy-handed intervention in public sector pay would
jeopardise its efforts to put greater emphasis on performance pay and
greater flexibility within centrally agreed pay settlements.
Any attempt to keep pay rises to below inflation would probably mean clashes
between the government on the one hand, and the public sector trade unions
representing more than 3m public sector workers and the review bodies that
recommend pay levels for a further 1.5m on the other. Pay freezes would make
conflict inevitable, with a possibility of industrial action.
However, any confrontation would be unlikely before next year. The public
sector pay round for 1992-93 is virtually complete. The first test of any
new government resolve would be in January next year when ministers decide
on the recommendations of the review bodies covering the armed forces,
teachers, senior civil servants, nurses and doctors and dentists, all of
which are due for implementation in April.
At present, expectations of public sector pay increases in 1993-94 are
running well ahead of the 3 per cent inflation rate that the government is
now thought to expect during that financial year. The Public Finance
Foundation, a research arm of the Chartered Institute of Public Finance &
Accountancy, expects a review body recommendation of 5.25 per cent for
teachers in 1993-94 and 5 per cent for armed forces personnel against a
likely out-turn of 4.75 per cent for all public sector workers.
In recent years, workers covered by the review bodies have fared
considerably better than the majority of civil servants and local government
workers, whose pay is determined by collective bargaining. There is,
however, nothing to stop the government ignoring the recommendations of the
review bodies, as it demonstrated last month when it cut pay rises of up to
24 per cent suggested by the Review Body on Top Salaries to 4 per cent.
But that decision was highly unusual and thought to have infuriated the
review body panel which made the recommendations. In the event, panel
members did not make their displeasure public; nor did any resign from the
panel. However, if the government were repeatedly to ignore the
recommendations of review bodies, panels would increasingly question their
role. Resignations and open criticism would doubtless ensue, bringing the
review body system into disrepute.
Confrontation with the broad mass of the government's employees would be
messier still. A pay freeze for the police, firefighters and the majority of
civil servants would involve the government in breaking long-standing
agreements with these groups of workers.
Police pay increases have been linked to the rise in average earnings in the
economy for nearly 15 years. The government has already placed this system
under review, causing rumblings of discontent among the police.
Union leaders representing firefighters have frequently threatened
industrial action in defence of their pay formula which links fire pay rises
with the highest quarter of manual male earnings in the economy.
On the other hand, the continuing recession is sapping the militancy of the
public service trades unions. This summer, leaders of the National Union of
Civil and Public Servants were rebuffed by their 114,000 members when they
urged them to strike over a 4.5 per cent pay offer.
It is clear, however, that public sector pay has become a major
preoccupation of ministers as they struggle to find ways of keeping their
spending within the targets set for the coming financial year. The sheer
size of the overall paybill, which in 1990-91, the most recent year for
which figures are available, amounted to Pounds 33.7bn for central
government and Pounds 32bn for local government, is a reason enough for a
cash-strapped government to put pay under special scrutiny.
Despite the known Byzantine tendencies of Whitehall and Westminister, there
is no reason to doubt that Downing Street's denials of a prime ministerial
veto over pay are genuine. But the government will be determined to keep the
future increases in public sector pay bills as low as possible - and the
mere floating of the pay freeze idea has served notice on Treasury, review
bodies and unions to prepare for an extra-tough pay round between now and
next spring.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920804

