FT923-9887

FT  03 AUG 92 / Price flaws undermining EC's single market hopes: With
internal borders soon to fall, why should the same electrical goods cost 30
per cent more in Spain than Germany


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


OF ALL THE companies which have agitated for faster European economic
integration, none has done so for longer or more loudly than Philips, the
large Dutch electronics manufacturer. Indeed, Philips claims to have
invented the idea of the single European market, and top executives have
repeatedly called for its speedy realisation.
Yet, when it comes to applying the single market's central principles -
total liberalisation of trade and unrestricted price competition across EC
borders - Philips' business practices appear to diverge from its lofty
rhetoric.
The company freely admits the trade prices it charges for the same products
vary, though it will not say by how much. It also says it supplies products
to dealers only for sale in their own countries and refuses to supply them
for re-export to other EC countries - so-called parallel importing.
'If an authorised Philips dealer in Italy asked us to sell him products in
the Netherlands, we would tell him, very politely, that we have a
distributor in Italy and he should buy his products there,' said Mr Jack
Reemers, a spokesman at Philips' Eindhoven headquarters. Mr Reemers said
Philips had no intention of changing its approach once the single market
took effect at the end of this year by unifying its prices across the EC.
'What have unified prices got to do with the single market?,' he said,
adding that the company planned to continue existing policies 'until the end
of the world'.
The European Commission strongly opposes parallel import restrictions which
segment the EC market and can impose heavy penalties. Earlier this year, it
fined Dunlop Slazenger International Ecu5m (Pounds 3.5m) for limiting
exports of tennis balls from Britain to other parts of the EC.
Brussels is also investigating price disparities in the car industry.
However, its legal armoury is limited by the competition powers given it in
the Rome Treaty. Normally, it can act against restrictive distribution
practices only when it has solid evidence proving illegal agreements or
contracts, or the abuse of a dominant position.
Some companies have already moved unprompted to harmonise European prices.
Compaq, a US personal computer maker, says it seeks to limit variations for
most of its products to no more than 5 per cent around a central price.
Lego, the Danish toymaker, Mars, the US confectionery and petfood
manufacturer, and Rank Xerox, the office equipment supplier, have taken
similar measures.
But in consumer electronics, wide price differentials are far from unique to
Philips, according to electrical retailers. They say the prices of leading
brands such as Grundig of Germany and Panasonic and Sony of Japan also vary
substantially.
Expert International and Euronics, two pan-European associations of small
electrical retailers, say the prices of many of these companies' products
are 25-35 per cent higher in Italy and Spain than in Germany and the
Netherlands.
As the table indicates, the differences can in some cases be 50 per cent or
more. The brand names and model numbers of the products were supplied to the
Financial Times but have not been published, at Expert's request.
Expert has conducted quarterly trade price surveys since 1989, based on
actual prices paid by its 2,500 affiliated dealers in 14 countries. The
surveys do not cover Britain, because Expert has no members there, though UK
prices are generally considered among the lowest in Europe.
Mr Wim van den Toorn, Expert's managing director, said exceptionally high
trade prices depressed dealers' margins. Though he had repeatedly asked
manufacturers to harmonise prices and to allow Expert to buy centrally on
behalf of all its dealers, he had made no progress. Panasonic said it knew
of no such request.
A Panasonic spokesman and Mr Knud Thomsen, European sales manager of
Grundig, which is 32 per cent owned by Philips, said Expert's calculations
exaggerated the price differentials. However, Mr Thomsen would give no
figures of his own, saying he did not know by how much Grundig's prices
varied across Europe.
Philips says it sets prices to meet varying local competitive conditions,
while Grundig and Panasonic say their prices reflect national differences in
taxes, distribution and other costs. But Mr Thomsen would not say how much
such costs amounted to, arguing that this was confidential information.
Mr van den Toorn is unconvinced by these arguments. Though he concedes
special taxes distort prices, he claims variations in the costs of
distribution, transport and manufacturers' contributions to after-sales
service give rise to differences of less than 5 per cent in prices across
Europe.
'We know what the costs are. We ship goods to our dealers using the same
transport companies, trucks and roads as our suppliers,' he said.
He and other retailers complain price differentials are maintained by
obstacles to cross-border product flows. 'Suppliers never say explicitly in
their dealership agreements that you can't make parallel imports,' he said.
'But if you know the business, you can read between the lines. And what the
suppliers are saying is 'we can make life very difficult for you.'
'If we bought Philips or Sony products in the Netherlands and sold them in
Spain, the suppliers would boycott our dealers. Or maybe they would be told
that certain spare parts they needed would be out of stock.'
Mr van den Toorn's fears are shared by Mr Marcel Vloemans, head of Euronics
which, unlike Expert, has tried to make parallel imports. It is currently
trying to buy 10,000 Philishave razors in the Netherlands for dealers in
Italy, where Mr Vloemans says the price is 20 per cent higher.
However, Mr Vloemans says such attempts have repeatedly run into outright
refusal or resistance. 'If I buy products for parallel imports, suppliers
won't do repairs, send spare parts or provide service manuals. They can also
threaten to remove dealer discounts,' he said.
Mr Vloemans said Euronics had tried to telephone senior executives of
manufacturers to discuss his problems, but has been told they were out and
his calls have not been returned. Mr Reemers said he knew of no such calls.
Mr van den Toorn complains that lack of EC-wide product guarantees and
manufacturers' insistence that dealers supply the serial numbers of products
and their purchasers' names and addresses also make it easy to control
parallel imports.
Some manufacturers which distribute exclusively or selectively through
designated dealers register the agreements with the European Commission,
which prohibits them from restricting parallel imports.
However, such arrangements are rare in the consumer electronics industry.
Brussels says only Grundig and Saba, owned by the French Thomson group,
currently have EC-approved agreements in force. Mr van den Toorn says they
are not strict enough.
Grundig's 15-year-old agreement is due to expire shortly. Mr van den Toorn
plans to write to the Commission, providing information about price
differentials and asking that Grundig's new agreement explicitly require the
company to allow parallel imports.
The attitude of the Commission - and manufacturers - is not yet clear. But
unless changes happen, some consumers in the EC will continue to pay more
than others for the same products - and the grand idea of a single market
will stay on the drawing board.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920803

