FT921-15333

FT  10 JAN 92 / Arts: King's Consort - Queen Elizabeth Hall


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


It is no longer enough to mark a composer's anniversary with performances of
one or two works. A recorded edition of his complete oeuvre is the least
that seems to be acceptable and The King's Consort is duly engaged on a
substantial survey of Purcell's music in preparation for the tricentenary of
his death in 1995. The group's concert on Wednesday marked the completion of
its project to record the Odes, which has taken five years. The choral music
is now to follow.
One can argue that a less organised approach by various different performers
would ultimately yield more insight. But where the public gains from these
large complete series is in discovering a lot of very worthwhile music that
is unrecorded and might otherwise remain so.
The Odes were written as occasional pieces, marking the birthday of the
Queen or lauding the King on his return to Court. The poetry is often weak
and embarrassingly fawning by today's standards. But the opportunity to hear
all of the Odes does enable us to judge how rarely Purcell let his standards
slip, even for the least auspicious occasion.
This programme opened with Why are all the Muses mute?, written as a Welcome
Song for King James in 1685. It is not one of the most memorable of the
genre, for it lacks well-made tunes, but Purcell's inspiration is never
dormant: the opening lines are appropriately declaimed by the singers before
the orchestra is allowed to start the Overture and at the end the words 'his
fame shall vanish' provoke a delicious final paragraph that simply fades
away.
Together with Come, ye Sons of Art it gave a good idea of The King's Consort
in action. Robert King is not ambitious for the music, as other Purcell
supporters such as Gardiner and William Christie are in their different
ways, but he directs agreeably stylish performances of good technical
quality. His solo singers add a touch of class and the crowded hall will
have enjoyed James Bowman and Michael Chance together in 'Sound the
trumpet'.
For the larger of the Purcell Odes and Handel's My heart is inditing they
were joined by the Choir of New College, Oxford, confident young singers if
a little light in the bass, while James O'Donnell was the neat soloist in
Handel's Organ Concerto, Op. 7 No. 3. Well, Handel's next anniversary does
not come round until 2059, but with an output as vast as his somebody should
be starting now.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920110

