FT922-7161

FT  20 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Arjo Wiggins chairman quizzed over Walls'
sacking


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


A DEFENSIVE Mr Cob Sten-ham, chairman of Arjo Wiggins Appleton, the
Franco-British paper company, was yesterday repeatedly asked at the annual
general meeting to explain last week's sacking of Mr Stephen Walls, the
group's chief executive.
In a pre-prepared speech to shareholders, Mr Stenham gave no reasons for Mr
Walls' departure. However, on four separate occasions he was subsequently
asked by shareholders for an explanation.
Mr Stenham, sitting next to Mr Walls, denied an acquisition had been
responsible for the differences between the board and its chief executive.
He also insisted Mr Walls' departure did not signify a change of strategy.
The company was still aiming to become the world's leading manufacturer of
high-value paper and become the sector's most profitable group.
There was no conflict of interest between minority shareholders and other
shareholders, said Mr Stenham. The group would be run in the interest of all
shareholders. Worms et Cie, the French financial company, indirectly owns 39
per cent of AWA.
Mr Nicholas Clive Worms, a non-executive director, said AWA was looking
consistently at opportunities, in particular the northern countries, such as
the Netherlands, Germany and southern Europe. However, a number of these
were involved in joint ventures dealing in newsprint and pulp. They were
areas AWA did not want to participate in. He said AWA still needed to
consolidate, particularly in the area of carbonless paper in Europe.
Mr Stenham said he was looking at possible replacements for Mr Walls. They
included one internal candidate.
A special resolution to allow the company to buy up to 80m of its own
shares, equivalent to 10 per cent of all shares, was passed.
Mr Stenham denied this was part of a devious scheme to increase the
proportion of shares owned by the French minority shareholders.
Mr Walls remained quiet for most of the meeting, but answered questions on
women employees and the environment.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920520

