FT924-905

FT  21 DEC 92 / Risk and reward in foreign policy


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


The ground rules of US foreign policy were once readily grasped. In military
terms, the constant Soviet threat made the world bipolar and dangerous. The
Pentagon could never relax. Economically, however, the world was unipolar.
The US felt secure because no nation came anywhere near challenging its
industrial or financial muscle.
As Mr Bill Clinton prepares to assume the presidency, these polarities have
reversed. With the collapse of Soviet communism, the US is unchallenged as
the world's sole military superpower. Yet the growing industrial strength of
Europe and Japan (and soon, perhaps, China) has created a tense, multipolar
economic world in which the main players seem unable to conclude even the
relatively unambitious Uruguay Round trade talks. This radical reshaping of
the foreign policy landscape creates great opportunities for Mr Clinton, but
also serious risks.
The heartwarming presence of US troops in Somalia is the most potent
illustration of the opportunities lying ahead. For the first time in recent
US history (perhaps ever), a sizeable military intervention overseas was
justified on purely moral grounds; troops were committed not in defence of
US national interests, or to influence the strategic balance of power in
Africa, but simply to help combat starvation.
This kind of intervention has always been favoured by a small cadre of
foreign policy idealists, sometimes dubbed 'neo-Wilsonians' after Woodrow
Wilson, the president who tried but failed to persuade the US to underpin an
ethical world order after the 1914-18 war. But in recent decades, the cold
war played into the hands of the opposing school of 'balance of power'
realists. In the fight to contain communism, the argument went, the US had
to put its strategic interests first. It thus propped up a stream of despots
from the Shah of Iran to Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines.
However, with the cold war over and US military strength unchallenged, there
is no good reason why idealism should not play a larger role in foreign
policy. There is no longer any excuse for coddling tyrants or making deals
with foreign powers that are inconsistent with US domestic values.
Indeed, the domestic enthusiasm for the intervention in Somalia suggests
that, in the absence of the communist threat, the most reliable way to
sustain public support for large military expenditures may be to base
foreign policy on values the public holds dear. In today's changed world, Mr
Clinton is thus being a realist, as much as an idealist, in pledging to make
the promotion of democracy and human rights the guiding principles for
overseas interventions.
The risks ahead mainly reflect the tensions resulting from the US's relative
economic decline. This has led a vociferous band of 'economic nationalists'
to argue that the US should abandon the broadly laissez-faire doctrines of
the last four decades and 'put the interests of its own industries first'.
The general idea is that the US public sector should join the battle for
global commercial supremacy by heavily subsidising strategic industries,
pouring huge sums into commercial research and development and retaliating
unilaterally against nations that Washington deems guilty of unfair trading
practices.
The degree to which Mr Clinton buys these arguments is uncertain. During the
campaign he talked ominously of 'mobilising' the nation for global economic
competition. He has since fulfilled his promise to create a new White House
economic security council (although the word security was wisely dropped
from its title.) And he has nominated Ms Laura Tyson of the University of
California as chair of his Council of Economic Advisers. Ms Tyson is
sceptical of free market economics and advocates an aggressive industrial
policy, involving subsidies for high-technology sectors.
The economic nationalists believe the US is in relative economic decline
because it has lacked a national strategy. This is mostly a misreading of
history. The whole point of the liberal international economic order created
after the second world war was to create conditions in which Japan and
Europe could stage a lasting industrial recovery. That recovery was
inevitably going to mean relative decline for the US. But had the US tried
to keep other countries poor, it would also be much poorer in absolute terms
today.
The liberal capitalist vision is of economic competition between individuals
and companies, not of competition between nations per se. Small countries
can flout the rules and become economic nationalists without endangering the
larger liberal order. But if the US took this route, the results could be
catastrophic. If the US started to subsidise strategic industries heavily
and play God in trade disputes, Europe and Japan would feel obliged to
follow suit. There is no obvious point at which such overt economic warfare
would stop.
It is easy to find flaws in free market policies. On any given occasion,
interventions favouring US industries are likely to look superior. Over
time, however, a global descent into economic nationalism would cause
economic relations between nations to deteriorate, ultimately increasing the
risk of military conflict. If Mr Clinton were to get his economics wrong, he
could ruin any chance of creating a new world order based on democracy and
respect for human rights.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

921221

