FT923-6466

FT  24 AUG 92 / The Emperor has no plan: America


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


The Republican convention was like a performance of Hamlet without the
Prince. The delegates, living in a fantasy land of their own, simply refused
to acknowledge the brooding presence of an enfeebled economy. Outside the
Astrodome everybody was complaining about the lack of growth and jobs.
Inside, the economy was barely mentioned; the talk was of glorious foreign
policy triumphs, the threat from 'deviant' lifestyles and the evils of
abortion.
In an outpouring of vitriol, Governor Bill Clinton was caricatured as a
skirt-chasing, pot-smoking, draft-dodging proponent of gay and lesbian
rights. President George Bush plunged in the final dagger claiming (falsely)
that Mr Clinton was anti-enterprise, would raise taxes on anybody with a
job, and favoured huge increases in federal bureaucracy. Some overnight
polls showed a surge in Mr Bush's support, although whether such crude
Clinton-bashing will provide lasting benefits is uncertain.
As Houston fades from memory, the economy must reappear as the crucial
issue: there is still no sign of the vigorous recovery the White House first
predicted 18 months ago. And it was ironic that as Mr Bush put final touches
on a speech celebrating US strength, the dollar - which nobody in political
circles ever ever mentions - was plunging toward a new post-second world war
low against the D-mark. Even if Mr Bush escapes a full-blown dollar crisis,
he may pay dearly for the off-hand vacuity of his economic proposals. Voters
will surely not be impressed by his offer of a tax cut balanced by new
spending curbs, when not even a dime of those savings was specified.
And the touted 'big idea' - that taxpayers should be able to earmark up to
10 per cent of their taxes for debt reduction - hardly survives scrutiny.
The intention is that spending would be cut each time a taxpayer ticked the
debt reduction box. If the plan were feasible it would be unpleasant; in
effect rich individuals would be able to veto programmes for the poor. But
since a Democratic Congress would never approve so arbitrary a form of
spending control, Mr Bush's plan would be no more than an irrelevant
accounting gesture, with money moving harmlessly from one pocket to another.
So where do the candidates stand on economic policy after the two party
conventions?
Mr Clinton has been attacked for claiming he would 'halve the deficit' while
substantially raising spending on infrastructure and education. This may
sound as implausible as former president Ronald Reagan's promise to balance
the budget while cutting taxes.
The point is this. The Clinton team is not proposing policy changes that
will halve the deficit (how could they when their tax and spending proposals
roughly balance?). All they are saying is that their policies will not
prevent the decline in the deficit projected by nearly all forecasters as
the economy moves out of recession and as distortions (such as the savings
and loan bailout) fade.
I suspect Mr Clinton will prove more fiscally conservative than Mr Bush.
However, it would be suicidal to be more explicit in a campaign. It was
probably a mistake even to promise higher taxes on the top 2 per cent.
In judging the Bush and Clinton plans it is far more important to understand
the very real philosophical differences. In his offhand way, Mr Bush is
advocating a continuation of Mr Reagan's supply-side doctrines. Cuts in
income and (especially) capital taxes are seen as way of stimulating growth
by encouraging affluent Americans to save and invest. The problem is that
huge cuts in tax rates in the 1980s did not raise savings, investment or
productivity growth.
Mr Clinton is also offering a supply-side strategy, fathered by Mr Robert
Reich of Harvard University. It works rather differently. The premise is
that in a world of mobile physical and financial capital, government can
best promote higher living standards by focusing on factors of production
that are relatively fixed.
The two factors that cannot move at all easily are people and
infrastructure. By advocating higher investment in education and training,
the Clinton team hopes directly to increase the productivity of American
workers, thus raising the wages they can earn in competitive markets. By
investing in public infrastructure, the team hopes directly to increase the
return that private entrepreneurs (of whatever nationality) can earn by
locating plant and equipment in the US.
The Clinton plan is a step in uncharted waters. But plenty of academic
research suggests it could work. The economic return to extra years of
education has steadily risen, suggesting that that this is the most potent
investment now available. The link between the profitability of private
business and the quality of public infrastructure (be it canals, roads or
fibre optics) is long established.
Mr Clinton's modest proposals for channelling an extra Dollars 200bn into
education, training and infrastructure over four years will not transform
American productivity. But it is a reasoned response to the challenge posed
by global economic competition that should appeal to the millions of
middle-income Americans who have seen their wages stagnate for a decade. It
is certainly more innovative than anything Mr Bush has proposed.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920824

