FT923-15376

FT  02 JUL 92 / Merged firm to be 16th-largest


   By ANDREW JACK


BAKER TILLY, the UK's 17th-largest accountancy firm by fee income, is to
merge with Milne Ross, a medium-sized practice based in the south-east, in
September.
The combined firm - to be called Baker Tilly - will have fee income of more
than Pounds 30m this year, with 76 partners and 448 professional staff in 17
offices. It will become the 16th-largest firm in the UK.
The merger is the second between medium-sized firms in recent weeks,
following one between Stoy Hayward and Finnie last month, and comes at a
time when firms are coming under increasing competitive pressure during the
recession.
The Milne Ross office in central London will close, while its other offices
in Kingston upon Thames, south London, and Swindon, Wiltshire, will become
part of the Baker Tilly network. The Milne Ross name may still be used in
some circumstances.
Mr Martin Rodgers, chairman of the Milne Ross management board, will join
the existing Baker Tilly management team, while Mr Alan Vause will become a
member of its committee controlling partnership issues.
Both firms said the merger was for strategic reasons. They said
profitability was likely to be up this year on last year.
Mr Clive Parritt, national managing partner of Baker Tilly, said his firm
wanted to expand its coverage in the south-east and welcomed the fact that
many Milne Ross partners are relatively young and will be able to help
support its compliance work. Mr Martin Rodgers, chairman of the management
board at Milne Ross, said his firm wanted to expand its international
coverage and add new areas of service such as insolvency and consulting.
Two of the 19 Milne Ross partners will not join the combined firm. Mr
Raymond Fear, the former senior partner, has said he wants to consider
alternatives to working in an accountancy practice.
There was no payment as part of the merger arrangement, and partners from
both firms will be comparably re-munerated when the merger takes place.
Milne Ross billed Pounds 6.5m last year, while Baker Tilly billed Pounds
25.8m, up 0.8 per cent on the year before.
The Glasgow office of Finnie which merged with Stoy Hayward last month, has
decided not to join the enlarged practice. The two partners in the office
made the decision earlier this week.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920702

