FT924-11344

FT  27 OCT 92 / Danish opposition calls tune over Maastricht: Government has
to grin and bear it


   By HILARY BARNES


I FEEL like a little boy who has had a distasteful plate of food put in
front of him and been told to eat it up,' said Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen,
Denmark's foreign minister last week.
The dish set before him is the 1,600-word position paper detailing the
supplements to the Maastricht treaty which Denmark requires before it can
put the treaty to a second referendum next year.
The paper is the work of three non-government parties, the Radical Liberals
(who normally count themselves as part of the minority Conservative-Liberal
coalition's parliamentary base), the Social Democratic party and the
left-wing, anti-Maastricht Socialist People's party.
These three control a majority in the Folketing, and so the government is
faced with a take-it-or-leave-it programme for negotiations with the other
11 EC states.
The two Socialist parties believe they have forged an alliance which will
enable them to topple the present government before long. 'It's only a
matter of time,' says Mr Holger Nielsen, leader of the Socialist People's
party. The Radicals, however, do not place this interpretation on the EC
compromise.
The final, official position paper which the government sends to the other
governments within the next few days may be modified slightly, but not in
any substantive way.
So, when Mr Ellemann-Jensen travels round the European capitals next month
trying to win support and understanding for the Danish position, he will to
all intents and purposes be acting as plenipotentiary for the opposition.
By the standards by which parliamentary politics normally work, the position
in Denmark is unusual.
The three-party position paper was worked out in the office of Mr Poul Nyrup
Rasmussen, the Social Democratic leader, with Mr Poul Schluter, prime
minister, and the foreign minister, as bystanders.
But this is not the first time that such a situation has arisen in Denmark.
From 1982, when Mr Schluter became prime minister, until 1988, the
government consistently had a majority of the same three parties against it
on a range of Nato-related issues.
However, because the Radicals supported the government on domestic issues,
there was never any question that the government could be brought down by a
vote of no confidence.
On the Maastricht issue, the government has accepted the opposition's
position paper with good grace as the basis for 'a national compromise'
because it regards the position paper's demands as realistic from two points
of view - as a basis for persuading the 11 to meet the Danish requirements,
and as a basis for persuading the voters to support the Maastricht treaty in
a referendum next year.
The key special arrangements which Denmark wants are well-known - no
obligation to participate in common defence policy, nor to introduce a
common currency or participate in the third stage of economic and monetary
union, no transfer of sovereignty in matters of legal and police
co-operation, and no obligation to introduce union citizenship.
To improve the way the EC works and make it more transparent, the three
parties propose open meetings of, and open voting at, the European Council,
a suggestion on which most other members are likely to choke.
They also urge speedy negotiations with applicant countries from the
European Free Trade Association and stronger contacts, with a view to
membership, with Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia. They further propose
that during the Danish chairmanship of the Council, for six months from
January 1, the Copenhagen government should arrange a conference on
perspectives in the development of European co-operation.
If the Danes can obtain from the 11 the main concessions which they require
 -which cannot be taken for granted - the evidence of recent opinion polls
is that a substantial majority support the treaty next time.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

921027

