FT924-8340

FT  11 NOV 92 / International Company News: Westpac to implement recovery
strategy


   By REUTER


   SYDNEY


WESTPAC, the troubled Australian bank, is planning a fast recovery programme
and a strategic redirection of its core retail and corporate banking
business in Australia and New Zealand, Reuter reports from Sydney.
Mr Frank Conroy, managing director, said yesterday that this followed a
review of the bank's strategy and recovery programmes by McKinsey, the
international management consultancy.
'Through these moves, the bank is seeking to further strengthen its capital
ratio, to rebuild market confidence and significantly boost the underlying
performance of its businesses,' he said.
Westpac's board had endorsed further development of the recovery strategy
implemented in the past few months, Mr Conroy said. This involved more
closely defined strategic priorities, an accelerated recovery programme to
improve performance and top-level management changes. The bank would
streamline and cut the size of the head office, sell non-core assets outside
institutional and retail banking and create an organisation to manage
problem assets.
Mr Conroy said Westpac would also rejuvenate its customer focus, improve
efficiency in Australia and New Zealand and reorientate institutional
banking. It would also build on its strong position in global financial
markets and eliminate corporate lending that did not meet strategic or
financial criteria.
He said a team of executives had been chosen to form the office of the
managing director to manage a fast recovery.
Westpac's share price fell to a nine-year low of ADollars 2.396 on Friday
after it revealed an extra tax liability of ADollars 115m (Dollars 82.1m) in
the US and said the final dividend could be halved from the previous
forecast of 12 cents a share. This prompted widespread investor criticism
and attracted the attention of regulatory authorities, including the
Australian Securities Commission

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921111

