FT924-5971

FT  24 NOV 92 / Arts: A Purcell weekend - Music in London


   By MAX LOPPERT


The Purcell celebration on South Bank this last weekend bore the subtitle
'The English Genius': three days of Purcell concerts - chamber music as well
as choral odes and a sampling of the dramatic music - interspersed with
talks and foyer events.
But this weekend was in fact the launching of a boldly conceived project of
Purcell reclamation, phased in annual stages and timed to reach its finale
on November 21 1995, the 300th anniversary of the composer's death. Purcell
still needs the reclamation that anniversarial celebration tends to
encourage: the favourite works - Dido, a handful of church works, the G
minor Chaconne, the familiar songs - are always with us, but the rest is
surprisingly apt to disappear from sight and earshot for periods of time.
The main focus of the annual South Bank Purcell weekends will be the
'semi-operas': those hybrid entertainments filled with speech and dance as
well as some of Purcell's most marvellous invention for voices and
instruments. In spite of the recent Fairy Queen stagings that have enjoyed
popularity and critical favour at international festivals, received opinion
of these works - Fairy Queen, King Arthur, The Indian Queen, Dioclesian -
remains that their musical treasures are padlocked into dramatic forms now
unrevivable, and therefore quite irrecoverable. The challenge faced by the
Purcell Tercentenary Trust committee (director, Nicholas Kenyon) is to
tackle these works - Fairy Queen next year, King Arthur in 1994 - in ways
that re-discover them whole.
On Sunday the Orchestra and Chorus of the Age of Enlightenment under Gustav
Leonhardt offered in the Queen Elizabeth Hall a mouthwatering taster of the
project in their concert version of the Dioclesian Masque. In this
wonderfully vast structure a climactic formal celebration is turned by
Purcell into a feast of varied, linked pleasures. The words are cardboard
pastoral; the music - shot through with strokes of individual, unrepeatable,
sometimes wholly inexplicable genius - goes beyond them; it cries out for
some sort of stage realisation.
The remainder of Sunday's concert and most of Friday's were devoted to the
choral odes, those formal celebrations of state occasions elevated by their
music to statements of an English artistic ideal. How dire are the
verse-jingles, the sycophantic images of 'Come ye sons of Art'] And how
irresistibly robust the melodic, harmonic and rhythmic energies infused by
Purcell into its stuffed-shirt sequences] His art, which finds exhilaration
in the texture of single words, evokes both immediate delights and long
vistas; it has never seemed more modern, and more timeless.
If I had a fault to find with Leonhardt's otherwise expertly balanced
accounts of the Masque, 'Come ye Sons of Art' and Friday's two hymns to St
Cecilia, it was their overall lack of the generous gesture, the overflowing
zest for phrasing and timing which marks the true Purcell interpreter. A
touch of Beecham was wanted - in soul if not in sound-picture; a similar
shortage of spirit was felt in the Purcell Quartet's neat and knowledgeable
playing (on Saturday, in the Purcell Room) of the string sonatas.
Of the singers on all three evenings, it was the two countertenors, the
nobly poetic Michael Chance and the spritely Christopher Robson, who did
most to cherish words as well as vocal lines. I wish the Purcell Project
very well; and pray that, amid all their other valuable explorations, its
exponents manage to re-discover the 'animal' pleasures of Purcell playing
and singing.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921124

