FT922-13491

FT  11 APR 92 / UK Company News: Littlewoods calls off talks to sell home
shopping side


   By MAGGIE URRY


LITTLEWOODS, the privately-owned retailing and football pools group, said
yesterday that was no longer in talks to sell its home shopping division.
It had been in discussions with Quelle, the German mail order group which is
also a family run business.
Littlewoods said the mail order business was the jewel in the crown of its
retail activities - it has about 22 per cent of the UK mail order market,
running six catalogues and selling to 6m customers.
The group had never made the decision to sell, but had simply listened to
overtures. It now wanted to end uncertainty which had unsettled staff.
During last year two other large UK mail order groups changed hands. Grattan
was bought by Otto Versand of Germany, and Empire Stores went to Redoute
Catalogue of France.
Littlewoods had appointed Kleinwort Benson, the merchant bank, to handle
negotiations in January last year. However, it appears that a price high
enough to entice it to sell was not forthcoming. Speculation was that
Littlewoods was seeking at least Pounds 500m.
Although a number of parties were interested initially, Littlewoods stopped
talking to buyers other than Quelle last autumn. Discussions appear to have
been spasmodic and were eventually broken off this week.
Observers said that talks had centred on a gradual sale of the business,
with Quelle buying a stake in the division initially and later buying the
rest at a price determined by future profits. Talks had cooled, though, as
neither side felt a strong need to do the deal.
Littlewoods said yesterday that its gearing was negligible and it had easy
access to bank loans, so it did not need to raise cash through a sale.
The group, still headed by Sir John Moores, the 96-year-old founder and
president, is also determined not to go public.
Littlewoods will be reporting results for 1991 on April 27 and is expected
to have bucked the dismal retail trend in 1991.
The group showed a strong rise in pre-tax profits in 1990, from Pounds 64.9m
to Pounds 94.8m, with home shopping making a trading profit of Pounds 53.5m
(Pounds 51.7m) out of total retail trading profits of Pounds 83.6m (Pounds
73.2m).

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920411

