FT921-15213

FT  11 JAN 92 / Why early adopters are going digital


   By PETER KNIGHT


EVER SINCE our toddler destroyed the record turntable three years ago, I
have been agonising over the best replacement. So this week's news that W H
Smith is to stop selling vinyl records came as a relief. I can scratch
turntables from my list and concentrate on the alternatives.
The delay in making up my mind is understandable. The electronics industry
long ago identified a small but influential socio-economic group that will
always buy the newest home-entertainment gadget.
They call them 'early-adopters' and these people (usually men) will pay a
considerable premium for the pleasure of being the first to own
state-of-the-art technology.
I am an eager early-adopter, but in spirit only. Considerable meanness leads
me to read about the gadgets in specialist magazines (gratis standing up in
W H Smith) and then pester early-adopting friends and neighbours to view
their patio-sized Nicam digital televisions and listen to hi-fi systems that
look like the control room from Thunderbirds.
Late-adopters might indeed covet such technology, but what really interests
us is to identify the right time to buy a new gadget.
We want to tender our Visa cards in the smug knowledge that we are
maximising our buying power (electronic hardware always gets cheaper as the
technology ages) and minimising the chance of buying into a dying format.
Now that long-players and turntables are as fashionable as the Gorbachevs -
even compact discs (CD) have lost their new shine - the early-adopters are
looking at digital tape systems.
CDs might have many benefits. The sound, for example, is crisp and you can
skip ghastly tracks at the touch of a button. The discs might not be tough
enough to double as drinks coasters but unlike tapes and vinyl they are
reasonably resistant to physical abuse.
But an ordinary CD player cannot record, which is a great let-down to the
majority of us who like to copy our friends' music collections. Digital tape
systems, however, can both record and reproduce CD-quality sound.
A format called digital audio tape (DAT) appeared in the 1980s, but it never
took off. Now Philips and Matsushita are offering digital compact cassette
(DCC), which is a digital version of the current music tape cassettes.
DCC players (in the UK by the autumn at about Pounds 300) will also play
old-style cassettes but will not record on them.
The future success of DCC is almost entirely dependent on the music business
producing popular recordings on the format. Controlling the availability of
software (the music) for a new hardware (the player) used to be up to that
other fashionable 1980s phenomenon: market forces.
But things have changed quite considerably since hardware makers started
taking control of the software industry.
Philips, for example, owns Polygram and Sony bought CBS Records, now Sony
Music. Both companies are using their software to promote new hardware.
One such development is a technology that not only gives digital sound but
digital pictures, too. This is CD-I, a system that plugs into the television
and the hi-fi.
The pictures will also respond to our instructions, or be what the industry
calls interactive (hence the 'I').
Stick in a disc and you can flip through an encyclopaedia where the dinosaur
actually walks across the screen. Children can colour-in Disney-type
pictures on screen and adults can learn how to play golf.
Welcome, ladies, gentlemen, and especially children, to the wonderful world
of 'edutainment' - marketing and toddler-talk for the combination of
education and entertainment.
CD-I is yet to be formally launched in Britain (available from the autumn),
but early-adopters can buy from some golf shops a Philips player and three
discs (interactive golf, music and colour-in nursery rhymes) in a Pounds 695
set actually called the 'early-adopters' package'.
It is not clear whether there will be sufficient pre-recorded discs exciting
enough to persuade people to spend around Pounds 700 on a player. But the
mere existence of CD-I certainly increases the procrastinatory agony for
late-adopters.
The demise of vinyl might reduce the fog, but the exact technological future
of home entertainment remains rather blurred. However, it does seem probable
that CD-based technology will be around for some time and manufacturers will
only make zippier versions of CD players.
You might not be able to record on to CD, but for me the medium wins over
digital tape because it is marginally more toddler-proof. Late-adopters are
by nature family-oriented long-term thinkers. As a result, I am already
worried about my grandchildren mucking about with my home edutainment.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII Illustration (Omitted).

920111

