FT922-7243

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (2): Pressure for leniency resisted
 -Regulators may use sanctions to enforce capital adequacy targets


   By SIMON LONDON


THE DEADLINE by which international banks must comply with the Basle Accord
on capital adequacy has not even been reached, but central bankers are
already working on the next stage of prudential regulation.
Regulators are considering whether to enforce sanctions against banks which
fail to meet the Basle targets, whether the original Basle agreement should
be stiffened or slackened, and how new rules covering securities dealing
should apply to banks.
Most international banks have until the end of this year to meet the Basle
targets, with Japanese banks having until March 1993, the end of their
current financial year.
From this time, all banks must maintain a minimum capital-to-assets ratio of
8 per cent. Moreover, half of total capital must be tier 1 or core capital,
consisting of common equity and perpetual preference shares. The rest can be
tier 2, or non-core, capital, including dated preference shares,
subordinated loans and hybrid debt instruments.
Japanese banks may face the biggest problems in meeting the full 8 per cent
capital ratio by the deadline. The decline in the Tokyo stock market has
eroded unrealised gains on large securities holdings. Under the Basle
accord, 45 per cent of these unrealised gains can count as tier 2 capital.
In the early stages of the Japanese equity market crash, new tier 2 capital
was raised in the form of subordinated loans, often from institutional
investors such as insurance companies. However, this year the fall in equity
prices has been so swift that new capital cannot be raised fast enough to
off-set the erosion.
IBCA, the credit rating agency which has specialised in the banking sector,
estimated that the hidden reserves of the largest 20 Japanese banks shrank
from Y34,992bn (Pounds 148bn) to Y18,693bn last fiscal year. With the Nikkei
stock market average at around 17,000, most Japanese city or commercial
banks are close to, or below, the Basle target.
Japanese banks are not alone in facing problems. The recession has led to
increased provisions against bad debt. The full extent of write-offs  -
against the property sector in the UK and US, for example - may not be clear
for another year.
However, the Balse committee has so far resisted pressure to ease the
targets, either by changing the required capital ratio, extending the
deadline, or allowing new hybrid debt-equity instruments to count as core
capital.
Experience shows that capital ratios can be improved quickly, if the right
steps are taken. Citicorp, for example, had a full Basle ratio of just 6.52
per cent in 1990. At the end of March this year, the ratio had improved to
8.12 per cent.
The bank achieved this by raising new tier 1 capital, mainly by placing
preference shares, cutting back on new loans and selling assets. For
example, the sale of a controlling interest in Ambac, the financial
guarantee insurer, both netted Dollars 350m (Pounds 196m) in cash and
removed Dollars 25bn assets from the consolidated balance sheet.
Indeed, far from easing the targets, regulators are now asking what
sanctions should be imposed on banks which fail to meet the Basle targets.
No punitive measures were included in the original agreement, which is a
purely voluntary undertaking.
A committee of central bankers, headed by Mr Gerald Corrigan, president of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, is looking at measures which could be
taken against banks that are seen as inadequately regulated.
The committee was set up following the collapse of the Bank of Credit and
Commerce International. National regulators feel that they have little
control over the branches of foreign banks operating in their jurisdiction.
Central bank sources said that inadequately-capitalised banks would 'by
implication' be subject to the same measures as inadequately-regulated
institutions.
The main proposal before the Corrigan committee is that host country
regulators should be able to assume additional regulatory powers over
foreign banks operating in their jurisdiction. This could be achieved by
forcing foreign bank branches to convert to separately capitalised
subsidiaries, fully regulated in the host country.
National regulators are also taking unilateral action, building the Basle
agreement into law. For example, the US congress last year passed
legislation giving the US regulators powers over under-capitalised banks.
The law allows 'critically under-capitalised banks' to be placed under the
control of the regulators, even though they are technically still solvent.
Under which circumstances these powers could be used has yet to be
described.
International regulators have also turned their attention to the securities
business - including the securities operations of banks. New capital rules
governing market risks such as underwriting, foreign exchange dealing, and
bond trading could impose an additional burden.
Regulators argue that new rules should not lead to banks having to provide
additional capital. Most securities holdings are already covered by the
'broad brush' approach of the Basle agreement. However, it is clear that
more detailed rules will encourage banks to become more sensitive to the
capital implications of types of securities business - running long
positions of non-government securities, for example.
Banks may also be more careful about allocating scarce capital resources
between different parts of the business.
Rules are being drafted by the European Commission, the International
Organisation of Securities Commissions (Iosco), and central bank regulators
meeting in Basle.
The Basle committee and Iosco have co-operated and hope to publish a first
draft by the end of the summer. The EC capital adequacy directive has passed
through several drafts, but remains stalled by political wrangling.
Bankers are concerned that the rules should give them equal treatment with
non-bank securities firms. Some issues on this score have now been settled.
For example, banks will probably be able to raise short-term subordinated
loans - a type of tier 3 capital - as backing for positions, in the same way
as non-bank firms.
But several areas remain controversial, such as the treatment of large
securities exposures, capital backing for underwriting risks and the netting
of short and long bond holdings.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920520

