FT921-11905

FT  29 JAN 92 / When fare is not fair: Road travel in the UK has built-in
cost advantages over rail


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


It is 9.30 on a Saturday morning in London. Alex and Sue, like many young
Londoners, are going to spend the weekend with relatives - in their case,
115 miles away in Birmingham, Britain's second biggest city.
They consider two ways of getting there. If they go by train, the cheapest
available second-class fare is Pounds 23 return, making Pounds 46 for the
two of them. If they jump into Sue's Peugeot 205 and drive, the petrol for
the round trip will cost them Pounds 11 - less than a quarter of the cost of
the rail tickets.
Not surprisingly, they choose to drive.
Inadvertently, Alex and Sue have just stumbled upon the reason why the
government is having so much difficulty privatising British Rail. The
trouble is, few but the rich can justify the cost of catching a train where
road transport offers a realistic alternative. Consequently, rail's share of
the UK passenger travel market is a miserable 6 per cent, and the railways
do not make money.
Superficially, it seems odd that rail travel should be more expensive than
driving. The cost of moving large numbers of people in a single train should
be much less than the cost of moving the same number of people in hundreds
of separate road vehicles.
The explanation lies in the fact that when a rail passenger buys a ticket,
he or she contributes not only to the cost of operating the train, but to
the cost of the railway tracks, signals and stations, too. The marginal
extra cost of a motorist's journey, conversely, is limited to the cost of
the fuel consumed: the road is provided by the government.
It is this disequilibrium that has undermined the viability of railways the
world over. Wherever governments provide roads that are free at the point of
use and there is enough space left to drive on them, passenger railways are
subsidised or struggling, or both.
The implication is that, if railways are to become profitable - and in doing
so, play a part in easing the world's worsening transport crisis -
governments will need either to start charging for the use of the roads, or
relieve train operators of responsibility for the railway tracks.
The first option cuts no ice with the roads lobby. Organisations such as the
British Road Federation say motorists in the UK already cover more than the
full cost of the road network through the taxes they pay.
They have a point. On current forecasts, the special fuel tax levied on fuel
used by road vehicles is expected to raise Pounds 10.8bn this year, and
vehicle excise duty another Pounds 3.1bn. The total of Pounds 13.9bn is more
than double the Pounds 6.1bn forecast to be spent this year on the building,
maintenance and policing of roads.
Excluded from this assessment, however, are the so-called social costs of
motoring. The Department of Transport says the costs to society of road
deaths and injuries was Pounds 6.8bn in 1990; a frequently cited study by
the Confederation of British Industry has put the annual costs of road
congestion at Pounds 15bn; and, in accordance with the widely accepted
'polluter pays' principle, the green-tinged Environmental Transport
Association, a lobby group, estimates that road users should be charged
Pounds 2.3bn a year to reflect the environmental damage they cause.
By comparison, the social costs imposed by rail travel are small; yet the
absence of a road pricing structure encourages people to make as much use as
possible of their cars to justify the high initial outlay made in acquiring
them.
Worse, the absence of charges for road use has created an adverse climate
for rail investment by distorting decisions on the relative merits of road
and rail schemes.
Under Department of Transport rules, the case for rail investment is judged
solely according to commercial criteria. An investment will only normally
proceed if the fare revenue it generates delivers a financial rate of return
of 8 per cent or more.
In the case of new road schemes, however, the absence of a pricing structure
means that commercial criteria cannot be applied. Instead, the Department of
Transport carries out a cost-benefit analysis to see whether the road should
be built.
Put simply, this means adding up the potential benefits to road users
(mainly, savings in drivers' time, savings in vehicle operating costs, and
reductions in accidents); giving them a notional monetary value; and then
calculating whether this value delivers an 8 per cent return on the cost of
the scheme.
Railways are doubly disadvantaged by this system: first, because the
appraisal of rail schemes excludes any consideration of benefits to users or
non-users, and second, because the appraisal of road schemes puts a value on
only the positive aspects of roadbuilding - not the negative ones, such as
environmental damage.
Thus, road schemes proliferate while investment in big rail projects is
scarce. Absurdly, in rare instances where the government decides that it
wants to proceed with a rail project even though it fails the normal
commercial test - as with the recent decision to approve the east-west
London CrossRail scheme - it uses a road-style cost-benefit analysis to
justify the project instead.
One obvious way of levelling the playing field between road and rail would
be to introduce a road pricing system which charged people not just for the
direct costs of the roads they used, but for the social costs, too. Then,
rational decisions about priorities for road and rail schemes could be based
on people's preparedness to pay.
Political realities, however, mean that road pricing is still some way off.
Voters do not like paying for what they are accustomed to receiving free.
But the privatisation of British Rail offers a different opportunity. If the
government decided to retain ownership of the tracks and privatise only the
trains, railways would for the first time be given the same status as roads.
Taxes on rail and road users could be brought into line, with each paying
the same proportion of their full economic and social costs. The government
would decide the provision of roads and railways in line with national
needs, using the same investment criteria for each, and the private sector
would be left to decide how best to make profitable use of them.
The result could be a new golden age for rail. Significantly, the would-be
train operators that have come forward already - Virgin, Stagecoach,
Orient-Express Hotels - have shown little interest in owning tracks, but a
great deal of interest in running trains. A level playing field between road
and rail transport would open the way to many more.
Far-fetched the idea may appear, but it is already a reality in Sweden. In
1988 the Swedish parliament, motivated by growing concern about the
country's transport problems, decided to split Swedish State Railways into
two: a national rail administration, Banverket, which owns the tracks, and
Swedish Railways, which runs the trains.
Today, the rail system operates much like the roads. Swedish Railways,
although still state-owned, has been put on a commercial basis with a view
to ultimate privatisation, while Banverket's investments are planned to
achieve maximum benefit to the social economy.
Rail vehicles, just like road vehicles, pay an annual licence fee to the
government, plus a fuel tax and a distance-related charge. Road users,
meanwhile, have faced matching increases in their tax regime - notably in
the form of a carbon tax applied to fuel.
Results of the scheme so far have included a transformation into profit of
the previously heavily loss-making Swedish Railways; the introduction of new
train services; the entry into the market of three private freight train
operators and one private passenger train operator; and plans for SKr45bn
(Pounds 4.5bn) of rail investment to the end of the decade.
Could it happen in Britain? Privatisation offers the opportunity, if
ministers could brace themselves to grasp it. The alternative, of course,
would be to privatise the roads and impose a tax on owners for the social
costs of operating them. But not even 13 years of Conservatism has yet put
that proposal on the agenda; and, given the private sector's lack of
interest in building toll roads, the question of finding a buyer could prove
more than a little troublesome.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
UK ROAD AND RAIL INVESTMENT
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Pounds m (constant 89/90 prices)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
         86/87   87/88   88/89   89/90   90/91*
Road     1,639   1,712   1,856   2,054   2,291*
Rail       515     620     628     715     806*
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
*estimated out-turn
Source: Department of Transport Report 1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 18 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted).

920129

