FT924-12192

FT  22 OCT 92 / De Klerk to override parliament on amnesty


   By PATTI WALDMEIR and REUTER


   CAPE TOWN, JOHANNESBURG


MR F W de Klerk, the South African president, yesterday decided to force
through a bill which will allow him to grant secret amnesty to security
force members for apartheid crimes, after the bill was rejected by the
segregated parliament.
It is the first time that Mr de Klerk has acted to overrule parliament since
he took office in September 1989, and demonstrates the fact that he is under
heavy pressure from his own security forces to provide such amnesties before
a multiracial interim government takes power, probably some time next year.
Earlier in the day, Mr de Klerk suffered a humiliating defeat when Indian
legislators blocked the bill in parliament. The president said last night he
would refer the bill to the multi-party President's Council, a section of
the executive branch of government which is dominated by the ruling National
Party.
The President's Council was designed to overcome exactly the circumstances
that arose yesterday: defeat of the ruling party in one of the non-white
houses of the three-chamber parliament (the 308-seat parliament debates
jointly, but legislators vote separately according to race). If a bill is
defeated in any house - white, coloured or Indian - it cannot become law
without being referred to the Council.
Mr de Klerk is likely to be sharply criticised by opposition parties for
frustrating the will of parliament.
ANC officials said yesterday they did not expect the bill to prove a major
obstacle to constitutional negotiations, arguing that it was unnecessary to
oppose individual amnesties granted now, as a multiracial interim government
would immediately cancel all such pardons or indemnities.
Mr de Klerk claims that the legislation is necessary to complete the release
of political prisoners from the African National Congress (ANC), but legal
experts dispute this, believing its main aim is to indemnify the security
forces from prosecution.
Liberal Democratic party spokesman Mr Tony Leon said the bill represented a
'charter for crooks, criminals and assassins'.
'It massively widens the net of assassins, bombers, terror ists, necklace
murderers, state killers and others in this rogue's gallery of South
Africa's terror who will now qualify to walk away from their deeds unnamed,
undis closed and unpunished,' he said during the parliamentary debate.
The African National Congress yesterday said a Swiss firm was planning to
sell South Africa training aircraft in what would be a violation of the
international arms embargo, Reuters reports from Johannesburg.
'The ANC is aware that arrangements are being made by a Swiss aircraft
company to sell Pilatus trainer aircraft to the South African Defence
Force,' a statement said.
'These aircraft are meant for the training of fighter pilots and are a
violation of the arms embargo.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921022

