FT923-15412

FT  02 JUL 92 / Truckers in France help bring about second day of chaos


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


TRAFFIC again came to a standstill throughout France yesterday as lorry
drivers staged their second day of protest against the government's
clampdown on dangerous driving.
The truckers' road blocks, together with continuing demonstrations by French
farmers, caused chaos. Deliveries to shops and factories were disrupted.
Shops in Lyons are running out of fresh food. Tourists were trapped at the
channel ports, unable to proceed to their holiday destinations.
There were lengthy tailbacks of cars and lorries at the borders with Spain
and Italy. Emergency telephone lines into traffic information centres were
saturated with calls from desperate drivers.
On a radio programme Mr Jean Louis Bianco, minister of transport and
housing, accused the truckers of 'holding the French hostage'.
This provoked uproar among an invited audience of lorry drivers, one of whom
shouted 'We are not gangsters' at the minister.
Truckers sealed off the centres of Lyons and Limoges with barricades. The
main motorways north and south of Paris were cut off by road blocks and the
ring-road around the capital was jammed with traffic.
In some areas lorry drivers joined forces with groups of militant French
farmers, demonstrating against the European Community's agricultural
reforms, to stage 'Operations Escargots' by driving convoys of trucks and
tractors at a snail's pace along main roads.
The lorry drivers are protesting against the new rules on dangerous driving
which came into force yesterday. Under the new system drivers are awarded
six points on their licences. If they commit an offence they will lose a
certain number of points. Drunk driving counts for three points, and
speeding or driving through a red traffic light counts for two.
Once a driver has lost six points he automatically forfeits his licence and
must wait at least six months to get it back. Truckers claim that, as
professional drivers, they should be allocated extra points, otherwise they
will risk losing their licences - and livelihoods. Taxi drivers have also
been campaigning against the changes, with a one-day taxi strike in Paris
last month.
So far the French government, anxious to reduce the accident rate on French
roads - which claimed 9,600 lives last year, twice as many as accidents on
UK roads - has remained adamant. Mr Georges Sarre, secretary of state for
transport, said the new points system was 'not negotiable'.
Mr Sarre said he would initiate an inquiry at the end of this week into the
progress of the new system which, he said, could lead to 'some
modifications'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920702

