FT924-6484

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (8): To the victors, the spoils - Damian
Fraser on the shake-out among the country's banks


   By DAMIAN FRASER


IT HAS been a tumultuous year for Mexico's 18 banks and 26 brokerages.
Having had to deal with privatisation, restructuring and refinancing, they
have watched sharp falls in their share prices in the face of rising
interest rates and a slowing economy.
The banks' loan book grew sharply, and those non-performing more than
doubled, to reach 3.1 per cent of the total. A handful of banks lost an
estimated Dollars 500m after the rise in interest rates slashed the value of
the government paper they were holding.
To top this, the government allowed foreigners to compete in the Mexican
market. According to the proposed North American free trade agreement
(Nafta), foreigners will have up to 8 per cent of market share in 1994,
rising to 15 per cent by 2000. Then, with some safeguards, the market will
be free.
The banks' most testing experience has been their privatisation, and the
subsequent formation of integrated financial groups, comprising banks and
brokerages. The 18 banks were sold for more than Dollars 12bn, an average of
14.75 times earnings and 3.07 times book value. While this was a triumph for
the Mexican government, the high price has put acute pressure on the banks
to cut costs, raise finance and in many cases redefine their corporate
strategies.
Mexican banks have to reach new capital levels of 8 per cent (risk-adjusted)
by the start of next year, but many are finding it difficult. Government
authorities say they will show leniency to those that are moving in the
right direction.
For the banks that get it right, the rewards are high. Mexico is
under-banked and under-leveraged, with just one branch per 18,000 people,
and credit equal to 6 per cent of GDP. In the US, by contrast, there is one
branch per 4,000 people and credit is 63 per cent of GDP. Net margins remain
high - at about 6-8 per cent - and in the fast growing retail sector, should
stay that way. Few expect foreign banks to enter the retail market in the
short term given the high entry costs, with or without Nafta.
The two largest banks, Banamex and Bancomer, account for almost 60 per cent
of total assets, and by virtue of their size, management experience and
superior technology, are most analysts' favourites to benefit from the
expected growth in the financial sector. While Bancomer is Mexico's leading
retail bank, Banamex is the top corporate bank and dominates the capital
markets.
Banamex was bought by Accival, Mexico's largest and most successful
brokerage, for Dollars 3.2bn in August last year: and the two now form Grupo
Financiero Banamex-Accival, or Banacci. The new owners - Mr Roberto
Hernandez and Mr Alfredo Harp Helu - have fired or accepted the resignation
of the majority of top managers, in a shake-up intended to assert more
discipline and central control. Banamex's former managers are now found
running Comermex and other smaller banks.
'When we took over this bank, it was seven banks vertically organised. Now
it is one horizontal bank, and we have removed four layers of bureaucracy,'
says Mr Hernandez.
Banacci hopes to maintain its position as Mexico's leading corporate bank,
expanding its presence in car loans, mortgages and credit cards, while
reducing its personal loans business. Mr Hernandez says his bank has no
interest in expanding significantly in the US or Europe, arguing that
Banamex 'is going to concentrate where we have a competitive advantage.'
Banacci's ambitions suffered a blow in June when it was forced to withdraw a
Dollars 1.5bn equity offering after steep declines in the Mexican stock
market. Its plans to expand have inevitably been affected.
It then experienced a second setback when it lost around Dollars 200m on
ajustabonos, government paper whose real interest rate rose from 2.5 per
cent in April to over 7 per cent more recently. The losses reflect the
group's trading rather than commercial banking bent: it still holds
uncovered risky positions in the money and currency markets, and derives a
large slice of profits from capital markets activities.
Bancomer's strength, by contrast, is in commercial banking, from which it
makes over 90 per cent of profits. The bank was bought for Dollars 2.6bn
from investors from the Monterrey-based Grupo Visa, which owned Vamsa, the
successful financial services company. Bancomer is now Grupo Financiero
Bancomer (GFB), which comprises the bank, the brokerage Absa, and a leasing
and factoring company.
The new owners have kept most of the top management and, unlike Banacci, had
the good fortune to make their equity offering of Dollars 837m in March,
when Mexico's stock market was still hot. While the bank hopes to maintain
its leading position in the retail market, it is currently trying to bolster
its presence in the corporate segment.
Other banks are struggling to define their market niche. Banca Serfin, the
third largest bank, and bought by investors from the brokerage Operadora de
Bolsa, has been in some disarray, and in September the owners fired scores
of senior and middle managers. It is paying the price of a rapid and perhaps
ill-considered increase in loans over past years.
Comermex, the fifth largest, and bought by investors from Inverlat, is
pursuing a pan-Latin American strategy, and has bought brokerages in
Colombia, sold a 5 per cent stake to Banco Novia Scotia of Canada, and hopes
to form more alliances with financial groups in the US and Latin America.
Like other Mexican banks, Comermex is focusing on the retail and
middle-level corporate market.
As competition between these and other banks hots up, observers expect a
second round of mergers and rationalisation. Foreigners, who so far have
limited presence to the occasional small-size strategic stakes, may move in
at this point.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921120

