FT923-6571

FT  24 AUG 92 / Republicans resort to fire and brimstone


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


IN savage campaigning over the weekend the Republican party for the first
time sought to link the Democratic party and its presidential nominee, Mr
Bill Clinton, with the troubled private life of Woody Allen, the actor and
film director.
And President George Bush, addressing a meeting of fundamentalist political
activists, came close to accusing his opposition of being anti-religious. 'I
am struck,' he said in Dallas, 'by the fact that the other party took
thousands of words to make up its platform and left out three simple
letters, G O D'.
The president and his surrogates emerged from the party's convention in
Houston last week breathing fire and brimstone and encouraged by scattered
polling suggesting Mr Clinton's lead in the electoral race has been reduced
to single figures. A Los Angeles Times poll, for example, had him only eight
points ahead, nearly 20 points below his previous lead.
But some of the Republican attacks are sure to trigger controversy,
especially that delivered, in Mr Bush's presence, by Congressman Newt
Gingrich of Georgia, an ardent conservative.
Warming up a rally for Mr Bush, he said: 'Woody Allen having non-incest with
a non-daughter to whom he was a non-father because they were a non-family
fits the Democratic platform perfectly.' The Democrats, he said, had 'no
concept of family'.
As is now standard practice, the Bush campaign issued a statement
dissociating Mr Bush from Mr Gingrich's remarks. 'The president is not going
to make Woody Allen an issue,' it said.
The Clinton campaign said the congressman's comments were 'silly and
outrageous'.
The Rev Pat Robertson, a convener of the Dallas meeting and prominent at
last week's convention, painted an even more Stygian picture of Democratic
values in an extraordinary attack on feminism - typified in Republican eyes
by Mrs Hillary Clinton - in a fund-raising letter he has written to an
anti-feminist campaign in Iowa.
One paragraph runs: 'The feminist agenda is not about equal rights for
women. It is about a socialist, anti-family political movement that
encourages women to leave their husbands, kill their children, practise
witchcraft, destroy capitalism and become lesbians.'
The Dallas meeting, to which Mr Clinton had turned down an invitation, made
the Houston convention seem mild. The Democratic candidate, it was charged,
was a friend of pornographers, would let homosexuals run the armed forces,
and failed to understand that the hole in the ozone later was an atheist
ploy.
The conservative Republican platform was frequently praised for having put
backbone into the president. Mrs Phyllis Schlafly, a leading opponent of
abortion, called it 'one of the cleanest, clearest victories we have had'.
Conservative satisfaction of a different kind was also expressed yesterday
by Mr Jack Kemp, the housing secretary, who said in a television interview
that he thought the president's acceptance speech had gone a long way
towards meeting right-wing demands for a commitment to sharply reduced
taxes.
Mr Clinton, in his weekend campaigning in the northern 'rust belt' states,
has not taken all this lying down, although he has focused more on the
economic issues which he considers his greatest strength. He came close to
accusing Mr Bush outright of being a liar in describing as 'untrustworthy'
the president's promise to cut taxes next year, which have been coupled with
attacks on Mr Clinton's alleged propensity to increase taxes.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920824

