FT922-433

FT  27 JUN 92 / Arts: Down Buchan's way - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


ON Wednesday, Radio 4 gave us In Richard Hannay's Footsteps, about the hero
of The Thirty-Nine Steps; and we shall follow his footsteps closer when we
hear an adaptation of that splendid book (published 1915, still selling 7000
copies a year) next Monday.
Presenter Christopher Lambton's first target was the precise location in the
Galloway country where Hannay had his adventures. Writer Frank Lindsay, both
the President and Vice-President of the John Buchan Society and Dr David
Daniel may or may not have found credible places, complete with inn; but
before they reached a prospect of agreement we were discussing Buchan's
personality and comparing it with Hannay's, alleged to be that of a prig and
a racist. It was very pleasant, and ought to be heard again after the Monday
play.
While we were in Buchan mood, we had the rather different Witchwood last
Monday, a product no doubt of the Covenanter, Calvinist personality ascribed
to the author. It is set in 1614, 300 years before 39 Steps, and follows the
fortunes of David Semphill (Paul Young), a young Scottish Presbyterian
minister. It is hard enough that he should fall out with the Presbytery over
the matter of Devil's Sabbaths in the Black Wood, in which some of his
parishioners are active. He is also involved with the defeated soldiers of
Montrose's royalist army, pretty unpopular in those parts.
It is a sad tale in the end - David is excommunicated, his love Katrine
(Gerda Stevenson) dies of the plague, Montrose and his friends go into
exile, even the chief of the devil-worshippers is killed by the devils. John
Scotney's adaptation is excellent, full of atmosphere and truly lively
characters - the ministers Mungo Muirhead and Ebenezer Proudfoot (Robert
Trotter and John Shedden) betray a Buchanesque ministerial hatefulness. The
spry direction is by Alec Reid. You can get cassettes of this and the 39
Steps together in the BBC Radio Collection.
No proper Englishman, only the crowds that resent the Tests on Radio 3,
could fail to offer good wishes to Brian Johnston on his 80th birthday. The
BBC celebrated it on Sunday. They played him on his old ground, Down Your
Way - his way, as it happens, Swanage, about which he was interesting and
where the music was as amiable as Terry Waite's, earlier that day in Desert
Island Discs.
In under a minute, he skipped from Swanage on Radio 4 to Lord's on Radio 3,
and what a good present that was, as exciting a Test as we have had for
years. I can't deny that I had both programmes on together for a bit.
I was disappointed in Radio 5's A Family Learns Spanish (Sunday, again
Tuesday), where Ian and Alison and their four children are coached, not so
much in Spanish, as in how to be taught Spanish. There are four more
programmes to come, and I must hope that learning Spanish is to be given
more time than overheard home chat.
Another family lurks on Radio 5, in It's My Life by Robert Leeson, which
began last week. Sixteen-year-old Janice (Jane Hazelgrove) has a mother who
has bolted, a boy-friend who may have lost interest, a little brother who
interrupts, and a Dad who tries to sort his family out when he can spare the
time from his work. Jan says things like 'bloody 'ell]' (it goes out at 9.30
pm). This sorts out her class; but she might have gone to university if she
hadn't had to take a job to keep the family. Her Life sounds like the small
paras in the local paper.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920627

