FT924-1002

FT  21 DEC 92 / Yeltsin saves reform cabinet


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


RUSSIAN President Boris Yeltsin yesterday reached agreement with Mr Viktor
Chernomyrdin, the new prime minister, on the make-up of the cabinet and
agreed the basic current team would be preserved, the president's spokesman
said yesterday.
Mr Yeltsin cut short his official visit to China this weekend to mount
efforts at home to retain the core of his economic reform team.
The president flew to Moscow on Saturday, saying 'the master has to return
home to restore order' because of attempts to scatter the reform team
assembled by Mr Yegor Gaidar. Mr Gaidar, the architect of Russia's market
reforms, was last week dumped as prime minister by Mr Yeltsin following
concerted pressure from conservative deputies in parliament.
Meanwhile, Mr Chernomyrdin has toned down earlier attacks on Mr Gaidar's
policies. Mr Chernomyrdin, who earlier had announced he wanted 'a market not
a bazaar', said at the weekend that he simply wanted reforms to be effective
and was ready to 'correct' his view after consultations with others.
However, there were signs last night that Mr Yeltsin might yet face an
uphill task to ensure that the reform team could work with Mr Chernomyrdin.
On the one hand, some of Mr Gaidar's closest colleagues, like Mr Anatoly
Chubais, the privatisation minister, and Mr Andrei Nechaye, the economics
minister, having threatened to resign if Mr Gaidar went, now say that they
will stay on as long as reform continues.
Others, however, say that they want clarification of Mr Chernomyrdin's
plans. The consensus among Mr Gaidar's colleagues is that, while Mr
Chernomyrdin is a decent individual and competent manager, he knows nothing
about macroeconomics and that, if he listens to the wrong advice, he could
steer the country into hyperinflation.
One cabinet change which could help boost the credibility of reforms could
be the appointment of an energetic new finance minister to try to keep a
grip on credit and monetary policy.
It is understood that Mr Boris Fyodorov, Russia's executive director at the
World Bank who resigned two years ago as the country's finance minister, was
in Moscow at the weekend to explore job possibilities.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921221

