FT921-15362

FT  10 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Disney offers 1,000 Britons jobs in
Paris


   By CATHERINE MILTON, Labour Staff


ABOUT 1,000 Britons are being offered the opportunity to help bring
fantasies to life when Disney's theme park opens outside Paris in April.
Based on US models, the park is set to become Europe's biggest leisure and
tourist attraction. Its size is being matched by the company's recruitment
drive.
Euro Disney will hire a total of 12,000 European staff, including the 1,000
from Britain.
The jobs available are in catering, hospitality, housekeeping, merchandising
and attractions operations.
The Europe-wide recruitment tour will stop at four cities in the UK and one
in Ireland this month and next.
A team of 20 specialists from the Euro Disney human resources department
will examine about 10,000 applicants for traces of 'pixie dust'.
According to Ms Vanessa Aves, a Euro Disney official publicist, this is the
quality which will ensure hopeful applicants a job offer. The special team
can tell instantly whether applicants have the required Disney magic, said
Ms Aves. 'You can more or less tell as soon as somebody walks through the
door whether they are a bright person.
'It is the smile and the way they say hello. The initial impression is very
important.'
Recruitment Disney-style is as saccharine and, the company says, as
successful as the cartoon characters.
Successful applicants - irrespective of their jobs - will find they have
been cast in roles following auditions rather than offered jobs after
interviews.
Ms Aves said: 'We will see anybody over the age of 18 who has some
conversational French. They need to be outgoing, enthusiastic and must have
a positive approach to working with other people in a service-related
environ-ment.
'We are looking for people who exude warmth and courtesy.'
The recruitment tour will stop in London, Manchester, Birmingham, Edinburgh
and Dublin. Applicants need only turn up, preferably with details of
previous jobs and a photograph.

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Photograph Spade work, Disney has launched a Europe-wide
recruitment drive to help it find 12,000 staff - making fantasies realities
is labour-intensive (Omitted).

920110

