FT924-8144

FT  12 NOV 92 / The Matrix Churchill Scandal: Officials probably knew of BSA
contracts


   By DAVID OWEN


THE MATRIX Churchill documents appear to indicate that Whitehall officials
had detailed knowledge of export contracts agreed with Iraqi interests by
other UK machine-tool manufacturers, including BSA Machine Tools.
The case, which is due to come before the Old Bailey today, was referred to
in the Commons this week by Mr Geoffrey Robinson, Labour MP for Coventry
North West. Questioning Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, Mr
Robinson asked: 'What will happen to the case that apparently continues
against BSA and its chairman and owner, Mr Keith Bailey? Does that go on?'
Mr Bailey, chairman of BSA's holding company, was arrested by Customs and
Excise last year. The documents - released in the course of the Matrix
Churchill case - date from early 1988 and relate to export licences granted
to BSA the previous year.
The first - a letter from an official based at the DTI - refers to a report
'claiming that the machine tools are being used for the manufacture of
munitions'.
The letter continues: 'There seems to be considerable merit in keeping as
quiet as possible about this politically sensitive issue. However, we should
be very careful about the validity of the claims on munitions manufacture
since there may be an element of mischief-making . . . while at the same
time be aware that almost any machine tool supplied to a country at war will
eventually be used to support the war effort in some form or other.
'If the licences are withdrawn then the consequences for the sector and the
companies will be severe, particularly for BSA Machine Tools because the
order is large relative to the company size, so they may seek redress
through the courts. Although keeping quiet seems the sensible option at this
time, we should be aware that news of this kind is likely to leak and
ministers should therefore be forewarned.'
A letter sent by another DTI official refers to a meeting concerning 'the
report that the Nassr Establishment for Mechanical Industries and the Hateen
Establishment for Technical Industries in Iraq were heavily engaged in a
munitions production programme'.
A later letter from a Ministry of Defence official stated: 'There are good
reasons for letting the licences stand. The intelligence community
recommends against revoking the licences as they fear for the safety of
their source and they believe that far more important information could
cease to become available as a result.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921112

