FT924-5942

FT  24 NOV 92 / Ending of Cold War hots up a merger: A Dollars 3bn deal that
reflects a declining US defence budget


   By MARTIN DICKSON


THE merger announced yesterday between Martin Marietta and the aerospace
businesses of General Electric is the most dramatic example yet of the wave
of consolidation reshaping the US defence industry in the post-Cold War era.
Many more such deals are likely over the next few years as long-pampered US
defence contractors come to grips with a sharply declining US defence budget
and the industry consolidates in the hands of the most efficient operators.
Martin Marietta is buying the GE business for Dollars 3.05bn (Pounds
2.01bn), making it the largest recent defence industry merger, but the deal
is also significant in that it brings together two of the more successful
businesses in the sector, combining from a position of strength, rather than
weakness.
Martin Marietta, with revenues of Dollars 6bn and net earnings last year of
Dollars 313m, is a leading manufacturer of space launch vehicles, such as
the Titan family of rockets, as well as military electronics, information
systems and missiles. It employs 56,000.
It is an important contractor to the Patriot air defence missile system
which helped defend Israel and Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War.
The GE businesses being sold, which had 1991 revenues of Dollars 6bn and are
expected to earn around Dollars 330m net this year, supply radar, sonar
avionics and armaments systems, missile system components and make
commercial satellites. They employ 37,700 people.
The two claimed yesterday their combination would create a defence
electronics business twice as big as the next nearest contractor and a
'lower cost, more competitive and more innovative global supplier'.
The deal was initiated by Mr Jack Welch, GE chairman, who over the past
decade has turned this once stodgy giant of US industry into a very
aggressively managed business, with interests ranging from financial
services to television. One of Mr Welch's long-held beliefs is that GE's
businesses must be first or second in their respective markets if they are
to prosper in the increasingly competitive global marketplace.
Mr Welch conducted a strategic view of the aerospace business and its flat
revenues and profits in the light of the US defence cutbacks and decided
that it needed to be part of a larger entity.
He identified Martin Marietta as the best possible partner and raised the
subject some six weeks ago with Mr Norman Augustine, the company's chairman,
while the two were closeted away at a meeting of the Business Council, a
retreat which brings together some of America's top executives.
Mr Welch admitted yesterday that GE might have tried to acquire Martin
Marietta, but it quickly became clear that Mr Augustine was interested in
buying businesses, rather than selling.
Indeed, Martin Marietta was unsuccessful earlier this year in an attempt to
buy the missiles and aerospace business of steel group LTV, which was
eventually sold to Loral, Carlyle Group and Northrop.
The deal has been structured so that GE will continue to have a stake in the
business.
It will get two seats on the Martin Marietta board and Dollars 1bn of the
sale price will be in the form of Martin Marietta convertible preferred
stock, which Mr Welch hopes will give GE a 'good upside ride'.
GE will suffer a small initial dilution of earnings per share, of around 2
per cent, but thinks that over the longer term the deal has to potential to
add 1 per cent to 2 per cent a year to the group's earnings. It says it will
use the Dollars 2bn cash proceeds for 'productivity improvements and global
growth'.
Martin Marietta will benefit from enhanced size and access to GE's research
and development laboratories, which are among the best in US industry, and
GE's global presence. The two also plan to pool the purchasing of some
commodity items.
The deal should allow some rationalisation of facilities and employees,
notably at headquarters, but both companies were at pains yesterday to
stress that they were remarkably complementary with relatively little
business overlap.
Mr Augustine, arguing that 'these two companies will be much stronger, much
better off than they would be alone', said, for example, that Martin
Marietta's space launcher business and GE's commercial satellite operations
might find work together.
Similarly, in underwater warfare, Martin Marietta made missiles and launch
systems and GE was involved in radar. This offered possibilities for the
joint business to assume prime contractor status.
While the combined business, with some Dollars 11bn of annual revenues, will
be largely defence-based, it will also have some Dollars 3.5bn of
non-military sales, in areas such as robotics, environmental clean-up and
commercial satellites.
The US company that has acted most aggressively to cope with the new defence
environment is General Dynamics, the second largest Pentagon contractor,
which is in the process of selling off non-core operations and slimming down
to just four areas of military expertise. Recent rumours have suggested that
it might even sell off one of these four, its jet fighter division, if it
can get an attractive price.
A study by Mr Jerrold Lundquist, of management consultants McKinsey, in the
current edition of the Harvard Business Review indicates that the industry
has a long slimming process ahead. 'Today a dozen defence companies compete
in six or more market segments. Tomorrow they will compete in two or three.
Several large companies and scores of small ones will fold altogether. In
1992 there are 13 companies in the space segment, and 16 vie for a slice of
the avionics pie. By 1997, there will be only five or six in each group.'
Mr Lundquist argues that the rationalisation will proceed quickly and
'companies that act first will have the greatest advantage'. Messrs Welch
and Augustine would doubtless agree.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921124

