FT922-3926

FT  09 JUN 92 / Strategy to re-sell a tarnished treaty


   By JOE ROGALY


If you think that following the Danish rejection of the Maastricht Treaty
the British government is up the Rhine without a paddle you are mistaken. It
hasn't much of a paddle, but just what kind of a creek it is up is unclear.
Mr John Major's cabinet is distinctly nervous, but at least it knows what it
proposes to do. There is a broad strategy, which I shall outline in a
moment. It lacks precision but it is more or less coherent. Its principal
defect is that its success or failure will be determined by the actions of
unpredictable tribes, such as the Danes, the Irish, the French, and
Conservative back-benchers.
The strategy begins with the simple proposition that it is the government's
job to prevent other Europeans from going off on their own to enact policies
that deeply affect Britain's interests. To this end the United Kingdom must
be a leading participant in European affairs. It must be welcomed as such by
the continentals. An unwillingness to accept this self-evidently correct
thesis has led to tears and tantrums on many occasions since 1945. Mr
Major's achievement has been to inscribe it upon a banner and hold it aloft
as the driving principle of his government.
It was under this banner that he and his foreign secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd,
worked so hard last year to reach agreement on the shape of a future
European Union. Both of them are certain that Britain does best in Europe
when it argues its case patiently and persistently, and worst when it
appears to be destructive, or leaves an empty chair. They will now work to
save the Maastricht deal. In this they regard themselves as blessed with a
greater sense of what is politically acceptable than the Portuguese, the
French and the Germans, who proposed at a meeting of foreign ministers in
Oslo to tell the Danish electorate to go to hell.
In some moods, it appears, the Danish government would have been rather
pleased with that. Perhaps they think it would browbeat their opponents. Old
hands know better. Mr Hurd persuaded the meeting to produce an emollient
communique. At the same time it was established that (a) Danish voters
cannot be asked to accept Maastricht unchanged, while (b) there can be no
renegotiation.
The question of when a renegotiation is not a renegotiation may trouble
Cartesian minds, but it is the kind of convoluted thought at which the
English excel. One non-renegotiation might be to take the treaty apart, with
the essence of it agreed by all 12 signatories including the Danes while
some bits - foreign and defence policy, say - would be set up as separate
deals among the other 11. The British government is against putting all of
the original treaty into a new Maastricht of the 11. That is 'not on.'
A different non-renegotiation, apparently favoured by Mr Hurd, would be to
try to show the Danes (and the Tories) that Maastricht represents an end to
the process of centralising the control of EC affairs in Brussels. Article
3b of the treaty, the one that states the principle of subsidiarity, would
be highlighted, perhaps by having everyone sign a new document affirming
that that is the way in which the future European Union will work.
The foreign secretary acknowledges that a declaration of this kind would not
suffice; he is looking for some further, concrete, means of making the same
point. It could not be a mere PR exercise. The groundwork for a fresh
proposal to tame the commission is therefore being carefully laid. Both Mr
Hurd and the chancellor of the exchequer, Mr Norman Lamont, have complained
that Brussels pries too much into the nooks and crannies of national life;
in consequence the phrase 'nooks and crannies' has become part of foreign
office jargon. It is tagged onto the names of those regarded as the more
interfering of the commissioners. One such is Mr Carlo Ripa Di Meana, who
looks after the environment.
Mr Hurd likes to refer to his Mansion House speech of April 29. He said then
 -pre Denmark - that the idea of an EC with a strong single executive
alongside a council of ministers working by majority voting 'is now looking
somewhat old-fashioned and I believe that the tide of reality has turned
against it.' In short, a modified Maastricht is to be sold as the original
was - as a victory over the centralisers.
For this argument to prevail the alternatives must first be shown to be
faulty. One option is a root-and-branch renegotiation, in which the treaty
agreed last November is whittled down to a free trade area. Some
Conservative backbenchers would prefer that. Mr Hurd regards such a route as
unrealistic; if the treaty was reopened the centralisers would be on the
warpath. The German chancellor said so when he met Mr Major at the weekend.
The positions won by Britain on both subsidiarity and the distancing of
defence and internal security from the ambit of the commission would have to
be fought for again.
Another popular alternative is to accept that Maastricht cannot be ratified.
We could then settle for a Europe without it. The European Single Act would
be implemented. To this Mr Hurd protests that the present irritations, the
delving into 'nooks and crannies' by the commission, derive their
legitimisation from the original Treaty of Rome and the Single Act.
The government's overriding argument against the above two options, what it
appears to regard as the clincher, is that if Maastricht was to be abandoned
what would follow would be a long period of bad-tempered confusion, fraught
with danger. Everything would be questioned - the enlargement of the
community, the Gatt negotiations, the reform of the agricultural policy. The
Germans and the French would become so frustrated that after a while they
would start all over again. They would develop their European army. They
would build an inner core of strongly-united European nations, taking in the
Benelux countries and perhaps even in extremis the Italians. Once again
Britain would be on the outside, knowing it must join in, afraid of the
consequences if it did, fearful of what would happen if it did not.
That, then is the government's strategy - to deploy the above arguments, at
home and abroad, over as long a period as events will allow. If the Danes
are not back aboard by December, then early next year, or a few months
later, will do. If parliament will not ratify the treaty now, the autumn
will be OK. These arguments are not without substance. But even the British
ministers who must develop them know very well that there is only the
slimmest of chances that they will succeed.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920609

