FT924-7984

FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement - Details: Public sector pay feels
squeeze


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


FOR the first time in 13 years the government yesterday set an explicit
target for pay rises for all public sector workers over the next 12 months
of 0 to 1.5 per cent. The chancellor said the pay squeeze would save about
Pounds 1.5bn.
The target will not be legally binding but the government will be able to
impose it directly on about 3m of the 5m public sector employees. For other
groups, primarily local government, central government grants will assume
pay awards within the 0 to 1.5 per cent range.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, accepted that the
announcement represented an 'evolution of policy' but also emphasised that
governments had always made assumptions about public sector pay.
He stressed that the pay limit, which also applies to MPs, had been
introduced to free resources for the provision of services and to help
'suppress pay expectations' throughout the economy.
Although the pay limit only lasts 12 months, Mr Dorrell said that the
'catch-up argument' would not be accepted next year.
He said it was important the pay limit should not interfere with the longer
term movement towards more localised and performance related pay in the
public sector.
The government has set aside all the pay formulae for civil servants,
policemen and firemen and bypassed the pay review bodies, while stressing
their value and insisting they will continue to operate.
The groups covered by review bodies - teachers, doctors and dentists, nurses
and the armed forces - will all receive the maximum rises of 1.5 per cent
from April next year. That is when the next public sector pay round begins
in earnest and when the restrictions will start to bite.
Settlements already agreed this year will be honoured. Coal miners, the only
large group not to have settled this year, may be the first group to be hit
by the limit.
One group escaping the squeeze is people covered by the Top Salaries Review
Body. The government intends to honour the second stage of the 1992 award,
giving them an increase of 2.9 per cent.
Local government employers wrote to the government asking for a pay squeeze
to apply across the private sector. The government has rejected that
suggestion but the local authorities are likely to welcome the fact that the
squeeze at least applies evenly across the public sector, defined widely to
include bodies that are largely public funded such as universities and
non-departmental bodies.
It appears that the pay commitments already accepted which run over into the
1993-1994 budgets will be treated separately and not eat into the extra
money for the 0 to 1.5 per cent settlement.
Several union leaders warned that the decision would build up big problems
of comparability with the private sector for the future.
Feeling the squeeze, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921113

