FT922-638

FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (1): Divided over union - Norway stands on
the brink of making important decisions about its relationship with the rest
of Europe. However, the country is in a divided mood as it prepares for
union


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


NORWAY is preparing for covergence with the rest of western Europe but is in
a divided mood. By the end of this year a number of important decisions will
have been taken by the country's politicians which will point the country in
a new direction and take it out of its semi-isolation.
In September, Parliament is expected to back, by a comfortable majority,
Norway's membership of the 19-nation European Economic Area, EEA. From
January 1 1993 the country will then become a part of an integrated free
market stretching from the Arctic to the Mediterranean.
Two months later, the ruling Labour Party at its conference, looks set to
vote decisively in favour of Norway joining the European Community. Mrs Gro
Harlem Brundtland, the indomitable prime minister, will then hand in the
Norwegian membership application before the end of the British EC presidency
in December. This will ensure Norway does not miss inclusion in the process
of enlargement, but lines up with Sweden, Finland and Austria for
negotiations with Brussels.
None of these decisions look like being easy to make. Norway - unlike any
other EC membership aspirant - retains a persistent and sizeable popular
opposition to any moves designed to take the country in the direction of
closer unity and co-operation with western Europe.
There has been a sharp deterioration in national support for Norwegian EC
membership in the aftermath of the Danish referendum rejection of the
Maastricht treaty on June 2, with one poll showing 52 per cent against and
only 36 per cent in favour. In spite of this, Mrs Brundtland intends to
stick firmly to the timetable she devised at least 12 months ago. Her
advisers insist there will be no sudden change of mind on this issue by the
government in the face of the hostile opinion polls.
Since her return to office at the head of a minority Labour government in
October 1990, Mrs Brundtland has come in for a great deal of criticism over
what has been regarded as the slow pace of her strategy towards the EC.
This, it is alleged, has enabled the anti-EC forces to seize the initiative.
Certainly, the prime minister has moved Norway much slower in an EC
direction than its Nordic neighbours.
It was in October 1990 that the Swedish government intimated it wanted to
join the EC and its membership application was handed in last July. In
Finland the conversion to the EC cause of the political establishment was
even more rapid.
Mrs Brundltand's caution does not reflect doubts on her part about whether
or not Norway should join. The prime minister's personal commitment is not
in question, but she faces domestic political difficulties over the issue
which have not been sufficiently appreciated by the outside world.
It is not the first time that Norway has found itself in its present uneasy
position. Twenty years ago a Labour government negotiated the country's EC
entry terms, alongside Britain and Denmark, but in the advisory referendum
called to endorse that membership agreement a clear majority of Norwegians
(53.5 per cent to 46.5 per cent) rejected membership.
The EC question brought a bitterness and division to Norwegian politics that
today's political leaders remember with a shudder and none want to see a
repetition of events that divided families and friends. But it is going to
take a high level of statesmanship and a good deal of luck for Norway to
avoid a return of those emotional feelings during the next few years.
Mrs Brundtland has embarked on a high risk strategy over the EC which could
weaken her party's perilous position in the next general election in
September 1993. The latest public opinion poll showed that the Labour party
this month has reached a record low popularity rating of about 28.7 per
cent. This dismal performance compares with Labour's vote of 34.3 per cent
in the 1989 general election, which was itself the worst result the party
had suffered since 1930, and a derisory 30.4 per cent vote in last
September's local government elections. For a party that has dominated most
of post-war Norwegian politics Labour's standing is very poor.
Some of the government's unpopularity stems from the country's persistent
economic woes, particularly the climbing level of registered unemployment
which is ecpected to climb to nearly 6 per cent by the end of this year.
This figure is a good deal less than in most of western Europe but it is the
highest suffered in Norway for over 60 years and it appears to be damaging
Labour's electoral position.
Because Norway's state finances continue to be propped up by oil and gas
revenues, the government has found it possible to pursue an expansionist
fiscal policy with a 1.3 per cent budget stimulus this year. However, this
seems unlikely to trigger any pre-election consumer boom as many Norwegians
seek to save and reduce the debts they accumulated in the care-free 1980's.
international demand remains too weak to stimulate mainland industrial
investment.
There are some bright economic indicators. Price inflation remains low at
under 3.0 per cent and so do wage settlements while the current account
surplus looks set to rise as Norway becomes a net creditor country by the
mid-1990's. In its spring survey of Norway, the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development suggested that Norway in the short term would
enjoy only a hesitant recovery, mainly because of the lack of a mainland
industrial upturn. It is also worried by the deep and intractable banking
crisis that underlines the fragility of the economy.
However, economic uncertainties are not perhaps the main reason for the
government's unpopularity. Even Labour ministers accept that the party's
attitude towards Europe is costing it dearly with the voters.
In spite of this, Mrs Brundtland is not going to be deflected from her
determination to start negotiations on Norway's EC entry as soon as possible
after November in the hope of short-term gains at the polls. Her position
inside the Labour Party that she has led since 1981 still looks impregnable.
Indeed, to many who are not Labour sympathisers, Mrs Brundtland is seen as
the only Norwegian politician with the strength and ability to govern
effectively.
On the EC issue she reflects majority Labour Party membership opinion. Over
the past nine months a wide-ranging debate has been going on at the party
grassroots on the pros and cons of Norway joining the EC. This culminated
during the spring in votes at Labour's 19 county conferences across the
country with only the four far northern ones coming out against an EC
application.
However, nobody in Oslo is under any illusions about the up-hill struggle
that Mrs Brundtland faces after the end of this year over the EC issue. The
anti-EC forces have built up a formidable head of steam with a clever appeal
to tiny Norway's strong sense of national identity.
The prime minister has resisted the demands for a referendum this autumn on
whether Norway should join the European Economic Area, or on whether the
country should submit an EC membership application to Brussels. But she -
like all the other political leaders - accepts there must be a national
referendum on the entry terms, as in 1972, once they have been negotiated.
Although the result will not be binding, because there is no constitutional
requirement for it, Mrs Brundtland has made it clear she would accept the
people's verdict one way or the other.
It remains unclear just how quickly Norway's EC application can be
negotiated once submitted. Much will depend on what the priorities are in
Brussels after the muddle over Maastricht. But policy makers in Oslo believe
it could be 1996 or even 1997 before Norway's membership question can be
settled. At least this will provide some time for the Yes to EC campaign to
transform public opinion from its hostility or indifference.
There are certainly powerful voices in favour of EC membership for Norway.
Most mainland industrialists support the cause while widespread backing can
be found among trade union activists. The media is sympathetic across the
spectrum. Among the political parties, the Conservatives and the ultra-right
Progress Party back EC entry. while Labour, after November, will campaign
separately in support of Norwegian EC membership.
The trouble is that this potentially broad and impressive alliance is
similar in composition to the one that narrowly lost this month's referendum
in Denmark. As in 1972, the Norwegian establishment backs EC entry but so
far not enough of the people are prepared to do so.
This makes it easy at the moment for the anti-EC movement to argue that the
issue is really elitist, us against them. If the EC question is polarised in
such a simplistic and emotional way it could be damaging for the pro-EC
coalition.
There is a much more immediate trouble confronting Mrs Brundtland. Unless
the Labour Party starts to restore its lost popularity, the anti-EC parties
 -the Centre and the Socialist Left - look set to increase their
representation in the next parliament. At present they lack the blocking
quarter of seats needed to stop the amendment to the constitution required
to take Norway into the EC after a referendum result.
While the Socialist Left has 17 seats, the Centre holds 11 in a 165-strong
Parliament. On present opinion poll evidence those two parties look set to
win enough seats to thwart any move by whoever is in government after
September 1993 to take Norway into the EC, even if the referendum supports
the EC entry terms.
The main opposition pro-EC Conservatives seem unlikely to win the next
general election.
All of this points to even more confusion after next polling day in
September 1993. Moreover, to add to the difficulties no government can
dissolve a parliament within its full four-year set term.
While Norway embarks on its journey towards the EC it is by no means clear
that it will reach its destination. So much is going to depend on the
ability of Mrs Brundtland to point the way ahead, shift public opinion and
negotiate terms of entry that safeguard Norway"s national interest.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920626

