FT921-3897

FT  12 MAR 92 / Standard Chartered advances 37%


   By ROBERT PESTON


STANDARD Chartered, the inter- national bank headquartered in the UK,
yesterday announced a 37 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to Pounds
205m, bucking the trend of poor results which have been announced by most UK
banks.
'It is good to be able to build the business, rather than fighting to stem
the decline, as we were a year ago,' commented Mr Malcolm Williamson,
managing director.
The core of Standard's operations is in the Asia Pacific region and its Hong
Kong bank is particularly important. Trading profits from this region were
Pounds 184m, 20 per cent higher than in the previous year.
However, Mr Williamson said the trend to interest rates in Hong Kong was
particularly favourable and he did not expect the exceptionally wide spread
between the local borrowing and lending rates to be sustained over the
longer term.
There was also a sharp rise, from Pounds 24m to Pounds 38m, in profits
earned in the Middle East and South Asia.
However, operations in Australia and the US were lossmaking. A sharp rise in
the charge for possible losses on UK loans, from Pounds 107.8m to Pounds
130.2m, meant that UK and European businesses made a trading loss of Pounds
46.5m, compared with a profit of Pounds 19.3m in 1990.
Most of the UK bad debt charge - between Pounds 70m and Pounds 80m - relates
to Standard's exposure to Brent Walker, the leisure company undergoing a
financial reconstruction.
Analysts were generally impressed by the banks' performance. 'Compared to
the directors of many other UK banks, Standard's management is able to
project a remarkably credible business strategy,' said a leading broker.
Standard maintained its full-year dividend of 20p, which is covered more
than twice by per share earnings of 44.3p, up from 13p in the previous year.
This ratio of Standard's earnings to dividends is far higher than most other
UK banks'.
On this measure, Standard had scope to increase its dividend. However, Mr
Rodney Galpin, chairman, said it was more important for Standard to build up
its equity base by retaining profits rather than distributing in the form of
dividends.
Lex, Page 22
Observer, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920312

