FT924-8245

FT  12 NOV 92 / International Company News: Honda luxury car to be built in
S Korea


   By JOHN BURTON


   SEOUL


DAEWOO Motor, South Korea's third biggest vehicle maker, announced yesterday
that it is to begin licensed production of Honda's Legend luxury car next
year.
The agreement with Honda is the first step by Daewoo to find foreign
partners following the recent ending of its 14-year joint venture with
General Motors of the US.
Mr Kim Woo-choong, chairman of the Daewoo business group, said the technical
tie-up with Honda could extend to other car models.
The Legend is the first luxury car produced by Daewoo in recent years. It
will compete in the domestic market under the Daewoo name against Hyundai
Motor's Grandeur and Kia Motors' Potentia.
Daewoo will initially sell the Legend only in Korea, but it hopes to export
the model later. Output will begin in the autumn of 1993 at Daewoo's Pupyong
plant near Seoul, with an annual capacity of 5,000 cars, increasing
eventually to 10,000. It expects to produce about 2,000 to 3,000 Legends
next year.
It will spend about Dollars 140m over the next two years for new presses and
the development of automotive components.
Daewoo Motor, like other Korean vehicle makers, is dependent on foreign car
companies for technology, with most of its models developed in co-operation
with GM. It also needs foreign financing since the unlisted company is
heavily in debt.
But the parent Daewoo group, Korea's fourth largest conglomerate, agreed at
the end of October to buy out GM's 50 per cent shareholding in Daewoo Motor
for Dollars 170m following growing managerial disagreements. The two
companies, however, will continue their automotive components joint venture.
While GM expressed concern about losses at Daewoo Motor, which amounted to
Dollars 200m last year on sales of Dollars 2.2bn, Daewoo said overseas
marketing restrictions imposed by GM were hurting the company.
Daewoo was unable to sell its cars independently in the US or Europe, where
they compete against similar GM models. Instead, most Daewoo exports
comprised the GM-licensed Opel Kadett which was shipped to the US and sold
by GM as the Pontiac LeMans.
Under the agreement terminating its partnership with GM, Daewoo can start
independent distribution of its cars in the developing world next year and
in North America and Europe in 1995.
Mr Kim predicts Daewoo Motor will earn profits of Won60bn (Dollars 76m) to
Won70bn this year although analysts estimate that it lost Won50bn during the
first half.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921112

