FT921-3830

FT  12 MAR 92 / Shares drop after Budget fails to please


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


SHARES IN London fell sharply yesterday on concern among investors that the
Conservative party faces a tough struggle in the general election campaign.
The FT-SE 100 index of leading shares, which has been trading in a narrow
range since the start of the year, lost 52.4, closing at 2,522.4.
The index has shown a larger drop on only two occasions since the stock
market crash in November 1987, in each case sparked by an international
crisis in the shape of the Gulf war and last summer's Soviet coup.
In contrast, sterling made a firm showing against the D-Mark and
strengthened against the dollar on foreign exchange markets.
Behind the stock market jitters was the reckoning by the Tories' natural
allies in the City that Mr Norman Lamont's Budget had failed to deliver a
vote-winning package for the party.
There was disappointment that Mr Lamont had been constrained by a weak
economy and rapidly rising public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) from
announcing the across-the-board cut in income tax that many had expected.
Many investors also took the view that reduced possibilities of a cut in
interest rates over the next month will hold back any economic upturn. The
lingering effects of the 18-month recession may, on this analysis, tilt the
balance of votes towards the Labour party.
Mr Peter Spencer, UK economist at Shearson Lehman Brothers, a US investment
house, said: 'A lot of people are worried that Mr Lamont failed to deal an
ace. Instead we've got a high PSBR, and not much to show for it.'
Mr Richard Kersley, equity strategist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the London
securities house, said: 'The Conservatives have a lot of work to do (in
making their case to the electorate).'
Share prices, which on Tuesday had stayed firm after an initially optimistic
reading of the Budget by the City, took their cue from a continuing slide in
prices of government gilt-edged securities, which dropped half a point.
Gilt prices fell on Tuesday, immediately after Mr Lamont announced a large
increase in the PSBR, a development which will require the government to
issue large volumes of bonds over the next two years and push up yields.
According to the Treasury, the PSBR will rise from Pounds 14bn in 1991-92 to
Pounds 28bn in 1992-93 and Pounds 32bn the year after.
One source of comfort yesterday for the government was sterling's
performance. The pound gained a quarter of a pfennig in London at DM2.87 - a
level maintained in New York - quelling speculation that the fall in share
prices could prompt large numbers of international investors to switch funds
out of sterling.
Nonetheless, the recent weakness in the pound, which is trading well below
its central rate in the European exchange rate mechanism of DM2.95,
diminished expectations on the London money market about an early cut in
borrowing costs.
Reflecting this, the three-month interbank rate, which shadows base rates,
closed  1/8 percentage point firmer at about 10 5/8 per cent.
Mr Lamont yesterday did little to encourage hopes about a rate cut, saying
this would be a 'high risk thing to do', even though he failed to rule out
such a move during the election campaign.
Observer, Page 20
Samuel Brittan, Page 21
Government bonds, Page 30
Currencies, Page 33
London stocks, Page 42

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920312

