FT923-6351

FT  25 AUG 92 / Arts: Janacek & Rossini - Salzburg Festival


   By DAVID MURRAY


From the House of the Dead, Janacek's last opera, can rarely have been
mounted so generously as by the Salzburg Festival this year. With Claudio
Abbado conducting the Vienna Philharmonic, Nicolai Ghiaurov  - as
Gorianchikov, the aristocratic prisoner in Dostoievsky's Siberian
convict-camp  - leads a cast with distinguished singer-actors even in very
brief roles. To name only a few: Barry McCauley, Philip Langridge as
Skuratov, Alexander Oliver, Heinz Zednik and Elzbieta Szmytka (the Serpetto
in Finta Giardiniera) as the boy Alyeya.
The huge stage of the Grosses Festspielhaus, Karajan's folie de grandeur, is
not an obvious venue for this intense but plotless little opera. Some
British colleagues complained that Eduardo Arroyo's bare sets  - a stark
prison compound with one gigantic tree (crowded with sinister black birds in
the final scene), a long, bleak beach for Act 2  - were too open and airy;
but perhaps that betrayed a British view of prisons. There is a lot of room
in Siberia: the horrors of the Dostoievsky camp had little to do with
space-shortages.
Correspondingly, and more controversially, Klaus Michael Gruber's production
proceeds in deadly calm. Physical brutality is at a minimum: even the
ghastly flogging of Gorianchikov on his arrival was reduced to two offstage
howls. There is little sense of pent-up communal violence. Instead, each
prisoner seems locked into his own private anguish.
That seems true enough both to Dostoievsky and to Janacek. The greater part
consists, indeed, in impassioned monologues  - reminiscent, grievous,
tortured or comic. Gruber gave them undistracted room. After McCauley's and
Langridge's sterling vignettes, Monte Pedersen crowned the opera with a
superbly sustained and beautiful account of Shishkov's wrenching narrative.
Clearly Abbado wanted this to be a lyrical House of the Dead above all.
In practice, there was one severe drawback: much of the audience could have
had only the vaguest idea of what the singers were on about. They sang in
the original Czech; surtitles for a multi-national audience would have been
impossible; the synopsis in the evening programme-book was wretchedly
inadequate, and there were no intervals between acts which could have let
German-speakers catch up with the libretto printed in the programme, or
others at least consult the confusing synopsis again.
A noble project, then, but not audience-friendly. There is a continuing
problem about programmes at Salzburg. The comprehensive, all-in
programme-book has much better synopses (and a fascinating essay on Janacek
by Milan Kundera, among others)  - but it is heavy and cumbersome, mostly in
German, costs the earth and has outdated cast-lists. As the leads in the
concert performances of Rossini's Tancredi in the Felsenreitschule, for
example, some of the audience will have thought they were hearing Marilyn
Horne and Edita Gruberova - who had walked out as the season began, to be
replaced by young Vesselina Kasarova and Nelly Miricioiu.
Salzburg really must adopt the Munich and Bayreuth habit of posting up the
actual cast-list for the evening. (If memory serves, they used to.)
Meanwhile, the Tancredi audience may have been underinformed, but not
disappointed. Miricioiu, now in the prime of her maturity, was an exquisite
Amenaide, full-voiced and imaginatively delicate as required. Her vocal art
is assured, her musicianship complete; and she played with the utmost
generosity to her young mezzo Tancredi.
The petite Kasarova is a creature of formidable promise, trumpet-voiced in
the heights and astonishingly powerful in the depths: her runs over two
octaves were terrific. (It was rotten luck that persistent church-bells from
somewhere nearby intruded upon her 'Di tanti palpiti'.) As Argirio, Donald
Kaasch wielded a Rossini tenor of bright timbre, with a useful cutting edge,
and a considerable sense of style; he must, however, learn to articulate
rapid scales before it is too late.
The bass-baritone David Pittsinger made a fine, stentorian sound as
Orbazzano, a further asset to the performance. Unlike Pinchas Steinberg's
conducting  - which was at best efficient, more often ponderous and
plonking, with a deplorable penchant for gross, un-Rossinian rallentandi at
the ends of numbers. He is down to conduct Verdi's Giovanna d'Arco next
Festival: why on earth?

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920825

