FT924-6103

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (5): Korean investment - New colour
TV plant at Fameck, near Metz


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   I don't believe in global production


we need to manufacture near the market,' says Mr Soonhoon Bae, president of
Daewoo, the Korean electronics giant, explaining his decision to start
making colour TV sets in Lorraine.
Daewoo is building a FFrs100m plant at Fameck, near Metz, which it hopes
will start production next spring, without output rising to 400,000 units by
1994-5.
'We looked at several European countries, but ruled out Germany because some
fellow Korean companies had not had a very happy experience there and the UK
because of transport costs,' Mr Bae says.
Daewoo was attracted to France, for two reasons:
First, wage costs there are competitive, at least with the rest of Europe.
Second, the French government is no longer - despite (or perhaps
increasingly because of) the continued problems of its own maker of TV sets,
Thomson - hostile to Asian companies setting up in competition on French
soil.
Having decided on France for TV manufacture, Daewoo then looked at various
sites. But it eventually rejected the idea of taking over facilities being
abandoned by Alcatel at Cherbourg and Bull at Belfort, and opted for a green
field site at Fameck.
'Within a 500 kilometre radius of Fameck, you have a market of some 50-60m
people', says Mr Bae.
Another possible site for Daewoo TV-making with the same general
geographical advantage was Strasbourg. But the Korean company decided to go
further north, because it has already been making micro-wave ovens for the
past four years at Longwy. 'With people coming from the steel sector in this
region, you have a very skilled work force,' says Mr Bae.
In July the European Commission launched a wide-ranging dumping inquiry into
TV sets imported direct from the Far East.
Did Daewoo feel compelled by such EC trade moves to invest in Europe? No,
says Mr Bae. Daewoo took its decision to manufacture TVs in Europe more than
a year ago, but it needed some time to complete negotiations with the French
government and the European Commission's regional fund which are, together,
paying one third of the Fameck plant's capital cost.
But Mr Bae admits that the EC dumping inquiry 're-inforces the logic of our
decision to manufacture locally in Europe.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

921123

