FT924-6479

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (12): New era for trade - Damian Fraser
explains the Nafta pact


   By DAMIAN FRASER


TWO months ago, in San Antonio, Texas, trade ministers from Mexico, US and
Canada formally signed the text of the North American Trade Agreement,
concluding 15 months of negotiations. The September 7 treaty, if approved by
the countries' legislatures, is likely to mark a profound transformation in
Mexico's economy.
For while Mexico is already relatively open to trade, the treaty will almost
certainly ensure there is no going back to protection. Almost every Mexican
industry now knows it will have to compete with its most efficient North
American rivals in order to survive. However compelling the case for special
protection, the Mexican government will be prohibited by law from offering
it.
At the same time, the treaty gives Mexican exporters full and certain access
to the US and Canadian markets, irrespective of protectionist developments
in the US. Trade disputes will be settled by special trade panels which,
judging by the US-Canada treaty, will be objective and fair in their
rulings.
Most significantly, the treaty provides a legal framework for almost all
business and trade in Mexico, perhaps for the first time. The thousand pages
of text tie the hands of any Mexican government wishing to meddle in the
country's economy. Rules over foreign investment, tariffs, quotas, rules of
origin, customs regulations, export subsidies, intellectual property,
sanitary and anti-dumping measures, technical standards, even driving
licences and medical tests of lorry drivers, are precisely laid down for the
foreseeable future.
In a country where government policy has swung wildly over the past two
decades, and where obedience to laws is often half-hearted, the
implementation of such a treaty would herald important social and economic
changes. An underdeveloped country with an Hispanic-Indian culture would
have to play by the same rules of the game as the US and Canada.
The promise of such rules is intended to attract foreign investment, and
above all, put increasing pressure on Mexican businesses and labour to match
the productivity of the US and Canada. Many of the impediments to doing
business in Mexico - corruption, over-regulation, outdated labour laws, poor
infrastructure - would, hopes the government, gradually be removed. But at
the same time, many inefficient Mexican companies - perhaps whole sectors -
will go bust.
The treaty has still to be approved by the legislatures in the three
countries. The vote in the US, where President-elect Bill Clinton has
expressed conditional support, will probably be in the first half of next
year. If passed, the agreement will come into effect on January 1, 1994.
In the first year the US will free tariffs on 7,300 goods, which last year
represented 84 per cent of Mexico's US bound non-oil exports. Many of these
already entered free under the General System of Preference. Mexico will
eliminate tariffs on goods equivalent to 41 per cent of its non-oil imports.
In the fifth year the US will free tariffs on another 1,200 products, or 8
per cent of Mexico's US non-oil exports, while Mexico will eliminate tariffs
on the equivalent of 18 per cent of goods. In the tenth year the US will
liberalise another 7 per cent of Mexico's exports, and Mexico 38 per cent of
its US imports. The tariffs on a few sensitive goods, such as sugar, maize
and beans, will not be liberalised for 15 years.
The details of the treaty reveal that almost all the significant concessions
were made by Mexico, although the US failed to persuade the government to
open up the oil industry to foreign investment:
Financial sector.
Mexico has agreed to open up 8 per cent of the banking sector and 10 per
cent of securities sector immediately to foreign investment, gradually
increasing this to 15 and 20 per cent respectively by the year 2000. During
the transition Mexico will apply individual market shares of 1.5 per cent
and 4 per cent to banks and securities houses respectively. After that, full
national treatment will apply.
Agriculture.
This consists of three separate bilateral agreements. Mexico and the US will
replace all non-tariff barriers with tariff, which will gradually be phased
out, and allow roughly one-half of their agricultural trade to go through
tariff-free immediately. Mexico will protect maize and beans for 15 years;
the US sugar and orange juice for 15 years. The three countries will permit
domestic support programmes in agriculture, but work to eliminate
export-subsidies, and commit themselves not to use marketing standards to
discriminate against another country's products.
Oil.
Mexico's constitutional ban on foreign investment in the oil sector remains.
However, Mexico will gradually open up procurement of the state oil and
electricity companies to US and Canadian companies and allow US and Canadian
companies to sell gas directly to Mexican businesses. It already has reduced
the number of basic petrochemicals reserved to the state from 19 to eight.
Cars.
Mexico will immediately halve its 20 per cent tariff on cars, and cut the
remaining 10 per cent gradually; phase out over 10 years the requirement
that links imports to a car company's exports, and the rule that forces cars
in Mexico to have 36 per cent local content. The US will eliminate its much
smaller tariffs, and consider Mexico to be North American for purposes of
the Corporate Fuel Efficiency Act.
Transportation.
US truckers would be able to carry cargo into Mexico by the end of 1999.
The treaty also covers dispute settlement procedures, intellectual property
laws, rules on competition policy and monopolies, the administration of
domestic laws that affect bilateral trade, and technical standards. But the
agreement does not cover immigration (barring that of professionals), nor
provide funds for regions unable to compete.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921120

