FT923-9853

FT  03 AUG 92 / Arts: Edinburgh Festival - Sponsorship


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


These are difficult times for arts companies as they try to maintain
sponsorship funding - difficult but not impossible. The Edinburgh Festival,
which opens in two weeks time, has managed, just, to exceed its target for
the year. It hoped to bring in Pounds 750,000, and actually achieved Pounds
770,000, the same sum as in 1991 and around 20 per cent of total Festival
revenue.
It is mainly the regular raft of companies who have rallied round, led by
the local banks, like the Bank of Scotland and the Royal Bank of Scotland,
and the brewers, like Scottish and Newcastle.
These days the Fringe is not only as prominent as the Festival artistically;
it also garners its fair share of sponsorship. Much of it is specific aid -
Kwik-Fit, for example, provides the Fringe programme, and BP the daily
events diary - but the main Fringe venue, the Assembly Rooms, has signed a
major deal with a new sponsor, Whitbread, which is worth Pounds 60,000.
Whitbread's Stella Artois and Murphy brands will be all over the Rooms,
while the Dream Tent in the Meadows carries the Boddington's brand name.
Edinburgh's success probably reflects the comparative strength of the
Scottish economy. Things are much tougher in London. The Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden, has a new season fast approaching, and none of its five new
opera productions has - to date - attracted a sponsor.
The revival of Turandot is being supported by UBS/Phillips & Drew and the
gala night of Otello has received a mighty Pounds 200,000 donation from
Boeing, one of Covent Garden's largest sponsorships ever. But the ROH needs
lots of energy and luck if it is to better the Pounds 881,000 sponsorship
brought in last season, which in itself was well below target.
But the arts always have the ability to mount exciting ventures which will
draw in new sponsors. The theatrical producer Thelma Holt has formed a
company, Infinite Space, which, in turn, has signed up Alan Rickman to play
his first Hamlet, opening at the Riverside Studios in London in
mid-September for five weeks, before going on tour.
The exercise will cost Pounds 200,000, but sponsorship has provided a total
of Pounds 40,000, the money coming from the backing by two unusual first
time sponsors, Morgan Creek, the film production company, and First Call.
Morgan Creek made the hit movie Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves, which Rickman
stole as the dastardly Sheriff of Nottingham. First Call, the West End
ticket agency, is an obvious sponsor of the arts but apparently no one had
approached it previously for backing.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920803

