FT923-11046

FT  27 JUL 92 / Team briefing has 'little effecton commitment'


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


EMPLOYEE-involvement initi-atives such as team briefings and company
newspapers appear to have little effect on the commitment of employees or
their understanding of management decisions, according to research sponsored
by the government.
The investigation of employee-involvement schemes in 25 companies was
conducted by the Manchester School of Management and took nearly two years.
The results were said by the Department of Employment to show that most
workers welcome involvement schemes.
But the report also includes some less encouraging findings. A survey of 700
employees in 18 of the organisations found that 81 per cent of respondents
thought team briefings either left unchanged (77 per cent) or decreased (4
per cent) their commitment to the organisation.
The report also notes a sceptical attitude to the employee-involvement
philosophy among middle managers and supervisors.
At one chemical company, supervisors described employee-involvement
initiatives as 'long-haired, idealistic views of workers', as 'soft'
management, or as 'eulogising the workforce'.
Seventy-one per cent of the employees in the survey said there was either no
change (66 per cent) or a decrease (5 per cent) in their understanding of
management decisions as a result of team briefings. Sixty-five per cent said
that team briefings did not lead to greater management openness and 8 per
cent said it decreased openness.
Fifty-nine per cent said team briefings did increase their information about
the company but 41 per cent said there was either no change or an actual
decrease in information.
In spite of the widespread introduction of team briefings, house journals,
total quality management, customer care initiatives and joint consultative
committees in the 25 companies during the 1980s, only 49 per cent of
respondents felt that communication had improved.
Twenty-six per cent said it was about the same and 25 per cent said it was
either worse or much worse.
The report tried but failed to establish any relationship between employee
involvement and overall corporate performance. It suggests that it may be
better corporate performance that facilitates em-ployee involvement rather
than the other way round.
New Developments in Employee Involvement, Research Management Branch,
Employment Department, Moorfoot, Sheffield S1 4PQ. Free.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920727

