FT923-9747

FT  04 AUG 92 / Image belies reality in violent capital: Thousands have died
but yesterday Pietermaritzburg was quiet


   By PHILIP GAWITH


IMAGE belied reality on a balmy day in Pietermaritzburg yesterday.
More than 3,200 people have died in the Midlands region surrounding the
Natal capital since January 1987, victims of the bitter rivalry between the
African National Congress and Inkatha. So far, however, the tensions of the
two-day ANC strike have not turned into widespread violence.
The townships outside Pie termaritzburg have for long been part of the front
line in one of the most strife torn regions of South Africa, and tensions
built up considerably in the last few weeks as the strike grew closer. Both
the ANC and the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP), the two main war ring political
groupings suffered attacks over the weekend.
But yesterday it was mostly quiet. This was borne out by a three hour trip
through the main IFP and ANC support regions.
Mr Radley Keys, an unrest monitor for the Democratic Party, did say, he had
received a number of reports of people being 'intimidated' to stay away from
work.
Not all parts of Natal were as fortunate as Pietermaritzburg. Twenty one
deaths were reported in the province on Sunday and Monday. Eleven of the
victims were shot on Sun day night in four separate, but related incidents
in the Esikhawini township near Empangeni, north of Dur ban.
Police said they had no knowledge of who was responsible for the attacks or
whether they were related to the strike.
Mr MG Ramcharan of Guy ana, one of the ten UN officials in the country to
monitor the violence, flew to the scene to investigate. His American col
league, Mr John Renninger, monitored the Midlands region - both in
helicopters.
In the Northern, poorer end of Pietermaritzburg, taxi ranks servicing the
main black areas like Imbali, Edendale, Swee twaters and Vulindlela were
deserted. Mr Keys said: 'This gives one an idea of the stranglehold on
transport that is being exercised.'
From Pietermaritzburg we drove to Mpophomeni, the small ANC stronghold near
Howick which has been a scene of bitter conflict in the past. Yesterday
there was a relaxed atmosphere.
Schools were closed and pupils at home, but there was no marching in the
streets. The same pattern was found in Edendale and Imbali, where Mr Alphas
Sibiya, a member of the local civic described the staya way as 'very quiet,
but very supportive."
In Durban roads leading to Kwamashu, Umlazi and other large townships were
barri caded to prevent people getting to work.
According to the South African rail commuter corporation, trains which
normally carry about 50,000 people every morning were running at 2 per cent
capacity.
Preliminary figures from the South African labour bulletin estimated a 75
per cent staya way in Durban.
Two journalists were shot and wounded in a South African township yesterday
while cov ering a general strike called by the African National Con gress
(ANC), Reuter reports from Johannesburg. Mr Paul Taylor of the Wash ington
Post was shot in the left shoulder and Mr Phillip van Niekerk of South
Africa's Weekly Mail and the London Guardian was shot in the mouth by gunmen
who stole their car in Sebokeng south of Johannesburg, police said. Both men
were flown to clin ics in Johannesburg. A clinic official declined to
comment on Mr van Niekerk's condition but a Weekly Mail reporter said it was
believed to be stable. An official at the clinic treating Mr Taylor said he
was stable and was to undergo sur gery last night to have a bullet removed.
Police last month advised non-residents not to enter Sebokeng, one of the
most vio lent black townships. Police regularly come under auto matic fire
from residents in some sections of the impover ished settlement outside Ver
eeniging. Mr van Niekerk, the Mail's political editor, also writes for Dutch
newspaper Volkskrant and the Toronto Globe and Mail of Canada.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920804

