FT924-12129

FT  22 OCT 92 / Survey of Leman Region (2): Fraught with difficulties -
Infrastructure


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


Despite calls for a coherent regional transport strategy, co-ordination on
the ground is bedevilled by the existence of two different sets of national
laws and regulations, five regional governments and several independent
transport authorities.
Even co-operation between Geneva and its immediate neighbours on commuter
services for the city's 30,600 'frontaliers' is proving a slow and painful
process. Transport Publics Genevois (TPG), the Geneva public transport
authority, has just celebrated the opening of the very first cross-border
bus service linking the northern outskirts of Geneva with the Pays de Gex.
Previous attempts to establish cross-border operations have been stymied by
the refusal of both France and Switzerland to allow foreigners to practice
cabotage by picking up passengers en route, and by French reluctance to pick
up the subsidy tab.
The new line solves the cabotage problem by separate licensing on each side
of the frontier, while the TPG and the Department of Ain will pay a pro rata
subsidy for their share of the route. Mr Christoph Stucki, TPG director,
hopes this will set a precedent for other routes.
The SFr1.1bn light metro system planned for Geneva in 2005 could also be
extended into France at some future date, Mr Stucki says, but so far the
French authorities have been unwilling to commit themselves.
Cross-border commuting by train is also difficult. SNCF, the French railway,
runs the local network from Thonon and Evian as a feeder service for
France's mainline rail system and says commuter services into Geneva are not
a priority. To the north of the Leman there are no French commuter services
at all.
Co-ordination between Geneva and Vaud also leaves something to be desired.
The public transport authorities have not been able to agree even on common
ticketing arrangements, let alone an extension of the metro. Nor have the
two cantons resolved differences over building a third rail line between
Geneva and Lausanne.
These local difficulties are compounded on a regional level. The five
cantons and departments comprising the Conseil du Leman do not necessarily
see eye-to-eye on transport policy. Even when they do, there may be
practical obstacles to co-operation. The last word on railways and motorways
belongs to national governments. Finances are limited. Laws may prohibit
spending across boundaries.
A good example is the acknowledged need to improve road and rail links along
the south side of the Leman. Residents and businesses have been agitating
for years for a South Leman motorway (the Trans-Chablaisienne), and are even
prepared to finance the road privately.
The French authorities, which already have plans to upgrade the most
congested section of road between Thonon and Geneva, say the motorway would
be uneconomic. Environmentalists are also opposed. But a categoric refusal
by the Swiss government to guarantee extension of the Trans-Chablaisienne
into the Valais has dealt the project a possibly fatal blow.
Meanwhile, alternative plans to upgrade the railway along the southern shore
have been handicapped by the SNCF's lack of interest, even though the
Conseil du Leman has put up FFr4.6m to rehabilitate the 'Tonkin' line from
Evian running east to the Valais.
The absence of a high-quality transport network is clearly impairing
prospects for development on the French side of the lake. Poor connections
with the Haute-Savoie also hurt the Valais. Despite recent extension of the
motorway up the Rhone valley to Brig, at the foot of the Simplon pass
leading to Italy, the Valais has yet to overcome its relative isolation.
The economic benefits from the north-south transalpine rail tunnel to be
carved out under the Lotschberg peak to the north of Simplon will not be
felt until well into the next century. When they are, the effect may be to
draw the Valais closer to central rather than western Switzerland. The new
air service to Sion, the Valais capital, run by regional airline Crossair,
hops over the mountains to Zurich rather than down the valley to Geneva.
In contrast, the Swiss side of the Leman has excellent road and rail
communications but offers relatively few new development possibilities. Thus
interest has chiefly centred on extending the transport infrastructure
westwards, opening up the areas of France close to Geneva to the south
towards Annecy and to the west towards Lyon.
The final Jura section of the Geneva-Lyon motorway was opened two years ago
and completion of the Geneva link to Annecy and thence to Chambery and
Grenoble is planned for 1995. Linking the Swiss motorway system - and Geneva
airport - with the French will be the long-awaited Geneva ring road,
scheduled to open next June.
Meanwhile, the canton of Geneva and the Swiss government are pushing Paris
hard to secure an extension of the French TGV 'bullet train' network from
Macon north of Lyon to Geneva. This would cut the Geneva-Paris trip from 3
1/2 hours to 2 hours 10 minutes.
French and Swiss ministers agreed last month to accelerate studies on the
Geneva-Macon line with a view to making a decision next spring. But it is
clear that the line will not go ahead without a hefty financial contribution
from Switzerland, perhaps as much as two-thirds of the estimated FFr13bn it
will cost to build.
The French authorities are also considering a TGV line running south from
Geneva through Annecy and Chambery to Provence and Turin in Italy. This
would suit Annecy but not Geneva, from where 80 per cent of rail passengers
go north.
Also, although the Conseil du Leman backs the Geneva-Macon link, the canton
of Vaud has broken ranks by going ahead with feasibility studies on a
possible TGV spur direct to Lausanne from the projected Rhone-Rhine route
linking France and Germany.
The region is no better co-ordinated over air services. Cointrin, Geneva's
international airport, serves the entire Leman region, and there is direct
access to the airport from France. But the airport, which handled 5.6m
passengers last year, is financed and run by the canton alone, with some
financial help from the government in Berne.
Plans for further improvement of passenger and aircraft handling facilities
are being constrained by Geneva's budgetary problems. Meanwhile, although it
cannot match Geneva's international network, Cointrin's main rival -
Lyon-Satolas - is making a determined bid for regional pre-eminence. Talk of
co-operation between the two has so far resulted in a linking coach service
but little more.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921022

