FT923-6426

FT  25 AUG 92 / Divisions emerge over worth of 'no-fly zone' in Iraq


   By TONY WALKER and ROGER MATTHEWS


   CAIRO, WASHINGTON


ALLIED plans to declare a 'no-fly zone' over southern Iraq have encountered
unexpectedly deep misgivings from across the Arab world, including the
capitals of states which joined the US-led Gulf war alliance.
The issue is also again exposing divisions among the Arabs. The Gulf states,
notably Kuwait, maintain an any-methods approach in dealing with Baghdad,
whereas other countries, including Syria, Egypt and Algeria, fear the
fallout from another damaging confrontation between Iraq and the west.
Seen from Damascus and from Cairo, the allies are embarking on a new and
risky venture whose outcome is impossible to predict and whose consequences
could be very grave for the region at a time when it is being buffeted by
all sorts of cross-currents  - from Islamic fundamentalism to deepening
economic problems. Looming large is the spectre of Iran profiting from
Iraq's possible descent into chaos.
Among the Gulf allies, Syria has been the most outspoken in its opposition
to the proposed exclusion zone. In Damascus on Friday, Mr Farouk al-Shara,
the foreign minister, said his country 'believed that any step which might
threaten the unity of the Iraqi lands would be unacceptable and of grave
concern for us in Syria'.
Egypt, America's closest Arab ally, has been more circumspect, but it
broadly shares Syria's concerns; although its criticism of western plans has
been stated more obliquely. This task has been left to newspaper
commentators who invariably reflect the views of the presidency.
'Dismembering Iraq does not necessarily mean that Saddam Hussein will be
ousted,' wrote Mr Samir Ragab, the paper's editor-in-chief in Saturday's
English-language Egyptian Mail. 'It is possible that the unified country
will be divided into three parts, while Saddam retains power. What will be
the case then?'
Concern that the allies have not given due consideration to the consequences
of a further escalation causes alarm in Cairo and Damascus. Among questions
being asked is: What action will be taken by the west if Mr Saddam deploys
columns of tanks and artillery against Shia rebels in southern Iraq in a
ruthless campaign to eliminate the resistance? Would the allies feel
obliged, for example, to strafe and bomb Iraqi positions?
Gulf rulers, on the other hand, appear less squeamish than their Egyptian
and Syrian colleagues about possible fallout from renewed conflict.
In London on Friday, the Saudi Arabian-owned Al-Hayat commented that the
allies had now realised that 'bolder' steps were needed to get rid of Mr
Saddam. The paper called for the abandonment of the 'superstition that the
survival of the regime is essential to guarantee the unity of Iraq'.
In this case, Al Hayat reflected King Fahd's hawkish views, in contrast to
those of Prince Saud al-Faisal, his foreign minister, who is understood to
be warning of the dangers of a break-up of Iraq and further opportunities
that would then be created for Iran.
Tehran has not declared specifically its opposition to the 'no-fly zone'
proposal, but at the weekend its Supreme National Security Council stated
that 'the Islamic Republic insists that Iraq's terr-itorial integrity and
independence should not be violated under any circumstances'.
Ayatollah Mohammed Baquer al-Hakim, the Iran-based Iraqi Shia leader,
endorsed last week the creation of 'safe havens' in southern Iraq without
reference to plans by the allies to use warplanes to enforce an exclusion
zone.
Whatever Iran may be saying publicly about allied plans, however, it cannot
be too displeased about the ban on Iraqi fixed-wing aircraft and
helicopters, since it is deeply involved in supporting Shia rebels in
southern Iraqi with both weapons and ground support. Estimates of Iranian
revolutionary guards who have crossed into Iraq range up to 4,000.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920825

