FT923-6552

FT  24 AUG 92 / Israel eases curbs on Palestinians: Concessions made as
parties gather in US for peace talks


   By Our Middle East Staff


ISRAEL yesterday announced the easing of some restrictions on Palestinians
living under occupation and the release of 800 prisoners. The concessions
came as Arab and Israeli delegations gathered in Washington for the sixth
round of Middle East peace talks.
A statement yesterday from the office of Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime
minister, said a number of steps were being taken to 'improve the atmosphere
among the Arab population in the West Bank and Gaza Strip'.
Apart from the prisoner release, Israel was also re-opening Palestinian
homes and streets sealed by the army. Such forms of collective punishment,
under which families of Palestinian activists are made to suffer, has been
much criticised internationally.
In addition, the statement said streets in Palestinian areas which had been
sealed by the army during violent clashes would gradually be reopened.
It expressed the hope that the measures 'will have a positive contribution
on the willingness of the Palestinian population to support the progress of
the peace negotiations'.
The apparent goodwill gesture follows a bitter row on Friday after Israeli
officials barred support staff travelling with Palestinian peace negotiators
from crossing into Jordan on their way to Washington.
The Palestinian delegation turned back in protest and demanded that the
Israeli authorities cease their 'harassment' of the Palestinian negotiating
team.
Mrs Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian spokeswoman, said in Jerusalem yesterday
before leaving for Washington that the delegation had been assured it would
not be subjected to further interference by the Israeli authorities.
'We have the assurance of the Americans that we will not be interfered with
and they told us that they have this assurance from the highest levels of
the Israeli authorities,' Mrs Ashrawi said.
The Palestinian spokeswoman added: 'We feel we have achieved something
absolutely basic - the recognition of the status of the delegation and
recognition that we should not be made subject to the dictates and the whims
of the Israeli authorities.'
Mrs Ashrawi said details of a written agreement on the status of the
Palestinian delegation would be worked out during the Washington talks to
avoid further 'harassment'.
The latest round of talks is the first since Mr Rabin and the Labour party
came to power. Mr Rabin has promised to freeze new Jewish settlements in the
occupied territories not required for security reasons and wants to
negotiate a swift agreement on autonomy for the Palestinians.
Peace hopes, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920824

