FT924-6218

FT  23 NOV 92 / High life has hazards for the long-range flyer


   By PAUL BETTS


AIRCRAFT ARE built to cope with marathon flights, but how does the human
body cope? Mr Hans Mirka is the ultimate high-flying businessman. He left
London on Tuesday for Dallas, flew on to Tokyo on Wednesday, was back in
Dallas on Saturday and is returning home to London tonight. He does this
sort of trip about once a month.
Head of international operations at American Airlines, the world's largest
carrier, he was moved from the group's Dallas headquarters to London this
year because his chairman, Mr Bob Crandall, felt London was the perfect
jumping-off spot for a globe-trotting executive.
'Hans can leave London on a Friday, be in Tokyo on Saturday, leave for
Dallas on Sunday, attend our Monday board meeting and then catch the night
flight to be in his office in London first thing on Tuesday,' Mr Crandall
explained during a recent visit to London.
Mr Mirka, who has already done several of these round the world weekend
business trips this year, is an extreme but by no means unique example of
the globe-trotting executive. And with the start next year of 16-hour 'hops'
with the A340 very-long-range airliner, the world will shrink further.
The A340 is expected to open up a whole series of new long-distance
connections that would be uneconomical to serve with a 400-seater Boeing
747-400. But the new era of long-distance flying raises a number of health
and safety implications for passengers and airline crews.
So far, there has been no real evidence that flying over many different time
zones damages your health. But Dr Rory Barnes, a medical adviser for the
UK's Civil Aviation Authority, recommends travellers to get up and exercise
their legs during very long flights and restrict alcohol consumption to a
minimum. 'If you can sleep on an aircraft, try to plan a nap to put yourself
in a new time zone,' he advises, as well following an eating pattern on
board to help the body change rhythm as it crosses different time zones.
One controversial issue is the possible risks of radiation. Dr Barnes says
that very frequent fliers may face some radiation hazards. Their exposure is
less than for workers regularly exposed to radiation on the ground, but
higher than for the normal population.
The higher and the closer to the North Pole you fly, the greater the
radiation risk. On Concorde, which flies at 50,000 ft, a radiation meter is
carried on board. New long-distance subsonic aircraft also fly high, with
the A340 able to cruise at heights of up to 41,000 ft.
In contrast to pilots and cabin attendants, who go off duty after a long
flight, business people usually have to start work.
Probably the biggest drawback of very long flights for businessmen is that
they can reduce their overall performance on arrival.
Several studies have shown that jumping off an aircraft after a long flight
straight into a meeting often leads to lower efficiency and poor
decision-making.
'People often don't allow enough time to travel: businessmen would do better
to delay taking decisions until they have recovered,' Dr Barnes suggests.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921123

