FT924-11402

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (10): Foreign competitors use cost
advantage to win market share - The attractions of Germany as an investment
location are shrinking


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


GERMAN INDUSTRY'S argument is straightforward enough: goods bearing the
'Made in Germany' label no longer earn a big enough premium to pay for the
luxurious lifestyle to which the west has grown accustomed, and to which the
east aspires. Everything - pay, taxes, energy, holidays, environmental
protection, education, social services and capital - is too expensive.
Germans stay at school longer, cost more to employ, have more holidays, work
shorter hours and retire earlier than virtually all their international
competitors.
Even when they are sick, Germans stay in hospital for more than twice as
long as their British neighbours.
As a result, international competitors are using their cost advantages to
steal market share from Germany, and the attractions of Standort Deutschland
 -as a country in which to invest and manufacture - are shrinking,
especially for German companies.
The main options for regaining lost competitiveness are clear to business
leaders: either reduce the whole of industry's cost-base or move out.
The tendency so far has been to side-step the enormous difficulties of
squeezing concessions out of prevaricating politicians and hard-line trade
union leaders and to take the direct route abroad instead.
The net result has been an extraordinary escalation in capital investment
abroad which has taken the annual total from an average DM8bn to more than
DM30bn in the past 10 years. The long-term average of foreign direct
investment in Germany has been a little over DM4bn.
While a large part of the rise in German foreign investment can be explained
by the need for German industry to internationalise in the wake of the
Japanese and others, and by the exploitation of opportunities opened up by
the development of the European Community into a borderless 'single market,'
there is evidence enough to show that it is no longer economic to
manufacture a widening range of products in Germany.
Recent examples of strategic shifts include the case of vehicle components
maker Heidemann, which announced earlier this month that it was to open a
factory in Pamplona, Spain.
The company, a typical Mittelstand employer of 2,000 inside Germany, and
mainly dependent on orders from Volkswagen, had the choice either of setting
up in Spain to supply parts for VW's Polo output which is being concentrated
in Spain, or lose the work to a local supplier. There is no suggestion yet
that the switch will cost jobs in Germany. However, 1,000 Nuremberg workers
will lose their jobs following Olivetti's announcement that it is to cease
making computers in Germany.
As an explanation, the Italian group said the factory closure would 'bring a
considerable improvement in the competitiveness of our product range'.
There have been many similar cases in the past 12 months. Robert Bosch, the
country's largest vehicle parts maker, has shunted car radio loudspeaker
production to south-east Asia, Mexico and Portugal, where labour is cheaper,
at the cost of 1,500 jobs in Hildesheim.
Chemicals giant BASF is shifting large chunks of its processing from Germany
to the Netherlands, mainly because of the immense costs of fulfilling
domestic environmental requirements and the delays entailed in negotiating
for planning permission.
Members of the chemical industry association, which this year face an
average 30 per cent fall in profits, claim that total environmental costs of
around DM8bn a year are more than 50 per cent higher than those in other EC
countries.
In the past six months the threat of recession and the dawning realisation
of the scale of the economic burdens taken on with unification have
temporarily diverted attention from the on-off 15-year debate over the
future of Standort Deutschland.
However, the shock-effect of these two new problems - driven home mainly by
a raft of huge job losses in the west this year and the failure of the
eastern economy to respond significantly to massive cash injections - could
hold the key to a resolution of the longer-term challenges facing German
industry.
In the context of a so-called 'solidarity pact' to aid recovery in the east,
IG Metall, the elite engineering trade union has offered tentatively to
accept a five-year pay deal which merely preserves the real value of wages,
in place of the usual inflation-plus formula.
While the union attached many strings to the proposal, it suggests that
appeals for a change of direction in pay policy may be having an effect.
Employers have blamed inflationary pay deals in the past two years for the
current round of job cuts which has hit engineers especially hard.
At Daimler-Benz, the country's leading company, for example, almost 30,000
people are to lose their jobs in the vehicles and aerospace divisions alone.
Mainly under the influence of recessionary pressures, the government has
committed itself to strict control of state spending which will limit
federal demands on capital markets and prevent increases in social welfare
and other levies on industry. A programme to reduce health service subsidies
by DM10bn a year will also contribute.
Marginal rates of corporate taxation are to be reduced by five percentage
points, compensatory reliefs will ease the burden of costs to industry
stemming from environmental legislation, and partial privatisation of state
authorities such as Deutsche Telekom should also lead to greater competition
and long-term cost benefits. As for the high cost of capital, it now seems
likely that once the Bundesbank is convinced that wage negotiations are set
on a more rational basis and the government can deliver on its promises to
cut spending, then it will lower interest rates from their present
near-record levels.
The process has only just started, and there are many other delicate issues
yet to be broached, such as regional pay differentials, working times and
holiday entitlements.
But the simple fact that government, employers and employees have in effect
undertaken to review the infrastructure of Standort Deutschland, with
concrete measures either proposed or already introduced, offers some grounds
for optimism.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921026

