FT922-4100

FT  08 JUN 92 / Nigeria's influential finance minister goes


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


NIGERIA'S influential finance minister, Alhaji Abubakar Alhaji, has been
appointed high commissioner to Britain, and Mr Jibril Aminu, the oil
minister, has resigned voluntarily, the country's military government
announced at the weekend.
Nigerian officials said in Lagos last night that neither move signalled a
significant change in government policy. But they declined to elaborate on
the reasons for the changes. Initial speculation has linked the departure of
the two men with recent violence in Lagos and Kaduna, blamed partly on fuel
shortages and deteriorating economic conditions.
There have long been suggestions, however that Mr Aminu, 52, was planning to
resign and stand for president in the election scheduled for December 5, the
last stage in the phased handover to civilian rule.
He is replaced by Mr Chu Okongwu, a former budget and planning minister and
currently minister for special duties.
More striking is the move to London by 'Triple A', the widely used nickname
for the former finance minister, who is succeeded by Mr Ahmed Abubakar, the
Finance Ministry's director general (permanent secretary).
It would be uncharacteristic of him to treat the job as a sinecure,
associates said yesterday, noting that he would be well placed to follow
Nigeria's talks with western creditors. But they added that it seemed
unlikely that he could exercise the same influence on policy making.
A former permanent secretary and minister of budget and planning, he became
increasingly influential after General Ibrahim Babangida seized power in
1985.
Triple A played a leading role in the implementation of the country's
structural adjustment programme. With a combination of belligerence and
charm, a shrewd understanding of western financial institutions, and a
disarming capacity to quote from the classics of English literature, he won
an international reputation as a formidable negotiator in his dealings with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and in rescheduling Nigeria's
external debt to government and commercial bank creditors.
He also emerged as a powerful but controversial figure in the politics of
Nigeria's mainly Moslem north. With Gen Babangida's backing, he was
installed last year as the Sardauna of Sokoto, entrenching his leading
position in the Moslem hierarchy.
His popularity within Nigeria has steadily diminished as economic hardship
increased, the state's financial management deteriorated, and the Babangida
government faced allegations of widespread corruption.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920608

