FT922-4029

FT  08 JUN 92 / G7 tries to end US isolation at Rio


   By DAVID LASCELLES and CHRISTINA LAMB


THE Group of Seven industrialised countries is trying to end the isolation
of the US at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro to raise the conference's
chances of success as it moves into its final week.
In particular, the G7 will be pushing for a strong agreement on forest
conservation, the one area in which the US has expressed interest, and is
willing to propose financial support.
However, President George Bush made clear after talks yesterday with Mr John
Major that he would not sign a treaty to protect the 'biological diversity'
of the planet's plant and animal life. 'We don't have an open pocketbook . .
. the financial parts are too open-ended for us,' Mr Bush said.
Britain is expected to sign the treaty but Mr Major, during the talks at the
president's Camp David weekend retreat, apparently made little attempt to
persuade Mr Bush to change his mind. Mr Major said the treaty seemed to call
for 'very substantial commitments without commitments as to how and where
the money will be used'. He thought, however, it would be possible to solve
these problems.
The US position has been complicated by the leak of a memorandum from Mr
William Reilly, the administrator of the country's Environmental Protection
Agency and its chief delegate in Rio, seeking to win Mr Bush's approval for
a modified version of the treaty.
Mr Bush said the leak was 'unhelpful' and 'insidious'. If its author were
discovered, he would soon be 'gainfully unemployed'. The president will be
among the more than 100 world leaders converging on Rio at the end of the
week for the formal summit. But the US has a lot of work to do in the four
days before Mr Bush arrives if he is not to be met by angry crowds of
environmentalists.
Washington's refusal to sign the bio-diversity treaty, and the doubts it has
expressed about other documents have cast a shadow over the proceedings.
They have angered delegates and because the agreements negotiated in Rio
will need US financial and political backing if they are to succeed.
The developing countries have been pressing for large amounts of aid, but
the industrial countries want any new commitments to be tightly controlled.
Mr Reilly confirmed yesterday that the US had still not decided whether to
sign the Rio Declaration, the summit document to which all world leaders are
supposed to put their names at a round table ceremony on Saturday. Some US
officials admitted that a US refusal to sign would provoke an outrage.
Protection of bio-diversity sparks controversy, Page 6
Document pleases nobody much, Page 6
Observer, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920608

