FT921-14189

FT  17 JAN 92 / The Property Market: Small inroads made into debt


   By VANESSA HOULDER


The property debt mountain is starting to erode.
For the second quarter running, total lending to commercial property has
fallen by some Pounds 500m, according to the Bank of England. At the end of
November, outstanding loans totalled Pounds 39.67bn, down from Pounds
40.21bn three months earlier.
It may be a step in the right direction, but the halting progress underlines
the magnitude of the problem. At this rate, the new funds from property
sales and capital injections will not, by themselves, let the banks off the
hook.
So what is to be done? The problem has taxed the financial profession, which
has tried to find ways to go beyond the traditional sources of funds.
One avenue being explored is the US commercial paper market, the largest
market for short-term non-government debt in the world.
The UK property industry made its first inroad into this market just before
Christmas, when Rosehaugh Stanhope Developments raised Pounds 100m to
refinance 135 Bishopsgate, occupied by County NatWest, in the Broadgate
office development in the City of London.
The advantage was two-fold. It should save the company as much as 50 basis
points or Pounds 500,000 a year. And it strengthened its negotiating
position with the banks. 'The syndicated loan market is very nervous. We
wanted to show we had other ways of financing Broadgate,' said Mr Paul
Rivlin, a director of Rosehaugh.
The snag with the deal stemmed from the complexities of breaking new ground.
Sorting out the legal, tax and financial implications took six months.
The deal has a symbolic importance in that it repays the banks which took
part in the largest development finance deal of its time. 'It gives the
banks an element of comfort that their loans can be taken out. There has
been concern that there will be a never-ending process of rolling over
loans,' says Mr Richard Mully of County NatWest which arranged the
refinancing with Sanwa International Structured Finance, part of the
Japanese bank.
It is not yet clear how far it will be copied. Sceptics may point to another
innovative securitisation, which was heralded in 1990 as an important new
source of funds but has spawned no imitators. This involved Pounds 90m of
credit-enhanced floating rate notes that were arranged for BHH, an
industrial property company, by the same team of financiers that engineered
the RSD deal (who were then at Paribas and are now at Sanwa).
BHH found that the up-front expenses of the issue were higher than expected,
although it expects to save money over five years as it takes advantage of
falling interest rates. Moreover, its funding has the great virtue that it
does not have to do annual valuations and thus risk breaching its covenants.
'It has enabled us to hold our entire portfolio together. The banks would
have been more nervous,' says Mr Robin Bagnall, BHH's finance director.
It is unsurprising that no companies have followed BHH's example, according
to Mr Gary Wilder of Sanwa. Margins in the asset-backed floating rate note
market have virtually doubled since the deal.
The US commercial paper market is currently a much cheaper option; several
companies are considering following RSD down this route.
But the main limitation of securitisation, in whatever market, is that it is
only relevant for well-let property (which is often able to take its pick of
the bank loan and debenture markets anyway). Moreover, the costs of
arranging an issue are too high to be worthwhile for portfolios much under
Pounds 100m. At most, the US commercial paper market could apply to Pounds
2bn to Pounds 4bn of UK property.
So where most of the debt-encumbered industry is concerned, there is no hope
that the US commercial paper market will come to its rescue.
Given the finicky appetite of property investors, it is not clear who or
what will replace the property loans made to second-rate property with poor
tenants. 'That is the big conundrum,' says Mr Rupert Clarke of Jones Lang
Wootton. 'If there is a single wart on a property it will not be
refinanced,' says Mr Mike Riley of Chesterton.
In the worst cases, the banks will have to bite the bullet and make write
downs, which might add up to billions of pounds of loans. Others will have
to convert debt to equity, even though this damages their capacity to make
further loans.
Many lenders will simply be forced to roll over their loans. 'The banks are
going to be long-term providers of mortgage finance to the property
industry,' says Mr Mully. Much of the debt mountain is here to stay.
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
                           CAPITAL GROWTH (%)
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Retail   Office   Industrial   All Properties
Year to Nov '91       -5.0    -15.1         -3.3             -8.8
Quarter to Nov '91     0.2     -3.1          0.6             -1.0
Month of Nov '91       0.4     -0.9          0.1             -0.1
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Investment Property Databank
 -------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 12 Photograph County NatWest building at 135 Bishopsgate in the
Broadgate complex. The site was refinanced to the tune of Pounds 100m
(Omitted).

920117

