FT924-1051

FT  19 DEC 92 / Hawks & Handsaws: Back on Russian spy duty


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


IT OCCURRED to me this week that I have been letting my friends in St
Petersburg down. My friends in the KGB. Not that they are the KGB any more.
They are now called the Russian security ministry, and a jollier, more
law-abiding group of people you could not hope to meet.
I first made contact with the security bosses in St Petersburg at the start
of October, after reading that they were miffed that Barbara Hay, the new
British consul-general to that city, had been offered lavish quarters near
the town hall in which to carry out her duties.
The security bosses said that cables carrying government information from
the town hall ran under the building in which Ms Hay was to be ensconced,
and that they believed that the British intelligence service would be able
to plunder classified information 'using various technical means and
devices.'
An ugly tiff was in the offing. So in I stepped. I rang Andrei Korodkhov,
the security ministry's liaison officer, and said that if he would get Ms
Hay bedded down swiftly in her new quarters, I would radio him, regularly, a
wad of intelligence news from London to offset any titbits Ms Hay might
glean by plugging - perhaps when turning on her TV or using her electric
toothbrush - into the security cables beneath her building.
On October 2 I radioed off a fine cache of intelligence snippets. The
security bosses were ecstatic. Then I forgot about them.
Anxious to make amends, I rushed to my transmitter yesterday and dashed off
another bulletin, encrypted, as before, in five-digit numerical groups
transformed (using false addition: 2 + 3 = 9) by a second devious
encryption. I know the Cold War is over, but those of us involved in the
espionage business prefer to stick to the old rules, plus minimum standards
of tradecraft.
To start with, I filled them in on some news that could save Russia zillions
of roubles:
'Whatever you do, be extremely sceptical of western 'experts' who urge you
to spend money you haven't got on fancy remedies for environmental damage.
We all know Russia is a mess, but take cheer from what Keith Clayton, dean
of environmental studies at the University of East Anglia, said this week. A
self-styled 'mad professor', Clayton thinks the North Sea a good place to
dump sewage, and says the bottom of deep oceans is suitable for disposing of
unwanted nuclear submarines.
''There is a lot of pressure against putting sewage into the North Sea,' he
said, 'but that is the best place to put it. You can do far worse than
putting it into a deep and well-flushed sea. As far as poisoning the
fish is concerned, that's rubbish. The sewage has probably kept the poor
fish alive.' Similarly, he favours jettisoning nuclear subs in deep oceans.
Eventually, they would be dragged down into the Earth's core. Listen to
Clayton, and you could save a meaningful fraction of your 21st century GDP.'
Having steered the Russians away from schemes of crackpot greenery, I told
them how to make some money, citing Britain's plans for a national lottery,
starting in 1994:
'Offering prizes of Pounds 1m-plus per week, and raising funds for various
good causes, the UK's national lottery will be a huge success, given that
the British rank alongside the Chinese and Australians as the world's most
addicted and addled gamblers. But nobody compares with you Russians.
'For seven decades your experiment with Marxist totalitarianism amounted to
the biggest lottery in the solar system. With a track record like that, I
suggest you launch a trans-Russia lottery soonest, and introduce horse, dog
and camel racing, plus bingo and casinos, in all towns and cities. You
already have the Mafia, so give them something to run.'
As a further good turn, I warned the Russians against over-indulgence at
Christmas, quoting directly from a story in yesterday's Daily Mirror:
'Rip-roaring Aussies are so full of wind they're blasting a huge hole in the
ozone layer, says a top doctor. Pongers from Perth and Sydney stinkers are
seriously damaging the environment by letting off a litre of gas each a day,
he claims.
'Professor Terry Bolin, stomach specialist at a Sydney hospital, is calling
for urgent research into the whiffers of Oz. 'There's been no real
measurement of emissions from humans as a contributor to the ozone problem,'
he said. 'But the methane produced does have an effect.'
'Professor Bolin is urging Australians to eat seafood and fruit instead of
the traditional Christmas dinner.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

921219

