FT924-6239

FT  23 NOV 92 / The ERM Realignment: New rates pressure on Bundesbank - Kohl
unlikely to be able to persuade central bank to abandon inflation fight


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


MR Bjorn Engholm, the German Social Democrat opposition leader, is expected
to press Chancellor Helmut Kohl at a meeting today to influence the
Bundesbank to ease its rigorous interest rates policy.
As trade union leaders argued at a similar session last week, he will say
the central bank's stance is killing jobs in western Germany and smothering
investment prospects in the east.
The talks, originally called to draft a 'solidarity pact' among all parties,
employers and unions to help recovery in the former GDR, are set to become
crucial to Bundesbank's deliberations.
Whatever the strength of the politicians' arguments - supported by a rising
wave of job cuts, forecasts of nil economic growth in the west and
downgraded expectations in the east next year - the Frankfurt policy-makers
are unlikely to back off just yet.
Unblinkingly dedicated to monetary stability, the bank has its eyes fixed on
two key indicators which dictate policy: inflation and money supply growth.
The depleted band of optimists still expecting German rate cuts before the
year's end may draw hope from inflation figures due later this week. Some
economists expect a shift down from October's 3.7 per cent annual rate in
the west to perhaps 3.5 per cent. But as others point out, any fall will be
a technical illusion, resulting from factors which pushed rates up 0.5 per
cent 12 months ago dropping out of the calculation.
Although producer price rises are now below 1 per cent year-on-year and
import prices in October were down 5 per cent on a year ago, there is still
considerable underlying inflationary pressure which the bank is determined
to squeeze out.
This stems mainly from increases in rents and services of around 6 per cent.
Housing shortages have been one influence, but the main source is the
undimmed pressure of high labour costs, which have increased the price of
some local authority services by as much as 20 per cent.
More trouble looms: a one-point increase in VAT to 15 per cent in January is
expected to push the overall rate of price increase firmly back above 4 per
cent.
Money supply growth, fuelled by demand for credit to ease personal and
corporate cash-flow problems, is currently running at 9.3 per cent, far
beyond the bank's upper 5.5 per cent target for annualised expansion in the
broad M3 measure.
Now that the economic squeeze has migrated into Germany, domestic political
pressure for rate cuts will grow. But the Bundesbank is determined that Mr
Kohl, Mr Engholm, unions and employers should come to accept its view of
what is 'right' for Germany.
The government has promised to cut public spending and attack its soaring
deficit, unions have hinted at restraining their pay demands, and employers
have again said they will stand firm in the coming wages round.
But the Bundesbank will need evidence more robust than tips and winks before
it is convinced that the enemy inflation is in full flight and feels able to
relax its grip on the interest rates leash.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921123

