FT923-10888

FT  28 JUL 92 / US bolsters Gulf power to warn Iraq: Exercises in Kuwait
planned


   By Our Foreign Staff


THE US took steps to bolster its military preparedness in the Middle East
region yesterday in a blunt warning to Iraq after settlement at the weekend
of the latest tense confrontation between Baghdad and the United Nations.
It has despatched a third aircraft carrier to the Mediterranean, has begun
sending Patriot missiles to Kuwait and will hold joint military exercises
with the Kuwaitis.
The moves follow President George Bush's warning to Iraq that it must comply
fully with all the terms of the Gulf war ceasefire resolutions passed by the
UN Security Council.
Queried about the reasons behind the military moves, a Pentagon official
said simply: 'Be prepared.'
The aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy broke off a visit to the Virgin Islands
to steam to the Mediterranean, joining the Saratoga and Independence within
striking distance of Iraq. The three ships carry a total of 200 warplanes.
The Pentagon said the US had also begun sending eight batteries of Patriot
anti-missile missiles to Kuwait from bases in Germany. They would be manned
by US troops to protect Kuwait from any attack by Iraqi Scud ballistic
missiles.
A defence official said US marines, navy and air force personnel would hold
two joint military exercises with Kuwaiti forces in the emirate south of
Iraq early next week to emphasise US resolve.
One exercise would involve the practice landing of up to 2,000 US marines in
Kuwait, while the other would involve practice in unloading US military
equipment from ships.
The US moves, keeping alive the threat of military action, came as Iraq
proclaimed it had won a 'brilliant victory' with the agreement for a team of
'neutral' UN weapons experts to inspect an agriculture ministry building in
Baghdad.
Under the weapons inspection agreement, a team of seven UN inspectors, led
by Mr Achim Biermann, will arrive in Baghdad today to complete inspection of
the building, from which a previous UN team had been barred since July 5.
But Mr Rolf Ekeus, chairman of the commission investigating Iraq's weapons
of mass destruction, said on his way to Baghdad he was pessimistic the team
would now find anything in the building.
British officials said they expected the team to find only 'some traces' of
the missile-related documents and materials which UN inspectors suspected
were hidden there.
The original team of UN chemical weapons inspectors called off a vigil
outside the building last week in the face of hostile demonstrations.
British and US officials stressed yesterday that although the crisis over
the agriculture ministry building had eased, there was concern over other
aspects of Iraq's defiance of the UN and the west. 'The atmosphere will
remain fairly hot for a while yet,' said a British official.
Diplomats were not convinced the stand-off over UN access to the agriculture
ministry would be the last time Iraqi President Saddam Hussein would attempt
a provocative policy of 'cheat and retreat'.
With few other readily available options, diplomats say the Gulf war allies
will keep up pressure not only over the UN weapons inspectors' access to
Iraqi installations but also over the safety of UN guards in northern Iraq,
Baghdad's attacks on Shia Moslems in the south and other breaches of the
Gulf war ceasefire terms.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920728

