FT922-13285

FT  13 APR 92 / Lloyd's may form fund to aid Names


   By RICHARD LAPPER


LLOYD'S OF LONDON may set up a market fund to help Names - the individuals
whose assets back underwriting at the insurance market - hardest hit by the
market's recent heavy losses, Mr David Coleridge, Lloyd's chairman,
confirmed yesterday.
A number of schemes have been examined and it is possible that Mr Coleridge
could recommend the adoption of one of them at a meeting of the Council, the
market's governing body, later this month.
Mr Coleridge said he didn't want to 'raise expectations' but he was 'looking
very carefully to see if there was a scheme he could recommend'.
The fund would be designed to cap the losses of hundreds of Names incurred
by their participation in syndicates specialising in catastrophe
reinsurance.
Syndicates managed by Feltrim, Gooda Walker and other agencies ran up half
the market's 1989 loss of over Pounds 1.35bn, which Lloyd's will report in
June.
Many are involved in litigation either against Lloyd's or their agents.
'For Lloyd's to be seen to be looking after its walking wounded would be
well received around the world,' said Mr Coleridge.
'One has to look at these schemes. It is humane and necessary,' he added.
'If I wasn't looking at it I would not be doing my duty.'
Mr Coleridge said he had been considering the idea for some months. Cost was
a problem - the fund would need to be financed by the market as a whole,
possibly by a levy on members.
But as a condition of benefiting, Names would agree to drop litigation
either against Lloyd's or their agents. As part of the deal Lloyd's would
establish a new arbitration procedure to handle disputes.
'If negligence were found this would still have to be paid for,' said Mr
Coleridge,
Over 2,000 Names are currently involved in legal action.
The Commercial Court meets today in the fourth day of an action brought by
820 Names seeking injunctions to prevent Lloyd's from drawing down from
their deposits to meet cash calls.
A new grouping of Names, formed last week by representatives of action
groups, can be expected to participate in any negotiations about a deal.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920413

