FT921-15541

FT  09 JAN 92 / Arts: All dressed in period strait-jackets - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


BILLY BATHGATE (14)Odeon Leicester Sq
LIEBESTRAUM (18) Cannons West End
MERCI LA VIE (18)Lumiere, Chelsea Cinema, Camden Plaza
THE BRIDGE (12) Cannons West End
A country with a short history makes mythology from its recent past. In
American cinema prohibition-era gangsters rear up at us as if they were
knickerbockered Borgias and a crumbling early-century department store can
seem as romance-haunted as a castle.
The films are Billy Bathgate and Liebestraum. You never saw such attempts to
make 60 years ago look like 600. In Billy Bathgate, scripted by Tom Stoppard
from EL Doctorow's novel about mobster Dutch Schultz, director Robert Benton
lays on the peeling posters and dingy-floral wallpaper. History is already
antiquing his characters as they live and speak. And in Liebestraum, an
essay in American Gothic from Britain's Mike Figgis (Stormy Monday, Internal
Affairs), the old high-street store in Elderstown has seen more terrors and
tragedies than the Palace of Versailles under a string of Louis's.
The problem with glamorising the past is that when a film is under-energised
mythologisation becomes 'museumisation'. Billy Bathgate is like a story in a
glass case. Where Doctorow's tour-de-force novel was a nervy, ironised
memoir of the gangster era, narrated in a precipitate pastiche of fine
writing by the boy hero who joins the Schultz gang and witnesses its
terrors, Benton's film is like a costume try-out by actors waiting for a
script. Worst casualty is Dustin Hoffman as Dutch. Tuxedo'd to the nines, he
struts and frets in his period strait-jacket, seeking the key of life to a
character whom his director has already locked away in a case marked Mythic
Mobster.
Scenes that horrified in the book - a concrete-shod gang member pushed to
his death off a boat, a fire inspector battered to death, Billy himself
given a bloody nose to camouflage the murder-stains on a hotel carpet - here
become picture-book pages from history. Nothing touches us: least of all
Loren Dean's performance as Billy, all bland generic innocence with no sense
of shocked individuality or scarring insights.
Everything, one suspects, was wrong about this project from the start. It
was produced by Disney, whose first instinct with the past is to turn it
into a theme park. It was written by the cerebral Stoppard when it needed a
scenarist of the visceral. And it was directed by Benton, whose best films
from Bonnie And Clyde (screenplay) to Kramer Vs Kramer and Places Of The
Heart have dealt with plain folk quirkily thrown into crisis. Nothing is
plain about the folk in Billy Bathgate: stunted, horrifically mediocre, the
blind leading the blinded.
Liebestraum has more life, but it is hard to define that life. In a Mike
Figgis film the visual background is a stroboscopic tapestry - shifting
shadows and blobs or shards of light - and the 'music', composed by himself,
consists of brooding electronic hums and throbs. If Antonioni had ever been
hit over the head and brought to Hollywood to make thrillers, he might have
made Liebestraum.
He would certainly be on a wavelength with its plot. Architectural writer
Nick (Kevin Anderson), visiting Elderstown, runs into ex-schoolfriend Paul
(Bill Pullman), a property developer who is demolishing the historic
iron-frame Ralston Department Store, the 'missing link in American
architecture.' Paul's wife (Pamela Gidley) completes the edgy love triangle
and shadows from the past rise up or spill advice from hospital deathbeds
(Kim Novak as Nick's mother).
For half an hour we might be watching La Notte done as a Hollywood
no-brainer. But even as the plot thickens and the daftnesses grow - spooky
mannequins in the midnight store, the town freak revealed as the town's
heir-to-power, a scene in a brothel that makes Twin Peaks look like
Pollyanna - Liebestraum casts its bizarre spell. As in Internal Affairs,
Figgis dives into the dark spaces between dialogue lines as if seeking the
lost secrets of silent cinema, when images spoke more than words. And unlike
Billy Bathgate, where the past becomes a mausoleum for the narrative, the
past here is a hunting ground for guilts and mysteries, where the last-scene
revelation lies crouched in hiding, ready to ambush.
Bertrand Blier's Merci La Vie begins as a shock-therapy black comedy in the
style of his Tenue De Soiree. A girl in a bride's dress (Anouk Grinberg) is
kicked to the ground by a man who then drives off; another girl (Charlotte
Gainsbourg) picks her up and befriends her; soon they are both picking up
men and seducing them as if on a two-woman campaign to reverse the
hunter-and-hunted roles in human sexuality.
Grinberg, it transpires is a VD-carrier out to fell men with disease under
the guidance of Dr Gerard Depardieu, a mad medico keen to increase his
work-load. A film whose opening imagery evoked Truffaut's The Bride Wore
Black shades into something more brutal and modernist: The Bride Brought
Clap, directed by Blier as if he were pushing us through life's emergency
wards on a runaway trolley.
Indeed we soon freewheel into total confusion. As if the screen were not
already alternating between colour and monochrome for no known reason, the
film begins to hop between decades.
We are in the present; we are in Nazi-occupied France. Mlle Gainsbourg is
alive today; she is alive at the same age 50 years ago ('Is this what they
call a flashback?' she asks). Jean-Louis Trintignant and Michel Blanc pop up
in cameos. Miss Grinberg levitates after sex. And there are Pirandellian
games with a camera crew on the oh-it's-all-only-an-illusion model. By the
close of what began as a sly comedy of sexual subversion, we feel we have
strayed into an end-of-series orgy for the cast and crew of Dr Who.
British cinema can be such a contrast to these deliriums. The Bridge, shot
with the gilded buttery glow of a TV commercial, speculates on what happened
to the impressionist painter John Wilson Steer (David O'Hara) during the
summer of 1887. At the end of his hols on the Suffolk coast he painted 'The
Bridge', a shimmering picture of a young woman with her back to us talking
to a gaunt man on a wooden bridge near the sea.
The artist fell in love with Saskia Reeves is what happened, according to
director Syd Macartney and screenwriter Adrian Hodge, adapting Maggie
Hemingway's novel. And Miss Reeves, loving him back, fought with her
conscience and her husband (Anthony Higgins). We the audience drowse through
two hours of genteel, tinkly romance while the flower of British character
acting - Joss Ackland, Rosemary Harris, Geraldine James - droops on the
window-sill.
One sometimes believes the world of British cinema has stopped turning since
Brief Encounter. The Bridge is prim, easy-on-the-eye and vacuously wistful:
a Merchant-Ivory film made by a team without M-I's talent and for whom the
past is a foreign country where everyone speaks with a far-away look as if
scanning subtitles.
The rest of the week is worth dashing through at high speed, holding one's
coat over one's head. VI Warshawski (15, Odeon Haymarket) has the stylish
Kathleen Turner in a soggy crime thriller drawn from Sara Paretsky's
woman-detective novels.
The local colour (Chicago) is thickly laid on as the smoke-voiced Miss T
croaks out her one-liners. Unfortunately this is one of those films where
everyone has a smart answer but no one has thought to bring a smart
question.
Year Of The Gun (15, Cannons West End)is worse: a thick-eared Italo-American
action thriller centred on the kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro. Star and
former brat-packer Andrew McCarthy flexes his two known expressions -
constipated and more constipated - while John Frankenheimer directs.
Hello Hemingway (ICA, no cert), a first feature from Cuba's Fernando Perez,
is sweet but small-voiced. In 1950s Havana, on the eve of revolution,
penurious young Laurita (Laura de la Uz) hopes to win a place at an American
university, with or without help from her rich neighbour E. Hemingway. Will
she succeed? The suspense is bearable. We keep watching thanks to fine
period evocation and the bubbly naturalism of Miss de la Uz.

The Financial Times


London Page 15 Photograph Picture book pages, a scene from 'Billy Bathgate'
(Omitted).

920109

