FT921-3798

FT  12 MAR 92 / 'Green' lobby wins a victory on road plans


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


THE environmental consequences of schemes for trunk roads and motorways are
to be given more weight when deciding whether roads should be built, the
Department of Transport announced yesterday.
The decision is a significant concession to the 'green' lobby, which has
long argued that procedures for assessing the environmental impact of road
schemes are inadequate and unfair.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England, an independent lobbying
group on conservation issues, called the decision 'a ray of sunshine from
the Department of Transport.'
Concern over damage to sites of special scientific interest or areas of
outstanding natural beauty has been at the forefront of objections to many
big road schemes such as the extension of the M3 through Twyford Down,
Hampshire.
It has also brought allegations from Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana, the European
environment commissioner, that Britain's methods of assessing the
environmental impact of several recent infrastructure schemes has been
defective.
Yesterday's announcement stems from a study of the Transport Department's
methods for assessing environmental costs by the Standing Committee on Trunk
Road Assessment, an independent advisory committee.
The long delay in publication of the committee's findings, which was
expected last summer, has given rise to the belief that transport ministers
have lost a battle with the Environment Department on the need for a more
pro-environment approach.
Mr Christopher Chope, minister for roads and traffic, said the government
had accepted the main principles of the standing committee's report. As a
result, it would integrate environmental concerns more directly into
transport policy, ensuring that environmental objectives and concerns were
given full weight when carrying out a cost/benefit analysis. It would also
accept in principle the idea of putting a financial value on environmental
effects and incorporate this into the cost/benefit equation. Tougher
penalties for motoring offences will come into effect on July 1, Mr Chope
said yesterday.
The changes, which include the new offence of causing death by dangerous
driving, were created in the Road Traffic Act 1991. Penalties will include
possible disqualification after just two speeding offences, and up to six
months' imprisonment for 'hit and run' drivers.
Assessing the Environmental Impact of Road Schemes. Standing Committee on
Trunk Road Assessment. HMSO. Pounds 15. The Government's Response to the
SACTRA Report. HMSO. Pounds 6.50.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920312

