FT921-636

FT  27 MAR 92 / People: Strains of the Classics


Professor David Spearman, mathematician and vice provost of Trinity College
Dublin, is envious of his brother John's new assignment - getting paid to
listen to classical music all day.
In fact, the new chief executive of Classic FM, Britain's first classical
music radio station that is both commercial and national, is unlikely to
have much time to wallow in Tchaikovsky and Rachmaninov during office hours.
Starting up 'sometime in the second half of this year' in a highly inclement
advertising environment, Classic FM starts off paying the government Pounds
1m a year plus 4 per cent of qualifying advertising revenue for the
privilege of its franchise. Despite the muscle of its backers which include
TimeWarner and Associated Newspapers, the going could be hard.
But 50-year-old John Spearman, former chief executive and chairman of
advertising agency Collett Dickenson Pearce (CDP), who was approached by
TimeWarner, relishes the chance of running a new national medium.
With the increased popular appeal of the classics in Britain in recent
years, Spearman, who has no intention of trying to emulate Radio 3, believes
the time is right.
'Central Television these days has to brief its telephone operators before
each episode of Inspector Morse' as to what pieces the musical inspector is
tuning in to, because of the flood of weekly enquiries.
'We will offer advertisers and agencies a valuable audience of ABC1
listeners - at substantially lower rates than a page in the FT.'
Spearman left CDP at the beginning of 1990 after nine years as chief
executive because of a disagreement concerning diversification strategy,
notably Playback, the management training company he started with Mel Smith
and Griff Rhys-Jones, and in which CDP had a 51 per cent stake.
He bought out that stake when he left and has subsequently been chairman of
Playback.
'I thought I would enjoy doing things in a less intense, more eighteenth
century way, but I was wrong' he says, relishing the return to '
constructing and developing companies'.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920327

