FT923-10758

FT  29 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Reshuffling education


YESTERDAY'S white paper on education promises a reform of the management of
state-financed schools that, it says, will lead to 'the pursuit of
excellence for all pupils'. This is a noble purpose. It can only be
applauded. What is not clear is how much of what is in the paper is likely
to lead to the fulfilment of so grand a mission.
The national curriculum itself is a step in the right direction. Established
in 1988, it is still bedding itself down. Many will think the same of the
assessment and examination process. The proposal to merge the relevant
governing committees into a single School Curriculum and Assessment
Authority will give the secretary of state, Mr John Patten, an opportunity
to place known believers in his strict, moralistic code in charge of what is
taught and how it is assessed. This is likely to be popular and may even be
beneficial. The powerful new chief inspector of schools will ensure
compliance; where there is failure an ad hoc 'Education Association' will be
sent in, rather as a company doctor, to improve or close the recalcitrant
institution.
Some of Mr Patten's personal thoughts, as expressed in the introductory
essay, will strike a chord with those who wish to see a more rigorous
approach to education. 'Schools should not be, and generally are not,
value-free zones,' he writes in one passage. 'Pupils need to be told when
they are doing badly just as much as they need to be told when they are
doing well,' he says in another. Nor does he ignore weak performers: schools
will be obliged to take children with special educational needs.
So far, so closely in tune with what is becoming the new educational
orthodoxy. The difficulty arises in the central thrust of Mr Patten's
proposals, which is to detach the school education system in England and
Wales from local authority control. The programme of local management of
schools within local government might have been made to work, but this
choice has not been made.
Before a decade is out most schools will be independently governed. Their
income will be provided by a new Funding Agency for Schools (FAS). Local
education authorities will gradually wither away. Their remaining functions,
such as identifying children with special needs, providing tuition for
difficult children, and looking after educational psychology services, may
be transferred to social services.
The government will gain from this. It completes the transfer of the
education budget from local control, where it hits local taxation, to the
Treasury, where it can be cash-limited. It finally liquidates local
education authorities it regards as ideologically undesirable. It
establishes a national voucher system, with the money following the child to
the school of its parents' choice. In the early years this evolutionary
change may present few difficulties. But as the new system gathers pace the
light bureaucracy implicit in the FAS will inevitably gather weight. It will
need to make local decisions about closures and the establishment of new
schools. Future ministers will inevitably add responsibilities to this at
present seemingly innocent little quango.
In short, schools are in for a huge, generation-long bureaucratic reshuffle.
The connection between this upheaval and the theory of parental choice is
evident. The connection with the improvement of what goes on in the
classroom is not.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920729

