FT922-3974

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (12): The profits of change
 -Industry


   By GEOFFREY OWEN


BUSINESS ORGANISATION AND THE MYTH OF THE MARKET ECONOMY by William Lazonick
Cambridge Pounds 24.95, 372 pages
WHY WAS Britain, the first industrial nation, overtaken by the US in the
early 20th century, and why has Japan taken the lead in the last 30 years?
For William Lazonick, an American economist and business historian, the
answers to these questions have to do with changes in the institutional
character of capitalism and, in particular, in the organisational
capabilities of the business firm.
Thus Britain's rise to economic dominance in the 19th century was
characterised by small, vertically integrated, family-owned firms. As
markets and technologies changed, this fragmented structure proved inferior
to the large, professionally managed, multi-divisional corporations which
emerged in the US. The American version of managerial capitalism dominated
the international economy from the 1920s to the 1960s.
Japan has improved on the American model by moving towards what Lazonick
calls 'collective capitalism'. Leading Japanese firms outperform their US
counterparts because of a superior form of managerial organisation. The
Japanese are able to organise cooperative investment strategies across firms
(through the keiretsu system) and to improve coordination within firms by
involving blue-collar workers in decision-making. These arrangements are
reinforced by a financial system which encourages long-term investment.
Neoclassical economists, Lazonick argues, have failed to understand, or even
to take an interest in, the link between business organisation and national
economic performance. The text book theory of the company 'takes as given
the technological and organisational capabilities of the business
enterprise. Yet it is changes in these capabilities that are the essence of
the development process'.
Central to Lazonick's approach is his view that 'organisational coordination
has increasingly replaced market coordination in the value-creation
process'. Through their attachment to the myth of the market economy
economists 'have failed to develop a theory of economic development that can
explain the nature and causes of the wealth of nations'.
Despite the pioneering work of Alfred Chandler, the business historian,
there has been no serious attempt to link business history with economic
theory. Because of the neglect of history, 'mainstream economics currently
propounds a view of economic activity that grossly misconceives reality'.
The separation from reality, Lazonick suggests, is reflected in the abstract
mathematical models that fill the economic journals and are presented as
economic science. 'The ability of economists to use mathematical technique
has far outrun their understanding of economic reality'.
Lazonick outlines his own theory of the 'innovative business organisation'.
Capitalist development, he says, is a process which combines innovative
strategy with organisational structure to alter existing technological and
social constraints on superior economic performance. The success of Japanese
companies is based in part on the ability to transform the traditional
division of labour between managers and workers as well as the skills and
attitudes of workers themselves. They have moved from a structure of work
organisation based on control to one based on commitment.
Although Lazonick may overstate the link between the organisational ability
of firms and economic performance, he is surely right to see the process by
which companies gain and lose competitive advantage not as a mere 'residual'
but as a crucial element in economic performance which deserves study. While
the book is aimed at economists, it is non-technical and draws on the
author's deep knowledge of business history. It contains insights and
arguments which the business reader will find stimulating and provocative.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920609

