FT924-11444

FT  26 OCT 92 / Russian government may hold referendum in fight for power


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THE Russian government, under pressure from an increasingly confident
opposition, fought at the weekend to retain its grip on power and its
command of the faltering process of economic reform.
Mr Alexander Shokhin, a deputy prime minister for foreign economic affairs,
said a referendum on a new constitution might be held soon to circumvent the
Congress of People's Deputies - the full Russian legislature which is
expected to vote down the government, and perhaps even President Boris
Yeltsin, when it convenes on December 1.
He said that holding a referendum on a constitution to replace the
Soviet-era constitution which still serves as a legal basis for the state of
Russia would 'leave the Congress as a temporary body without real weight'.
Nationalists and communists united at the weekend under the name of the
National Salvation Front to 'save the fatherland' from a 'government of
occupation leading the country to civil war'.
Under the crossed banners of the Soviet Union and the Tsarist government,
1,500 delegates to a founding convention gave ovations to a list of
prominent opponents of the government, whose most devastating argument was
their recitation of the fall in living standards.
The participants made it clear that they were readying themselves for a
bitter struggle, including a series of demonstrations and strikes in the
run-up to the Congress meeting.
Colonel Vadislyav Terekhov, leader of the Russian Officers' Union, hinted at
the use of force, though most speakers said they would use constitutional
means, at least for now.
The Front, ranging from once democratic groups to near extremists of left
and right, is distinct from the 'centrist' opposition grouped round General
Alexander Rutskoi, the Russian vice president, and Mr Arkady Volsky, the
powerful industrialists' leader.
The hardliners are demanding Mr Yeltsin's resignation, whereas the centrists
want the resignation of the six to eight ministers who are the most
prominent economic reformers in the cabinet, led by Mr Yegor Gaidar,
Russia's acting prime minister.
Mr Gaidar, with Mr Shokhin and other ministers, met top industrialists in
the industrial city of Togliatti yesterday in an effort to open direct links
between the government and the most powerful figures of the centrist
opposition. The ministers promised a consultative council and tax breaks,
and in return a number of managers spoke in tones of measured support for
reform.
Fighting in Tajikistan, Page 3

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921026

