FT921-15417

FT  10 JAN 92 / International Company News: Nippon Sanso to acquire
Texas-based gas maker


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


NIPPON SANSO, the Japanese industrial gas producer, is to pay Dollars 90m
for Tri-Gas, a Texas-based gas maker, which is likely to become part of the
Japanese company's growing US network of companies supplying the
semiconductor industry.
Early last year, Nippon Sanso faced US Justice Department opposition to the
purchase of Semi-Gas, a leading US maker of gas equipment for
semiconductors, but a court ruled in March that the acquisition did not
violate anti-trust legislation.
Nippon Sanso said Tri-Gas, with a staff of 320 and annual sales of about
Dollars 70m, produced oxygen, nitrogen and other gases for steel, chemical
and other US industrial companies. However, the Japanese company said that
it would eventually form part of its 'total gas centre' network supplying
the semiconductor industry.
'We don't expect any problems with this acquisition. At the moment, the
company is simply a supplier of general use gas,' a Nippon Sanso spokesman
said. 'We want to link its capability to that of our other US companies.'
The opposition to the Semi-Gas purchase became a symbol of US concerns about
foreign acquisitions of high-technology companies. The inter-agency
Committee on Foreign Investment approved Nippon Sanso's bid, made through
Matheson Gas Products, an earlier acquisition by the Japanese company, but
the Justice Department attempted to block the purchase.
Nippon Sanso said that Tri-Gas was purchased in the expectation that demand
for industrial gas would generally increase with a recovery in the US
economy, and that demand from high-technology companies for special gases
would inevitably expand.
In the Japanese market, Nippon Sanso, the largest producer of oxygen, has
been hurt by rising materials and transport costs, with the country's labour
shortage causing a general increase in transportation charges. The company
also has a joint venture in Malaysia, and a facility in Singapore.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920110

