FT924-11552

FT  24 OCT 92 / When radar went bump in the night: Wilfred Harper recalls a
key move by Britain's wartime scientists


   By WILFRED HARPER


FIFTY years ago some of Britain's top scientists took over Malvern College
in Worcestershire. The move was undertaken with great haste, in deep secrecy
and amid farcical chaos. The scientists were ordered to move by Winston
Churchill's because they and their existing laboratories were at risk of
attack.
A little while before a British parachute commando force had raided a German
radar station on a cliff-top north of Le Havre in occupied France. They
overpowered it, ripped out the vital components of the Wurzburg radar,
carried them down to the beach, loaded them on to boats and whisked them
away in the darkness. Back in England the trophies were examined by
scientists.
The success of the raid both pleased and alarmed the Telecommunications
Research Establishment. Its radar laboratories were near the cliff-top at St
Albans Head, in Dorset, overlooking the English Channel. A similar raid by
the Germans could have been disastrous. It seemed prudent to move out before
the Germans came in.
The chosen home for TRE was far inland, technically suitable and very
attractive. Under protest, the staff and pupils of Malvern College were
evacuated to Harrow School.
During the move there were moments of farce. Lorries full of highly secret
equipment left under the protection of Dorset Home Guard. However, the local
commander refused to allow his mens' firearms over the county border. The
lorries continued unguarded and unguided lost their way on the un-signposted
roads and ended up in a farmyard.
After the upheaval the scientists settled down among the Victorian Gothic
tracery in the shadow of the Malvern Hills. There they developed the
'instruments of darkness' without which the Allies might not have won the
war.
Radar's military history had been short but spectacular.
It began in Britain with a report to the Air Defence Committee of February
1935 entitled Detection of Aircraft by Radio Methods by Robert Watson-Watt,
the Superintendent of the Radio Department at the National Physical
Laboratory.
The Committee requested a demonstration. Watson-Watt's assistant quickly
wired together some equipment, loaded it into a caravan and towed it to a
place near the BBC's short wave radio transmitter at Daventry. An old bomber
was flown about and its radio reflections were picked up and displayed. The
committee was convinced.
Immediately, and secretly, money was made available and some of Britain's
brightest scientists were recruited. Unknown to each other several countries
were working on radio detection, notably Germany, France, the US and Japan.
The British dubbed the system Radar, an acronym for Radio Detection and
Ranging.
So rapid was its translation into operational hardware that Neville
Chamberlain's aeroplane to Munich in September 1938 was tracked down the
Thames Estuary by five radar stations. By Easter 1939 a chain of 20 stations
looped around the British coast from the Firth of Tay to the Isle of Wight.
Without its early warning the British would have lost the Battle of Britain
and probably the war.
With the Luftwaffe repelled, TRE concentrated on radar for offensive
purposes. This is the work which came to fruition at Malvern. It was largely
based on a crucial invention of 1940, the cavity magnetron. This enabled the
reduction of pulse wavelengths from metres to centimetres, which in turn
enabled considerable extension and enhancement of radar's abilities. (The
same device generates microwaves in ovens).
The magnetron was used in advanced airborne radar. By 1942 the big bombers,
the Halifaxes, Sterlings and Lancasters, were in service and with them came
the 1,000-bomber night raids. These required an on-board electronic
navigation system for target finding to replace the system based on signals
transmitted from Britain, which were of limited range and could be jammed.
Bernard Lovell, a young university physicist, was in charge of its
development. His team developed a ground scanning system which displayed
features such as cities and coast lines. Hamburg, a city on an estuary, was
its first target in January 1943. Nearly 40 years later a derivative, aboard
a Vulcan, was used for a raid against Port Stanley airfield in the
Falklands.
Another airborne system enabled night fighters to close in on enemy aircraft
after initial guidance by ground radar.
By the spring of 1943 German submarines were sinking almost 1m tons of
Allied shipping a month and threatening Britain's supply lines. A
newly-developed airborne radar enabled Coastal Command aircraft to find and
attack the U-boats, often at night when they were on the surface recharging
batteries. Soon U-Boats were being destroyed faster than the Germans could
replace them. Shipping losses fell by 90 per cent.
Sir Bernard Lovell is now in his late 70s. Recently he attended the
dedication of a memorial window at Goodrich Castle near Malvern, close to
the place where a Halifax bomber crashed 50 years ago. It was testing one of
his prototype radars. All the scientists aboard and the aircrew died.
It is impossible to describe all the systems and counter measures developed
during the first radar war. Radar warfare has come a long way, as we saw
during the Gulf conflict.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921024

