FT922-7415

FT  19 MAY 92 / Personal View: Maastricht's minor role


   By BRIAN TEW


The Maastricht treaty on European union details the evolution of monetary
arrangements from now till 2000. By then hopefully all the UK's fellow EC
members are expected to have replaced their currencies with a single EC
currency, managed by an EC central bank. Will the treaty prove a reliable
guide to the future course of events? The obvious precedents - the Bretton
Woods Agreement of 1944 and the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) Agreement of
1979 - offer little hope.
The Bretton Woods regime of the 1960s was de facto one of free foreign
exchange markets in which central banks operated by pegging on the dollar;
but the 1944 agreement made no mention of free markets, of central bank
dealings in such markets, or of pegging on the dollar.
Likewise the ERM regime in the 1980s was de facto one of pegging on the
D-Mark, with almost all the provisions of the ERM agreement turning out to
be dead letters. The intention that official intervention should be wholly
in European currencies (rather than in dollar) has been ignored, as has the
intention that the burden of adjustment should be shared between strong and
weak currency countries. The official Ecu in the agreement (as distinct from
the market Ecu adopted by private-sector intermediaries) has not played its
prescribed role; in particular the so-called 'divergence indicator' has not
been important in practice. The credit provisions of the agreement have
remained almost unused. The European Monetary Co-operation Fund has not been
transformed into the proposed European Monetary Fund, as was intended should
happen in 1981. Moreover, the most effective peggers on the D-Mark have been
Austria and Switzerland - both non-members of the ERM.
Central bankers are pragmatists. In the 1960s they judged the best
arrangement to be pegging on the dollar. Then, in the 1970s, when the dollar
waned, most of Europe (though not the UK until October 1990) turned to the
D-Mark instead.
Post-war experience warns us against accepting uncritically the Maastricht
treaty as a guide to the future. Instead we must consider the reactions of
decision-makers to the likely circumstances of the 1990s, especially since
the EC's pegging regime will differ from both the 1980s and the
pegging-on-the-dollar regime of the 1960s.
This is because financial deregulation has reduced the instruments available
for implementing monetary policy. Exchange controls have now gone; in
consequence financial regulations (such as credit ceilings) serve to drive
business off-shore, and changes in fiscal policy no longer have a
predictable effect on the exchange rate. (A stricter fiscal policy improves
the balance of trade but discourages the inflow of capital since the
government becomes less active as a borrower.)
The only surviving instrument of policy is the management of short-term
interest rates and in a pegging regime this instrument has to be dedicated
to maintaining the peg. The only objective which might take precedence over
maintaining an invariable peg is combating stagnation.
Currency depreciation operates to cut unemployment by improving the
international competitiveness of home industry, but only so long as the
domestic economy is not so fully integrated with neighbouring economies that
the depreciation is not offset by an equivalent rise in home-currency
prices. This proviso means that already by now Germany's smaller neighbours
are unable to improve their competitiveness by currency depreciation and
thus stand to lose nothing by freezing their exchange rates with the D-Mark
or by a transition to a common currency. The same will be so of other EC
states as their economies become assimilated into the wider Community
economy.
There is, however, a second argument. The Belgian authorities might
hypothetically argue as follows. 'We want to reduce unemployment not by
making prices more competitive but by cutting interest rates. This means
that to offset the capital outflow which would result from lower interest
rates, we must allow the franc to depreciate, while encouraging the
expectation that it will recover.' This is not plausible because the market
would be unlikely to expect any recovery of the Belgian currency unless its
initial depreciation left the franc 'undervalued'.
Already adjustments in exchange rates afford no advantage to those EC
members whose economies are so fully integrated that such changes would be
offset by equivalent changes in their domestic prices. Other EC members may
be reluctant to abandon the possibility of a realignment of exchange rates
until their economies become more integrated into the Community economy. It
is thus the pace of integration, rather than the Maastricht treaty, which
will determine the timetable for monetary union.
The author is professor of money and banking at Loughborough University
Banking Centre

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920519

