FT921-1291

FT  25 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Prudential advances by 9%


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


PRUDENTIAL Corporation, life insurance company, yesterday reported 1991
pre-tax profits of Pounds 267m, up 9 per cent, on the comparable Pounds 244m
in spite of continuing losses in its general insurance business.
The company raised its dividend by 7 per cent to 11p per share.
Prudential also announced it would no longer sell its commercial lines
general insurance through brokers, a move which resulted in a Pounds 53m
extraordinary charge.
Losses in general insurance slowed somewhat to Pounds 149m from Pounds 185m
in 1990, although within the broker sector, they rose sharply to Pounds 77m
from Pounds 48m in 1990.
However, general insurance sold through the home services division, the
sales network which distributes Prudential's life, pensions and savings
products, broke even. This reflected tighter underwriting standards which
caused a 9 per cent drop in policies written and an average 20 per cent
increase in premiums.
Profits from the sale of traditional long-term business rose by 5 per cent
to Pounds 385m, helped by sales of single-premium with-profits bonds, under
the brand name of Prudence Bonds.
Mr Mick Newmarch, chief executive, said that since last May, the company had
sold more than Pounds 500m of these bonds and sales agents were at present
selling some Pounds 30m a week.
Advertising for the product, sold in similar form by several large life
insurers, is now the subject of a review by Lautro, the self-regulatory body
for the industry. Some companies may have to make refunds to customers who
were misled about the products.
Mr Newmarch believed Prudential's advertising was 'a paragon of clarity' and
clearly warned prospective customers about the risks.
Meanwhile, Mercantile and General, Prudential's reinsurance subsidiary,
produced a small trading profit which masked a significant improvement in
the underlying performance on the life side.
Nearly half of the Pounds 60m trading losses on the general reinsurance
business were due to prior years' charges, said Mr Newmarch.
He said Prudential expected to be able to raise reinsurance premiums this
year due to declining capacity in that market.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920325

