FT924-6386

FT  21 NOV 92 / The wealth cascade runs dry: Britain's inheritors may
receive bills rather than property


   By JOHN AUTHERS and PHILIP COGGAN


When Mr Nigel (now Lord) Lawson was chancellor he had a vision of a nation
of inheritors. 'Inheritance, which used to be the preserve of the few, will
become a fact of life for the many,' he said in 1988. But that prospect is
fading in the recessionary climate of the early 1990s, as the value of
estates falls and more resources are devoted to caring for Britain's ageing
population.
The idea was beguilingly simple. The owner-occupiers of the post-war
generation would gradually die out. They would pass on, via their estates,
the wealth built up in their houses. For their children, this would
represent additional resources, since most would already own their own
homes.
The result would be the revival of the rentier class, living off the income
from its investments, just like P G Wodehouse's hero, Bertie Wooster. John
Major was impressed by the notion, telling last year's Conservative party
conference that he wanted to see 'wealth cascading down the generations'.
Whether this was consistent with his vision of a 'classless society' is
debatable. Sir Peregrine Worsthorne, the Sunday Telegraph columnist was
explicit about the prospects in an editorial in 1988. He wrote: 'Hundreds of
thousands of middle-class families are going to be able to leave their
children loads of money, if only in the form of one (or in many cases two)
houses . . . The tide of egalitarianism, which has been sweeping all before
it for 100 years, is about to be decisively reversed.'
How strong was the evidence for such hopes? Total wealth passed directly
from one generation to another in 1990-91 was Pounds 8.1bn, according to
Mintel, the market research company, a figure projected to rise to Pounds
13bn by 2000.
According to Mintel, 20 per cent of Britons inherit money between their
mid-40s and 50s, and 9 per cent are left a house or flat. An NOP survey
shows that 67 per cent of all property inheritors are aged 40 or over, when
most will have a house and may be well on the way to repaying their
mortgages.
This inheritance is highly concentrated. The average value of inheritances
between 1985 and 1989 was Pounds 29,730, according to the Joseph Rowntree
Foundation, the social research organisation. But this average was boosted
by a few large estates; the median figure was just Pounds 10,000.
The value of inheritances in heirs' pockets was raised by 13 years of
Conservative government which looked kindly on inherited wealth.
Inheritances have never been taxed more leniently. No inheritance tax is
payable at all on estates of less than Pounds 150,000, while a competent
accountant can exploit loopholes to avoid paying any tax on estates much
larger than this. One accountant even described inheritance taxes
'voluntary'.
Whether the idea of an 'inheritance dividend' for the middle-aged middle
classes ever filtered into the public consciousness is uncertain. Perhaps
the notion contributed to the general feeling of prosperity, and thus the
rapid increase in consumer spending, of the late 1980s.
But the theory that Britain was heading towards a society of inheritors is
now being questioned, and its premises may never have been watertight: It
was never likely that Britons, as a whole, could become more wealthy simply
by buying and selling each other's houses.
One of the planks on which the theory rested, the rapidly increasing values
of domestic properties during the 1980s, appears to have rotted away. The UK
is suffering its fourth successive year of falling real house prices -
reducing the value of estates.
Demographic change has cancelled out even more of the potential benefit for
the current middle-aged generation. Indeed, the mass of elderly could soon
be a burden on their children, not a benefit to them. And that would turn
the 'inheritance society' theory on its head.
According to some actuarial estimates, the number of people aged over 75
could rise from 3.9m in 1991 to between 5.1m and 9.2m by 2031. This has
significant implications for the UK economy, as a smaller workforce
struggles to support a greater dependent population.
When people live longer, they tend to need long-term care. And that costs
money. According to Mr Dryden Gilling-Smith, managing director of Employee
Benefit Services, the needs of the 'old old' (those aged over 85) tend to be
labour-intensive, as they become less and less independent.
Mr William Laing, of consultancy Laing & Buisson, believes that the burden
on the nation will increase rapidly. In the next 10 years, he forecasts that
the total cost of financing long-term care in the UK will rise by 17 per
cent in real terms from the current annual level of Pounds 9bn.
By the year 2050, when long-term care spending should peak as the children
of baby-boomers reach their old age, he predicts the real cost of long-term
care will be 70 per cent greater than it is today. In other words,
expenditure on care for the elderly will rise from 2 per cent of gross
domestic product today to about 4 per cent in the next half century.
Britain's tax and benefit system does nothing to protect estates from these
high costs. Income support is only available to pay for long-term care when
an individual's total assets are less than Pounds 8,000. So there is
effectively no state help for those who still own their houses (although
certain exemptions exist where there are resident carers or relatives).
Research by the Family Policy Studies Centre suggests that the costs of care
could even wipe out the value of some inheritances. The sum raised by
selling an average house, which the FPSC puts at about Pounds 66,000, would
not be sufficient to pay for more than five years in a nursing home, or for
more than eight years in private residential care without nursing.
Once this money has run out the income support available from the government
falls seriously short of the average costs incurred by people in long-term
care. This shortfall has been estimated, by Francis McGlone of the FPSC, at
between Pounds 27 and Pounds 44 a week.
In a recent report*, Mr Chris Hamnett, visiting senior research fellow of
Nuffield College, Oxford, cites inland revenue statistics which show the
number of homes passed on at death has been relatively constant over the
past 20 years. 'Above all,' says the Hamnett report, 'older homeowners are
increasingly selling or transferring ownership of their houses prior to
death. They are doing this either to pay for residential and nursing care,
or to provide additional income in old age.'
This only serves to force house prices down further and squeeze out any
wealth effect from the economy.
According to Mr Hamnett's calculations, between 120,000 and 190,000 people
enter care homes each year. Nearly half of them own their own homes. About
two-thirds of these need to sell their houses to pay for the care. Mr
Hamnett estimates that these houses fetch about Pounds 2.5bn a year.
Far from funding a new leisure-class spending boom, the nation's accumulated
wealth is currently being used to come to the rescue of escalating care
bills for the elderly. In the process it is forcing down the property
market. There may come a point where the wealth runs out.
So the rentier class may have to stay within the fictional confines of P G
Wodehouse's comedies. Nursing home bills, rather than wealth, could cascade
down the generations.
*Inheritance in Britain; the Disappearing Billions, published by PPP
Lifetime.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921121

