FT923-10970

FT  28 JUL 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: Hatchet blade may have the edge - A
new development in rowing technology


   By KEITH WHEATLEY


SUDDENLY, rowers have become highly design-conscious. All competitors at the
Olympic regatta are being scrutinised for the shape of their oar blade.
Cleaver or conventional? Six months ago the advent of a new hatchet-shaped
blade, developed by an innovative US company, set rowing on its ear.
Believers claim that the larger area of the new blade gives more power per
stroke. Against that is increased drag and wind resistance. Around the
lakeside at Banyoles, the mountain resort 150km from Barcelona, little else
is being talked about. Mind games abound.
The German eight, current world champions and favourites for the gold medal,
changed back to conventional blades a week ago, causing puzzlement among
their opponents - possibly intentionally. Rumour has it that research at a
German university has found against the hatchets. Most spectators and
competitors agree that they are visually unappealing.
'They may look ugly, but close your eyes and they feel fine,' said Steve
Redgrave, the British rower who is favourite for a third gold medal in the
coxless pairs with partner Mathew Pinsent. In the same event his American
opponents have tried the new equipment and discarded it.
'My guys were slower with the big blades. There were some gains in the first
500 metres but it was a definite trade-off further down the course. Maybe
you get more tired using them,' said US coach Bruce Konapka. However, the
bulk of the powerful US team will be using the new oars.
The hatchet oar originated with the Dreissigacker brothers, Peter and Dick,
in Vermont. Their Concept II company introduced the successful Delta blade
eight years ago, the first break from traditional oars in 30 years.
Critics say that Concept II is far more interested in marketing that rowing.
Certainly the company knows how to sell.
The first commercially available big-blade oars were tested against
conventional sweeps in a blizzard last December by the Harvard A and B
crews. Despite changeovers, the rowers with the new equipment always won.
Within an hour of the result leaking out, the Dreissigackers had an order
from Yale for eight hatchet oars at Dollars 350 each.
Since then, any crew has tended to feel at a pyschological disadvantage if
it hasn't at least tried and discarded the new fashion. To try to protect
poorer countries from spiralling costs, FISA, rowing's governing body,
considered banning the big blades but decided against it.
One equipment manufacturer based at Banyoles for the Olympic regatta said
that he had refitted a battered Estonian eight out of human charity - then
witnessed the crew turn up with Dollars 3,500 worth of new big-blade oars
for their first practice.
'There is a huge amount of pure fashion and kidology in this,' cautioned
Australian team coach Paul Thompson. 'If the opposition is using them, any
sportsman wants to feel he is on equal terms.'
Some of the little scientific research that has been undertaken on big-blade
oars has been done at the world-renowned bio-mechanical department of the
Australian Institute of Sport in Canberra.
According to Thompson, there is a measurable advantage at sub-maximal strike
rates, fading somewhat as the rowers peak at full power. The effect was more
marked with physically stronger rowers.
Against that was an easily perceived difficulty of handling the big blades
in higher winds. 'In the end it's the motor in the machine, not the colour
you paint the box, that is going to make the difference,' said Thompson.
There is some evidence that the more experienced rowers are more sceptical.
Pertti Karpinnen, a Finn single sculler with three gold medals and now
attending his fifth Olympics, handed his hatchets back to Zurich equipment
manufacturer Stampfli after a short trial.
'He just gave them back and said 'wood is better',' said company boss
Melchior Burgin, himself a former world champion rower.
'Aesthetically it's not appealing,' agreed Burgin, 'but people said that
when we moved from wooden to composite boats. Scientifically, nothing is
proved. If the German eight wins with traditional oars it's going to have a
lot of people scratching their heads. It caused consternation when they
dropped big blades after the Lucerne championships.'
Although Burgin is benefiting commercially from what he describes as
'everyone rushing to buy new equipment,' he is sad to see a conservative
sport falling overboard.
Australian oar manufacturer Howard Croaker, sharing Burgin's workshop,
pointed out that if the stars do well here with the new design, every
college kid and high school rower is going to be badgering his dad for new
oars.
'A lot of people think that the only ones really benefiting are the
manufacturers,' said Bruce Konapka.
Croaker, more of a rower than a businessman, agreed with him. 'My turnover
on oars is already up 400 per cent this year. This has opened a whole new
can of sardines.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920728

