FT923-15709

FT  01 JUL 92 / Jobs: Where to find future company leaders - The scrapping
of whole layers of management leaves less room for top talent to show itself


   By MICHAEL DIXON


AMONG the numerous prized qualities possessed by Jobs column readers, it
seems, not the least is an unusually long memory. Take for instance the
antiquated pop song, 'How do you speak to an angel?', cited here four weeks
ago. No fewer than 29 of you claimed to recall same - over half identifying
it, I think correctly, with Dean Martin in the early 1950s - including a
civil servant who sort of sang the whole thing over the telephone.
Nevertheless I doubt that as many of you can come up with the goods on
today's test, even though the quotation which needs to be identified is a
good dozen years more recent. It goes:
The most intangible and yet by far the most important factor in improving
industrial efficiency is the quality of industrial management. There is now
a growing interest in management education, and it is expected that in the
next few years the increased quantity and quality of management education of
all kinds will be making an important contribution.
The source, in fact, is Britain's one and only National Plan, published in
September 1965. And my reason for recalling it is that now, after nigh on 27
years, there appears to be a possibility that one of the assumptions buried
in it may at last prove justified.
Even so, there is no shame in failing to remember the plan as originally
formulated, because besides being a unique exercise it was an extremely
short-lived one. Just about the only aspect of it that remains at all
contentious is why the British security services were sent to comb London
for a pre-publication copy which went missing just before the launch.
(Certain government officials of the day allege that the Jobs column's
esteemed colleague Samuel Brittan, who advised on the plan, left the said
copy on a bus; Sam himself dismisses such claims, saying he only thought
he'd left it on a bus.)
By contrast, almost everything planned in the plan was swiftly and
conclusively decided by events, in the adverse direction.
Perhaps the prime example is referred to in my quotation. For the thing to
which management education was officially expected to contribute was a
projected average growth in national output of around 4 per cent a year.
Indeed such was the planners' faith in management education that, if I
remember aright, they expected it alone to generate an eighth of the
envisaged growth rate. And while the quotation talks of all kinds of
management education, the faith was mainly invested in one sort: the
master's-degree courses then being set up, particularly in the specialist
university business schools at London and Manchester. The expectation was
that the Masters of Business Administration and such produced by those
courses, would soon take over the topmost tiers of British management.
The fact that they largely haven't done so vindicates the few sceptics of
the time. Their argument was that the executives already in post, while
perhaps ignorant about Bayesian decision-trees and the like, had certainly
gained political skills in fighting their way up the promotional ladder.
They would therefore find ways of stopping the MBAs from being inserted
above them.
But although the past quarter century has seen the sceptical view prevail,
the last three or four years have brought changes that could well
countermand it. With organisations scrapping whole tiers of management,
there are not only far fewer people in middle-rank blocking positions, but
often no longer enough lower rungs on the ladder for it to provide adequate
training for work on the highest perches. So where are the future
big-company leaders to come from?
Well - while the answer given by some observers of the British scene goes
'Eton, Winchester . . . and Oxford, of course' - the majority of senior
managers and headhunters I've sounded are less cynical. They're more
inclined to think MBA courses may at last come into their own, despite the
bad effects of importing earmarked 'crown princes' on the motivation of
other employees.
There is, however, at least one exception in the headhunting field who
maintains there is no need for companies to court such dangers. He is
psychologist Rob Irving of the Whitehead Mann consultancy in London, who
besides having tested some 2,000 managers of all ranks over the past six
years, has made a special study of 300 senior executives ranging upwards
from functional directors of subsidiary companies to group chief executives.
As a result, he believes that far from having to recruit outside, all
companies need do to find their future leaders is look searchingly at those
working in their more junior ranks. For the traits making for success at the
heights are identifiable by the time people are in their late 20s.
Moreover, when it comes to intellectual skills such as verbal and numerical
reasoning, the 300 proven performers' test scores cast doubt on the
relevance of the MBA qualification to practical company leadership. While
they resembled the generality of managers in scoring in the top 15-10 per
cent of the population, they did not show the still more rarefied
intellectual cast of mind associated with academic degrees at master's
level.
Where the 300 do differ from managers in the large sense is in personality.
They are somewhat more extraverted than pure chance would predict and, at
the very highest rank, considerably more intuitive and visionary. But their
most marked differences are in three particular areas.
First, they have a voracious need for power. 'In a group of managers picked
at random, they'd stand out as domineering,' Rob Irving says. 'It's not just
that they like taking charge; it's that, try as they might, they couldn't do
otherwise.'
Second, they are avid for personal achievement, not only having extremely
high aims, but being tireless and ruthlessly competitive in pursuing same.
Their third big distinguishing mark is a propensity for planning ahead in
the sense of making a firm decision as to what is going to happen, and
getting others to bring it into being. Typically, too, they find calculated
risk-taking attractive, whereas the bulk of managers are averse from it.
True, the picture emerging from the study is something less than humanly
appealing. But that's not the point, Rob Irving says. As things are, people
of the sort portrayed seem to be the best at heading big companies, which in
turn are essential to modern economies. So if the rest of us want to prosper
materially, we'll just have to grin and bear it.
NOW to a job offered by Greek headhunter John Piperoglou of the Stedima
consultancy on behalf of one of his country's banks. As he may not name it,
he promises to abide by applicants' requests not to be identified to his
client at this stage.
Being about to open an office in London, the bank wants someone to run and
build it swiftly into a fully fledged branch, with emphasis on private
banking and portfolio management, and currency and other asset dealing.
Besides familiarity with same, candidates need success in managing and
developing a separate profit-centre. Fluency in Greek a distinct advantage.
Salary at least Pounds 60,000 plus bonus on results, car and other typical
City-banking perks.
Inquiries to 3 Hatziyianni-Mexi Str, GR-115 28 Athens; tel Greece 1-723
4771, fax 1-721 1414.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920701

