FT924-6312

FT  21 NOV 92 / Finance & the Family: Better a spender than a saver be -
Diary of a Private Investor


   By KEVIN GOLDSTEIN-JACKSON


IT DOES not seem all that long ago that Britons were being criticised by the
government for not saving enough. Now, it would appear they are at fault for
not spending enough. Chancellor Norman Lamont's autumn statement, which was
really a mini-Budget, was designed partly to give people confidence enough
to spend. But will they?
Abolishing the special car tax should reduce the average price of a new car
by around 4 per cent. But cars are still overpriced compared with, say, the
US where I could buy a beautiful, luxurious Lincoln Continental, complete
with air-conditioning, for less than the cost of a rather ordinary car sold
in Britain. People with money to spend still feel they are being ripped off,
and the product range available in the UK is rather limited.
As a private investor, I shall be keeping a close watch on companies which
may suffer (or benefit) from the chancellor's actions in 1993. But he is
unlikely to want to increase tax on too many items for fear of producing
increases in the retail prices index, which would have a big impact on his
wish to keep pay claims low and inflation under control.
The chancellor's injection of Pounds 750m, to be used before the end of the
financial year to help remove 'the overhang of empty properties in the owner
occupied sector,' is unlikely to halt the fall in house prices. This sum is
equivalent only to 20,000 homes at Pounds 37,500 each - not much help to the
middle and upper end of the market, where prices are likely to remain
depressed due to record levels of unemployment in the managerial sector and
continuing problems for many Lloyd's underwriters.
Housing Corporation and other public spending on existing homes could even,
in some areas, reduce the demand from the private sector. After all, a
housing estate or apartment block loses its attractions to many private
buyers if they think their neighbours might be council tenants.
If interest rates were to fall further, say to 3 or 4 per cent, perhaps the
chancellor could announce in his next Budget a phased ending of mortgage
interest tax relief. This could be spread over 10 years and would help to
balance the government's books.
It is also worth pointing out that, quite often, one person's pain is
another person's pleasure (and vice versa). Rather like cars, house prices
in the UK remain at rather high levels compared with those in many other
countries.
While people with hefty mortgages and 'negative value' homes obviously will
resent further falls in the value of their properties, the situation would
be very helpful for first-time buyers.
A further cut in interest rates is expected widely. Again, this is
double-edged. People with mortgages and other borrowings welcome such cuts
but savers - particularly those who depend for part of their income on
interest payments - find it painful. Savers have less to spend, and many
borrowers use an interest rate reduction not to increase their spending but
to reduce further their debts.
Thus, I shall continue to avoid investing in stores groups, as I cannot
envisage much increase in people's spending. I will also keep an eye on
items which might attract new taxes next year and I am reconsidering my
investment in premium bonds. From March 1, the prize fund is being reduced
from 6.5 to 5 per cent, thus increasing the odds of any Pounds 1 bond unit
winning a prize in each draw from 11,000-1 to 15,000-1.
Increasing the minimum purchase of bonds for children from Pounds 10 to
Pounds 100 from February 1 seems particularly mean. I thought the government
needed to borrow as much as possible from the British public  - including
children's pocket money - in order to afford all its spending plans and its
vast armies of civil servants.
The chancellor also announced the establishment of a 'new panel of
independent forecasters' to be in operation in time for next year's Budget.
As my youngest daughter (now eight) and I have predicted economic events
consistently with more accuracy than the Treasury, we await eagerly our
summons to 11 Downing Street. We can then also tell the chancellor what he
can do with premium bonds . . .

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921121

