FT922-4018

FT  08 JUN 92 / Keeping up the pressure


What happens after Rio is all over? Will the participating countries just
disperse and forget all about it, or will someone be keeping up the pressure
for action on the environment?
The main proposal - for which there is growing acceptance - is for a
Sustainable Development Commission which would be part of the UN. This would
be similar to the UN Commission on Human Rights: it would monitor countries'
record on environmental protection, and apply 'peer group pressure' to those
who lagged behind.
The Commission would report to the Economic and Social Council, which
reports to the General Assembly, and would have over 50 members.
The exact details will be decided by the General Assembly in the autumn.
Mother Nature is delivering her own message to the Earth Summit. Any doubts
that delegates might have about global warming have been dispelled by a
sweltering heat wave which has engulfed Rio. Even though it is supposed to
be mid-winter, temperatures yesterday soared past 40 degrees Celsius. far
above the seasonal norm. Some delegates took the opportunity of the Sunday
break to snatch moments at the beach - where they must have ruminated about
the dangers of climate change.
Pollution can be caused by many things - including war. Invasion-ravaged
Kuwait has a specially poignant message for the summit. Its delegation
office is decked in grisly posters of burning oil wells, shattered homes and
oil-covered beaches.
The tiny oil state has brought a relatively large contingent of 50 people,
including consultants and scientists, who are pushing the message that
Kuwait is on the mend.
'We want people to know what happened during the invasion, and also after
the liberation,' says Dr Abdulwahad Alfouzan, the minister of health.
Only a few steps away from Kuwait's expansive office stands Iraq's much more
modest one-room presence. It contains a large picture of President Saddam
Hussein. But while the Emir of Kuwait will be coming at the end of this week
for the ceremonial signing, Mr Saddam, sensing he would not be enormously
welcome, has dispatched foreign minister Tariq Aziz instead.
The Brazilian Indians' claim that they know what is best for the jungle led
to some consternation in Rio over the weekend when a well-known Indian
spokesman appeared in the parallel non-governmental conference trying to
sell a large spotted jaguar skin. Mario Juruna said he had killed the 8-foot
animal and was determined to sell it, adding: 'If Indians were free they
would sell alligators, wild cat and other skins.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920608

