FT921-1498

FT  24 MAR 92 / International Company News: Olivetti in computer printer
link with Canon


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


OLIVETTI, the loss-making Italian computers and office equipment group, is
reinforcing its links with Canon of Japan with a L130bn (Dollars 103m) joint
venture to produce up to 700,000 bubble ink-jet printers annually.
Bubble ink-jet printers represent the fastest-growing sector of the computer
printer market. Olivetti estimates that such 'non-impact' technology
accounted for around one-third of the 7.8m printers sold in Europe in 1991,
with a growth rate of around 25 per cent.
The two already collaborate through Olivetti Canon Industriale (OCI), a
joint venture set up in 1987 to make photocopiers under both the Canon and
Olivetti badges.
Under the latest deal, to take effect in April, OCI will create a new bubble
ink-jet printer division, providing 580 jobs at its existing plant in
northern Italy over the next five years. First-year output is expected to
reach 200,000 units. Around L70bn of the total investment will go towards
research and development, while L46bn will be spent on production.
Olivetti has been attacked, unfairly it claims, for being slow to strike
strategic alliances with other high-technology groups to help overcome its
current problems. The latest deal should go some way to meeting such
criticisms.
The company gave no precise sales or profits forecasts for the new venture.
However, it claimed to hold around 11 per cent of the market, with sales of
around L400bn.
The new joint venture will be based on Olivetti's existing production and
research activities, to be complemented by the introduction of Canon
technologies. According to Olivetti, the two companies are, with Hewlett
Packard, the leaders in bubble ink-jet technology. The division will extend
Olivetti's two-model range, with products using technology from both
companies and marketed under both Olivetti and Canon names.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920324

