FT922-3996

FT  08 JUN 92 / Letter: Institute plans to act on Cadbury corporate
governance report


   From Mr W I D PLAISTOWE


Sir, A number of the Cadbury report's recommendations on corporate
governance require action by the accountancy profession. These are now being
addressed urgently by my institute.
Internal controls: The institute made several submissions to the Cadbury
Committee, one of which recommended that listed companies should report
publicly on the state of their internal controls. The institute, with the
100 Group of Finance Directors, and the Institute of Chartered Accountants
of Scotland, has set up a working group to examine the practicalities of
reporting on internal control from the business viewpoint, and to take
forward Cadbury's recommendations.
Going concern: A similar working group will look at guidance for company
directors on the Cadbury recommendation that they should state in their
report that the business is a going concern. This work will be complementary
to that relevant to the proposals of the Auditing Practices Board on this
subject.
Rotation of audit partners: The institute also plans to carry out work on
the Cadbury Committee's proposal that the profession should draw up
appropriate guidelines for periodic changes of audit partners. Careful
consideration will be given to the implications of this, with a view to the
possible production of ethical guidance by the three institutes of chartered
accountants.
Prelims and Interims: The auditing committee of the institute recently
issued a discussion paper on the need for preliminary announcements of
listed companies' annual results to have audit approval. It is also
considering the role of the auditor in relation to interim statements and
will take account of the Cadbury Committee's recommendations on the subject.
Research: The institute has earmarked funds for any research proposals which
would carry forward the Cadbury Committee's work.
W I D Plaistowe,
president,
Institute of
Chartered Accountants,
Chartered Accountants Hall,
Moorgate Place, London EC2

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920608

