FT921-11727

FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (5): Gargantuan ambition - Refineries
and petrochemicals


   By MARK NICHOLSON


BECAUSE Saudi Arabia tends not to do things by half, it should perhaps only
be expected that just as the country is engaged in raising oil output
capacity to 10m barrels a day, it is meanwhile busy with a complete overhaul
and expansion of its oil refining and petrochemicals industry.
And, as with the upstream plans, the scale of cost and ambition for the
downstream plan is gargantuan. Including Saudi Aramco's plan to lift oil
production, oil analysts reckon the kingdom is on track to spend more than
Dollars 33bn on developing all aspects of its oil industry by the end of the
decade. This figure includes at least Dollars 10bn on upgrading its domestic
refineries, Dollars 6bn on the petrochemical industry, and nearly Dollars
2bn on extending its oil tanker fleet.
The expansion plans follow a rationalisation of the kingdom's downstream
industries since the arrival in 1986 of Mr Hisham Nazer, the oil minister,
in the seat vacated by Sheikh Zaki Yamani.
The expansion is aimed at making Saudi Arabia the world's largest producer
of unleaded petrol, to lock as much oil into partly-owned refineries in its
main market so as to guarantee demand, and to increase and diversify the
kingdom's petrochemicals catalogue.
Both the refining and petrochemicals expansion are already in progress
although Saudi officials stress that the full programme will not be complete
before the end of the decade. And there are additional plans by Saudi
Aramco, already the world's biggest oil company, to expand its shipping
fleet. Thus, the kingdom expects by the year 2000 to fully integrate its
domestic oil industry, and lock its production firmly into western and East
Asian markets.
The principle behind this integration is 'reciprocal security' between the
kingdom as supplier and its main markets. 'It's widely held that where
there's more integration in the oil markets, there's more stability,' says
one Saudi official. 'Saudi Arabia is looking for stability.'
Mr Nazer began by making organisational sense of the country's upstream
interests, gathering the previously independently managed domestic refinery
under the umbrella of Samarec, which was formed in 1989 to market and refine
the kingdom's oil.
Lubricating oil companies were similarly gathered under the wing of another
new creation, Petrolube, and the Ministry of Oil and Petroleum, which acts
as the holding company for these new concerns, is busy with plans to create
a further group to manage mining and minerals. For this prospective company,
the government is understood to be interested in finding foreign
joint-venture partners.
Once rationalised, Samarec began its expansion plans in 1989 and suffered
only temporary interruption during the Gulf war. In July last year, Samarec
awarded to Foster Wheeler, the US heavy engineers, the project management
contract for upgrading the kingdom's three main domestic refineries at
Jeddah (capacity 90,000 barrels a day), Riyadh (134,000 b/d) and Yanbu
(170,000 b/d). Phase one of the project, to be completed by 1996, will cost
Dollars 2bn and later phases an extra Dollars 8bn. Both joint venture export
refineries, with Mobil at Yanbu (250,000 b/d) and Shell at Jubail (250,000
b/d) will be similarly upgraded.
Samarec's primary aim is to upgrade 'bottom of the barrel': enabling its
refineries to produce higher octane petrol from the kingdom's heavier crude
oil. Samarec is also boosting production of octane enhancers, notably Methyl
Tertiary Butyl Ether (MTBE), a lead substitute for petrol, to enable the
kingdom to meet the domestic imperative announced by King Fahd, the Saudi
ruler, of meeting domestic petrol needs of 500,000 b/d entirely with
unleaded petrol by 1994.
Ras Tanura, the country's biggest refinery, with capacity of 530,000 b/d, is
also to be overhauled in a project expected to cost as much as Dollars 2bn
for the first phase of upgrading. Saudi Aramco, which runs the refinery, in
an apparent and unexplained exception to the Samarec reorganisation, has
signed Brown & Root as project managers for the six-year first phase with
options for two three-year extensions. Should the latter be taken up, the
final bill p more than Dollars 10bn.
The country's other main refinery, the 325,000 b/d Rabigh plant, which is
jointly owned by Samarec and Mr John Latsis, the Greek investor, Saudi
officials say they prefer not to discuss. Officials say the costly refinery
is too basic to fit in with their upgrade plans and that the investment was
just the sort of thing they hope in future to avoid with the newly
rationalised Samarec.
The kingdom's domestic refining plans are only a part of a global strategy
to expand downstream operations. Since Saudi Aramco signed a 50-50 joint
refining deal with Texaco, the kingdom has sought to guarantee market access
for its crude in its main consumer market through participatory ventures.
Under the Star agreement, Texaco receives up to 600,000 b/d of Saudi heavy
crude for its East Coast refinery in the US. This guarantees a market for
the Saudi oil and pleases Texaco by giving them a secure flow of the same
type of crude, enabling their refineries to fine-tune and yield higher
quality petrol.
In August last year, Mr Nazer confirmed a second deal with the Ssangyong Oil
Refining Company of South Korea, under which, Aramco acquired 35 per cent of
the group's equity and an agreement to supply up to 300,000 b/d of oil to
the Korean group's two refineries and petrochemical plants.
This month, feasibility studies on a third such deal were announced with
Japan. Saudi Aramco, in tandem with Nippon Oil, Nippon Mining and Arabian
Oil Company of Japan, is to study investment in 450,000 b/d of refining
capacity in Japan, while studying plans for a further 300,000 b/d refinery
in Saudi Arabia. Neither costs nor dates for the project have yet been
outlined. Saudi officials say there is also 'the intent' to forge a similar
deal in Europe although there have been no decisions reached on where.
Officials say there is no 'magic figure' for the amount of Saudi crude oil
they wish to see locked into these overseas deals. Some oil analysts say the
kingdom may be trying to assure overseas markets for up to half of total
crude production by the end of the century.
Further downstream, the kingdom is also investing heavily in extending its
petrochemicals industry, its fastest growing manufacturing sector. The
industry grew by 3.9 per cent a year between 1984 and 1989 and comprised 3
per cent of GDP in 1990.
Sabic, the state-run industrial company, is well into a Dollars 6bn
expansion plan designed to double its capacity from the present 10m tonnes a
year of liquid petrochemicals, plastics, resins, steels and fertilisers by
the mid 1990s, including more than doubling the output of MTBE to 1.2m
tonnes a year.

The Financial Times


London Page III Photograph Oil minister Hisham Nazer, confirmed South Korea
deal (Omitted).

920130

