FT923-15460

FT  02 JUL 92 / UK Company News: British Bio raises Pounds 30m via shares
placing


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


BRITISH Bio-technology Group yesterday raised Pounds 30m before expenses via
a placing of its shares, mostly in the UK.
The issue, the first flotation of a bio-technology company in London, valued
the company at Pounds 151.8m.
The 7.06m shares were priced at 425p, right in the middle of the 400p-450p
target range the Oxford company gave in its pathfinder prospectus.
They closed on their first day of trading in London up 25p at 450p.
They also traded in the US on the Nasdaq market.
'We are delighted to get away in such a difficult climate,' said Mr Keith
McCullagh, chief executive.
'This shows there is an exit route for venture capitalists investing in
biotechnology and should encourage further investment in the sector.'
Mr Henry Somerset, a director at Kleinwort Benson, the issue's lead manager
and principal underwriter, said: 'The situation at the Daily Telegraph . . .
will have no effect on British Bio-technology. All of the stock has already
been placed with institutions.'
About 85 per cent of the placement was in the UK and 7.5 per cent in
continental Europe.
Morgan Stanley is lead manager in the US, for which only 7.5 per cent of the
stock was earmarked.
An additional 1.06m shares are available in the form of American Depositary
Shares as a 'green shoe' option to cover over-allotments or for price
stabilisation.
Mr McCullagh said demand in the US had been below expections when the
flotation had been planned in March.
US investors have shown increasing disenchantment with the biotechnology
sector in recent months.
British Bio-technology now has Pounds 60m in cash reserves, following a
private placement of Pounds 40m last year, said Mr McCullagh.
He said this should be sufficient to allow the company to bring its products
to market.
It is concentrating on four therapeutic areas: inflammatory diseases such as
arthritis; cancer; vascular and heart disease; and viral infections,
including Aids.
It has two drugs in early clinical trials and trials on a third are expected
to begin in August.
Cantab Pharmaceuticals, the Cambridge-based biotechnology company, yesterday
announced that it had sold 1m American Depositary Shares at Dollars 10 each.
Net proceeds after expenses will be between Dollars 8.5m and Dollars 9m.
The stock will be traded on Nasdaq.
The company said it would be looking for a London listing in the future.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920702

