FT921-1186

FT  25 MAR 92 / US investigators look at BCCI-BNL transactions


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


   NEW YORK


US INVESTIGATORS of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI)
affair have launched a related inquiry into a series of financial
transactions between BCCI and the branch in Atlanta, Georgia, of Italy's
Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL).
The BNL Atlanta branch made more than Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.3bn) of improper
loans to Iraq, nearly half of which were used by President Saddam Hussein to
help finance his development of nuclear missile and chemical weapons
projects. Indictments of former BNL employees and a senior Iraqi central
bank official were lodged last year.
Both BCCI prosecutors and US Congressional investigators are now looking
into a series of money market transactions between BCCI and BNL, which
totalled nearly Dollars 2.5bn between 1986 and 1989.
Documents obtained by the Financial Times show dozens of short-term
transfers to BNL Atlanta from BCCI branches in London, Abu Dhabi and Hong
Kong. The funds, which were handled by London and New York money brokers,
would generally be sent by BNL back to BCCI, with interest, after 48 or 72
hours.
A senior executive at BNL in Rome said the transfers appeared to be nothing
more than 'normal, overnight transactions' but was at a loss to explain why
BCCI should have chosen to make the overnight deposits at BNL's Atlanta
branch which, until the huge Iraqi loans were discovered in August 1989, had
been thought of as a minor office.
The BNL executive also noted that Dollars 2.5bn was a relatively small
amount in the context of the Atlanta branch's overall funding operations.
US investigators say BNL Rome is not a target of inquiry.
Until now, the only BCCI-BNL fund transfer known was some Dollars 22m in
July 1989, discovered by inspectors from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York when they were analysing BNL's clearing account at the New York offices
of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company. Morgan, which cleared a total of
Dollars 1.7bn of BNL Atlanta funds, has not been accused of any wrongdoing.
US investigators are also examining deposits at BNL Atlanta, held by an
individual suspected as a front for other interests. At least part of these
funds was transferred to a BCCI Nassau branch in the Bahamas, and the
Atlanta account was closed on July 31 1989, four days before the FBI raided
BNL Atlanta.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920325

