FT924-11362

FT  27 OCT 92 / Last of the royal yards are placed in the dock: A government
decision on the location of submarine facilities will determine the fate of
Rosyth and Devonport


   By DAVID WHITE


Just upstream from the Forth rail and road bridges in eastern Scotland there
is a giant cavity dug into reclaimed land. The hole is easily big enough to
accommodate half a dozen football pitches. Dump trucks beetle around its
floor. Being poured into this pit are a quarter of million cubic metres of
concrete and public money already exceeding Pounds 120m.
It is meant to become two dry docks for nuclear-powered submarines, one big
enough to take Britain's new Trident ballistic-missile vessels, the largest
submarines ever built in the UK. But it could equally well become nothing at
all.
The government has to make a judgment of Solomon between the two remaining
royal dockyards. A decision between this project at Rosyth and the rival
plans of Plymouth's Devonport dockyard is due by Christmas. At both yards,
thousands of jobs are at stake.
The dilemma has received little national publicity, but either region would
take failure as a blow comparable to the government's plans for colliery
closures. Rosyth Royal Dockyard is the biggest single industrial site in
Scotland, Devonport the biggest in south-west England.
They are the remnants of a network of naval yards dating back to Henry VII,
the first monarch to maintain a standing fleet. Deptford and Woolwich
disappeared last century. Chatham and Gibraltar were abandoned in 1984, and
Portsmouth was downgraded. They used to build ships as well as repair and
refit them, but no warships have been made at the dockyards for more than 20
years.
In the late 1970s the royal dockyards employed 34,000. By the mid-1980s the
figure had dropped to less than 20,000. Since then, the annual business has
remained constant at about Pounds 420m. There are now just 5,000 working at
Devonport and 4,000 at Rosyth.
In 1987, after 16 years of intermittent studies, the government brought in
private-sector managers to tackle waste and inefficiency in the dockyards.
Devonport, the largest complex of its kind in Europe, was won by a
consortium of Brown & Root of the US, BICC and the Weir Group. Rosyth went
to Babcock Thorn, a joint venture between Babcock International and Thorn
EMI of the UK. The assets remained the Ministry of Defence's, and the
managers paid licence fees.
The yards were guaranteed a 'core programme' of work. But this has withered
along with the cold war. Above all, requirements for submarines have been
cut. Refuelling and refitting a nuclear submarine is two and a half years of
work, worth up to Pounds 150m. It is the backbone of the business. When the
management companies entered their seven-year contracts there was room for
two facilities. Now there clearly is not.
The issue needs to be resolved before the government can go ahead with its
next plan, fuller privatisation. The current consortia may be able to extend
their contracts by one or two years beyond 1994 but the Ministry of Defence
has already invited companies to express their interest in purchasing either
or both the dockyards. It is looking for 20 per cent savings in naval
support costs and says selling the yards is a 'logical progression' from
today's contractor arrangements.
'We would see the ministry washing their hands of all future redundancy
costs,' says Mr Allan Smith, managing director of Rosyth Royal Dockyard.
At least 10 companies are believed to have responded to the MoD's
invitation. Potential bidders include VSEL, which makes all Britain's
submarines and is itself in the middle of deep retrenchment; GEC, which owns
Yarrow Shipbuilders and has ambitions to be an all-encompassing naval
supplier; British Aerospace, which makes naval weapons; and Rolls-Royce,
which supplies naval engines. However, the two incumbent groups regard
themselves as front-runners - both of them prepared to bid for both yards,
but each intent on holding on to the nuclear work.
Both companies have branched out into non-MoD work such as boatbuilding.
Rosyth has 500 people refurbishing carriages for British Rail and London
Underground, and much of the site looks more like a railway marshalling yard
rather than a dockyard. But commercial work is only about a quarter of the
total.
'Without the nuclear work we would be going below the critical mass for a
facility of this size,' says Mr Mike Leece, managing director of Devonport
Management Limited, The Devonport yard. This contains a messy array of
buildings from various stages of its long history and covers 300 acres, much
bigger than Rosyth. It has been on a crisis footing for the past 18 months.
Rosyth, which has been building its new facility since 1987, was initially
the natural choice for a reduced submarine programme. It was the only yard
to have refitted ballistic-missile boats. In April last year, Devonport made
an unsolicited bid to provide rival facilities by converting old battleship
docks, big enough to house the Trident submarines. It says this would limit
capital costs to Pounds 170m, well below the cost of completing the works at
Rosyth. By enabling Devonport to operate at optimum levels, it would save
millions of pounds a year on the cost of refitting surface ships.
Without the submarines, it expects employment would fall to about 1,000,
with little security. If it closed, the logic of having a big naval base on
the same site would also be undermined. Studies indicate that more than
22,000 jobs in the region could be lost.
But if Devonport got its way, Mr Smith is convinced there would be no room
for another yard. 'We would end up sooner or later shutting Rosyth,' he
says.
Rosyth has had an unsteady history. Built as a specialist refit yard before
the first world war, it was closed between the wars. The adjacent naval
base, from which only minor warships are expected to operate in future,
provides very little of the dockyard's work.
The race for survival is bringing out increasingly dirty tactics. Rosyth's
managers make dark hints about nuclear safety risks at Devonport; a study
commissioned by Devonport questions the wisdom of relying on Scotland,
drawing comparisons with Russia and Ukraine.
Faced with Devonport's challenge, Rosyth scrapped plans for a grandiose
covered dock and is offering to complete a simpler project for a fixed price
of Pounds 267m. It envisages a new consortium which it says would be able to
keep both dockyards going, employing some 3,500 at each.
Mr Smith believes the yard's late campaign may have brought it back from the
brink. He is counting on government reluctance to contemplate 'another
Ravenscraig' (the Lanarkshire steel complex, the closure of which was
announced in January), and the temptation of opting for the least damage to
the dockyard communities. If he is wrong, Rosyth will literally be staring
at a hole in the ground.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921027

