FT922-4229

FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and the Family: Bond market turmoil


   By SARA WEBB


MANY European financial markets were thrown into a state of confusion this
week by Denmark's vote against the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty on
closer European integration.
Tuesday's referendum result - showing a slim majority against ratifying the
treaty - sent some of the high-yielding government bond markets reeling,
particularly the gilts market, and the Spanish, Italian, French and Ecu bond
markets. The UK, German and French stock markets also reacted negatively to
the news, falling back initially although economists say the reaction was
based more on the initial shock than a measured response. Many investors
face even more confusion when choosing European bonds and equities.
The sharp fall in the European bond markets stems from the fact that hopes
of a falling inflation rate and lower interest rates have been dashed, at
least temporarily.
The higher-yielding European bond markets attracted money from investors
because of the convergence theory: investors expected economic and monetary
union to force inflation and interest rates in Europe to fall to the levels
seen in Germany. Since bond prices rise as interest rates fall, investors
stood to make substantial capital gains in those countries where interest
rates were expected to fall towards German levels.
However, Denmark's vote has thrown the bond markets into confusion. Those
investors who hold European government bonds either directly or indirectly -
via a global fixed income fund - will have seen a sharp fall in bond prices
this week and some of the markets could drop further.
The main beneficiary of the uncertainty has been Germany: investors rushed
to the safety of the D-mark and German government bond prices showed a
modest rise after the referendum result. For the time being, many economists
feel that the only European government bonds which they can safely recommend
are those in the D-mark bloc, in other words, German, Dutch and Belgian
bonds.
While both the French and the UK government bond markets suffered sharp
falls this week, economists point out that these markets should see some
signs of recovery. The problem is that France has now decided to hold its
own referendum on Maastricht, and this could unsettle the French bond market
in future.
The traditionally high-yielding markets such as Italy and Spain will appear
far less attractive to investors especially if the governments in these
countries come under less pressure to meet convergence criteria.
Investors are also worried that Denmark's action could prompt a realignment
within the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System, with
higher-yielding currencies (such as the Italian lira and Spanish peseta)
facing a hidden devaluation.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920606

