FT924-5943

FT  24 NOV 92 / GPA in collateral offer to banks


   By ROBERT PESTON, Banking Editor


GPA, the aircraft leasing company, yesterday offered its banks fees of
around Dollars 20m (Pounds 13m) and improved collateral in return for
deferring up to Dollars 1bn of debt repayments for two years.
One of the 250 bankers, representing 100 banks, who attended yesterday's
meeting said: 'There was resignation among the banks that something has to
get done to put GPA on a firmer financial footing.'
Another banker praised GPA's directors, led by the chairman, Mr Tony Ryan,
for showing 'the right degree of humility and acknowledgement of the
mistakes of the past'.
The banks were asked to give a temporary waiver by December to a potential
breach of GPA's borrowing covenants. The deadline for agreement on debt
rescheduling and a permanent change in covenants is mid-January.
The company, which has total debts of Dollars 5bn including bank debts in
excess of Dollars 3bn, needs a two-thirds majority of the banks - measured
by value of loans - for the borrowing changes. However, Mr Maurice Foley,
GPA's deputy chairman, said: 'We don't want to win by scrambling to victory
by just one vote. We want unanimity.'
Though GPA has offered Dollars 20m of fees, one banker said there were
'bound to be arguments that the fees should be higher'.
Some banks are disappointed by GPA's decision not to ask for any sacrifices
from the providers of Dollars 1.5bn of unsecured debt through an assortment
of capital market instruments, such as bonds and medium-term notes.
GPA argued that its future viability depends on its ability to tap the
capital markets which would be impossible if bondholders were alienated.
GPA gave the banks forecasts that cashflow should meet interest payments
over the coming two years, but not its commitment to buy Dollars 3.5bn of
aircraft over the same period. Bankers estimate that GPA could, however,
raise Dollars 2bn from the sale of leases and bonds backed by leases called
ALPS. If manufacturers refuse to defer or cancel some orders, bankers said
they would build conditions into covenants to force the company to ask their
permission each time it bought an aircraft.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921124

