FT923-15613

FT  01 JUL 92 / Algerian rulers seek successor to Boudiaf


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   ALGIERS


ALGERIA'S ruling authorities were in crisis talks yesterday in an attempt to
select a new leader to succeed Mr Mohamed Boudiaf, the head of state who was
assassinated on Monday.
As the ruling High State Council met in permanent session, the state-run
television station continued its news blackout with non-stop broadcasts of
chants from the Koran.
According to a government official, a decision on a new leader could come in
the next few days.
General Khaled Nezzar, the defence minister and most influential figure on
the council, is an obvious candidate to succeed Mr Boudiaf as head of state.
However, the council might choose a civilian to deflect criticism of the
military grip on the country.
Meanwhile, the search for Mr Boudiaf's killers widened. The identity of
organisers of the attack, initially suspected to be the fundamentalist
Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), remained a mystery.
After confused reports, it was confirmed that one of the attackers was shot
dead by Mr Boudiaf's bodyguards immediately following the assassination.
Security forces were yesterday questioning another suspect.
The population of Algiers reacted calmly to the attack on Mr Boudiaf, during
which about 40 other people are believed to have been injured, and the
forces of order kept a discreet presence on the streets.
The FIS is seen as having had strong motives to retaliate against the
government for its banning in March and for the imprisonment of thousands of
its members in desert camps. The authorities have also put seven of the
movement's senior members on trial for alleged crimes against the safety of
the state.
Several other influential groups also held grievances against Mr Boudiaf,
who made many enemies after being asked in January to take the leadership
after 28 years in exile.
He replaced President Chadli Bendjedid, who resigned in January after the
authorities cancelled Algeria's first multi-party elections which the FIS
was set to win.
said to believe that Mr Boudiaf's wish to hold a presidential election
before the end of the year was a dangerously fast return to democracy so
soon after the disaster of the last poll. The attack took place in the
eastern city of Annaba. It was only Mr Boudiaf's second trip outside the
capital since taking office.
Mr Boudiaf is expected to be buried alongside other national figures in Ain
Nadja cemetery, just outside Algiers.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

