FT921-15221

FT  11 JAN 92 / Finance & The Family (Briefcase): When do share offers
warrant a tax charge?


THE Williams offer (three for 20 plus 10 per share cash) for my Racal
Electronic Ordinary states:
'a holder of Racal Elect Ord will, to the extent that he receives cash
consideration, be treated as making a disposal for the purposes of UK tax on
capital gains and may be liable to tax as a result'.
I presume therefore that the share exchange part of the offer is not liable
for CGT.
The Hanson offer (90p cash plus warrants to the value of Pounds 33.5p) for
my Beazer ordinary states:
'The receipt of cash or warrants will constitute a disposal for the purposes
of UK taxation of capital gains and may give rise to a gain or loss for the
purposes of such taxation. Such a gain or loss would arise where the cash
(together with the market value of the warrants) differ from the cost of
their Beazer Ordinary and any under allowance on such cost.'
Why in the Williams offer is only the cash element liable for CGT but in the
Hanson offer the whole value, cash and warrants is liable?
Where warrants are issued on a takeover, they sometimes rank like shares for
rollover and sometimes they do not. It all depends upon what else was
offered at the time. An offer of simply warrants, or simply cash and
warrants, will produce a deemed disposal for a consideration equal to the
quarter-up market value of the warrants (or, in the second case, that market
value plus the cash). On the other hand, if there is a loan-note alternative
to the cash, for example, the warrants will generally be eligible for
rollover like shares, because section 139 of the Capital Gains Tax Act 1979
says:
'(1) if a quoted option to subscribe for shares in a company is dealt in (on
the stock exchange where it is quoted) within three months after the taking
effect, with respect to the company granting the option, of any
reorganisation, reduction, conversion or amalgamation to which Chapter II of
Part IV above applies, or within such longer period as the Board may by
notice in writing allow - (a) the option shall, for the purposes of the said
Chapter II (under which a holding prior to the reorganisation or reduction
of capital, conversion or amalgamation is to be treated as the same as the
resulting new holding) be regarded as the shares which could be acquired by
exercising the option . . .'
So far as we are aware, nobody has ever produced a convincing explanation
for this arbitrary distinction. As the rule has remained unchanged since
1971, however, it clearly has the support of MPs in all parts of the House.
Before asking your MP for clarification of the purpose behind this odd piece
of tax law, you may like to ask your tax office for the free pamphlets CGT13
(The indexation allowance for quoted shares) and CGT14 (Capital Gains Tax:
an introduction).
The House of Commons postcode is SW1A 0AA.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920111

