FT922-13312

FT  13 APR 92 / Election 1992: EC presents foreign policy challenge


   By DAVID MARSH, European Editor


MR JOHN Major's greatest foreign policy challenge during the next five years
will be to turn relations with the European Community into a source of
opportunity, rather than a threat to British interests.
By returning to power with a solid mandate at a time when governments in the
other three main EC countries - Germany, France and Italy  - are looking
shaky, Mr Major has been dealt a strong hand.
The move towards a 'federal' Europe - attacked by Mr Major during his
election campaign - has been dealt a severe blow during recent weeks, as
some of the compromises agreed at last December's Maastricht summit have
started to come unstuck.
Senior British ministers believe that the Maastricht timetable towards
monetary union has been slowed by Germany's post-unity difficulties. German
officials are now talking of the possibility that Germany may fail to meet
the economic performance targets laid down as criteria for movement to a
single European currency in 1996-97.
Mr Major's trump card is likely to be his friendship with Mr Helmut Kohl,
the German chancellor. Although he is not ill-disposed towards Mr Neil
Kinnock, Mr Kohl showed a clear preference for Mr Major remaining in office.
Germany's waning enthusiasm for rapid moves towards European union is likely
to create more room for common ground between London and Bonn. Britain hopes
to stage a summit meeting with the German government in June, shortly before
the UK takes over the presidency of the EC.
The prime minister expects to devote considerable attention during the
British presidency to the question of widening the Community. Sweden, in
particular, is looking to Britain for a lead to advance its hopes for EC
membership.
Mr Major is also expected to arrange soon a meeting with Mr Pierre
Beregovoy, the new French prime minister. The two already know each other
from their previous meetings as finance ministers. Mr Major respects Mr
Beregovoy's pragmatism, and has noted with satisfaction his introduction of
tax cuts to try to get the French economy moving.
While the Franco-German relationship remains the key bilateral partnership
in the EC, links between Paris and Bonn have been affected by
disillusionment since German reunification. British officials believe that
Mr Major may be in a strong position to vie for Chancellor Kohl's favours -
and possibly push his relationship with President Francois Mitterrand into
second place.
A crucial test will come during attempts to solve the impasse in the
negotiations on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) during the
next few weeks. Mr Major will use his influence with Chancellor Kohl to try
to work for a free-trade breakthrough. Here, Mr Kohl would risk alienating
France, which has opposed central elements of the proposed Gatt measures to
liberalise agriculture.
Defence is another area in which Britain will need to show imagination in
European policies. Hopes of genuine trilateral co-operation between Britain,
France and Germany in working out a new European security partnership have
so far foundered on the three countries' differing perceptions of their
national interests.
However, British officials are optimistic that Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the new
defence secretary, will strike up a constructive relationship with Mr Volker
Ruhe, the new German defence minister.
One British official yesterday described the Rifkind-Ruhe tandem as 'made in
heaven'. The simultaneous arrival of two younger generation defence
ministers offered a golden opportunity to break the European defence
impasse, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920413

