FT924-1059

FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: A rare soprano talent - Recital


   By DAVID MURRAY


MISS Upshaw's Wigmore recital on Thursday offered rare and complicated
pleasure. For one thing, her heart-tugging high soprano prompts epithets
like 'natural' and 'unaffected', when it is nothing so simple as that. She
is an enormously intelligent artist, and any native wood-notes wild that she
emits are no product of innocent spontaneity. For another, she plainly
chafes at the limits of the high-soprano soubrette repertoire (she is an
enchanting Despina, and I long to hear her Susanna): here, she took on
Schumann's op. 39 Liederkreis - the opulent Eichendorff cycle, not the
bleaker Heine (op. 24) - which might seem to favour her kind of voice only
in a few songs.
More of that below. She had begun with three of Haydn's English songs,
delivered with bright American vowels and as charmingly as expected.
Probably her pianist Gilbert Kalish made even more of an impression, finding
original dramatic force in every accompaniment. (Contemporary music fans
have long admired his recordings, but over here we know too little of his
Classical work.) After the interval, Miss Upshaw was touching, funny,
imaginative and precise in five of Mussorgsky's Nursery songs - what can she
possibly have got against the other two? - and revelled in a batch of the
most familiar Charles Ives songs, nicely varied.
They concluded with lullabies, all limpid and lovely: Montsalvatge,
Szymanowski, Falla, Brahms - and what may have been the first performance of
an unaccompanied and unpublished one that Debussy composed for a play. Miss
Upshaw remarked that it struck her as un-Debussyish, more like a troubadour
song; it struck me as a close cousin of Melisande's Act 3 ballad, but anyhow
she sculpted it beautifully. Somebody, somewhere, is surely pleading with
her to learn the role of Melisande, and Mozart's Constanze too.
As for the Liederkreis: the slight mismatch between the Upshaw timbre and
tessitura, and our conventional expectations of a ripe mezzo or baritone
sound, threw her unwinking insights into high relief. 'Die Stille' was
natural territory, of course - winsome staccato, with a touch of irony; but
where she might have just floated 'Mondnacht' exquisitely (she controls long
lines to perfection, and rhythmic periods too) her visionary purpose drew
tears. 'Waldesgesprach' became a genuinely chilling vignette. There were
dark, penetrating tremors in 'Zwielicht' and 'Im Walde' as well, the better
to set off the rapturous final outburst of 'Fruhlingsnacht'.
It is some time since I have heard any live performer - even those more
'naturally' suited to the music - attack every song in this cycle with such
searching fervour. In his lean, pointed way, Kalish matched her. More
generous pedal-cushion might have flattered her voice better, but his
forceful articulacy was of a piece with her laser-sharp intentions, clothed
though they were in an air of sweet simplicity. These American artists mean
serious business; they do not forget Old Europe, but they do not indulge it
either.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

921219

