FT924-6528

FT  20 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Cars, congestion and pollution


THE AUTUMN Statement's removal of car tax may help sell a few more cars, but
it also emphasises the contradictions between the UK's transport and
environmental policies. More cars mean both more congestion and more
pollution. The question is whether the two birds can be killed with one
policy stone or whether distinct instruments are required.
Official forecasts of UK emissions of carbon dioxide, one of the gases
thought to cause global warming, range from an 18 to a 78 per cent increase
over 1990 levels by 2020, at least in the absence of new environmental
curbs. If present trends are extrapolated, the volume of traffic on the
roads will also rise by two and a half times in the next 30 years. These
developments are related, since emissions from transport are the fastest
growing category in all forecasts.
Traffic was already mainly responsible for the 30 per cent rise in carbon
monoxide emissions during the 1980s. Traffic also doubled the emissions of
black smoke over the same period. The introduction of catalytic converters
on new cars from next year will begin to curb the emission of those
unpleasant gases. But converters work properly only on hot engines, while
most car journeys are shorter than five miles. Converters will also fail to
reduce emissions of carbon dioxide. Failure to change the transport trend
therefore threatens the UK's ability to meet internationally agreed
environmental targets, which require 'greenhouse gases' to be back to 1990
levels by 2000.
Marginal cost
Growth in the private use of motor vehicles is so high partly because of the
underlying increase in demand, partly because of unwillingness to provide
alternatives and partly because of the failure to charge properly for road
use. Once a motorist has paid for a car, taxed and insured it, the marginal
cost of driving is little more than the price of the fuel and the parking.
In consequence people drive too much.
The UK government's most publicised proposal for meeting the global warming
targets is a tax on energy and on its carbon content. But the European
Commission has calculated that its proposed tax of Dollars 10 a barrel of
oil or oil equivalent would add only 6 per cent to the price of a gallon of
petrol and 9.6 per cent to diesel, not enough to make any difference to
demand.
A far higher increase in the marginal cost would be needed if traffic
volumes were to be restrained. The simplest tool would be a higher tax on
fuel. It would be an unpopular measure, but introduced in stages - with the
proceeds returned, perhaps through lower value added tax - it might be
politically achievable. It would work by discouraging driving and also by
making the vehicle fleet more fuel efficient.
Blunt instrument
Higher taxes on fuel would tend to lower congestion. But they are a blunt
instrument for that purpose. Higher fuel taxes would also fail to provide
any incentive to the private sector to build the new private toll roads that
the government desires. Thus road pricing, suggested this week by Mr John
MacGregor, the transport secretary, has an important role to play.
Road pricing and higher fuel prices are logically distinct instruments
addressed at different targets. But they should be mutually supporting.
Moreover, in practice, comprehensive road pricing is not something for
tomorrow or even for the day after, while a move towards higher fuel prices
can be. Tolls on trunk roads can also be introduced relatively soon, along
with trial road pricing in cities, before the introduction of more
comprehensive road pricing schemes, perhaps early in the next century. In
the meantime there is always the possibility of higher taxes on inner-city
parking.
Any attempt to tackle the problems caused by motor vehicles will be
politically unpopular. This is certainly true of higher fuel prices and road
pricing, both of which are likely to be part of the solution. But a survey
of attitudes in the European Community, published yesterday, suggests
recognition by the average Briton of the environmental threat posed by
traffic. The government needs to educate the public on the painful measures
required if its vague concerns are to be dealt with effectively.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921120

