FT924-11403

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (9): Insurers face surprising turmoil -
Germany's insurance industry is the largest in Europe with premiums of
DM168bn last year


   By DAVID WALLER


   FOR decades, Germany's big insurance companies


dominated by the Allianz colossus - have enjoyed good profits and have
benefited from relative immunity from competition.
But in the space of a couple of years, competition has intensified and
German insurers - facing uncharacteristic turmoil - have joined the ranks of
other insurance companies around the world which rely on investment business
to make a profit.
A turning point - for the perceptions of investors in the German insurance
industry - came in late July when Allianz, the Munich-based insurance giant
announced an underwriting loss of DM1.78bn for 1991, compared to a profit of
DM182m for the previous year. This was worse than expected and the shares
fell by 3 per cent on the day of the press conference. But later that week
the Deutsche Bank's research arm questioned Allianz's accounting for its
east German acquisition and the shares fell further.
In total, the Allianz share price has fallen by a quarter since the
beginning of June. The company has the largest market capitalisation on the
German stock market, accounting for more than 10 per cent of DAX 30-index of
large companies, and its poor performance has helped drag the market as a
whole down by 16 per cent in the third quarter of the year.
Disillusion with Allianz is largely due to the problems the company is
having with two recent acquisitions: of Deutsche Versicherungs, the former
east German state monopoly acquired for DM711m and Fireman's Fund, the US
insurer bought in 1990.
Another factor is the changing shape of the German market as a whole. By
1994, a series of European Community insurance directives must be
implemented in member-states. In Germany, the effect of the directives will
be to introduce price competition into a number of hitherto protected - and
highly profitable sectors of the market, predominantly in the personal
sector .
In theory, this should open the German market to competition from non-German
insurers, including the British who are reputed to have the best designed
products in Europe.
So far, the only interest shown by foreign companies is from the French: the
Victoire subsidiary of the Suez French financial and industrial group took
control of Colonia - one of Germany's largest insurance groups - in 1989 and
negotiations are underway to sell the stake on to Union des Assurances de
Paris, another French group.
More recently, Assurances Generales de France (AGF), another large French
group, bought up a 25 per cent stake in Aachener und Munchener Beteiligungs
(AMB), Germany's second largest insurance group. After a ferocious battle,
the French company earlier this year won the right to have the full voting
rights attached to its stake and boardroom representation at the German
company, whilst AMB's former chief executive was obliged to resign.
In practice, foreign companies will find it difficult to enter the German
market. Competition will intensify between domestic institutions which have
hitherto not had to compete with one another on price, at least not in
personal business sectors of the market. Where there has been price
competition, for example in industrial risks markets, losses have been steep
for a number of years. Added impetus to competition will come from the
banking sector. For decades, banks have operated marketing agreements with
insurance companies but their engagement in the market has intensified in
the last 18 months. Within this time, Allianz has emerged as a 22.3 per cent
shareholder in Dresdner Bank, Germany's second biggest bank - and Deutsche
Bank has this summer made two big investments in the insurance market.
Deutsche bought a 30 per cent stake in Gerling, the largest independently
owned insurer in Germany and has - if market rumours are to be believed - an
option to buy the remaining stake. It also bought Deutscher Herold, an
insurance company specialising in private client business. The total outlay
could be as much as DM2bn, although the bank will not comment on the price.
The latest moves have given rise to stories about a 'battle of the giants,'
between the Allianz/Dresdner axis on the one hand, and
Deutsche/Herold/Gerling on the other.
Both sides dismiss this interpretation, Deutsche saying that the Herold
purchase is consistent with long-held plans to strengthen its investment
services for its private clients.
The rationale for the Gerling purchase is less clear, Deutsche saying that
it is an investment rather than an excursion into mainstream insurance
business. However, the bank has clearly not ruled out an all-out assault
into the industrial insurance market at a later date. This was implicitly
recognised by Germany's cartel authorities this September when they dropped
their insistence that Allianz should scale back its 22.3 per cent stake in
Dresdner, saying that competition was intensifying across the board in
Germany's insurance market.
Allianz and Deutsche, the two most powerful financial institutions in
Germany, show by their recent moves that the concept of 'allfinanz' -
co-operation between banks and insurance companies - has its followers in
Germany. They have not been discouraged by AMB's purchase of a majority
stake in the BfG Bank in 1987.
The bank was supposed to bring opportunities for cross-selling between
banking and insurance products. Instead, it has cost the parent insurer
nearly DM3bn as the bank encountered one serious problem after another. The
bank is on the verge of being sold to Credit Lyonnais of France as part of
the deal which has brought reconciliation between AMB and AGF.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921026

