FT921-12004

FT  29 JAN 92 / International Company News: Compaq hit by price competition


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


COMPAQ Computer, facing severe price competition in the personal computer
market, reported sharply lower income and revenue for 1991 as the company
embarked upon an overhaul of its product and distribution strategies.
Fourth-quarter net income of Dollars 67m, or 77 cents a share, was at the
high end of analysts' estimates but down 51 per cent from Dollars 135m, or
Dollars 1.50, in the same period a year ago. Compaq's fourth-quarter sales
declined by 13 per cent to Dollars 873m from Dollars 1bn last time.
For the full year, Compaq reported net income of Dollars 131m, or Dollars
1.49, down 71 per cent from Dollars 455m, or Dollars 5.12, in 1990. In the
third quarter, it took a Dollars 135m restructuring charge.
Revenues for the year were Dollars 3.3bn, a decrease of 9 per cent from
Dollars 3.6bn in the previous year.
Intense price competition, fuelled by poor economic conditions was the
largest cause of Compaq's lower revenues, the company said.
In October, Compaq realigned its top management and announced plans to
launch new low-cost products that will be more competitive.
These products will include 'low-end and mid-range personal computers in
each segment of the market, including desktops and portables,' said Mr
Benjamin Rosen, chairman. The new products will begin to emerge around
mid-year, he added.
Compaq is also planning new products aimed at the Japanese market.
'In the fourth quarter we made a good start on bringing the company's costs
into line with market conditions,' said Mr Rosen. 'Costs will be our number
one priority in 1992.'
Compaq is anticipating slow economic growth in the US and Europe in the year
ahead as well as relatively slow growth of about 5 to 8 per cent in the
personal computer market, Mr Rosen said. 'The market will continue to be
very competitive in terms of pricing,' he added.
Fourth-quarter gross margins improved from the previous quarter, but this
was largely a result of favourable exchange rate trends, the company
acknowledged.
Earlier this month, Compaq announced it had withdrawn from a technology
partnership with Silicon Graphics, a workstation manufacturer.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920129

