FT921-11768

FT  30 JAN 92 / UK Company News: BPCC pensioners thankful for their timely
escape


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


'MAXWELL knew I would never take any shit from him,' is how Mr John
Holloran, chief executive of BPCC, the printing group, describes his
relationship with the late chairman of MCC.
It was that very toughness that attracted Mr Robert Maxwell in the first
place when he saw Mr Holloran in action trying unsuccessfully to buy his old
employers, McCorquodale, the printers. McCorquodale was ultimately taken
over by Norton Opax.
Mr Holloran worked for Mr Maxwell for two years before putting together a
buy-out that did work - a Pounds 235m deal which in January 1989 took BPCC
out of MCC and Maxwell out of printing in the UK.
Some 4,000 members of the BPCC pension fund should be more than a little
grateful for Mr Holloran's persistence and robust attitude to his former
employer.
Nearly Pounds 100m owed to the BPCC pension scheme was successfully
transferred to the fund in late September and early October last year. The
money arrived safely at the very time when the Maxwell empire was under its
most extreme financial stress and when, it is now known, many millions were
missing from other Maxwell pension funds.
Under the buy-out agreement an initial Pounds 30m went into the BPCC pension
fund and a further Pounds 97m was due last autumn. When the money was
several weeks late Mr Holloran, who is chairman of the BPCC pension fund,
contacted Mr Maxwell and Pounds 50m arrived in late September while the
balance was paid in early October.
'All our pension money has been paid over. It's virtually all in alpha
shares, cash or gilts,' says Mr Holloran, who adds that considerably less
than Pounds 1m is in Mirror Group Newspapers or MCC shares.
MCC's stake in BPCC, which started out at 19.9 per cent in 1989, has now
fallen to 14 per cent because rights were not taken up.
Mr Holloran said that the collapse of the Maxwell empire has not affected
the BPCC business in any way apart from the irritation of having to deal
with constant rumours and questions.
The recession has hit the printing business hard but Mr Holloran said that
all 50 printing plants taken over from Maxwell were still operating,
although the workforce has fallen from 7,400 to 5,200.
In 1990 the company made pre-tax profits of Pounds 39m. Since then recession
has eroded margins, particularly in the company's web offset printing
businesses. It is however expected to have remained profitable in 1991.
But one of Mr Holloran's greatest assets at the moment, given the history of
the company, must be its fully funded pensions fund.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920130

