FT923-6633

FT  22 AUG 92 / Finance & the Family: Children who hold a bank to account -
Diary of a Private Investor


   By KEVIN GOLDSTEIN-JACKSON


LAST MONTH, my two daughters (aged 10 and seven) learned that their National
Westminster World Savers bank accounts had gone the same way as the dodo.
According to the colourful publication produced for them: 'Some World Savers
have been worried over the environmental costs of producing Our World
magazine, the Royal Mint medal and the plastic membership pack' - all of
which focused on assisting the World Wide Fund For Nature.
The bank also pointed out that 'many customers are aware that, more
recently, NatWest has developed a different account, First Reserve, with
several advantages over and above those offered by World Savers. In
particular, First Reserve offers rates of interest which rise to reflect
balances maintained and, even at the lowest balances, pay significantly more
than World Savers.' The bank recommended switching to First Reserve.
At that time, registered non-taxpayers like my daughters had been receiving
World Savers interest of only 3 per cent gross. First Reserve offered 4.25
per cent gross on amounts up to Pounds 99 with rates increasing in stages so
that, for example, accounts with Pounds 1,000 received 6.25 per cent.
NatWest deserves credit for writing to savers explaining its changes in
accounts. Too many banks and building societies allow savers to leave their
money in inappropriate accounts earning little (or no) interest when new and
much better ones are available.
My children feel, though, that banks and building societies should credit
youngsters with more intelligence. Most of the comics which accompany
accounts aimed at children are rather simple (although Our World magazine
was an exception). But why do banks and building societies not use such
publications to explain and promote a greater and more detailed knowledge of
savings and economics?
Why do they not mention how to buy shares and explain what share ownership
means - perhaps using a few well-known companies like Walt Disney and United
Biscuits? They could also explain what the bank does with their money. To
whom is it lent? How does the bank or building society make a profit?
Like many other savers, my children have become more sophisticated over the
years. While 'freebies' such as money boxes, comics and other incentives are
still very welcome, higher rates of interest are even more desirable in
these difficult economic times. So, if it comes to a choice between a
freebie and a good rate of interest, my children know where their priority
lies.
In any case, the number of accounts at building societies offering special
incentives to young savers seems to be decreasing rapidly. This could be due
to children keeping a tiny sum in them to qualify for the freebies but
placing larger sums in other accounts, sometimes with the same society.
The more children who do this, however, the quicker the demise of these
accounts is likely to be as it becomes uneconomic to operate millions of
accounts with very low balances and still provide freebies. Already, we have
seen the end of the Portman building society's Young Generation account,
with its free coloured pencils and other incentives, and the Chelsea Kids
account.
Some types of account still pay more interest to children than adults. While
children can no longer open a Chelsea Kids account, those with money in it
get better interest than an adult with an account of less than Pounds 1,000
at the same society.
Some accounts vary the interest depending upon the age of the child. The
Junior Barclay Plus account for under-11s pays less than a Barclay Plus
account for those between 11-16 (although if those young savers had Pounds
100 or more, they would be better off in an ordinary higher-rate deposit
account).
Many children receive money from grandparents. But sometimes this can give
rise to shocks. I know of one grandparent who had been paying Pounds 2 a
month by direct debit into TSB accounts for each of his grandchildren since
they were born.
When, last month, the father was asked to take control of the passbooks, he
discovered that the interest rate on those accounts was only 2.5 per cent -
and that it was possible to switch those accounts immediately to a First
Save account paying 7.25 per cent gross. He also found that tax had been
deducted from the interest.
I suspect there are millions of accounts like these where people are having
tax deducted unnecessarily from interest when their income is too low to
incur a tax liability.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920822

