FT923-15571

FT  01 JUL 92 / Cleansing the Elbe by data


   By ANDREW LAWRENCE


The River Elbe, which rises in Czechoslovakia and runs for more than 1,000
kilometres before it joins the North Sea near Hamburg, is one of the world's
most beautiful rivers. It is also one of the filthiest. Anyone unlucky
enough to fall in will swallow a dangerous cocktail of sewage, bacteria,
heavy metals, nitrates and chlorinated hydrocarbons.
A single dose of Elbe water may not be lethal, but much of the wildlife in
and around the river has been killed off. After years of talk, an
international project is at last under way to clean up the river and the
North Sea into which it runs. For the first time, the scientists involved
can draw on advanced data collection, computer analysis and measurement
techniques borrowed from the world of process manufacturing.
The initiative to clean up the Elbe began in 1985 when the countries
bordering the North Sea signed a treaty to halve pollution levels. While the
former West Germany was willing and able to tackle pollution in the 200
kilometres of river it controlled, the Czechoslovakian and East German
authorities, which controlled the remaining 900 kilometres, were
uncooperative and lacked resources. Now Germany is unified and the Czech
market economy stabilised the real work has started.
The first step was the formation of the International Commission for the
Protection of the Elbe (IKSE) in 1990. IKSE, backed by the Czech and German
governments and the European Commission, has concentrated on accurate
measurement. 'It's the first part of the battle. You have to have results
before you can build plants to clean the river up', says Rolf de Vries, a
project manager on secondment from computer supplier IBM.
As part of its main project labelled INES (Information Network Elbe
Sanitation), IKSE is now treating the river like a huge process plant.
Remote sensors, monitoring stations and laboratories are being established,
sending information back for consolidation and further analysis.
Such an elaborate network of stations would have been unthinkable five years
ago, but the cost of the technology has fallen and IBM has donated PS/2
notebook and desktop computers and RS/6000 Unix workstations worth DM 1m.
The 18 measuring stations are being installed along the banks of the Elbe or
on floating pontoons. A suction pump takes water and distributes it to
automatic instruments which measure its composition.
The results are stored by a local PS/2 personal computer, and forwarded
electronically every 24 hours, by modem, to laboratories or land stations.
The water quality data is then sent up through an electronic hierarchy.
Local results are transmitted to Hamburg and Prague for country analysis and
then forwarded to the IKSE Secretariat in Magdeburg for final analysis.
The detectors could reveal if a serious accident has occurred. For example,
the level of one chemical may exceed allowable levels or the water may be
less opaque than it should be. The station computer would send an alarm call
to the land offices. The river is never unguarded. If an alarm occurs
outside office hours, a standby service receives the alarm call. Duty
engineers then call into the station using notebook computers for more
information.
IKSE expects the benefits from the INES project to be enormous and
long-term. Ultimately, the data could be used to underpin every
anti-pollution activity, ranging from prevention, clean-up, legislation,
prosecution or the issuing of licences to discharge substances.
The project team hopes its methods will attract interest. An initiative to
clean up the River Oder (in Poland and Czechoslovakia) is underway, and IKSE
believes that those responsible for rivers across Europe and beyond could
make use of the methods and software involved.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920701

