FT921-12023

FT  29 JAN 92 / UK Company News: BET shares fall 17p as its broker cuts
forecasts


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


BET, the business services conglomerate, saw its shares tumble 13 per cent
to 153p in heavy trading before closing 17p down at 159p in the face of
downgradings by analysts including the group's broker.
Analysts have recently turned bearish about BET and forecasts of its
performance over the year to March have recently been lowered by a growing
number in the City.
Last week, UBS Phillips and Drew, Warburgs, James Capel and Robert Fleming
Securities all lowered their forecasts. UBS, which was considered a strong
supporter of BET, cut its forecast from Pounds 158m to Pounds 130m pre-tax
this year and from Pounds 170m to Pounds 140m for next year.
The sharp fall was said to have been triggered by the decision of Cazenove,
BET's broker, to follow the trend. Cazenove would not comment yesterday.
The decision by UBS to lower its forecast and reverse its position to a
seller of the shares was also noted on the market as another key factor.
Analysts expressed concern about the effect of continuing slow business
activity in the UK and the US on the group's services, plant and
construction operations. The expected slow pace of recovery of the UK
economy and BET's involvement in low end business services were not
encouraging.
A further concern was the possibility that BET would cut its dividend. Mr
Mark Shepperd at UBS said: 'I no longer believe that (the dividend) is
absolutely safe.'
With the lower forecasts, the dividend is likely to be uncovered for the
next two years. It would be in the company's own interests to think about
reducing its dividend to allow more cash to be invested in its own business,
Mr Shepperd added.
Last year when BET announced sharply lower first half profits, its shares
gained 5p to 212p despite a 44-point fall in the FT-SE Index. Investors had
been cheered at the time by the group's decision to maintain the interim
dividend at 4.25pand by its improvement in the generation of operating cash.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920129

