FT921-3835

FT  12 MAR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Utilities under pressure


   By COLIN MILLHAM, JOEL KIBAZO, STEVE THOMPSON and CHRISTOPHER PRICE


THE UTILITIES sectors of the markets were especially sensitive to worries
about the post-Budget political outlook. Dealers said they had had to
accommodate increasingly large selling orders in both the water and
electricity areas.
In the former sector the Footsie constituents were heavily sold, with
Anglian sliding 12 to 355p on 2m traded, North West Water 16 to 364p on
1.3m, Severn Trent 16 to 340p on 3.2m and Thames 13 to 361p on 1.1m.
Specialists pointed out, however, that there had been an element of
correction in the water sector, having outperformed the equity market in
recent months.
Mr Angelos Anastasiou, at Panmure Gordon, said water shares were delicately
poised ahead of the general election: 'Although I think the Tories will win
I still think, whatever the outcome of the election, there is more upside
than downside in the sector.'
The regional electricity issues closed marginally above the day's lows,
leaving the Electricity Package 97 down at Pounds 2723.
Oils upset
Enterprise Oil and Lasmo, the UK's two leading exploration and production (E
& P) stocks, led the oil sector lower as the market was affected by a bout
of nerves ahead of Enterprise's preliminary figures, due this morning.
Enterprise dropped 20 to 369p, some 5.7 per cent, while Lasmo retreated 12
to 196p, or around 6 per cent, with much of the activity concentrated in the
latter, where turnover expanded to a hefty 5.3m shares. Volume in Enterprise
was just short of 1m shares.
The nervousness surrounding Enterprise was said to have been focused on the
dividend, where there were rumours that one influential broker had cut his
forecast. The dividend stories were unfounded, but there remained
considerable unease about the size of the expected fall in Enterprise's net
income over the past year.
Mr John Toalster at Strauss Turnbull said he expected the E & P stocks to
trigger another downward lurch by the oil sector. 'The E & P's are the most
exposed to weak oil prices,' he added, 'and a slide by the E & P's will be
followed by BP and lastly by Shell.
BP, where there was evidence that the recent US support has dried up,
receded 5 1/2 to 263p on turnover of 12m. Shell lost 7 to 442p.
Forte active
Following its recent strong showing, further support for Forte pushed the
shares forward 3, before slipping to end a halfpenny down on the day at
231p. Turnover was a busy 2.6m shares.
The hotel group will today announce that a majority of holders of the
group's warrants - which were attached to an Pounds 83m maturing Eurobond -
had exercised them into 30.4m ordinary shares, providing Pounds 70m for the
company out of a potential Pounds 93m.
A spokesman for Forte said the company was 'very pleased' with the result.
For technical reasons, the deadline for exercising warrants may be extended
until tomorrow, and the spokesman said the figure could rise further.
Laporte lower
Chemicals group Laporte came under pressure as two brokers moved to a sell
stance on differing worries over share dilution and company performance.
Hoare Govett changed its position due to the technical nature of Laporte's
disposal of the 25 per cent stake held by Solvay, the Belgian chemicals
group. Around 9 per cent is due for an imminent share placing, while the
remainder is to be cancelled, and the broker believes this will lead to some
institutional shareholders becoming overweight on the stock. The shares fell
14 to 599p.
Credit Laing Lyonnais also moved to a sell, arguing that Laporte's stated
objective of a 15 per cent growth in pre-tax profits would not be realised,
mainly because of tight margins and its need to make acquisitions.
Kingfisher weak
Among stores, Kingfisher looked particularly weak, falling 28 to 503p after
County NatWest recommended selling the shares. County produced a strategic
reassessment, suggesting that it is very difficult to believe the company
will deliver above-average growth unless it makes a major acquisition.
Fears of a price war in the do-it-yourself market was seen as particularly
damaging for Kingfisher, which makes above-average profits from this sector.
Brewery issues, like stores, held a premium rating ahead of the Budget and
were liable to profit-taking as nervousness increased after the naming of
the general election day. Shares in the major brewers slipped, with
Allied-Lyons retreating 19 to 630p, Bass 21 to 552p, Grand Metropolitan 26
to 907p and Whitbread 'A' 13 to 431p.
A pegging of the Uniform Business Rate and a cut in the lowest rate at which
income tax is levied was seen as helpful for stores, but the sector already
had a premium rating and lost ground in general disappointment with the
Budget.
Analysts had doubts whether the chancellor had done enough 'to help the
Tories get back in' and therefore saw stores as particularly vulnerable to
profit-taking. Boots gave up 12 to 450p, Marks and Spencer 6 to 317p and WH
Smith 10 to 470p.
The Budget had few implications for the tobacco sector in spite of a rise of
13p in the price of 20 cigarettes. UK volume of Rothmans International
accounts for only 8 per cent of total group sales, but the shares fell 18 to
1050p.
Standard Chartered's excellent profits performance failed to prevent a slide
in the shares of 7 to 456p. Other banks were given a rougher ride by the
market, with Barclays finally 13 off at 350p.
Bespak, which makes valves for inhalers, jumped 14 to 525p as stock came
into the market following a recent rights issue.
Good two-way business in Fisons saw the shares off 4 at 367p in busy
turnover of 5.4m.
US sellers were prominent in a fall for Glaxo, adding to the market's
negative sentiment. The shares lost 20 to 777p.
Food group Hillsdown surprised the market with a rise of 10 per cent in its
full-year dividend to 8.8p, in spite of a decline in last year's profits to
Pounds 186.8m from Pounds 191.2m. The profit figures were slightly above
average market estimates of around Pounds 184m, and the shares put on 3 to
172p as the dividend announcement showed continued confidence in the
company's prospects.
Other food manufacturers followed the general downward trend, with Cadbury
Schweppes falling 7 to 457p and Unilever losing 11 to 939p.
BTR followed the market south, ending 13 down at 386p in spite of reporting
favourable figures slightly better than market expectations. Mr Jack Jones
at UBS Phillips & Drew was particularly encouraged by the 'positive
statement' accompanying the results and predicted 1992 profits of Pounds
1.065bn. Turnover was 4.8m.
P & O surrendered gains made earlier this week and fell 10 to 402p after the
Department of Trade and Industry vetoed a request from the company and
Sealink Stena to set up a joint cross-Channel service. The DTI said the link
would damage competition ahead of the Channel tunnel's opening.
Shares in Eurotunnel responded by firming a penny to 451p, making it one of
a handful of FT-SE 100 stocks to buck the market trend. Turnover was,
however, poor.
NFC was another transport stock favoured by investors. Some 2.6m shares were
traded as the stock gained 1 to 253p.
Simon Engineering experienced a volatile session. The shares initially rose
modestly as the market appreciated the company's maintained dividend in
spite of a 50 per cent profits setback to Pounds 18.3m. But fears for the
1992 dividend following a gloomy analysts' meeting surfaced and sent the
shares tumbling to end 34 down at 246p.
However, Mr Sandy Morris at County NatWest, who is forecasting 1992 profits
of Pounds 24m, believes a modest recovery should help the company maintain
the dividend.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1991/92
NEW HIGHS (60).
AMERICANS (4) Dun & Bradstreet, Honeywell, Morris (Ph), Sears Roebuck, BANKS
(2) HSBC, Standard Chartered, BREWERS & DISTILLERS (2) Greene King, Wolv. &
Dudley, BUILDING MATERIALS (3) Heywood Williams, Do. Cv. Prf., Titon,
BUSINESS SERVICES (2) Davis Service, Johnson Cleaners, CONGLOMERATES (1)
Jardine Hldgs., CONTRACTING & CONSTRUCTION (1) Maunders (J), ELECTRICALS (3)
China Light, Jones Stroud, Unidare, ELECTRONICS (3) ACT, Bowthorpe,
Microvitec, ENGINEERING GENERAL (3) Concentric, Fairey, Weir, FOOD
MANUFACTURING (1) Nichols (Vimto), FOOD RETAILING (1) Morrison (Wm) 5 1/4 pc
Prf., HEALTH & HOUSEHOLD (2) Bespak, Crown Eyeglass, HOTELS & LEISURE (1)
Mandarin Oriental, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (7) Beta Global Emrg. Mkts. Wrrnts.,
China & Eastern, Drayton Blue Chip Zero Prf., Pacific Assets, Do. Wrrnts.,
Second Market, Templeton Emrg. Mkts., MEDIA (1) News Corp., MISCELLANEOUS
(4) Calderburn, Cornwell Parker A, Relyon, Stag Furniture, MOTORS (7) BSG,
Dagenham Motors, Davenport Vernon, Lex Service, Pendragon, Sanderson Murray
& E, Vardy (Reg), OTHER FINANCIAL (3) BWD Secs., Jardine Strategic, Swire
Pacific A, OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (1) Servomex, STORES (1) Lloyds
Chemists, TEXTILES (3) Courtaulds Texts., Readicut, Sherwood Grp., TRANSPORT
(3) Cathay Pacific, NFC, Tibbett & Britten, MINES (1) MIM.
NEW LOWS (48).
BRITISH FUNDS (2) Ex. 13 1/2 pc 1992, Tr. 9pc 2012, BUILDING MATERIALS (1)
Ward Grp., BUSINESS SERVICES (1) Brook Service, CONGLOMERATES (1) Gieves,
CONTRACTING & CONSTRUCTION (2) Galliford, Kajima, ELECTRICALS (2) Fujitsu,
Toshiba, ELECTRONICS (1) Alphameric, ENGINEERING AEROSPACE (1) ML,
ENGINEERING GENERAL (3) Ransomes, Do. 8 1/4 pc Prf., Renold, HOTELS &
LEISURE (1) European Leis., INSURANCE BROKERS (1) Archer (AJ), INVESTMENT
TRUSTS (10) Drayton Blue Chip, Drayton Recovery, Electra, JF Asia Select
Wrrnts., JF Pacific Wrrnts. (Regd), River & Merc. Geared Inc., Scot. Natl.
Inc., Do. Cap., Sphere Inc., Venturi Cap., OIL & GAS (8) Alliance Res.,
Cairn Energy, Clyde Petrlm., Enterprise Oil, Globe Petrlm., Premier Cons.,
Teredo Petrlm., Triton Europe, OTHER FINANCIAL (1) King & Shaxson, PROPERTY
(10) Brit. Land (Jersey) 8 5/8 pc Cv. 2011, Capital & Counties, Derwent
Valley, Gt. Portland, MEPC, Merivale Moore, Micklegate, Regalian, Slough
Ests., Do. 8 1/4 pc Prf., TRANSPORT (2) All Nippon Airways, Manchester Ship
Canal, MINES (1) Leslie.
Other market statistics, including the FT-Actuaries Share Indices and London
Traded Options, Page 31.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

920312

