FT921-11866

FT  29 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: FT-SE Index clears the 2,550 hurdle


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


A NEGATIVE survey of busi-ness opinion from the Confederation of British
Industry proved no restraint for the UK stock market, which yesterday
bounded above the FT-SE 2,550 hurdle last seen in mid-November 1991. London
was helped at the close by a firm opening on Wall Street as it awaited the
State of the Union message from President Bush.
On the domestic front, the UK market continued to respond favourably to
political factors, with a firm pound at first encouraging hopes for a cut in
domestic interest rates ahead of the Budget and the UK general election
which is likely to follow soon after. Speculation over the re-election
prospects of Mr Major's government were enhanced by his announcement of
further plans for a Citizen's Charter.
Equities opened sharply higher, moving quickly above Footsie 2,550 in early
trading, but only to be trimmed back for a while when institutional demand
for shares proved relatively restrained. However, traders identified some
buying of UK equities by overseas and domestic funds.
By midsession, the stock market was less than four points above the Footsie
close of the previous night. But share prices resumed the upward path when
the Dow Industrial Average opened with a gain of 9 points in UK trading
hours.
The final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,552.0 for a gain on the day of
12.1 points. The index last closed above 2,550 on November 14, but has been
struggling to regain this level in recent days.
Trading volume increased from Monday's relatively low levels. The Seaq
system yesterday recorded volume of 551.8m shares, compared with 448.1m the
previous day. On Monday, customer, or retail, business in London equities
totalled only Pounds 821.4m, against daily totals in the Pounds 1.1bn area
in many recent sessions.
In contrast with the general appearance of the market, the blue chip
internationals recorded a somewhat ragged performance yesterday. Financial
issues gave back a few pence of their recent gains and the pharmaceutical
sector turned in a more mixed pattern than in recent weeks.
One of the chief talking points was the annual meeting of Hanson, where
London traders were attentive to Lord Hanson's statement that the group had
no intention of bidding for ICI. While there was little likelihood of the
Hanson group trying to sell its 2.82 per cent shareholding in ICI yesterday,
or in the near future, there were enough disappointed speculators around to
depress the share price of the UK's premier chemical group.
Other features were few and far between, with traders unconvinced by a rerun
of some old bid stories in the insurance sector. Although the London money
markets discouraged hopes for an early cut in base rates, there were some
gains among the building shares, which have been so badly hurt by the
prolonged period of high interest rates in the UK. Some consumer-orientated
stocks also responded to interest rate optimism.
The initial firmness on Wall Street made little impression on oil shares,
which moved narrowly around their overnight levels as the London market
closed for the day. Nor was there much response from Cadbury Schweppes or
Reckitt & Colman, both traditionally affected by transatlantic
considerations.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

920129

