FT922-4077

FT  08 JUN 92 / Arts: The RA's cupboard is full of surprises - Architecture


   By COLIN AMERY


Reviewing the Royal Academy's annual Summer Exhibition is one of the bench
marks for a critic of the architectural year. At a time when the rate of new
architectual commissions for architects has slowed down alarmingly because
of the recession, the RA exhibition provides a good opportunity to consider
the state of the art. The Academy this year has described the Summer
Exhibition as being about complexity. It is certainly not one of those shows
that eliminates contradictions in order to produce a rational and clear
statement about the visual arts.
Architecture and architects now plays a much a much more important part in
the Academy's activities and the placing of the architecture room in Gallery
VI means that it is right on the main axis from the Central Hall. The rich
mixture of models and drawings makes this room look like an intriguing
cupboard full to bursting with potential surprises. It seemed less
predictable than last year and highly catholic in its selection.
What are the acknowledged 'masters' showing this year? James Stirling
exhibits his competition entry for the Kyoto Centre in Japan, and shows once
again his particular drawing skill. Stirling remains an architect completely
outside the current architectural stylistic debate, pursuing his sculptural
approach to architecture that sees each new commission as a work of modern
art.
Sir Richard Rogers has strayed beyond the architecture room and you will
have to look in Gallery One to see his geometric study of the Court of Human
Rights that he is building in Strasbourg. This is a major commission for a
British architect and, as a rather simple exercise in basic geometry, it
looks as though it may be a building with a tough presence. Rogers continues
the European theme by showing his great model of his proposals for the
Potsdamer/Leipziger Platz in Berlin. This seems to be a somewhat
schizophrenic scheme: half wants to follow the formal street plan of the
city and half wants to impose giant and unfriendly buildings upon the
hapless inhabitants; because of the democratic nature of the German planning
system, it seems unlikely that that one architect will be allowed to impose
his own vision upon such a large slice of the new city. In his unsuccessful
competition entry for the new Inland Revenue headquarters in Nottingham,
Rogers vast elegant glass tents certainly showed considerable panache.
The third member of the trio of Academician 'masters', Sir Norman Foster,
remains, for me, the most disciplined and elegant of them all. He shows this
year his winning design for the new airport - the Chek Lap Kok Airport in
Hong Kong. The great relief model shows how clearly Foster grasps the
complexities of modern air transport and refines the problems they cause
down to a solution of distinction and style. We know from the completed
terminal at Stansted that he can produce a public space of great light and
beauty. The impressive thing about the Hong Kong airport is that it is the
corner stone of some ten major infrastructure projects for the Crown Colony.
British Government please copy at home . . . Can there be something wrong
when this trio of such prominent architects are all exhibiting as their
major work projects that are being built abroad ?
British architects do, however, exhibit some highly distinctive British
characteristics in the exhibition. There is nothing wrong with an affection
for history and it is always fascinating to examine some of the drawings
that accompany conservation activity. Proposals for the insertion of an art
gallery inside the shell of that neglected masterpiece, Alexander 'Greek'
Thompson's Caledonia Road Church in Glasgow, by Gillian McInnes may prompt
more action to save that splendid building. It is interesting to compare
this scheme with the plans exhibited by David Chipperfield for the major
alterations to that strangely Islamic looking First Church of Christ
Scientist in London's Sloane Terrace. Chipperfield's solution has a clarity
and boldness that should be commended. The detailed study for the
replacement of railings at Gibbs's great church of St. Mary-le-Strand in
London by Donald Insall reflect the care and craftmanship that is still
active in this country.
There are a few exhibits that really belong as much in the art galleries as
in the architecture room. Surely Ben Johnson's two paintings of European
interiors, the great vista orf the Cini Foundation and the view of part of
Chateau Margaux, would have raised the standard in the main painting
gallery, Gallery III? Michael Sandle's study for an architectural monument
also has a place to elevate the sculpture selection.
There is an underlying theme in the RA show that affects the artists as well
as the architects, and that is the increasingly visible concern with
landscape. The wonderful panoramic landscape painting by Michael Andrews and
Richard Long's Two Stones represent the the two poles of landscape art. In
the architecture room, the finely detailed drawings of Sir Geoffrey Jellicoe
for a classical garden, an Egyptian garden and an English Wiltshire garden
show the lasting influence of this old master of the land. Landscape is a
whole area that the British understand and are once again beginning to
reinterpret as a new art form. I detected some of this thinking in two works
very strongly: in Richard Reid's 'Greenville, an Urban Village' traditional
landscape and settlement patterns are reinterpreted; senand in Edward
Cullinan's design for the National Trust Visitors' Centre at Fountains Abbey
in Yorkshire the interweaving of the architecture, the landscape and the
siting promises to be a remarkable contribution to this encouraging marriage
of architecture and nature.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920608

