FT921-1115

FT  25 MAR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Market rallies after new opinion poll


   By STEVE THOMPSON


LONDON'S equity market danced to the tune of the latest opinion poll and
more than recaptured the ground lost on Monday, the FT-SE Index ending a
trading session of sharply increased turnover 17.7 higher at 2,458.7.
Shrugging aside worries and press comment about the trade deficit, which
again had little effect on sterling or gilts, share prices gave an immediate
and positive response to a Harris poll published in the Daily Express which
confounded most of the weekend political surveys.
Harris indicated a five-point lead for the Conservatives over Labour,
reversing evidence from the weekend polls which gave a clear lead to Labour.
In the background to a broadly based upturn in market sentiment was a series
of positive developments involving leading UK companies.
Among these were better than expected results from P & O, with figures from
the shipping to building group accompanied by a reorganisation of its joint
venture with Chelsfield.
The deal put an end to long-running nervousness among P & O shareholders
about the property venture. Sentiment in the shipping group's shares was
given a further fillip by news that Lord Sterling, P & O's chairman, had
spent around Pounds 1m in buying a block of 250,000 shares.
The market opened on a much brighter note with the Footsie 14.8 up, buoyed
by the overnight opinion poll indicating a lead for the Conservatives over
Labour. A bout of selling pressure, triggered by an opening discount on the
Footsie future to the cash market, saw prices falter, before resuming their
upward path over the lunch period.
The future remained at a discount to the underlying cash market for the rest
of the session. At least two programme trades were operated during the
morning period. The early afternoon saw another wave of local and overseas
buying in the market, driving shares further ahead and pushing the Footsie
to the day's high of 2,462.3, up 21.3 points.
Thereafter, intermittent bouts of profit-taking, and selling by marketmakers
unwilling to hold large lines of stock on their books ahead of the next
series of opinion polls, took the edge off the market, which ended about
four points below the day's best level.
There were suggestions around the market towards the close that the next
batch of opinion polls would show the Tory lead in the Harris poll to have
been no more than a blip.
Traders said one of the day's more encouraging features had been an
expansion in turnover. The Seaq system revealed volume of 493.2m shares,
well ahead of Monday's 370.6m.
Drug issues were among the market's outstanding performers, with Glaxo and
Wellcome prominent in the wake of keen support from US institutions.
Laporte, the chemicals group, rose strongly after announcing that it was
buying the US group Rockwood in a deal financed by the placing of a large
block of Laporte shares.
Following the redesign of the FT, Monday's yield on the FT-SE 100 Index,
normally carried in the markets panel on our front page, was omitted
yesterday. The figure was 5.06.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

920325

