FT923-15722

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Portugal's last-minute
victory - The City and the Single Market / Investment


   By SARA WEBB


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
BRITAIN may well feel it has been robbed of a victory. Shortly before
Portugal handed over the presidency of the EC to Britain, European Community
finance ministers reached an agreement on the key aspects of the Investment
Services Directive (ISD), paving the way for the creation of a
Community-wide market in financial services.
The breakthrough on Monday evening - after two years of wrangling - has
received a cautious welcome from City institutions. 'All that remains to be
achieved is some tidying up of the text . . . there is every prospect of the
Directive going through and its legal adoption will take place under the
British presidency of the EC,' said one Community official yesterday. The
three main points of the ISD which have been clarified are 'Transparency',
'Concentration' and 'Freedom of Access'.
Transparency - referring to the reporting of information about the price and
volume of securities traded - was the main stumbling block in the
negotiations, but a breakthrough was achieved on Monday evening with EC
members agreeing on the following conditions:
Publication at the beginning of each day's trading of the weighted average
price, highest price, lowest price, and volume traded on the market on the
previous day.
The highest and lowest prices, calculated over a rolling two-hour period,
which would be published every 20 minutes, with a delay of one hour.
Publication requirements could also be delayed or suspended to preserve the
anonymity of firms and investors dealing either in very large quantities or
in particularly illiquid stocks.
Many City institutions have been particularly concerned about the question
of Transparency. With the market-making or quote-driven system which
operates in the UK, dealers must be prepared to hold large blocks of shares:
revealing sensitive price and volume information to the market immediately
could put them at a disadvantage.
However, City institutions yesterday gave a cautious welcome to the
reporting delays which have been agreed. Progress was also made on the
question of 'Concentration', whereby investors will have the freedom to
choose which of the regulated financial markets to use, or whether to go
'off-market' - in other words, to buy or sell securities without going
through an exchange.
The final agreement concerned 'Freedom of Access' or the right of EC banks
to become members of the stock exchanges in other EC countries. The decision
should allow banks which conduct investment business to become members of
the stock exchanges in other countries without having to set up subsidiaries
in those countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920701

