FT924-6286

FT  21 NOV 92 / Gardening: Weeds in pots at Pounds 2 a time (each) - When
does a plant become a weed? When Robin Lane Fox decides to poison, burn or
uproot it


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


WISHFUL gardeners have already declared the season at an end; non-gardeners
are thankful that they never let it start; in my garden, it never seems to
stop. My strategy for the winter is simple: start early, and remain bent
double until the rain stops play. Recently, I have swung back in favour of
winter planting, because plants can be bought in winter from the open
ground, not the misleading shelter of a polythene tunnel. Besides planting,
there is so much to invent or alter that unless I start now, it will never
stop.
As in life, so in the garden, the worst problems are of one's own making.
Four years ago, I set out with virgin soil on which nothing was growing
except some harmless lawn turf. I made new borders; the mood was
adventurous; optimism still ran high. Surely there were under-rated winners
in all those catalogues which Weekend FT readers would love to try in the
1990s? Winners indeed there were, particularly among smaller plants like
campanulas (I recommend Tymonsii) and the lesser-known varieties of roses
bred in the 1950s (Mme Louis Laperriere is still in flower, a strong, deep
red).
Naturally there were also losers, not least the soft penstemons which died
en masse in the first sharp frost after I had praised them to the skies.
There were also plants which I had not expected: space invaders, whose
habits were utterly unmanageable. As a result, I am in an embarrassing
position: I have bought my own invasive weeds.
Why do nurserymen not give us more warning? Their descriptions are seductive
and I have fallen for them, from Verbena Gravetye Gem with a haze of violet
flowers in late summer to Achillea Perrys White which is said to be so much
better than the well-known form called The Pearl. Both of them run so badly
that they have had to be poisoned. So, in places, has a Geranium called
Thurstonianum, a rose bay willow herb with fragile white flowers, a
variegated groundholder which lost its variegation and an awful little
celandine with a well-deserved name of Brazen Hussy.
Why did I allow these invaders on to the place? Some of them were presents.
In the first year, they flourished. In the second year they ran wild and
have been a menace ever since. Before you buy an unknown performer, be
certain that it is not a weed. If in doubt, ask. Remember that a high price
is no guarantee of quality.
In many lists you will find a Korean Campanula called Takesimana. Nurserymen
praise the beauty of its spotted flowers, nobody explains that it runs wild
like Ladies Mantle, perhaps because many of them sell Ladies Mantle too, at
Pounds 1.80 a plant. Admittedly, Campanula Rapunculoides is even worse. All
the books of my childhood tried to deter readers from trying it, and so I
bought one, just to be sure. It cost about Pounds 2 and after six weeks had
developed white roots like fangs and had to be burnt before it started
jungle warfare.
I suspect that many nurserymen do not know what some of their plants will do
when mature. We all went wild for the white-flowered Lavatera Barnsley
before anyone explained that it had space-invasive qualities: surely the
first suppliers knew? I have developed my own suspicions: never trust
unknown soapwort, and above all avoid any highly-praised form of dock.
Catalogues call them rumex which may conceal their habit.
Three years ago, I bought an attractive dock in the pot because it had
silver leaves like shields. At the time, even The Plant Finder hesitated
about its existence: might Rumex Scutatus be the Weekend FT find of the
year.
Once again, it is a weed in disguise: if you see it, curse it because it
seeds and worst of all, puts out roots which are so fragile that you are
never rid of them entirely. The young leaf looks enchanting but like some
fatal beauty, the plant takes over your life. Stems sprawl everywhere;
rust-coloured flowers throw seeds in all directions and one innocent
pot-plant becomes a sprawling blanket, nearly a yard wide. I buried mine in
long grass but it is equal to the fight. It might make an alternative
ground-cover wherever you are bothered with buttercups.
These weeds, and others, cost good money, forcing us to wonder when a weed
becomes a weed, not a garden plant. I used to rally to the old liberal
definition, that a weed was a plant in the wrong place. It now seems to me
to be a wet, soggy definition.
Weeds are invaders with take-over tendencies which have to be fought to be
controlled. Whoever defined an enemy as a soldier in the wrong place?
Toughening my tactics, I am beginning this season of re-arrangement in a
pugnacious way. I am starting by poisoning plants which I bought less than
five years ago.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

921121

