FT923-10998

FT  28 JUL 92 / Fabius to be sued by Aids victims


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   PARIS


TWO FRENCH lawyers representing Aids victims yesterday began legal
proceedings against three former ministers, including Mr Laurent Fabius,
first secretary of the governing Socialist party, for alleged poisoning.
The move could provoke an embarrassing parliamentary debate over the
government's responsibility in the distribution of HIV-infected blood to
haemophiliacs, as a result of which 256 people have died in the past seven
years.
If the debate takes place, it is likely to happen in the run-up to the
sensitive September 20 referendum on European union, thus dealing another
blow to the government's unsuccessful attempts to avoid controversy.
The indictment, which also cites Ms Georgina Dufoix, former social affairs
minister, and Mr Edmond Herve, former junior health minister, arises from a
trial of four former senior health officials, charged with allowing
transfusions of HIV-infected blood in 1985.
French ministers cannot be brought to court directly to face charges linked
with the exercise of their jobs. They have to be impeached by both houses of
parliament.
First, examining magistrates have to decide whether there is a case to
answer and pass on the case to the public prosecutor. It will then be up to
Mr Michel Vauzelle, justice minister, to decide whether to pass the case to
parliament.
Given the huge public interest in this tragic trial, any official attempt to
bury the indictment would spark an uproar.
Mr Fabius, prime minister at the time, told the court last week that he
acted as quickly as possible to introduce obligatory screening of blood as
soon as he knew of the danger.
Mr Herve admitted he knew stocks were infected, but acted on experts' advice
in allowing them to be used until heat sterilisation became available.
Around 1,300 people have since become HIV positive, including nearly 45 per
cent of French haemophiliacs.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920728

