FT922-4558

FT  05 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: French voters 'will back treaty'


   By IAN DAVIDSON


   PARIS


THE FRENCH will vote two to one in favour of the Maastricht treaty in a
referendum, according to a newspaper poll yesterday.
The poll in the Parisien buttresses the government's decision to submit the
treaty for ratification in a referendum, in response to the Danish No vote.
Meanwhile the conservative opposition parties yesterday displayed deep
differences over the Maastricht treaty. In the Gaullist RPR party, General
Secretary Alain Juppe formulated an ambivalent and uneasy attitude to the
treaty, in an attempt to straddle the gulf between anti-Europeans and those
moderately pro-Europe in the RPR. But Mr Jacques Chirac, the leader of the
Gaullists, is so embarrassed by the intense conflict within the party that
he remained silent for the second day running.
However, the government is aware of the danger thatthe electorate could
decide to use the referendum to register a vote against an unpopular
president, rather than in favour of the treaty.
Paradoxically, President Mitterrand was yesterday urged to put his
presidency on the line in the referendum, by Mr Francois Bayrou,
secretary-general of the centre-right UDF. 'I do not see how the president
can fail to take personal responsibility (in the referendum),' he said. 'And
I say that all the more strongly because I intend to vote Yes.'
While Mr Mitterrand remains unpopular, Mr Pierre Beregovoy, his new prime
minister, has climbed steadily in the opinion polls since his appointment in
April. The latest rating in Figaro Magazine gives Mr Mitterrand a popularity
rating of only 37 per cent, compared with 60 per cent for Mr Beregovoy, an
unprecedented gap between president and prime minister.
The classic precedent for the government's misgivings was the referendum of
1969, when the voters turned down President de Gaulle's proposals for a
reform of the Senate, and the president was forced to resign. In that case,
the voters knew that the referendum was really just a pretext for a vote of
confidence in the president.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920605

