FT921-3833

FT  12 MAR 92 / Major calls April 9 poll with parties neck and neck: All
sides promise most elaborate, expensive and frenetic campaigns in British
politics


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR set the stage yesterday for the most open political contest
for a generation after asking the Queen to dissolve parliament for an April
9 general election.
The prime minister's confident prediction of a Conservative victory was
followed by an equally upbeat forecast from Mr Neil Kinnock that Labour is
set to return to power after 13 years.
The two main parties were joined by the Liberal Democrats in promising the
most elaborate, expensive and frenetic campaign ever seen in British
politics.
Speaking on the steps of 10 Downing Street, Mr Major said that a
'spectacular' Budget earlier this week had put in place the final plank in
his election platform.
The choice at the general election would be between a Conservative party
committed to low taxation, individual choice and greater independence and an
opposition tied to higher taxes for rich and poor and more trades union
power. 'That is a very clear decision indeed for the public to make and I
shall be inviting them to make it on April 9', he said.
Mr Kinnock declared that his party would 'make history' by securing the
biggest swing against an incumbent government since Mr Clement Attlee's
defeat of Mr Winston Churchill in 1945. He needs an 8 per cent swing to
overturn the 102-seat majority which Mrs Margaret Thatcher won for the
Tories in June 1987.
The Labour leader declared that 13 years of Conservative government had left
Britain deep in recession and debt. 'We have the policies, we have the team
and we have our offer to the British people of government by partnership in
building together the best for the people, the families, the businesses and
industries of our nation,' he said.
For the Liberal Democrats, Mr Paddy Ashdown set economic recovery and
constitutional reform at the heart of his programme. He warned of a 'crisis
of legitimacy' if the main parties tried to form a minority government in
the event of a hung parliament.
In private, senior figures on all sides agreed that this would be the first
time since 1974 that the outcome of the election would be decided during the
four campaign weeks.
Mr Major's announcement, taken after consultation with cabinet colleagues
and an audience with the Queen, marks him out as the first prime minister in
the post-war period who has voluntarily called an election while his party
is behind in the opinion polls.
The FT's weighted average of the latest six polls gives Labour a slight
lead, but points to a hung parliament, with the Conservatives holding
fractionally more seats than Labour.
Senior ministers drew comfort from a Gallup poll conducted for today's Daily
Telegraph which suggested more than two thirds of voters backed the tax cuts
in the Budget. It was less clear from the survey, however, that the package
would boost Conservative support on April 9.
The ministers said that the tax debate - alongside Mr Major's personal
popularity - would be at the centre of the government's election campaign.
But they would be accompanied by an 'imaginative' election manifesto
promising personal choice, ownership and opportunity.
Mr Major, who informed Mrs Thatcher in a personal letter of his decision,
was rewarded with the immediate public endorsement of his predecessor. She
said he was the 'right man' to continue her policies.
In Washington, Mr George Bush said Mr Major was 'a superb leader' but sought
to sidestep questions on whether it mattered to the US who was in power in
Britain. 'I expect the worst thing an American president could do would be
to try to intervene in an election in another country. Having said all that,
the respect I have for the prime minister knows no bounds,' he said.
Mr Kinnock will set out his prospectus in a speech to his party's Scottish
conference tomorrow. Yesterday he drew comfort from the City's lukewarm
response to the Budget, as Mr John Smith underlined Labour's opposition to
any tax reductions paid for by borrowing. He called instead for a 'Budget
for investment'.
That political fault line will be highlighted again when MPs vote on the
finance bill tomorrow. Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, is determined the
main measures, including the tax cuts, should become law.
Mr Smith, however, voiced confidence that he could counter the tax cuts with
a more attractive package when he presents his shadow Budget on Tuesday. He
said Labour would put the recession, training, health and education at the
centre of its campaign.
Mr Major chose April 9 as his favoured election date some weeks ago and
confirmed the decision in a weekend telephone conversation with Mr Chris
Patten, party chairman. But he decided to 'press the button' only at 8am
yesterday.
The government was last night negotiating with opposition parties on which
other outstanding legislation it might get through before dissolution on
Monday.
ELECTION '92
Labour poised to push 'time for a change'
Revolution that exploded into uncertainty
Lamont hopes to extend 20p lower tax band
Pages 12 and 13
Editorial Comment: An election that matters, Page 20
Joe Rogaly: Banking on mistrust, Page 21
Marketing, Page 14
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920312

