FT921-14262

FT  16 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Early gains reduced before the close


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


INTERNATIONAL and domestic factors turned more favourable for the UK stock
market yesterday and London followed the upward trend of other European
bourses. The 60-point jump by the Dow Industrial Average overnight, quickly
supported by a strong rise in the US dollar, drove the Footsie ahead by more
than 40 points in early trading. Later, however, UK stocks began to flag,
and when Wall Street opened the new session 13 Dow points down the early
Footsie gain was halved.
Most of the early advance reflected widespread marking up of share prices by
UK marketmakers. But other factors were also in the market's favour. The
latest UK public opinion poll indicated that the Conservative government
headed by Mr John Major was one point ahead of the Labour opposition, the
first time since last February that this poll has put the Tories ahead.
Also, Mr Major appeared to fuel speculation that the UK Budget in March may
include some tax-cutting measures.
The strength of the dollar boosted the international blue chip stocks, while
the pound's firmness against the D-Mark continued to soothe fears of a rise
in domestic interest rates. And once again, a strong premium on the March
futures contract on the FT-SE Index set the pace.
Against this background, the first half of the session was very optimistic
and some institutional buying was seen, in particular of the privatisation
stocks, which are influenced by the government's re-election prospects. The
electricity issues, regarded as threatened in the event of a Labour party
victory, responded strongly to the shift in public opinion polls.
Sellers appeared, however, when the market broke through the Footsie 2,550
mark, and share prices were already coming off their peaks before Wall
Street disappointed London by failing in early trading to extend the strong
advance of the previous session. The final reading showed the FT-SE Index at
2,537.1 for a gain of 20.8.
Trading volume increased sharply to 673.6m shares through the Seaq network,
compared with 519.7m on the previous day. Stock Exchange data disclosed that
customer, or retail, business remained strong on Tuesday, just topping the
Pounds 1bn level seen as the sign of a healthy and profitable stock market
in London. Traders said institutional business was good yesterday but warned
that the big funds were selling as well as buying. One leading UK-based
house said the day's trading balance was 'skewed towards the sell side'.
The Footsie was driven ahead by widespread gains in the dollar-orientated
stocks, with BAT Industries, Reuters and SmithKline Beecham all sharply
higher. The oil sector, where a setback last week dragged down the rest of
the internationals, continued to recover yesterday in response to a change
of view among UK based analysts.
Overall optimism brushed off on to the retail and building share sectors,
both of which would respond readily to any moves to stimulate the UK economy
by tax-cutting or similar measures.
A handful of weak spots in the market were seen as reactions to specific
situations. Lonrho, with trading news due shortly, ran into sellers, and
both Glaxo and Wellcome gave back some of recent gains as attention switched
elsewhere.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

920116

