FT933-12723

FT  22 JUL 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Sterling roller-coaster gains


THE POUND yesterday made erratic progress on the foreign exchanges, showing
early strength against both the dollar and the D-Mark which later proved
difficult to sustain.
During the morning, European currency traders seemed to shrug off worries
about today's Maastricht vote in the House of Commons, as sterling gained a
pfennig against the D-Mark, and more than a cent against the dollar. By the
end of trading, however, the UK currency had only built on these gains in
the case of the dollar, finishing 1.3 cents higher at Dollars 1.5145. Its
rise against the D-Mark had been trimmed to  3/4 pfennig at DM2.5725 by the
close.
Sterling's haphazard movement came as markets tried to weigh a new batch of
healthy domestic figures against the political trials facing the government
and the retreating prospect of German interest rate cuts. Retail sales rose
by 1.3 per cent in June compared with the previous month, while exports last
month climbed to their highest ever level. In the end, political instability
appeared to have been the least important factor.
The better than expected UK figures were decisive against the dollar, said
analysts, because the markets seem to be expecting quite poor economic
figures to come out of the US in the months ahead.
This would explain the dollar's fall the previous day, in spite of the
upbeat comments by the chairman of the Federal Reserve in his testimony
before congress on Tuesday. This would usually have boosted the US currency
but traders believe the desire to sell the dollar will continue.
Sterling's gains against the D-Mark were restrained by the fact that many
traders now think that unacceptable domestic monetary growth is going to
keep German interest rates high for a while longer.
Meanwhile, the currency markets did not appear to be too concerned about the
political uncertainties overshadowing British events.
'Foreign investors are tending to view the Maastricht vote the same way as a
number of MPs,' said Mr Julian Callow, international economist at Midland
Global Markets in London. 'They do not really understand the issue and are
just hoping it will all blow over. At the end of the day, most in the market
probably think Mr Major will win, but at the moment the pound is really only
reacting to economic news.'
The dollar also lost ground against the D-Mark, ending at DM1.6985, more
than a pfennig down on the day. The US currency finished New York trading at
DM1.6975.
The Bank of France announced that it had bought French francs, as traders
focused again on whether the French government can withstand an absence of
German interest rate cuts at next week's Bundesbank council meeting. The
French currency finished at FFr3.415 per D-Mark, a little above the previous
day's FFr3.417 close.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930722

