FT932-7091

FT  26 MAY 93 / Speyhawk calls in receivers


   By VANESSA HOULDER, Property Correspondent


SPEYHAWK, a property development company with debts of more than Pounds
350m, lost its two-year struggle for survival yesterday and became the
latest casualty of the recession in UK commercial property.
The company said it was going into receivership after the withdrawal of its
bankers' support. The appointment of Mr Peter Spratt and Mr Alan Barratt of
Price Waterhouse as receivers is expected to be confirmed today.
Speyhawk's 46 banks are likely to share losses of more than Pounds 150m,
based on an estimated value of its assets of Pounds 200m. The property
company's main lender was Barclays Bank, which made loans totalling about
Pounds 50m.
The receivership is another example of heavy losses inflicted on the banks
by the collapse of large property companies, which last year included
Mountleigh, Rosehaugh and Olympia & York, developer of Canary Wharf.
Speyhawk has been technically insolvent for well over a year. It continued
trading because it had won agreement in principle from its banks to
restructure its debts.
The change of heart by the banks followed a new assessment of the company's
position, which suggested the value of its assets, particularly in the City,
had fallen to a point where it was not feasible to support it. Mr Trevor
Osborne, Speyhawk's chairman, called the banks' decision a 'devastating
piece of news'.
The banks' action was seen in sections of the property market as signalling
an increased willingness to put companies in receivership to take advantage
of the first signs of recovery in the property market.
Barclays, however, said Speyhawk's receivership was an isolated case. 'We
don't want this to be seen as a sign of banks' impatience with property
companies,' it said. Moreover, Speyhawk's portfolio, much of it unlet, is
unlikely to be an early beneficiary of the improvement in the property
market's prospects.
The company had losses of Pounds 2.9m, Pounds 216.9m and Pounds 90m for the
three years to September 1992.
High-flier's debt burden, Page 21
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930526

