FT933-10251

FT  05 AUG 93 / Cut in housing grants confirmed


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


THE GOVERNMENT is to proceed with cuts in grants paid to housing
associations.
Confirmation of the move follows warnings that lower grants would force up
rents, push more tenants on to social security benefits, and make it harder
for associations to borrow on the capital markets.
The cut, which will apply from April next year, will reduce the average
government grant to housing associations from 67 per cent of the price of a
new home for rent to 62 per cent. The balance is raised on the capital
markets, which lend about Pounds 1bn a year to associations.
Sir George Young, the housing minister, said that he would also be changing
the rules for allocating housing association grant. Associations that bid
for funds at less than the 62 per cent rate would have priority.
Priority would also be given to associations which supplemented government
grants with funds from local authorities and other public bodies, and to
those that raised their own funds by selling more homes to tenants.
The Department of the Environment yesterday said the government's target of
153,000 additional housing association homes in the three years to April
1995 should still be exceeded comfortably.
The government originally planned to reduce the grant rate to 60 per cent,
with a further cut to 55 per cent in 1995. That produced an outcry among
housing associations, builders and lenders, and was opposed by the Commons
environment committee.
It was also believed to have been against the advice of the Housing
Corporation, the quango that distributes the grant to associations.
The lower grant rate may make it harder for associations to borrow against
the security of their new homes. Many lenders want cover of 1 1/2 times the
amount of the loan. Because tenanted homes are valued at about half of their
cost, it can be hard to borrow much more than 35 per cent of the value of
the new home without additional security.
Housing associations warned that rents would have to rise. 'A headline rate
of 62 per cent is better than 60 per cent,' said Mr Len Bishop, chief
executive of Hyde housing association, one of Britain's largest, and a
member of the Right to Build campaign which has been fighting the cut. 'But
it still creates an affordability problem,' he added.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930805

