FT932-13503

FT  23 APR 93 / UK may back US on bombing Serbs


   By DAVID WHITE and PHILIP STEPHENS


BRITAIN signalled yesterday that it was ready to give reluctant backing to a
move by the US administration to bomb Serbian supply lines in Bosnia or to
lift the international arms embargo on the Bosnian Moslems.
As Washington continued to weigh its responses to the latest Serbian
advances in the former Yugoslav province, senior British ministers said that
they now judged President Bill Clinton almost certain to announce new
measures against the Serbs.
The London government has drawn up detailed contingency plans to withdraw at
short notice its 2,400-strong contribution to the UN humanitarian effort if
the US stance brings an escalation in the fighting.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, told a cabinet meeting that it was
uncertain whether he would choose lifting the arms embargo or the threat of
air strikes. But ministers concluded that in either case it would be
impossible for Britain to stand out against such a move.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, said after talks in Washington
that the same debate over the right course of action was going on within US
government departments as in London and Paris. He said he was satisfied the
US attached a high priority to UN humanitarian operations, which he had
warned could be jeopardised by military action.
'It might be a price worth paying,' he said. Mr Rifkind was critical of
calls to lift the embargo on deliveries of arms to the Bosnian Moslems. 'You
are unleashing the dogs of war but you have no control over them. Other
forms of military action don't have that particular problem,' he said.
Meanwhile, Canadian UN troops in Srebrenica are prepared to use force to
protect the demilitarised zone, the commander of the UN Protection Force
(Unprofor) in former Yugoslavia said yesterday.
'The order is that the (troops) protect this demilitarised zone as
peacekeepers,' Lt Gen Lars-Eric Wahlgren, the Unprofor commander, said at a
news conference in Zagreb. 'That means that if somebody tries to enter it
with force, they will use force in self-defence.'
However, a UN official said the remarks by Gen Wahlgren did not imply the
troops were ready to defend the eastern Bosnian town if the ceasefire broke
down and Serb besiegers resumed shelling. 'We have no mandate, no ability
and no intention of defending Srebrenica by the use of force,' the official
said.
The 150-strong UN contingent consists of lightly-armed infantry soldiers
with thinly-armoured personnel carriers and a few trucks and jeeps. The
nearest reinforcements are Canadian and British soldiers at Tuzla, 60km away
and the other side of the confrontation line.
The ceasefire in Srebrenica which was agreed by the Bosnian Serbian and
Moslem military commanders last weekend was holding and an Unprofor
spokesman in Sarajevo said that UN troops had completed the destruction of
weapons handed in by the Moslem defenders of the town.
However, one of the commanders of the Serb besieging forces said that the
Moslems had surrendered 'a ridiculously small' quantity of 'mainly obsolete
and useless' arms.
In central Bosnia, Moslem and Croat forces, once allies in the struggle
against the Bosnian Serbs, continued to fight for territory, breaking a
brief ceasefire negotiated hours earlier.
Some 250 people, mainly civilians, have died in the Croat-Moslem clashes
over the past few days.
Moslem-controlled Sarajevo radio said Croat forces had captured the town of
Vares, 35km north of the Bosnian capital. It accused the Croats of shelling
Moslem positions around Kiseljak, to the west of Sarajevo.
The radio also said that 12 people died in the shelling of Gorazde over the
last 24 hours.
In western Croatia, one Czechoslovak peacekeeper was killed and two wounded
in a Croat attack on Gospic, amid mounting clashes between Croat and Serb
forces.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930423

