FT932-3408

FT  15 JUN 93 / Industrial groups join forces to bid on private rail
projects


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


THREE of Britain's biggest industrial groups are joining forces to bid for
some of the large privately financed rail projects being promoted by the UK
government.
General Electric Company yesterday announced that it is to take an equal
share in Eurorail with Trafalgar House, the construction, property, shipping
and hotel group, and BICC, the engineering and construction company.
The emergence of the grouping is one of the strongest indicators yet of
private sector enthusiasm for the government's attempts to attract private
funding into public infrastructure.
Eurorail said yesterday it would seek to work with government agencies in
the development of the Pounds 2.5bn Channel tunnel rail link, the Pounds 2bn
CrossRail project under London and a proposal to improve the main west coast
railway line between London and Glasgow, expected to cost at least Pounds
900m.
Lord Parkinson, a former Conservative transport secretary, was yesterday
appointed chairman of Eurorail. When in office, he rejected a joint bid by
BICC, Trafalgar House and British Rail in 1990 to build the proposed high
speed rail link between London and the Channel tunnel because the public
subsidy required by the companies was regarded as too high.
The government has recently adopted a more positive attitude towards joint
ventures between private and public sector interests investing in
infrastructure projects.
The addition of GEC to Eurorail will complement the engineering and
construction skills of Trafalgar House and BICC as well as providing access
to GEC's financial strength.
Lord Weinstock, GEC's managing director, has previously indicated the group
might be prepared to invest some of its cash reserves of nearly Pounds 2bn
in private infrastructure projects.
GEC owns 50 per cent of GEC Alsthom, the Anglo-French joint venture which
makes railway engines, rolling stock and power equipment.
Trafalgar House was part of the consortium which built the privately
financed toll road bridge across the River Thames at Dartford. BICC is part
of the consortium building the Barking Reach Power Station.
Minister to announce joint building ventures, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930615

