FT934-10293

FT  06 NOV 93 / Weinberg plans fresh assault on insurance industry


   By ALISON SMITH


SIR MARK WEINBERG, one of Britain's leading innovators in the sales of
financial products, is to have another attempt at shaking up the country's
insurance industry.
Sir Mark, the prime mover behind the successes of Abbey Life and Allied
Dunbar, yesterday announced the creation of a venture which aims to take
over existing life insurance companies and link with a bank or building
society to sell financial products to its customers.
The venture will be backed by St James's Place Capital, the investment
company run by Sir Mark and Lord Rothschild, Scottish Amicable, the mutual
life insurance company, and J Rothschild Assurance Holdings.
Scottish Amicable already has links with the group since it carries out
administration for J Rothschild Assurance, of which Sir Mark is also
chairman.
The venture plans to acquire life companies, stop selling new policies and
manage their funds more efficiently by streamlining the administration. It
will also seek to create a joint venture with a bank or building society,
taking a minority stake. The two elements of the business might eventually
be run separately.
Mr David Beynon, a long-time colleague of Sir Mark at Allied Dunbar, will be
chief executive of the project. He said yesterday that the UK life insurance
industry faced 'a tremendous amount of restructuring'.
By the end of the decade, he predicted, the number of companies would have
dropped by about one-third from the present 195.
Overcapacity is widely recognised as a problem and next year companies will
face new rules under which sales agents will have to give potential
customers more information about their products.
Traditional life companies are also facing growing competition from
'bancassurance', the sale of life insurance products through banks and
building societies.
The entry into the market of the new venture will add to the pressures which
these trends are already exerting to reduce costs. It should intensify
companies' efforts both to retain existing customers and attract new ones by
cutting margins and developing a wider range of products.
Mr Beynon said there were some 20-25 life companies in the market, and that
he was 'looking actively' at eight as possible acquisitions.
He said existing policyholders would benefit from the closure of a fund,
since it no longer had to carry the costs of attracting new business, such
as training and maintaining a large salesforce.
Mr Beynon resigned earlier this year as managing director of Midland Bank's
personal financial services division to head the new project. He had
previously worked for Sir Mark during 17 years at Allied Dunbar.
Sir Mark, 62, set up Abbey Life - one of the first companies to introduce
unit-linked assurance policies - in 1961. Ten years later, he founded Hambro
Life, which was subsequently renamed Allied Dunbar.
His links with Lord Rothschild led to his departure in 1990 from Allied
Dunbar after it was bought by BAT Industries. Lord Rothschild had
participated with Sir James Goldsmith and Mr Kerry Packer in an unsuccessful
bid for BAT.
In 1991, Sir Mark helped to set up J Rothschild Assurance, to which he
brought some of his former colleagues from Allied Dunbar.
Background, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931106

