FT932-222

FT  30 JUN 93 / Output down, joblessness up in Japan


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


A SHARP drop in Japan's industrial output last month and a marked rise in
unemployment have cast doubt on hopes that the Japanese economy is bottoming
out after its two-year decline.
Figures published yesterday suggest a pick-up in economic activity in the
first three months of this year may have been short-lived.
The downturn in industrial production last March was expected but, if it
continues this month, the Bank of Japan will come under increasing pressure
to cut official interest rates below their historical low of 2.5 per cent.
The Bank of Japan regards industrial production as one of the keys of the
economy's health. Industrial production in May fell 4 per cent from the same
month last year and 2.4 per cent from April, when it was down 2.5 per cent.
The falls in the last two months wipe out the slight increase in industrial
output in February and March, which were greeted as evidence that the
economy was starting to recover.
Most significantly, invent-ories rose 0.5 per cent in May after falling for
several months. The rise in inventories means production in June will be cut
in response.
The largest falls in industrial shipments were in transport equipment, down
8.4 per cent from April, general machinery, down 8.3 per cent, and precision
instruments, down 8 per cent.
Mr Geoffrey Barker, economist at Baring Securities in Tokyo, said: 'The June
and July industrial production data will be vital for the Bank of Japan's
policy.'
Unemployment meanwhile rose 0.2 per cent last month to 2.5 per cent, the
highest level since 1988. Employment growth has virtually stagnated.
Employment rose by 0.2 per cent to 65.27m.
The ratio of job offers from companies to the number of people seeking jobs
fell to 0.81, the lowest level since November 1987. The ratio means that for
every 100 people seeking jobs there was just 81 job openings.
New job offers were 18 per cent down in May the year before.
A further shake-out of labour is almost certain as Japanese companies cut
costs to restore their profits. The proportion of Japanese companies
reporting they have a surplus of labour, exceeded those reporting a shortage
for the first time for six years according to a labour ministry survey. The
survey of 2,334 companies found that 18 per cent thought they had excess
labour while 16 per cent reported a shortage.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930630

