FT932-3388

FT  15 JUN 93 / Morillon warns of 'catastrophe': Serbs increase pressure on
besieged Moslem town of Gorazde


   By LAURA SILBER


THE French commander of United Nations troops in Bosnia, General Philippe
Morillon, said last night he hoped a ceasefire between Moslems and Serbs
could be reached today to save the Moslem enclave of Gorazde from
'catastrophe'.
Bosnian Serb commanders said their troops were just 150 metres from Moslem
positions in Gorazde, which is a UN-proclaimed 'safe area' and the last
government stronghold in the once mostly Moslem east of the country.
As Serb forces pressed ahead with their three-week offensive,
Moslem-controlled radio said 69 people had been killed and dozens wounded in
the last 24 hours as Serbs poured in rocket and artillery fire. Radio
messages from Gorazde have been appealing for outside intervention to save
the town from the Serbs.
But in his statement on French TV Gen Morillon said a ceasefire needed to be
in place before UN forces could act. 'We will go back into Gorazde before
there is a catastrophe provided there is an agreement among parties to cease
hostilities,' he said.
Amateur radio operators in Gorazde called the besieged town a 'real hell
under constant attacks from Serbian multiple rocket launchers and grenades'.
'Everything is burning and the villages are being destroyed,' said one
report.
In an another move to consolidate their self-proclaimed state, Serb forces
set up checkpoints on the UN-controlled road from Sarajevo airport to the
capital. The Serb barricades violate a year-long UN agreement for an
international airlift to Sarajevo airport and the unhindered transport of
food and medical supplies on the airport road, a vital lifeline for the
380,000 people trapped in Sarajevo.
Serbs holding Croatia's Krajina enclave shelled the Adriatic coastal resort
town of Biograd yesterday, killing five people, Croatian officials said. The
attack coincided with rising tension between Croatia and the Krajina Serbs
over their plan to hold a referendum this weekend on merging the enclave
with Serb-held Bosnia as part of a 'Greater Serbia'.
In New York, a report to the Security Council recommended that the UN send
7,500 more troops, backed by air power, to Bosnia immediately to guard
civilians in six Moslem 'safe areas', including Gorazde. But the report, by
Secretary General Boutros Boutros Ghali, said 34,000 soldiers would be
needed if the enclaves were to be protected properly.
Earlier this month the Security Council called for more troops and air power
in the 'safe areas' and asked for a report on the subject.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930615

