FT932-3410

FT  15 JUN 93 / Venables not wanted at Spurs, Sugar says after ruling


   By JOHN MASON, Law Courts Correspondent


MR ALAN SUGAR, chairman of Tottenham Hotspur, last night sought to impose
his authority on the troubled football club after winning the first round of
his legal battle with Mr Terry Venables, whose dismissal as chief executive
was upheld by the High Court.
Speaking with some bitterness Mr Sugar said that he and his family had been
put through 'hell' by Mr Venables and that, in future, the north London club
would be run on 'correct' business lines.
As some fans threatened to boycott ticket sales and the club was warned that
several players might not renew their contracts, Mr Sugar said Mr Venables
had no future at Tottenham except in his role as a non-executive director.
We don't want him at the club,' said Mr Sugar, 'and if I have anything to do
with it, he's not coming back at all.'
Mr Sugar was speaking after a senior High Court judge rejected an attempt by
Mr Venables to extend the injunction preventing Mr Sugar and the Tottenham
board from sacking him as chief executive.
Hundreds of Spurs fans again demonstrated their support for Venables
cheering, clapping and chanting, 'we'll support you evermore', as he left
court.
Some supporters responded by threatening to starve Tottenham of ticket sales
in an attempt to force Mr Sugar to leave the club.
Mr Eric Hall, Mr Venables' commercial agent who also represents several
Spurs players, said after the hearing: 'I represent about 12 players at
Tottenham Hotspur and they've all told me in the last couple of days that
they certainly will put in for transfers and leave Tottenham Hotspur.'
Mr Sugar acknowledged that the battle between himself and Mr Venables over
control of Tottenham had damaged the club. However, he went on: 'Everyone
has forgotten that this is a company. What has happened is no different to
what happens every day in corporate life.'
Mr Venables insisted that he would pursue his court battle to force Mr Sugar
to sell him his 47 per cent share in the club. Mr Sugar he would fight that
move vigorously.
The legal battle between the two men will resume this autumn or early next
year. However, Sir Donald yesterday said this move would probably prove
'difficult' for Mr Venables. He ordered Mr Venables to pay Mr Sugar's legal
costs.
Mr Sugar said the search for Mr Venables' replacement would now begin but
this would not be a hurried 'cosmetic' process.
He said he would be talking to the existing team management duo of Mr Doug
Livermore and Mr Ray Clemence, as well as the rest of the players as soon as
they returned from vacation.
The judge said he was aware Venables was popular with fans and players. 'I
have seen 700 letters expressing support for him and dismay at the prospect
that he may leave,' he said.
Teddy Sheringham, the Tottenham striker, said he was shocked by the court
ruling. 'To be ousted when he felt on the threshold of something great is a
crying shame.'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930615

