FT932-13538

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (6): Not the bustling place it used to be -
Emma Tucker visits Cairo's stock exchange


   By EMMA TUCKER


CAIRO'S stock exchange is not the bustling place it used to be.
It was once the fifth busiest exchange in the world. Now it has been reduced
to a largely empty room, 13 telephones, one or two brokers and several
listless coffee waiters.
So few stocks are traded that a recent attempt by a group of academics to
construct an index came to nothing and on most days, Cairo's 16 brokers
average about two small trades each.
The casual atmosphere of the exchange - trading lasts for only two hours a
day - might be about to change.
Independent analysts believe that successful completion of the first round
of Egypt's IMF talks, some real progress with its privatisation programme
and implementation of the new capital markets law, could lead to a sharp
revival in Egypt's stock market.
'I think the potential in Egypt is so great, and the opportunity at the
moment so big, that enough people from the Arab world and from the West are
going to invest in Egypt to boost prices sufficiently,' says Mr Miles
Morland of Blakeney Management, a London based consultancy which looks at
and reports on emerging markets.
The death of the Cairo stock exchange began in the 1950s under President
Gamal Abdul Nasser. Although not all its listed companies were nationalised,
portfolios were, and the compensation given to shareholders was
significantly less than the value of their holdings. Mr Nassef Nazmy, a
broker who started work on the stock exchange as a jobber in the 1950s,
remembers nationalisation as a 'suffering time'.
But from his office in one of downtown Cairo's cavernous buildings he
reflects that the worst is over. 'We have just passed through the hardest
period,' he says. 'Egypt's elite abandoned investment in securities after
losing so much. Now we have to win back the confidence of their sons and
daughters.'
There is still a long way to go. Aside from the matter of whether or not
Egypt can complete the liberalisation of its economy, a number of technical
problems have to be tackled before the stock market can compete effectively
with other emerging markets.
The exchange itself looks little changed from the days when President
Nasser's socialist policies knocked the life out of it. Mr Fag El-Nour,
chairman of the Capital Markets Authority has said that a new electronic
stock exchange modelled on Singapore will replace the existing exchange, but
as yet dealing is laboriously old-fashioned. Prices are chalked on the wall,
and deals are relayed by a little bucket that dances above the heads of the
brokers.
Under the new law, however, there is nothing to stop an alternative stock
exchange opening. One Cairo-based consultant said it was open to question
whether the current exchange would survive.
Other groups are apparently investigating the possibility of setting up a
new centre. A workable index also has to be compiled. The last attempt
failed because it was heavily weighted towards those shares with the biggest
listed capital. As these never trade - they remain mostly under state
control - the index was meaningless and had to be scrapped.
Merchant bankers at Kidder Peabody in Cairo have compiled their own index
which tracks the movements of the smaller, more liquid companies: about 23.
In time they intend to publish its results, but preliminary research
suggests share prices rose by 30 per cent in the year to January, and has
chalked up a further 30 per cent rise since the beginning of the year.
In spite of the technical constraints facing the Egyptian market, it is a
difficult market for investors to ignore. 'So many of the ingredients that
led to stock market booms in Latin America and Asia are present in Egypt,'
says Mr Morland. 'Reverse capital flight, fiscal and monetary reform,
declining inflation, a growing economy and great potential foreign
interest.'
A Cairo-based analyst at an American Bank shares his optimism. 'The Egyptian
stock exchange will attract foreign investors,' he says. 'There is Gulf,
western and domestic interest in the local market.'
A further boost should come from the many private, closely-held Egyptian
companies which will turn to the stock exchange to raise capital, once the
new law is in place. This option was previously not available, and companies
were confined to borrowing money from banks.
According to Mr Morland, privatisation remains the key to developing the
market. He has estimated that with daily volume running at about Dollars 1m,
the liquidity does not exist to absorb potential demand if Egyptian Treasury
bill rates decline and money starts looking for an equity home - or if
foreign funds try to get a foothold in the market. 'Until privatisation
creates the new supply, there is simply not enough stock available for a
genuine market to develop,' he warns.
Besides privatisation, potential investors will be watching the progress
made with other structural changes, and the ability of the government to
contain recent outbursts of fundamentalist terrorism. While there is general
agreement that the Egyptian stock market offers a lucrative return in the
short-run, investors will need some convincing that they should stick around
for longer.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930422

