FT931-4130

FT  12 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Row on Europe upsets MPs' normal
service - The daily business of Westminster under strain


   By ALISON SMITH


THE behind-the-scenes relations between the government and the opposition
that keep the business of Westminster on the rails hit the buffer of
Maastricht this week.
The paper hats, the successive votes and the other disruptive antics of
Wednesday's proceedings - on matters completely unrelated to the treaty -
were a sign that the normal parliamentary arrangements between party whips
had broken down. The 'usual channels' were temporarily blocked.
Labour backbenchers' insistence on dragging MPs away from the dining tables
of Westminster to march through the voting lobbies was not about the
uncontroversial matters at issue, but was Labour's warning to the government
of how business would be conducted if it decided to make parliament sit
through the weekend on the Maastricht bill.
Tory recriminations yesterday about 'deplorable behaviour' underlined how
different it was from the normal run of business. In usual circumstances,
whatever the snarling across the chamber during debate, those who manage
parliamentary business have a close relationship.
It goes beyond the clubbability of getting on well with MPs of other parties
and reflects a recognition that political interests coincide more often than
publicly admitted.
Opposition spokesmen, like ministers, can see the advantage in not
prolonging some debates so that a sensitive issue is dealt with early in the
afternoon - in 'prime time' - rather than late at night when it will receive
much less media attention.
Party interests can even be served by different aspects of the same outcome.
A couple of hours of uproar in the Commons may be a price the government is
quite ready to pay to achieve its business. Each side can then try to
convince a sceptical press that it triumphed and its opponents were
embarrassed.
The front benches also agree that the Commons does not need to spend much
time on uncontentious matters which are of limited or specialist interest.
Thus Westminster processes much more legislation than is generally noticed,
as orders are approved en bloc, taken without debate, or referred to a
Commons committee where a few MPs give them rather more consideration.
As Wednesday's events showed, the disadvantage of this is that Commons
business can be derailed relatively easily if tempers unexpectedly fray or
an ambush is organised.
From the start, Maastricht has been somewhat outside the usual agreements
because Labour could not rule out hitting the government if the Tory rebels
brought it down.
Until now, however, it has been fairly self-contained. The government has
been able to get much of its legislation through the Commons already, and so
far has had to impose a 'guillotine' motion to cur-tail debate on only one
bill.
Wednesday's events may mark a watershed that changes all that. Within the
procedural rules but outside the parliamentary conventions is a rarely
explored area for troublemakers.
It could well become familiar territory before the Maastricht bill finally
reaches the statute book.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930312

