FT934-8354

FT  16 NOV 93 / Profitable British Steel warns on overcapacity


   By ANDREW BOLGER


BRITISH Steel yesterday reported a better than expected recovery in profits,
but warned that governments must stop subsidising overcapacity in the
European steel industry.
The company, which was privatised in 1988, made pre-tax profits of Pounds
27m in the six months to October 2, compared with a loss of Pounds 51m. It
also paid an interim dividend of 0.5p, having passed it last time. Turnover
slipped from Pounds 2.56bn to Pounds 2.45bn.
The group said UK demand recovered markedly in the first half, but this
largely reflected an increase in stock.
The underlying improvement in UK steel demand remained modest. In mainland
Europe markets were very depressed and no recovery was expected this year.
Mr Brian Moffat, chairman and chief executive, said: 'The company continues
to demonstrate its ability to deal with extremely difficult market
conditions, but the critical ingredient for a return to adequate
profitability and increased dividends remains the political will of
governments to end the proliferation of state subsidies.' The group said
progress on solving overcapacity and subsidies had been slow, particularly
regarding state-owned companies in Italy, Spain and Germany.
Mr Moffat said: 'While strenuous efforts are being made by the European
Commission to uphold existing restrictions on state aid, subsidies continue
and the Council of Ministers must now bring matters to a head to prevent
insolvent state-owned companies forcing some private sector producers out of
markets.'
British Steel has improved its performance by pushing through price
increases and cutting costs. The group workforce at the period end was
41,400, compared with 46,500 last time.
Capital expenditure fell from Pounds 110m to Pounds 42m, reflecting a
reduced programme focused on small schemes with quick paybacks. Cashflow of
Pounds 97m from operations helped cut debt by Pounds 20m to Pounds 62m,
giving gearing of 2 per cent.
Earnings per share were 1p, compared with a loss of 2.4p.
Lex, Page 22; London SE, Page 44

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931116

