FT933-10076

FT  06 AUG 93 / French bank privatisation upsets the secret liaisons: The
government has dominated banking with its ownership of 'les trois vieilles'


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


WHEN Banque Nationale de Paris, the bastion of France's state-controlled
banks, is privatised this autumn, the sale will mark the start of a new era,
not only for the bank, but for the French government's relationship with the
banking industry.
For decades the French government has dominated the banking sector mainly by
its ownership of the leading commercial banks - BNP, Societe Generale and
Credit Lyonnais, known as les trois vieilles, the 'three old ladies'. The
state has not only had direct influence over those banks - choosing their
chairmen and scrutinising strategy - but through them has indirectly
influenced developments across the industry.
Societe Generale was sold to the private sector by the last centre-right
administration in 1987. BNP will be the second of the three to be
privatised, with Credit Lyonnais scheduled for sale before the 1995
presidential elections. The sale of two, and eventually all three, of the
'old ladies' will dramatically diminish government influence over the
banking scene.
One of the most significant changes will be in the selection of senior
personnel. The government has traditionally appointed the chairmen of the
state-controlled banks. The candidates were invariably fonctionnaires, or
civil servants. The chairmen - Mr Michel Pebereau at BNP, MrMarc Vienot at
Societe Generale and Mr Jean-Yves Haberer at Credit Lyonnais - have all
worked at the treasury and ministers' private offices.
The choice of chairmen is intensely political. A change of government, or
the end of the chairmen's three-year contracts, triggers a game of musical
chairs. The new government has already replaced Mr Rene Thomas as chairman
of BNP with Mr Pebereau, who worked for conservative ministers earlier in
his career. Some financiers suspect the next victim may be Mr Haberer, who
was fired from Paribas by the conservatives in 1986 and appointed to Credit
Lyonnais by the Socialists.
After privatisation the banks' chairmen will be chosen by shareholders as at
any other private company. This should ensure that the big French banks are
no longer prey to sudden shifts in strategy. It should also make their
senior executives less vulnerable to political pressure over corporate
strategy and their role in economic policy.
The precise nature of the relationship between the French government and the
public sector banks is shrouded in secrecy. The banks claim they are
independent. Other financiers disagree. 'France is a country where banks
have traditionally been tools of the state,' says one Paris banker. 'There
are instances when ministers shout instructions down the telephone, but
mostly they don't need to. The government puts its own people in charge, who
know exactly what it wants them to do.'
One of the most sensitive areas is interest rates, specifically the degree
to which the government uses the state banks to control base rates. In
recent months, when the government has been anxious to keep rates low for
fear of aggravating the recession, BNP and Credit Lyonnais have led the rate
reductions, whereas the private banks, notably Societe Generale, have been
the first to raise them. The privatisation programme, which coincides with
the independence of the Bank of France, should mark the end of this
practice.
It should also be more difficult for the government to use the banks as
tools in industrial policy. The state banks have inherited large stakes in
other public sector companies as part of the regular reshuffles of the
government's industrial holdings.
However the tradition of the 'industrial bank' is so well-entrenched in
France that, even if the banks stop taking stakes in public sector
companies, they are likely to continue to invest in the private sector as
Societe Generale has done.
Similarly it will take a long time for the French banks to lose the
fonctionnaire culture left by years of government control. The
state-appointed chairmen have filled junior positions at the banks with
fellow civil servants. Analysts suspect this public sector ethos has
contributed to the French banks' cautious approach to international
expansion and to their bureaucratic management structures.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930806

