FT933-12563

FT  23 JUL 93 / Arts: A mish-mash from the RSC - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


This is an unusual way to go down in the record books: Misha's Party must be
the worst play ever staged by the Royal Shakespeare Company.
True, it cannot have been initially the RSC's fault. The idea of
collaboration between the American playwright, Richard Nelson, and the
Russian Alexander Gelman, must have seemed attractive at the start, even
though Nelson says that he speaks no Russian and Gelman no English, and in
spite of the fact that Nelson's last venture at the Barbican (Columbus and
the Discovery of Japan) sank without trace.
At least the background was promising: Moscow, August 1991 and the attempted
coup against Mikhail Gorbachev as witnessed by a group of Russians and
Americans from a smartish Moscow hotel. And for about the first five minutes
promising is what it is. Screen subtitles and the sound effects of a crowd
remind us of the drama that is going on outside. There is a dining table
heavily laden with bottles which, one spots early on, is a sign of a long
night to come.
The rest is lamentable. This is domestic squabbling which merely coincides
with great events. You may search for wit, allegory or indeed any kind of
significance, but it will be in vain.
The principal character, played by Barry Foster, is called Mikhail. He has
been married several times and claims to have had hundreds of liaisons in
between.
On his 60th birthday, he has brought his ex-wives, their current husbands,
his bride-to-be and his daughter together. One assumes that there must be
some symbolism about Gorbachev, Mother Russia or the brief history of the
Soviet Union. If so, it is elusive. All that happens - or rather does not
happen - is that Mikhail's birthday speech remains undelivered.
The piece is being played concurrently at the Moscow Arts Theatre, where the
audience should be closer to events and may pick out subtleties. Try it
there, not at the Pit. Is there no one in the RSC administration capable of
spotting a loser in rehearsal and removing it from the programme before it
runs into the buffers?
*****
There are reservations, too, about the RSC's Taming of the Shrew which has
moved to the Barbican from Stratford. Just over three hours is a trifle long
for one of Shakespeare's slightest plays. The first two thirds are heavy
going.
Bill Alexander's production makes a couple of fundamental mistakes. He sits
the audience to the play within the play at the back of the stage almost
throughout. This is static and immensely distracting to the real live
audience in the theatre. Then the set is constructed of heavy wooden
panelling with a heavy wooden floor to match. The effect is deadening.
There are very few laughs. The production in Regent's Park earlier in the
summer was much funnier and the current performance of Much Ado About
Nothing at the Queen's shows that Shakespeare does not have to be treated
quite so ponderously.
Still, the Barbican show has its merits, notably Amanda Harris's lively and
attractive Kate and Maxwell Hutcheon's appealing Christopher Sly. One can
see why, for all its inadequacies, The Shrew remains a controversial play.
Is Kate a shrew and, if so, why? What is a shrew anyway? And even if she is
a shrew, does she have to be 'tamed' in quite such brutal fashion? Why does
she, particularly this one, succumb so easily? Discuss.
*****
The Chelsea Centre is not at the centre of Chelsea, but at the far (western)
end of the King's Road in London. I have wondered before whether it can make
it when it so far off the beaten theatrical track. Yet it is setting very
high standards. The present production is George Bernard Shaw's Widowers'
Houses. If you have never seen the piece before, see it now, for it reveals
a wonderful knowledge of the property market which has not much changed with
the decades. And even if you know the work, you will admire the direction by
Sharon Maughan and the wonderful playing of Sartorius by Lisa Harrow. She is
a very fine actress.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930723

