FT931-4209

FT  12 MAR 93 / Three Italian oil group heads held on corruption charges


   By ROBERT GRAHAM and HAIG SIMONIAN


   ROME, MILAN


MILAN magistrates yesterday dealt a further blow to the political control of
Italy's state-run companies by arresting on corruption charges the heads of
the three most important subsidiaries of Eni, the national oil concern.
Mr Raffaele Santoro, chairman of Agip petroleum, Mr Pio Pigorini, head of
the Snam gas distribution unit, and Mr Giovanni dell'Orto, chairman of
Saipem, Eni's pipeline and engineering subsidiary, were arrested on charges
of illicit funding of political parties and falsifying company accounts.
They were taken by police to Milan's San Vittore prison, where a growing
number of Italy's business elite is being held.
The latest move was accompanied by extensive searches of the Milan offices
of the three Eni subsidiaries.
Yesterday police, who had sealed the buildings overnight, told employees
they could enter only after a floor-by-floor identification of their
contents and functions.
Yesterday's arrests followed those on Monday of Mr Gabriele Cagliari, Eni's
chairman, and Mr Franco Chiatti, head of the turbines subsidiary, Nuovo
Pignone, also on charges of illicit funding of political parties and
falsifying company accounts.
The latest detentions are believed to relate to incidents separate from
those affecting Mr Cagliari and Mr Chiatti, which concerned the illegal
payment of L4bn (Pounds 1.82m) to secure a power station contract.
The three arrests were directly connected to the interrogation on Wednesday
of an Italian financier with close links to Eni, Mr Pierfrancesco Pacini
Battaglia, who controls a Geneva-based bank, Karfinco. The bank is
understood to be connected with Eni's activities abroad.
To demonstrate support for the Eni management, prime minister Giuliano Amato
and Mr Piero Barucci, the treasury minister whose ministry formally controls
Eni, met Mr Francesco Bernabe, the group's chief executive.
In another and as yet unrelated incident Mr Roberto Ruberto,
director-general of Sace, Italy's export credit agency, was arrested and
charged with serious corruption.
Arrest of chairmen may speed Eni flotation, Page 2
The real revolution, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930312

