FT932-3151

FT  16 JUN 93 / Davignon attacks EC leaders for 'timidity' over jobs


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


VISCOUNT Etienne Davignon, one of Europe's most powerful industrialists, has
launched a scathing attack on EC political leaders. He accuses them of being
too timid to deal with the unemployment crisis.
Mr Davignon said in an interview with the Financial Times that European
industry should consider adopting American-style labour market flexibility
to strengthen manufacturing against competition from Asia and the US.
Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, will make a
personal presentation on the EC's failure to create new jobs at the EC
summit in Copenhagen on Monday.
Mr Delors is said to be ready to tackle the sensitive issue of whether
Europe's welfare state is indirectly contributing to low growth, but
reluctant to disavow the Maastricht treaty's social chapter.
Mr Davignon, a senior member of the European Commission in the early 1980s
and now chairman of Societe Generale de Belgique, the biggest holding
company in Belgium, said he was worried about industry polarising along
free-market and protectionist lines in the EC. Instead, it was necessary to
adopt a new approach to job creation, with more short-time working and
flexible hiring and greater attention on small businesses.
'This is a very tough message,' he said, 'but if you look at history in the
US, the jobs and growth have not come from large companies such as General
Motors, IBM and Exxon.'
Behind Mr Davignon's intervention lies a fear among European industrialists
about the risks of a social explosion caused by low growth, rising
unemployment and a crisis of business confidence.
'You see it in our companies,' he said. 'If you want Dollars 300m for
lay-offs and restructuring, you get approval in 15 seconds. But if you go
out and buy something, your share price goes down.'
According to Mr Davignon, Europe's leaders have failed to respond properly
to two historic shocks: German unification and the collapse of the Soviet
empire. Instead, they have applied a philosophy of 'business as usual'.
He argued that EC leaders' approach to the collapse of communism was flawed
and 'totally lacking in imagination'.
Editorial Comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930616

