FT932-13410

FT  23 APR 93 / Arts: For Services Rendered - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Good chaps - white men - pick of the British nation. That horrible war]
Terribly fond of you, old thing. When you think of what the War did to him,
I'm only too happy to sacrifice myself for him. I may only be a farmer now,
but I've been an officer and a gentleman. I don't suppose he drinks any more
than anyone else of his class. Are you awfully in love with me? Awfully.
And so on. In his 1932 play For Services Rendered, Somerset Maugham catches
all the argot and snobberies of the midwar English upper middle class, and
shows them up as a facade. Frustrations and disillusion are ready to burst
forth. And they do, they do. Mrs Ardsley (Sylvia Syms) is terminally ill,
her son (Tim Sabel) is an invalid blinded in the Great War, her daughter
Ethel (Harriet Bagnall) has unhappily married a mere common farmer (Colin
Haigh), another daughter (Moir Leslie) is being driven bonkers by a life of
spinsterly self-sacrifice, and a third daughter (Sarah Burghard) is tempted
to elope with a married man just to win some independence.
Maugham shows how the war spoilt everybody's world. Even Mrs Ardsley,
preparing for death, admits to her son that she is out of place in the
modern world: 'I'm pre-War'. All this has a certain socio-historical
interest today. The designer, Kit Surrey, sets the Ardsley's drawing-room
pointedly between a backdrop of English landscape and a foreground of burial
crosses and Remembrance poppies.
Yet half the war stuff seems rather laboriously tacked on. The play is
really just a diagram of the minor provincial gentry's pathetic decline.
Every character is plainly a type. When blind, hard-headed Sydney says,
'There are families all over England just like us,' he is only too right. If
a play is to live, we need to believe in the particulars that make its
characters like nobody else but themselves; but not so here.
The first quality that a play like this needs in performance today is sheer
tact. We have to buy all its old-school understatement and circuitous
snobberies without sniggering at them. In this respect, Deborah Paige's
staging is excellent, its period sense flawless. Sarah Burghard is not
luminous enough to persuade us that married men would really fall for her,
but she shows Lois's dilemma with perfect clarity. As her crazed sister
Evie, Moir Leslie does a very good job, bringing off a fit of violent
hysterics and a mad scene. Ann Penfold, Terry Taplin, Jeffrey Segal, Harriet
Bagnall, Colin Haigh, and Peter Halliday all contribute fine pieces of
period character acting.
But it takes another order of performance, conjuring eloquence from every
detail, to make such a play gripping. For this, see the beautifully
understated playing of Sylvia Syms and Tim Sabel as dying mother and blind
son. Every feature of body language makes its point, every phrase makes its
impact. With these two this play spirits us backs through the decades as if
1932 were alive today. Elsewhere it is just a creaky, 'interesting', bitter
little piece of period sociology.
At the Old Vic; limited season

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930423

