FT934-10113

FT  06 NOV 93 / Arts: Pieces of silver - Off the Wall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


SO A New York jury has decided that the Sevso treasure, 14 pieces of silver
made around 400 AD for Sevso, a dignitary of the late Roman Empire, belongs
to the Marquess of Northampton, who bought it from a group of dealers,
including the late Peter Wilson, former chairman of Sotheby's, for over
Pounds 9m in the 1980s.
It is bad luck on Croatia and Hungary, who could not provide convincing
witnesses to prove the hoard was unearthed in their territories and then
smuggled abroad, but a massive relief for the Marquess, who has spent
millions defending his ownership.
But his problems are not over. Sotheby's, which planned to sell the silver
in New York in 1990 with an estimate of Pounds 40m, has hardly stood
shoulder to shoulder with the Marquess during the case and will not get a
second chance to sell the silver. Christie's turned it down originally and
might well feel the silver has the mark of Cain on it. On the other hand it
has traditionally disposed of the Northampton family treasures. The most
obvious purchaser, the Getty Museum in Malibu, was approached in the 1980s
and decided against buying the silver because of doubts about its
provenance. It is unlikely to have changed its mind.
So Lord Northampton may have his silver back (although an appeal is
possible) but he is no nearer finding a buyer for objects of great aesthetic
and historical importance but quite outside the interest and purses of most
art collectors, and museums, especially as he is on record as wanting to
sell the silver intact.
What is the price of immortality? Well, Pounds 15m-Pounds 20m would do
nicely. That is the sum the Tate is seeking to raise for its new Gallery of
Modern Art which it hopes to have open by the Millennium. It is already
talking to its rich friends and if one dips his hand deeply enough into his
pocket his name will live on into the next century as resoundingly as that
of Sir Henry Tate, whose sugar money brought the museum into existence in
the 1890s.
The Tate is confident that the government will provide matching funds from
the Millennium revenues of the Lottery for the Pounds 40m project, which
will give London its much needed specialist gallery of modern art, while the
old Tate, due to be much enlarged in 1995-96 thanks to a Dollars 10m gift
from an anonymous American benefactor, becomes the home of British art.
In the next few months the Tate will decide on a site for its Gallery of
Modern Art. One thing is certain: it will be on the River Thames. The
favourite location seems to be the abandoned Bankside Power station, with
its magnificent views towards St Paul's, which could be converted
comfortably. The aim will be to build a foot bridge linking the two
attractions. The alternative sites are the car park alongside the South Bank
arts complex and the Effra development area west of Vauxhaull Bridge.
So confident is the Tate that the scheme will go through that it is already
worrying about how to stock the new museum. Although up to 80 per cent of
its holdings cannot be shown through shortage of gallery space, the Tate
lacks major works by many of the leading 20th century foreign artists,
particularly the Americans. It is hoping that owners will be keen to loan
seminal paintings and sculptures to such a prestigious new Gallery.
While the new auditorium at Glyndebourne nears completion in readiness for
its opening next May the Arts Council seems to be spoiling for a fight with
Glyndebourne Touring Opera, which for seven weeks a year brings the Festival
productions to the general public at subsidised prices.
In an unashamed reversal of policy the Arts Council has decided against
bunching opera performances in big theatres in major urban centres and in
favour of an outreach programme to small and medium sized towns and venues.
It wants GTO to stop visiting traditional haunts like Manchester, Oxford and
Southampton, which are also on the itinerary of companies like Welsh
National Opera and Opera North, and instead move to opera starved middled
sized theatres, like the Marlowe in Canterbury and the Derngate in
Northampton.
The threat is that if GTO does not fall into line its grant will disappear.
GTO is understandably upset. It likes playing to big loyal audiences for big
box office revenues, and its productions fit better in the larger theatres.
Also they help it attract the best young singers. The other major opera
companies that tour, the WNO, Scottish Opera, and Opera North, are
presenting a common front on this one, and refusing to tender for any Arts
Council dates rejected by the GTO.
It should be possible to work out a compromise, with GTO adding some new
venues while losing some traditional ones. If the Arts Council study group,
cobbled together to come up with a policy by early December, decides to call
GTO's bluff and concentrates its funding on pocket opera companies visiting
even smaller venues, it will have a nasty row on its hands - and by then the
Council will be wrestling with the inevitable fall out from the anticipated
Pounds 5m reduction in its grant for 1994-95, as well as the consequences of
the Hoffmann report which, in theory, will eliminate funding from two London
orchestras. Perhaps it hopes that GTO's misery will be subsumed within the
general gloom.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931106

