FT934-10036

FT  08 NOV 93 / Hopes grow for Dounreay cargo contract


   By JAMES BUXTON and GEORGE GRAHAM


   EDINBURGH, WASHINGTON


THERE WAS optimism in the nuclear industry yesterday that the US government
may fail to take over a cargo of spent nuclear fuel from Belgium which had
been destined for the Dounreay nuclear plant in northern Scotland.
However, the Belgian authorities have indicated a willingness for open
negotiations with the US Energy Department on shipping spent nuclear fuel to
the US. That could pose a long-term threat to the British plant's operation.
The last-minute competition between Britain and the US over the shipment of
144 nuclear fuel rods from Belgium follows a policy change by the US
government. From 1988 until recently the US has refused to take spent fuel
from European experimental reactors, despite having supplied the fuel in the
first place.
This created an opportunity for Dounreay to set up its own reprocessing
operation to cater for the European plants.
But last month the US Energy Department offered to take the Belgian spent
fuel at an advantageous price to store it in South Carolina in order to
prevent it being reprocessed into re-usable highly enriched uranium. It is
doing this as part of its policy of reducing nuclear proliferation.
It also offered to indemnify the Belgian authorities against legal action by
Dounreay for breach of contract.
It now appears that SCK-CEN, which operates the BR2 reactor at Mol in
Belgium, is close to deciding to stick to its contract with Dounreay.
The Financial Times has seen a letter dated November 3 from Mr Carl
Malbrain, general manager of SCK-CEN, to Mr Thomas Grumbly, assistant
secretary of the US Energy Department, in which he says it is 'highly
unlikely' that the US would be able to obtain either transport or official
clearance in Belgium to take the fuel before the end of the year, a
necessity because the Belgian nuclear inspectorate will close the plant if
the fuel is not removed by then.
Mr Malbrain also writes of 'hopefully' starting to ship fuel to the US
before the end of the year 'as a first step in a renewed long-term
relationship with the US DoE.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931108

