FT932-6934

FT  26 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Taskforces that face a competitive
challenge - Lucas Industries lifts a page out of Japan's methodology of
manufacture


   By ANDREW BOLGER


AT LEAST some employees of Lucas Industries have allowed themselves a wry
smile over suggestions that the Birmingham-based engineering group is a
prime takeover target for predators such as BTR, the acquisitive industrial
conglomerate.
For the 400 people working in Lucas's engineering and systems business have
been involved in teaching best manufacturing practice to a host of the UK's
blue-chip companies - including BTR. Lucas got into this area in the early
1980s, when the shock of recording its first losses forced the group to look
afresh at how it made components for the motor and aerospace industries.
From a handful of people looking at improving Lucas's performance, the
engineering and systems business has developed into a separate company
within the group, with annual sales of Pounds 23m and customers which
include Rolls-Royce, British Aerospace and Unilever.
Mr David Friday, director and general manager of Lucas Engineering and
Systems, said his company had decided in the early 1980s that it needed to
do something fundamental to study markets outside the UK and Europe -
particularly Japan.
He said: 'We didn't understand then that the Japanese were concentrated on
the methodology of manufacturing - we were spending just as much. There was
a lot of hoo-hah about robots - by and large, it was much simpler.'
Lucas now preaches what has become the accepted wisdom on how to achieve
international competitiveness, often based on the performance of leading
Japanese competitors, which doubles the sales per employee achieved in the
west.
Just-in-time manufacturing can treble stock turnover. Product costs are
estimated to be 30 per cent lower and manufacturing lead times 50 per cent
shorter as a result of concurrent engineering techniques and better
management structures. The emphasis of Japanese businesses on quality means
that their defects are measured in parts per million, rather than percentage
figures as in the west.
Central to Lucas's approach is challenging the western approach which
divides companies into separate functions - such as sales, distribution and
production. Instead, the Lucas approach identifies logical processes and
units, which can eliminate duplication and allows each to focus on optimum
performance.
Traditionally in the UK, products are first designed in isolation and then
designed for manufacture, resulting in production problems, frequent
redesign, introduction delays and higher manufacturing costs. Concurrent
engineering combines product and manufacturing design in one integrated
process, with the product designed from the start for the simplest, least
expensive, production process.
Lucas still regularly sends engineering systems experts to Japan on study
tours. Mr Friday said, resignedly: 'The Japanese are very free and open
about the process. They've learned that no matter what they tell us, we
don't do it. Brits coming back fixated on quality circles, uniforms and PE -
the trouble is, it's all the other things as well.'
Despite this strong theoretical underpinning, Mr Friday's approach is
intensely practical: 'Our fundamental principle is to encourage businesses
so that they have the capability themselves. I don't even like the term
'consultants': we are implementers, doers - we're not in the business of
writing big reports and then leaving businesses with them. We don't write
reports, we work.'
Lucas reckons it takes between two and three years to complete what it
describes as a 'step-change' in a company's operating methods, although some
achieve it in less. Some external clients bring Lucas in to do just the
initial overall plan.
The primary focus is on establishing taskforces - normally one or two, but
some companies have had as many as 18. They are full-time,
multi-disciplinary teams of six people - only one a Lucas consultant, who
will not be the leader. Taskforce membership should be a real cross-section
 -perhaps a machinist, foreman, engineer, quality assessment expert and a
production engineer, including trade unionists.
Mr Friday tells senior managers: 'These need to be your best people - give
us your worst and you'll get the sort of business you have now.' Combined
with a widespread educational programme, the taskforces must set clear and
achievable targets - such as on stock turn, lead times. They hold weekly
reviews of progress and monthly reviews with the general manager.
Despite having completed more than 600 projects, Lucas claims it has never
had any group of people who have blocked a restructuring. Mr Friday said: 'I
can show you men who have resigned as shop stewards because they saw the
logic of what we had to do. 'You can't cloak it if a company's workforce
needs to shrink. It just means you have to set it up properly - we're not
prepared to work for a client for more than one or two weeks if they're not
prepared to tell employees what is going on.'
Inevitably, private-sector clients of Lucas are reluctant to talk about what
benefits they received. However, Parcelforce, the Post Office subsidiary,
called Lucas in to help co-ordinate an efficiency programme which yielded
savings of Pounds 80m - some Pounds 10m above target.
Mr Friday said that Lucas also does consultancy work for banks and the NHS -
indeed any organisation which can benefit from a 'process' approach. About
25 per cent of the business's work now comes from outside Lucas, and the
proportion is increasing steadily.
The Lucas consultants, based at Shirley, near Birmingham, acknowledge that
it is not always easy to go into companies at a time when their own parent
is the City's favourite takeover candidate, following a collapse in profits
and a botched boardroom succession.
Mr Friday said that despite these recent troubles, the Lucas name was still
widely respected in manufacturing circles: 'People know that when we talk
about how to make things, we can actually do it.'
Perhaps ominously for Lucas, Hawker Siddeley was another name famous in the
annals of British engineering. BTR joined Lucas's client list after being
impressed with the work which the Lucas consultants were doing at Hawker,
which BTR swallowed in a Pounds 1.5bn hostile takeover at the end of 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930526

