FT933-5378

FT  03 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Greycoat pref holders oppose Postel plan


   By ROLAND RUDD


A NUMBER of Greycoat preference shareholders yesterday said they would vote
against Postel's proposed rescue package after the UK's biggest pension fund
said the terms and conditions would not be improved.
In a circular to shareholders, who are being asked to approve the rescue
deal on October 8, Greycoat warns that failure to accept the agreement will
probably lead to administration.
The property company also unveiled a pre-tax deficit of Pounds 164.4m
(Pounds 7.6m) for the year to March 31. This was mainly because of a fall in
property valuations and a loss on the sale of properties. Rental income fell
from Pounds 50m to Pounds 45.4m.
Net assets per ordinary share collapsed from 201p to 33p. Shareholders funds
declined from Pounds 226.5m to Pounds 81.8m. The dividend for the year is
omitted - last year 2.3p was paid.
The company needs the support of 75 per cent of all classes of shareholders.
Some preference holders, who are being asked to waive their dividends and
take a 60 per cent cut in nominal value in exchange for a dividend and
participation in a rights issue, yesterday said they would vote against the
deal unless it was improved.
Mr John Katz, a research consultant asked by more than 25 per cent of the
preference shareholders to contact Greycoat, said: 'It is difficult to see
how any preference shareholder can accept the plan. It will have to be
improved if it is to stand a chance of success.'
Opponents include Gruss Partners, the US arbitrage house, and two banks. The
preference shares yesterday fell 6p to 41 1/2 p. The ordinary were unchanged
at 25 1/2 p.
Mr Richard Guignard, Greycoat's finance director, said: 'Nobody is happy
with this deal, which is a good sign. The pain is spread evenly. If all the
shareholders understand the consequences of what will happen if the deal is
not agreed then they will give it their support.'
Holders of the zero-coupon bonds and bank loans, who have temporarily waived
loan covenants after the company defaulted, may insist on payment of their
bonds and loans if the deal is not agreed. In such an event Greycoat warns:
'It is likely that the group would have to cease trading immediately . . .
preference and ordinary shareholders would receive no payment.'
If there was a forced sale the document says Greycoat's properties would be
worth only Pounds 366.9m.
The document also reveals that Mr Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of
Postel, is no longer being invited to join the board of a restructured
Greycoat. If the invitation had remained he would have been deemed by the
Stock Exchange to be a proposed director and therefore responsible for the
listing particulars. To avoid this he will wait and see if the restructuring
is approved. He is expected to join the board if his rescue plan is
accepted.
The restructuring could leave Postel with 87 per cent of the shares.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930903

