FT932-6601

FT  27 MAY 93 / International Company News: Tandy to sell some PC
manufacturing operations to AST


   By NIKKI TAIT


   NEW YORK


TANDY, one of largest US consumer electronics retailers and manufacturers,
yesterday abandoned plans to spilt itself into two independently-quoted
companies - one representing its retail operations and the other its
manufacturing arm.
Instead, the Texas-based group said it would sell part of its personal
computer manufacturing operations to AST Research, a California-based
manufacturer of IBM-compatible desktop and notebook computers, and then
divest much of the remaining manufacturing business.
'Our primary strategic thrust is retailing, as previously announced,' said
Mr John Roach, Tandy's chairman.
AST said the purchase price for the PC assets was estimated to be no more
than Dollars 175m, which would be met either in cash and three-year
promissory notes or entirely in cash.
The operations it plans to buy include the GRiD brand of products,
Tandy-GRiD Europe, and certain computer manufacturing plants in Texas and
Scotland.
GRiD Systems, which Tandy acquired in 1987, is believed to have lost money
recently and has been retrenching after an ambitious expansion programme.
Its president recently resigned.
Tandy will take a charge of around Dollars 70m in the second quarter to
end-June as a result of this divestment. The company announced in January it
planned to divide itself into two separately-quoted companies - with the
manufacturing arm being known as TE Electronics.
Shareholders would have received shares in TE Electronics as a tax-free
'dividend'.
Yesterday, Mr Roach said Tandy had decided the sale route would strengthen
its balance sheet and increase future income potential. The company would
retain 'limited strategic manufacturing units', he said, although these were
not detailed.
Mr Roach has being putting a good deal of emphasis on Tandy's efforts to
revive its big retail operation. On the one hand, it has developed a new
'superstore' concept called 'The Incredible Universe', and opened the first
two outlets - both about 150,000 sq. ft. - last year. But the Texas company
also plans to open a series of 'small stores', under the 'Radio Shack
Express' fascia.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930527

