FT932-7048

FT  26 MAY 93 / Large urges clampdown on investment fraud: Calls for a
regulatory system that can prevent a recurrence of events like the Robert
Maxwell pensions scandal


   By ROBERT PESTON


MR ANDREW LARGE'S report on financial services regulation does not recommend
a dramatic overhaul of the system put in place by the 1986 Financial
Services Act.
The chairman of the Securities and Investments Board, the City of London's
senior regulator, summed up the nature of his proposals in the foreword:
'This report is about the next big chapter in the regulatory story. If
Chapter One has been about creation and setting the system up, Chapter Two
will be about making the system really work well in the future.'
Mr Large was asked to conduct his investigation in July last year by Mr
Norman Lamont, the chancellor. It was to be an examination of how the
regulatory system permitted the plundering of pension funds by Robert
Maxwell and of the more widespread concern that the regulatory system does
not adequately achieve its goals.
Mr Large defines four main goals of the system:
It should operate in the public interest.
Fraudsters should be caught and dealt with.
Sharp practice should be dealt with.
Cost-effective investor protection should be provided.
Mr Large's report dismissed suggestions that the two-tier system of SIB
overseeing a collection of self-regulatory organisations (SROs) should be
ended. Yet he is not surprised that problems have emerged with the
regulatory system, because it is highly complex and was created only seven
years ago: 'Some 20 regulatory bodies have been recognised and over 28,000
firms authorised to do business in which 300,000 people earn their
livelihood primarily from investment business. Rules have been written and
rewritten to give substance to the provisions of the (Financial Services)
Act.'
He highlights a number of particularly telling criticisms of the system:
The objectives of the act are unclear.
Self-regulation is often seen as equating with self-interest.
The system is not seen as particularly cost-effective.
There is too much fraud that goes unpunished.
The system is too complex.
Retail business is under-regulated whereas business carried out for
professional customers is over-regulated.
Investor compensation schemes exact excessive costs on more prudent firms.
SIB's role is unclear.
SIB's enforcement role should be more visible and comprehensible.
SIB's resources are inadequate and its structure is wrong.
SIB is not sufficiently accountable.
He accepts many of these criticisms and tries to learn from three recent
examples of regulatory failure, the most important of which was the
inability of the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (Imro) to
stop Maxwell robbing his pensioners and the failure of SIB to spot Imro's
weaknesses.
Another regulatory lapse was SIB's inability to prevent personnel employed
by a recognised investment exchange, London FOX - which trades futures and
options in commodities - from engaging in improper conduct in collusion with
firms operating in a new property futures market.
Finally, Mr Large tries to learn from the failure of several regulatory
bodies to prevent the widespread sale of home income plans - products
allowing purchasers to convert equity tied up in their homes into income -
to customers for whom the product was not suitable.
His first recommendation is that SIB and the recognised bodies should
publish a clear statement of their objectives, the central one being the
protection of investors.
He also argues that SIB should play a more active role in setting the
standards of regulation it will expect the recognised bodies to fulfil.
It should establish criteria for authorising firms to carry out investment
business, for the content and frequency of information that regulators must
obtain from financial firms, for the speed of response of regulators to
complaints and for their disciplinary policy.
It should also set standards of investor protection, setting out a list of
hazards for investment customers which the regulatory system is intended to
stamp out - such as agents not seeking the best prices for clients, the
giving of unsuitable investment advice to clients, or the mingling of client
money with company money.
SIB should set these standards for recognised bodies and develop measures to
verify that they follow the regulation standards and enforce the investor
protection standards.
A radical proposal is that SIB should become far more active in monitoring
the performance of the recognised bodies, in regular meetings with them and
supervisory visits to them. It should also visit regulated firms to ensure
that their regulators are doing their job properly.
Mr Large also calls for SIB to take a much higher profile in enforcement -
it has never used its legal powers to bar individuals from the investment
industry.
SIB should also try to promote greater co-operation between the many
different regulators with potential interests in prosecuting for fraud, and
play a more active role in prosecuting those suspected of unauthorised
business.
Although Mr Large calls on SIB to develop investor protection standards and
the best framework for meeting them, he says the board should attempt to
give the recognised bodies more freedom to develop their own rules and other
ways, such as codes of conduct or training requirements, to achieve these
standards. It should also attempt to remove unnecessary, impractical or
excessively costly rules.
The report calls for a new focus on the cost of regulation, with SIB
generating information on the costs of the system and commissioning an
independent study of cost-benefit monitoring techniques that regulators
might use over the longer term. SIB should set up a 'cost of compliance
unit' to monitor regulators' overheads.
Mr Large says it is no longer appropriate for SIB to have a role in the
direct monitoring of financial firms - a number of substantial firms,
notably the clearing banks, are regulated by Sibro, part of SIB.
'SIB's objective must be that the SROs should be the front-line regulators,
not SIB. The direct regulation powers may have been a necessary part of the
original structure, but I believe that now direct regulation should be
available only as a truly last option.'
SIB needs to have some expertise in direct regulation, so that if it were to
withdraw recognition from a regulator, it could take over the business of
monitoring that regulator's firms. But it should not supervise financial
firms on an everyday basis.
Mr Large is keen for Sibro's members to join the proposed Personal
Investment Authority, which is being set up as a new umbrella regulator for
retail financial business. He also wants SIB to clarify boundaries between
recognised bodies, to eliminate the considerable overlap which currently
exists between them.
But before SIB and the recognised bodies can increase their authority and
win back the confidence of the public, Mr Large says they need to become far
more open - to publish their objectives, budgets, management plans, reports
and accounts, performance indicators and operational reviews.
There should be a review of information on fees charged by SIB and the
recognised bodies.
In recognition of SIB's responsibility to serve the public interest, the
majority of non-executives on its board should not be active in the
financial services industry. SIB should set up advisory groups representing
the interests of consumers and the financial services industry. SIB is also
urged to work with other regulators on the training of personnel for
regulatory bodies.
On implementation of the report, SIB is charged with creating an
implemention team and publishing progress reports twice a year.
Financial Services Regulation. SIB, 2-14 Bunhill Row, London EC1Y 8RA.
Pounds 15.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930526

