FT932-3216

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Company News: SEC study could bring equities
trading shake-up - Patrick Harverson examines the US regulation issues which
the Market 2000 review is considering


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


THE STRUCTURE of equities trading in the US could soon face a shake-up if
Market 2000, the Securities and Exchange Commission's year-long study into
the regulation of the country's stock markets, packs anything like the punch
of its predecessor.
The last comparable study undertaken by the SEC, the government agency that
administers US securities laws and regulates financial markets, was
completed 20 years ago and led to the 'May Day' revolution of 1975, which
abolished fixed brokerage commissions and forever changed the way business
was conducted on Wall Street.
The SEC's division of market regulation, which is compiling Market 2000,
hopes the review will be ready later this summer, although it may be delayed
by the arrival of the new SEC chairman, Mr Arthur Levitt, who has yet to be
confirmed in his job by Congress.
The study's recommendations will be considered by the agency's five
commissioners, who will decide whether to introduce regulations based on its
findings. Congress may then amend the US securities laws in line with any
reforms.
The motivation behind Market 2000 dates from the changes introduced in 1975.
The SEC hoped then that the competitive forces its reforms unleashed would
lead to the evolution of a single national market system through which all
stock trades would be routed, and which would be accessible to all
investors.
While many of the changes introduced in 1975 have benefited the securities
business - trading volume has risen steeply, new financial instruments and
trading methods have proliferated - the competition that the reforms
unleashed produced a fragmentation, not a centralisation, of US stock
markets.
Today, share orders are executed in an array of different arenas. While many
investors buy and sell stocks in the traditional way - through brokers who
place their orders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange - others
trade via brokers who execute orders on electronic over-the-counter markets.
Also, some bigger investors trade directly with broker-dealer firms, while
others prefer to bypass the intermediaries and exchanges altogether and buy
and sell directly with each other.
The growing multiplicity of trading forums has had a profound effect on the
NYSE, the country's largest stock market. Its share of trading in US stocks
has been under attack from a growing band of competitors. They include:
Nasdaq (the electronic broker-dealer market run by the National Association
of Securities Dealers).
Smaller registered exchanges such as the American Stock Exchange; regional
stock markets such as those in Cincinnati and Philadelphia.
Privately-run computerised trading systems that offer investors an
electronic trading forum free of dealers and other intermediaries.
The NYSE has also lost business to the London Stock Exchange, which trades
US shares before New York opens and which imposes less strict disclosure
requirements on brokers and institutions than is the case in the US.
Competition has been the prime reason for the way the NYSE's grip on
domestic equities trading has weakened. In 1981, 75 per cent of trading in
all US stocks was handled by the NYSE. Today its share of the business has
dropped to a little more than half.
Quite simply, brokerage firms and institutional investors have turned to
other markets or systems where the absence of expensive trading floors and
market-makers means trades can be completed more efficiently and for less
cost.
This sort of fragmentation is leading to the emergence of a two-tier market
with one level for the big players and another for the small investors: and
it is a development which is of concern to the SEC.
In many ways, a two-tier market already exists. Powerful institutions enjoy
the benefits of fragmented markets by using their money and power to keep
transaction costs down, and to gain access to intermediary-free computer
trading networks.
Additionally, institutions can trade where they do not have to disclose all
the details of their activities. The Posit system, run by the Californian
broking house Jeffries & Co, is one example, and the London Stock Exchange's
Seaq International system, another.
As for smaller investors, they lack the sophistication, technology and
capital to access the cheaper electronic systems, and have to use
traditional markets where execution can be slower and more expensive. Even
if their orders are directed by brokers to some of the newer trading arenas,
it is mostly done without their knowledge or without attendant cost
advantages being passed on.
The SEC is approaching the issue of market fragmentation gingerly. The
agency will not say what it hopes its Market 2000 study will achieve.
Instead, the SEC says only that it has been addressing a number of issues in
detail, among them: fragmentation of trading; market liquidity; the
execution of trades; the emergence of privately-run computerised trading
systems; and the relative regulatory burdens on the different markets.
Above all, the SEC wants to look again at the regulatory framework that
supports equities trading.
Much of the regulatory structure dates from before the 1970s, when trading
stocks in the US was a simple process.
In the intervening years, the SEC has failed to develop an overall
regulatory strategy. The agency admits that its approach to regulation has
not been well organised. Mr William Heyman, former director of the SEC's
division of market regulation and a guiding force behind Market 2000,
describes the study as 'an effort by the staff to look comprehensively at
things which in the past we have been looking at piecemeal'.
Among the regulatory issues the study is tackling, the most contentious is
the future of NYSE Rules 390 and 500. The former limits NYSE member firms
from trading listed stocks away from the exchange, the latter makes it
difficult for companies voluntarily to remove their stock listing from the
exchange.
The NYSE's competitors have lobbied for abolition of both rules, claiming
they give the exchange an unfair advantage.
Although there is no indication that the abolition of Rule 500 would lead to
a rush of companies away from the NYSE, the exchange nevertheless fears that
some companies might leave and list their shares on Nasdaq, home to such
corporate giants as Microsoft and Apple Computer.
While the NYSE is under fire over rules 390 and 500, it is on the attack
over other issues. It is highly critical of the practice employed by trading
systems and over-the-counter marketmaking firms of paying brokers a fee
(usually between one and two cents a share) for directing customer orders
their way.
This 'payment for order flow' is used by trading firms and systems to bring
in business that might otherwise go to the NYSE. Madoff Securities in New
York is one of the biggest payers for order flow, luring large amounts of
business from brokers in exchange for a payment and a promise of quick order
execution on its in-house stock trading system. On a good day, Madoff
handles as much as 10 per cent of all trading in NYSE stocks.
Not surprisingly, the NYSE wants the SEC to ban payment for order flow,
arguing that in accepting payments to route customers' orders to a
particular firm or system, brokers are not necessarily finding the best
execution price for their customers.
Until the SEC rules on the issue, the NYSE is defending its share of trading
by offering rebates to brokers who bring small trades to the exchange. Mr
William Donaldson, the NYSE chairman, said he hoped the rebate offer would
'at the very least, arrest further order erosion, and at best, accomplish
repatriation of order flow'.
The NYSE has also challenged what it claims are unevenly distributed
regulatory costs. It says that while it is forced to comply with a wide and
costly array of SEC regulations, rival electronic trading systems bear a
lighter regulatory burden. The NYSE would like to see these systems
regulated as fully as the established exchanges. For their part, operators
of systems say they should be regulated differently because they handle only
a fraction of the business handled by the NYSE.
What are the chances of the SEC heeding the NYSE's requests, or those of its
competitors? From the start the SEC singled out Rules 390 and 500 as
important issues for review in the study, so neither is likely to survive in
its present form.
While abolishing the two rules would hurt the NYSE, the pain of the blow
could be softened. As for the broader issues of fragmentation, and the
two-tier market, the SEC's task will be still more difficult. Although, the
agency is reluctant to intervene, it is under increasing pressure to do so.
As the agency's Mr Heyman says: 'Ultimately, the market participants will
look to the SEC to resolve these seemingly intractable issues.'

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930615

