FT934-8453

FT  16 NOV 93 / Warring Tajiks slide to economic collapse: A second winter
of civil strife in the absence of energy and hard currency


   By GILLIAN TETT


THE Tajik people do not yet have an everyday word for 'economic collapse.'
In the coming months, however, they may need to invent one.
As Tajikistan enters the second winter of a civil war that has claimed up to
100,000 lives, out of a population of 5m, and left many more homeless, the
republic, which was once one of the most pleasant in the Soviet Union, has
become one of the most tragic.
As an international aid worker based in the capital Dushanbe says: 'Because
the western TV cameras haven't been here, the rest of the world has been
ignoring it. But what's happened here is as bad as Georgia - and in some
ways parts of Bosnia as well.'
The current Tajik government, stung by these comments, are at pains to point
out that the worst may be over. After a year of bitter fighting between the
government and opposition, the rebels have mostly been pushed south to
Afghanistan, and the gunbattles confined to the border and eastern
mountains.
Some 50,000 refugees have returned to their homes, and two-thirds of the
cotton crop, and most of the grain, has been salvaged.
But fighting may flare up as snow pushes the rebels down from their mountain
hideouts, and a political solution is still nowhere in sight.
Even by the standards of the former Soviet Union, the battle in Tajikistan
has been viciously convoluted. Although both sides have been quick to use
'anti-Communist' and 'anti-Islamic fundamentalist' tags, the issue at stake
has not been ideology, or even nationalism, so much as regional rivalries.
On one side is a shaky alliance of the Tajiks from the Kulyab and Khodjent
regions, heirs to the former Communist regime and the government. On the
other side are the people of the south-west and Garm regions, who overthrew
the Communists 18 months ago, but were then overthrown by Russian and Uzbek
backed troops.
The government and Russians label the opposition 'Islamic Fundamentalist,'
and claim they are supported by international Islamic groups - a claim given
credence by western intelligence sources, who say not only are Afghan
leaders such as Gulbuddin Hekmatyar involved, but also groups in Pakistan
and Iran.
'The key to the conflict is in Afghanistan. The fundamentalists there have
managed to use Tajikistan for their work,' says Mr Abdulmalik Abduladjanov,
Tajik prime minister.
In practice, though, the opposition includes not just Islamic groups, but
also secular democrats taking refuge in Moscow, the people of Pamir in the
east, which is pushing for independence from Tajikstan, and a huge number of
apolitical Tajiks.
Mr Abduladjanov says he is willing to negotiate with the rebels. But after a
year of suffering atrocities and ethnic cleansing, the rebels seem set on a
revenge in arms.
'We have bases across the country and all the strength we need,' says Mullah
Davlat Usmon, military 'minister' in the opposition, in his stronghold in
Pamir.
Time may be on their side. Resentment on the part of the Khodjentis, the
former soviet era leaders, at the Kulyabis' new power is threatening the
government alliance. And though the rebels are no match for the Russian
peacekeeping troops stationed on the border, their guerrilla campaign is
steadily pushing the country into economic crisis.
With 93 per cent of the republic covered with mountains, Tajikistan has
never been rich - in Soviet days it sent its cotton and minerals to Russia,
receiving energy supplies and some 80 per cent of its budget subsidies.
However, the war has now left it critically short of energy and hard
currency. The capital, Dushanbe, is virtually without heating, and
electricity in much of the country is erratic. There is virtually no air
service, due to the lack of petrol. Industrial production has slumped
sharply, by 50 per cent in Dushanbe alone. The 1993 budget deficit is
expected to exceed 50 per cent of GDP.
In an effort to relieve the energy crisis, the Tajik government recently
travelled to Turkmenistan to beg the Turkmens not to charge hard currency
for gas and petrol supplies. A deal was signed - partly because Tajikistan
controls part of the water supply to Turkmenistan - but as one Tajik
minister said: 'What can we offer them? Just fresh air.'
The key effect of this crisis has been to push Tajikistan back into the arms
of the Russians. In spite of speculation last year that Persian-speaking
Tajikistan could fall within the orbit of Iran or Turkey, the Iranian
presence in the republic remains low key.
Tajikistan is in no position to print its own currency, and wants to remain
part of the rouble zone. But with the republic unable to match the Russian
Central Bank's tough new fiscal demands, Russia has refused to issue
Tajikistan with any new roubles, forcing it to use pre-1993 Russian tender,
now technically invalid in Russia. Inflation is spiralling and its economic
isolation is growing.
Mr Abduladjanov himself sadly concludes: 'Tajikistan is rich in many
resources. But to attract any investment we need stability - and that will
take a while yet.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931116

