FT934-11484

FT  30 OCT 93 / EC Summit: Treaty celebrations give way to sober talks -
Europe is settling down to the task of finding ways to create jobs and boost
growth


   By DAVID GARDNER


'IT WAS our kind of talk,' a senior British official said of the summit's
debate on how to rekindle economic growth in Europe and respond to the
EC-wide unemployment crisis.
Asked whether this special summit was to celebrate entry into force of the
Maastricht treaty on Monday, Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, Danish prime minister,
said soberly: 'There is one thing to celebrate: that is that now we start on
solving pressing economic and employment problems. That is our major issue.'
But beyond saying that the 20m unemployed the EC will shortly have is
'intolerable', the 12 heads of government were vague on what to do about it.
'Concrete conclusions' are awaited at the December summit in Brussels, when
Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president, presents his White Paper
on growth, competitiveness and employment.
Mr Delors, and Mr John Major, the British prime minister, made what there
was of the running yesterday.
Mr Delors acknowledged the economies of the Twelve had ceased to converge.
To counteract this, he urged beefing up the 'growth initiative' agreed at
the Edinburgh summit in December 1992 and upgraded at Copenhagen in June; a
labour market reform to cut the cost of employing workers; spurring
investment to boost average growth to 3 per cent and cut jobless levels from
11 per cent to 6-7 per cent; and an investment drive in information and
communications technology which he said required Ecu135bn (Pounds 105bn)
over the next five years.
The Commission president was scathing about progress of the much-trumpeted
'growth initiative'. Only Ecu3.3bn of the Ecu7bn agreed at Edinburgh has
been allocated. One of the few concrete measures to emerge yesterday was a
widening of eligibility criteria, so that more 'national' projects could
apply to a facility designed for trans-European infrastructure networks.
Energy projects, transport equipment and urban renewal were singled out in
the summit's conclusions.
Mr Delors noted acidly that finance ministers 'are not interested' in making
use of Copenhagen's upgrading of Edinburgh: a bridging facility to bring on
stream faster the Ecu48bn in EC regional and structural funds earmarked for
1994-95, soft loans for small industry, and an ambitious European investment
fund. In the conclusions, finance ministers who this week rebuffed Mr
Delors' call for an expanded growth initiative, were instructed by their
bosses to stop dragging their feet on the last two summits' pledges.
There was little discussion of the labour market reforms emphasised in a
recent draft of the Commission White Paper. This calls for more part-time
work and job-sharing, greater wage flexibility including possible dilution
of minimum wage norms, a reduction in non-wage costs on lower skilled jobs,
and shifting part of the social security burden on employment onto eco-taxes
on pollution and energy.
But the tone of most debate across Europe over labour markets enabled Mr
Major to devote most of his speech to hammering home the UK's recipe without
much demur from his colleagues. The UK prime minister said whereas long-term
unemployment in the US was 6 per cent of the jobless total, and 18 per cent
in Japan, in the EC it was 45 per cent of all unemployment. 'A better
climate for enterprise' and jobs needed more flexible working hours; relaxed
minimum wage legislation; reduced employers' social security contributions;
pricing the jobless into work; and better education and training.
Mr Major also made the strongest of the few summit references to the Uruguay
Round world trade reform negotiations, theatened by French intransigence
over farm trade. 'Completion of the Uruguay Round must be our highest
priority over the next six weeks,' he said, referring to the December 15
deadline for concluding the talks.
The absence of real discussion on the trade talks reflected the desire of
France's partners not to push Paris into a corner - at least not yet. The
draft conclusions said: 'It is now more than ever necessary to make every
effort, within the agreed timetable, for a global, balanced and durable
Uruguay Round accord.' But in the final communique, France managed to add a
sentence saying any final agreement would have to take account of the
additional agricultural demands that the EC raised last month under French
pressure.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931030

