FT932-6817

FT  27 MAY 93 / Motorway charges scheme provokes opposition - Roads sell-off
dispute looms


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


THE government faced fresh controversy over its transport policies yesterday
as it set out proposals for a scheme to privatise the motorways. The plan
comes shortly after a close Commons vote in favour of privatising the
railways.
A green paper published by the Department of Transport suggested that the
motorways could be operated profitably by charging users. Car drivers could
face pay-as-you-go tolls of up to 1.5p a mile or an annual fee of up to
Pounds 75.
Private-sector companies could then be invited to compete for franchises to
operate the motorways, using the revenue produced to fund construction of
extra lanes or new roads.
Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, announced the proposals yesterday,
hours after narrowly surviving a Commons vote on the government's
controversial railway privatisation plans, also based on route franchising.
Mr MacGregor made no mention of motorway privatisation as he launched the
green paper. But Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, was simultaneously
telling a Confederation of British Industry conference on private-sector
funding for infrastructure that charges 'could pave the way for the
privatisation of large parts of Britain's motorway network'.
Mr John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, called the plan 'another poll
tax on wheels' and said the revenues from charges and privatisation would
benefit only the Treasury.
Motoring organisations warned that motorway charges would be acceptable only
if there were guarantees that the money was used for extra spending on
roads.
Mr MacGregor said motorway charges were being proposed because the
government could not afford to finance the construction of enough new roads
to stop existing motorways becoming congested.
He repeatedly emphasised that the government was not committed to any of the
proposals in the green paper. 'I want to stimulate a big public debate,' he
said.
Mr MacGregor said annual permits or electronic tolls were the favoured
options for collecting charges. The former was less satisfactory because it
made a flat charge, Mr MacGregor said, but an electronic system would not be
available until at least 1998.
The green paper suggests that charges for lorries, already taxed more
heavily than almost anywhere else in Europe, would be much higher than those
for cars. The option yielding the most revenue - Pounds 700m a year - would
leave car drivers paying 1.5p a mile or Pounds 75 a year, while lorry
drivers paid 4.5p a mile or up to Pounds 750 a year, depending on the
vehicle's weight.
Many motorists would be unaffected by the charges because fewer than half of
them use the motorways regularly, the green paper says. It also predicts
that charges would result in a diversion of no more than than 10 per cent of
vehicle mileage to secondary roads.
Meanwhile, Mr Lamont told the Confederation of British Industry that there
was 'no limit' to infrastructure projects that could be financed by private
investment.
'From now on, any project which can be paid for from user charges and can
satisfy the normal planning requirements can proceed,' he said. 'If someone
wants to build a road . . . why should the government stand in the way?'
Editorial comment, Page 23
Many Tory MPs sceptical, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930527

