FT934-8635

FT  15 NOV 93 / Wise men warn of German zero growth


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


GERMANY'S 'five wise men' have warned the government that the west German
economy is unlikely to grow in the coming year and the recession may not yet
have bottomed out.
The government's independent economic advisers fear that unemployment will
top 4m in 1994, up by another 500,000, and industrial investment continue to
stagnate. Their report, due out today, is notably more pessimistic than the
recent forecasts from the leading German economic institutes.
Their forecast of zero growth in west Germany compares with a prediction of
1 per cent recovery by five of the six economic institutes. The government
itself is still hoping for a 1.5 per cent growth rate.
Private and public consumption in west Germany are expected to decline for a
second year in succession, while investment in plant and equipment is likely
to shrink by a further 2 per cent, after a 15.5 per cent drop in the current
year. The one hopeful sign is a forecast recovery of 2.5 per cent in export
earnings, while inflation should slow further to 3 per cent in west Germany
and 4 per cent in the east.
Yet the five wise men are probably more hesitant than at any time in recent
years in their prognosis for the German economy, arguing that it could
easily pick up sooner, or deteriorate further.
'We must emphasise that we do not consider ourselves on safe ground in
making this forecast,' the authors say. 'The danger that the recession could
deepen has been initially averted, if not yet fully banished.' The advisers
recall that they forecast zero growth for the west German gross domestic
product for 1993 - the most pessimistic prediction published last autumn -
only to see it heading for a 2 per cent decline. They say a revival of
industrial investment is an urgent necessity, combined with rigorous control
of public sector spending.
They accuse all levels of the government of failing to pursue a clear and
predictable course of consolidation in budget spending over the past two
years.
The wise men warn that the impending introduction of an oil tax from January
1 and simultaneous increases in social security and pensions contributions
are likely to mean a further cut in production in the coming months.
As far as encouraging investment is concerned, they call for further steps
to reform the corporate taxation system, with a view to real tax cuts from
1997 onwards. That would be possible only if there was a consistent savings
programme at all levels of public spending.
The call for action on investment was taken up yesterday by Mr Rudolf
Scharping, leader of the opposition SPD, who urged a revival of 'concerted
action' to tackle the jobs crisis.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931115

