FT931-4171

FT  12 MAR 93 / World Trade News: Republicans demand US dumping study


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


TWO Republican members of the US International Trade Commission are
demanding that the Democratic chairman start a controversial study of the US
dumping and subsidy laws, requested by Mrs Carla Hills, former US Trade
Representative.
The study was delayed for at least 90 days by Mr Don Newquist, ITC chairman,
who referred it to Mr Mickey Kantor, the new US Trade Representative. Mr
Newquist said he would cancel the study if Mr Kantor asked him to do so.
The two Republicans - Commissioners Anne Brunsdale and Carol Crawford -
stated jointly that Mr Newquest's 'unilateral decision to withdraw the
action request (for the study) is beyond your power as chairman.'
The ITC has six members - three Republicans and three Democrats. The
chairmanship, which alternates between the parties, is appointed for two
years by the US president.
The proposed study on the impact of dumping and subsidies, and on the laws
which govern them, is very controversial, particularly in Congress where the
'fair trade' laws are seen as the last defence against predatory dumping by
subsidised producers.
But many exporters complain that they are being harmed, by the higher costs
that result from the duties and by the dumping and countervailing duties
laws of other nations, which is why Mrs Hills ordered the study before she
left office in January.
Mrs Paula Stern, a former ITC chairman and adviser to President Bill
Clinton, said studies such as these from an independent agency had been
invaluable in the past.
'Different interests will try to influence the outcome but an independent
agency should be able to sort through the different voices on all sides and
come through with a document that can be helpful,' she said.
Mrs Brunsdale, a former ITC chairman, said in a statement of her own that
withdrawal of a study from the Commission's agenda had always been by
consensus, in 'an informal, collegial process.' The chairman's explanation
that he was concerned about the commitment of agency resources to the study
was 'both specious and irrelevant to the issue at hand,' she said.
The resources involved are the ITC staff, which must be paid whether or not
the investigation goes forward. 'These investigations are mandatory,' she
said. 'We do not have a choice of whether to devote resources to them.'
Despite the commissioners' objections, the ITC chairman seems to be able to
act unless a majority of the commission - four of the six members - tell him
he cannot. But his action in stalling the study, even temporarily, has
caused turmoil in the commission.
'Our agency has always prided itself on being non-partisan, ready to serve
Republican and Democrat, President and Congress,' said Ms Crawford. 'We risk
undermining our ability to serve the government, and violating our legal
obligations, if we take it upon ourselves to decide which requests, from
which Congresses or which administrations, we are going to honour.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930312

