FT933-10017

FT  06 AUG 93 / Technology: A speedy result on exams


   By DELLA BRADSHAW


As students bite their nails waiting for their examination results, due to
be published this month, they might spare a thought for the examiners, who
have to mark the papers and compile the results.
The task could hardly be more difficult than for the International
Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO), the charity that offers a pre-university
curriculum and examination for 16-19-year-olds in nearly 500 schools in 67
countries. The papers are set in up to 80 different languages, from English
and French to Dzongkha, Swahili and Welsh.
The IBO is now turning to the latest technology to ensure that the results
are published as quickly as possible. The sooner the publication, the
greater the chance of students getting a 'second bite of the cherry' if
their first choice college rejects them, points out Andrew Bollington, IT
project manager at the IBO.
The IBO is conducting a trial with an international managed data network
service which should eventually whizz the test results between the
administrative centre in Cardiff, the headquarters in Geneva, the offices in
New York, Singapore and Buenos Aires and the many schools where the
examination is conducted.
At the moment the post from some schools can take six weeks to arrive in
Wales. Communicating with the examiners can also take an inordinate length
of time, Bollington points out.
Once the IBO's plans are fully operational, Bollington envisages data being
sent backwards and forwards between the participating schools and Cardiff in
minutes. The bulk of the schools should be communicating electronically in
two years, he believes.
The network will be used for schools to register the marks for individual
coursework, which is one aspect of the assessment process. Then it will be
used for examiners to send the test results. Cardiff will then send the
final results back to the school.
The IBO has chosen to use BT's managed data network, which means that the
schools need only pay a local call charge to dial into the network - the
IBO's Cardiff office foots the rest of the bill.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930806

