FT932-13392

FT  23 APR 93 / Personal View: One step forward deserves another


   By HOWARD DAVIES


In the last couple of weeks there have been signs of a re-emergence of
industrial unrest in the UK: the bitter Timex dispute, rail and bus strikes,
threatening noises from the firemen and teachers, and a European 'day of
action' on April 2. There is no clear pattern to these disputes and we at
the Confederation of British Industry see little prospect of a big increase
in the number of industrial disputes across the country.
But there are dangerous hints - mainly in the public sector - of union
claims for 'catch-up' awards next year, to compensate for restraint in 1993.
And, despite ministerial protestations to the contrary, the chancellor has
not helped by reaffirming that this year's 1.5 per cent public-sector
ceiling would not continue beyond the autumn, without describing any new
approach. At the same time, the growing number of indicators suggesting that
economic recovery is under way is encouraging a feeling that good times are
just around the corner, and that we shall all be better off next year.
I believe this assumption, that after tightening our belts this year we can
loosen them next, is wrong.
Certainly it is true that pay pressure continues to be weak. Pay settlements
in manufacturing averaged 2.5 per cent in the three months to March, down
from 4.4 per cent in the same period last year, and the lowest figure for at
least 25 years. And since productivity has continued to rise rapidly, unit
labour costs have fallen over the last year - a better performance than has
been achieved by any of Britain's principal competitors.
Private-sector service settlements were down at 2.8 per cent on the same
basis, and of course public sector pay settlements, which were generally
higher than in the private sector last year, are capped at 1.5 per cent.
Most public-sector unions are disposed to accept that they cannot hope to
breach it without strikes for which their members seem unprepared (only
senior management pay has failed to respond).
But let us not forget that headline inflation was only 1.9 per cent in the
year to April. And the TPI (tax and price index) - a fashionable measure
this year, though it will certainly not be in 1994 - has risen by only half
a percentage point in the last 12 months. So most public servants will be
getting a 1 per cent real increase in take-home pay, at the bottom of the
longest recession since the second world war - a rather generous definition
of national belt-tightening.
In fact, for those in work real incomes have not fallen at all in this
recession. Between the third quarter of 1990 and the end of 1992 average
real pay increased by 1.6 per cent. This is in contrast to what happened in
the mid-1970s, and during the early 1980s recession, when real pay fell (by
3.9 per cent from end-1979 to mid-1981). The recent growth in retail
spending, while the savings ratio has actually risen, shows real incomes
have risen quite rapidly in the last 12 months.
The truth is that the pain of this recession has been borne most heavily,
indeed quite disproportionately, by the 1.5m people who have joined the
ranks of the unemployed, by those (sometimes the same people) under water on
their mortgages, and by perhaps 2m to 3m people (mainly in manufacturing
industries) whose pay has been frozen. Those were the companies most
affected by the exchange rate mechanism squeeze.
So against that background, what should happen next year?
Undoubtedly inflation will rise somewhat, as a result of devaluation. But if
Britain is to ensure that inflation falls back again quickly, and to lock in
the competitive advantage that devaluation offers, there is no case for
domestic pay rises to compensate for its effects on import prices. To secure
sustained improvements in the UK's trade performance a continuing period in
which unit labour costs do not rise is therefore needed. That would also
help to begin to get unemployment down.
Tight control of pay will be harder next year, and harder than it need be if
no management example is set. Disposable income will not have been inflated
by sharp falls in the mortgage rate, and tax rises will begin to bite next
April. But it will be as vital as ever to ensure that pay does not run ahead
of productivity performance, and preferably some way behind.
It is time the government began to make that clear, rather than hinting at
jam tomorrow. And the unions - if they want to make a useful contribution to
the reduction of unemployment - could explain the realities to their
members, rather than indulging in feel-good gestures such as the European
day of action.
The author is director-general of the CBI.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930423

