FT933-5169

FT  04 SEP 93 / Markets: Medicine starts working for drug houses - Wall
Street


   By RICHARD WATERS


US drug stocks managed a half-hearted cheer on Thursday on news that
President Clinton wasn't about to impose price controls as part of his
planned health care reforms. After the battering they have taken over the
past 18 months, though, few expect US pharmaceutical and other health-care
stocks to rebound further soon.
Thursday's advance came as welcome relief after the unremitting gloom of
recent months: the healthcare component of the S&P Composite index has
halved in value relative to the index as a whole since the beginning of
1992. News that the reform plan, details of which are due to be unveiled in
less than three weeks, would not peg prices in the industry helped to nudge
the leading drugs stocks up by as much as 5 per cent. Merck, the largest,
gained Dollars 1 5/8 to Dollars 33 1/8 , while the share prices of Pfizer
and Schering-Plough each rose by more than 3 per cent. Most drugs stocks
held on to their gains yesterday, though Merck lost Dollars  1/4 in early
trading.
However, drugs companies' earnings are not likely to see any early benefit
from the stance in Washington. While political control of drugs prices has
been only a theoretical threat, the companies have faced far more immediate
commercial pressures to hold down prices. Christina Heuer, an analyst at
Smith Barney Shearson, says: 'The problem is not Clinton, Washington or
politics at all. The problem is the market.'
Most leading groups have announced voluntary price restraints in recent
months, in part as a public relations exercise to head off the threat of
Washington-imposed regulation of prices. But such moves have also been a
tacit admission that the biggest buyers of drugs - particularly those who
buy through health management organisations to gain the clout that comes
with bulk purchasing - are demanding cuts in their health care bills. A
combination of political and commercial pressures could yet force drugs
prices lower.
The threat comes from the growth of discounting. Around a third of all drug
sales in the US are estimated to be made at a discount to bulk buyers, with
discounts regularly reaching 25 per cent and in some cases climbing as high
as 40 per cent. Washington's plans could eventually force drugs companies to
extend these discounts to all buyers. Health alliances, the name given to
the big cooperatives the Clinton administration plans to assemble to wrestle
lower prices from providers, will add to the pressures on prices.
Politicians are already asking: If discounts of up to 40 per cent are
available to some buyers, why shouldn't they be available to all?
Significantly, Washington made clear it that it would keep an eye out for
what it termed 'profiteering' in the health care industry. A politician's
definition of profiteering is usually very different from a businessman's or
a shareholder's, particularly if the industry concerned has few political
friends to spring to its defence.
Drug companies are also bracing themselves for a price war in the wake of
Merck's Dollars 6bn takeover of Medco Containment Services, the US's biggest
mail-order distributor of drugs, announced in July but yet to be completed.
Merck has made it clear that it will use the distributor to gain a greater
share of prescription drug sales, a process that will involve undercutting
competitors' prices.
Against this uncertain background, at least two other troubling factors have
hung over drug stocks. One is the slashing of tax breaks for manufacturing
operations based in Puerto Rico, confirmed in the Clinton budget package.
The move prompted Smith Barney to cut its estimates of net earnings in 1994
by 5 per cent, along with other analysts.
A second factor that overhangs share prices is the expiry in the near future
of a raft of US patents on prescription drugs. Tagamet, an ulcer drug
produced by SmithKline Beecham, loses patent protection next May, while
Glaxo's Zantac, the market leader, is currently embroiled in a legal action
over whether its patent should expire in 1995 or not until 2002.
The effects of expiring patents are not easy to predict, says Viren Mehta,
of Mehta & Islay in New York. Patent expiry on Tagamet, whose US sales have
already flagged in competition with Zantac, could hit Glaxo's sales in the
US far harder, since it has more to lose. Also, the question of whether
prescription drugs are able to make a transition to over-the-counter
treatments - a move planned for Naprosyn, an arthritis drug produced by
Syntex, whose patent runs out this year - will have a big influence on
future income.
 -----------------------------
Monday      3643.99  +  3.36
Tuesday     3651.25  +  7.26
Wednesday   3645.10  -  6.15
Thursday    3626.10  - 19
Friday      3633.93  +  7.83
 -----------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

930904

