FT932-6662

FT  27 MAY 93 / Dull can be dynamic: The Eurobond market has been
transformed since its launch 30 years ago


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


In June 1963, Autostrade, an Italian financing agency, issued Dollars 15m of
bonds through S G Warburg, the UK merchant bank, to build a motorway. Since
then, companies, banks, governments and agencies have borrowed more than
Dollars 2,000bn on the Eurobond market, according to IFR Securities Data,
which tracks Eurobond issues.
Once a small offshore market designed to circumvent regulatory barriers, the
Eurobond market today boasts outstanding bonds totalling an estimated
Dollars 1,300bn. Turnover in the market reached more than Dollars 7,000bn
last year, according to the International Securities Market Association
(Isma), the industry's trade body.
As dealers gather today in Copenhagen for Isma's annual meeting, they will
be celebrating the 30th anniversary of a market which has undergone radical
change.
'The market is virtually unrecognisable from the early days,' says Mr
Stanislaus Yassukovich, former head of the Securities Association and of
Merrill Lynch Europe. 'It is a high-volume, low-margin business, which no
longer requires the amount of executive attention that it got in the early
days.'
Twenty years ago, those entering the City from Oxbridge or the army became
stockbrokers. But by the middle 1980s, any lingering sense that working in
the Eurobond market was inferior had been cast off. The influx of US banks
and securities houses brought a spirit of meritocracy to the City, plus
competition between houses, which fuelled innovation but squeezed profits.
Some old hands lament the passing of the so-called 'star' system of
prominent bankers who once held sway over the market and were credited with
its growth.
'It has moved from a market dominated by individuals to a market dominated
by companies,' says Mr John Langton, chairman of Isma, who began his career
in the back office of Strauss Turnbull, a brokerage house.
Today, there are no personality cults, and nights at Annabels have been
curtailed by the demands of 7am starts. Traders who used to work on gut
instinct do not make a move without running charts through a computer.
'From the point of view of career satisfaction or intellectual interest,
it's duller,' said Mr Yassukovich.
But there are compensations - profit for one. The mature Eurobond market
which is emerging at the end of its third decade is also more lucrative. In
the 1990s, perhaps dull is good, because some of the reasons for the
market's new-found dullness are also at the root of its dynamic growth.
Over the past 10 years, retail investors, once easy game for aggressive
salesmen, have all but disappeared from the market, preferring instead to
place their money in pension funds or other collective investments. As a
result, the investor base of the Eurobond market now consists mainly of
professional institutional investors, whose analysis of the market is more
rigorous.
In addition, US houses started to use their own capital to trade themselves
from so-called 'arbitrage' desks. Initially, they made money by taking
advantage of the anomolies which existed between markets, but these were
gradually evened out in another step towards more rationally priced markets.
Second, the 1980s were a period of regulatory liberalisation. As the
barriers between markets fell away, restrictions on investment disappeared,
and instead of being a separate entity, removed from any domestic market
denominated in the same currency, Eurobonds became virtually
indistinguishable from many domestic bonds. This blurring of the lines made
it easier to compare value between markets.
In addition, the Latin American debt crisis of the early 1980s left banks
nursing their wounds, and unable or unwilling to meet the financing needs of
companies in the buoyant years of the 1980s. Many turned instead to the
Eurobond market, again broadening the range of investments available.
Last, the advent of the swaps market, which allows borrowers to swap the
proceeds of a bond issue into whichever currency is required, created
further freedom of movement between international and domestic markets.
The Eurobond market is now a vital, if not essential, source of funding for
agencies, governments, banks and companies around the world. For example,
when the upheavals of Europe's exchange rate mechanism last September left
several governments in urgent need of fresh funds to replenish their
reserves, the Eurobond market proved the cheapest and quickest source of
funds available.
While some dealers may start to get misty-eyed as they reminisce in
Copenhagen tonight, not everyone harks back to a golden age. Many are
relieved that the market has at last cast off its barrow-boy image. Tales of
salesmen arriving in the Middle East, armed with briefcases stuffed with
bond certificates and a strong sales pitch, and returning with wads of
petro-dollars, make for colourful bar-room anecdotes but do not foster the
impression of professionalism which is now considered de rigueur.
In any case, memory can prove deceptive. 'Don't let them kid you,' warns Mr
Peter Luthy, a partner of Luthy, Baillie, a bond boutique. 'There were a lot
of dull people and dull times in the old days too.'

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930527

