FT934-10068

FT  08 NOV 93 / Clinton waves big stick at N Korea


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


NORTH Korea 'cannot be allowed to build a nuclear bomb,' President Bill
Clinton asserted yesterday, and any attack by the north on South Korea will
be considered an attack on the US itself.
In a morning television interview which touched on several controversial
aspects of foreign policy, the president refused to discuss specific options
now under consideration, such as a possible pre-emptive strike against North
Korea's nuclear clear facilities. But he added, grimly, 'this is a very
grave issue'.
He said US relations with North Korea were at 'a difficult moment'. He used
similar words to describe Pyongyang's own current position, including its
political isolation, its big economic problems and its patent uncertainty
over whether to negotiate closer ties with South Korea or to remain
threatening towards it.
There was some disagreement, he said, inside his administration about the
best policy, but there had been extensive consultations with governments in
Seoul, Tokyo and Beijing - 'who are helping us to work through this'.
He did not comment on reports that North Korean troops had been massing just
north of the demilitarised zone separating the two Koreas. But he noted that
US forces were stationed in the DMZ and stood ready to rebut any assault.
Their engagement, he said, demonstrated that any offensive against South
Korea meant that the US would automatically be involved.
On other issues, Mr Clinton argued that the US was 'trying to strike the
right balance' in its relations with China. He had been 'firmer and colder'
than his predecessor on human rights and weapons sales disagreements but he
was pleased with the 'consistent' US approach on the economic front and with
the emergence of the US as a growing market for Chinese exports.
'We believe that market reforms and decentralisation will promote democracy'
in China, he said.
Mr Clinton said his preferred course on Haiti was to tighten the sanctions
against the military regime in Port-au-Prince and he urged other nations to
follow the US in freezing the assets of its leaders. But he did not rule out
widening the oil and arms embargo.
Nor did he absolutely exclude a US invasion to restore to power Mr
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the ousted president. Comparisons, however, could
not be drawn with the US invasion of Panama in 1989 because of the absence
of any Haitian request for such action. He also refused to criticise the
Central Intelligence Agency for providing Congress with a report questioning
Mr Aristide's mental stability and commitment to democracy.
Generally, Mr Clinton expressed full confidence in his foreign policy team.
Some of the attacks on Mr Warren Christopher and Mr Les Aspin, secretaries
of state and defence, were 'quite unfair.'
He acknowledged three 'inherited' problems in Bosnia, Somalia and Haiti, but
was pleased with progress made on Russia, the Middle East, on raising the
profile on economic security issues and in reforming the Pentagon.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

931108

