FT934-10212

FT  06 NOV 93 / UK Company News: The tell-tale signs that set the alarm
bells ringing / Profile of Queens Moat Houses on the run up to suspension


   By MAGGIE URRY, PEGGY HOLLINGER and MICHAEL SKAPINKER


THE MORE that is learnt of the Queens Moat Houses story, the more worrying
is the picture painted of life in what was once a sizeable public company.
The case raises disturbing questions for investors and regulators alike.
As the Financial Times pieced together the last months at QMH before the
shares' suspension in March - through conversations with former executive
directors, all of whom have resigned, new management, advisers,
shareholders, analysts and hotel managers - a yet more frightening tale
emerged.
Directors claim to have had no knowledge of the severity of the company's
difficulties only days before the Stock Exchange announcement of the shares
suspension, sticking to profit forecasts for 1992 of Pounds 80m to Pounds
85m. QMH last week reported a Pounds 1.04bn 1992 loss.
Advisers, except Bird Luckin, the group's auditors, which has refused to
make any comment, all say they were kept in the dark as to the true extent
of QMH's problems, only being told hours before the suspension.
Investors, advisers, rivals and observers have already been shocked by the
size of the losses and the apparent lack of nitty-gritty financial controls
which has been revealed by the new management.
As the tale unfolds, concern must deepen that a quoted company could be run,
and continue to be run, in such a shambolic manner. And that the checks and
controls which should have picked up and prevented the QMH disaster had
totally failed.
Mr John Bairstow, chairman and until December 1992 joint managing director,
says the new management is 'kitchen-sinking' the figures and that the report
produced by Grant Thornton, accountants called in after the suspension, in
May showed a less dramatic picture. Although he admits QMH's current
difficulty 'has to be regarded as mismanagement' he says: 'I see this as a
profits downturn after many years of successful trading.'
Advisers, no doubt anxious not to take the blame, point the finger at the
directors. Says one: 'Everybody has to rely on the directors, even the
auditors. If the directors are taking responsibility for the accounts,
investors, brokers, merchant banks and lending banks are entitled to rely on
that. We had no reason to see the management accounts'.
However, they each claim they were advising and putting pressure on the
company to address perceived problems.
Many investors and analysts had concerns about QMH long before the share
price began to plummet last summer. Rival hotel groups wondered how QMH kept
producing better profits than they did.
One large investor says: 'It made profits every year but cashflow was
negative all the time, and it had lots of rights issues. That rang alarm
bells.'
He says other pointers were the 'small, obscure auditing firm', the
depreciation policy - QMH did not depreciate its properties, fixtures and
fittings, Mr Bairstow was once quoted saying 'you can't depreciate
appreciating assets' - and the incentive scheme under which many hotels were
run. Although, he says, he did not entirely believe the record of sharply
rising profits, 'we must have believed it a bit'.
These worries began to crystallise when interim results were published in
mid-August last year. Pre-tax profits were ahead from Pounds 36.2m to Pounds
38.1m and the dividend increased. Mr Bairstow said then that the group was
'cautiously optimistic' because despite the UK recession 'prospects for
profitable growth and expansion in western Europe continue to be highly
attractive'. Debt stood at Pounds 790m, which he called 'comfortable' and
assets were worth over Pounds 2bn.
At this stage analysts were predicting full year profits of up to Pounds
95m, up from the Pounds 90.4m made in 1991, a figure since restated at a
loss of Pounds 56.3m.
Yet the share price fell sharply, from 70p before the results to 27 1/2 p by
mid-September. Analysts and shareholders were especially concerned about the
rising level of debt, which had stood at Pounds 709.3m in the 1991 balance
sheet, and that continental trading conditions would deteriorate.
The directors who made presentations to the City including Mr David Hersey,
finance director, and Mr Martin Marcus, joint managing director, were taken
aback by the severity of questioning from analysts over the debt and its
interest cover covenants and by the fall in the share price. 'The market
took a much stronger view of breaking covenants than we ever did,' says Mr
Marcus.
Immediately after the results it began an intensive round of talks with
shareholders, trying to persuade them that the debt was not a problem and
trading conditions in continental Europe were holding up.
Frew Macmaster, an investor relations firm, was appointed in the autumn.
Like QMH's joint brokers de Zoete & Bevan, it took soundings among investors
and drew up a long list of concerns about the company ranging from the
auditors to the quality and structure of the board, including its
non-executive directors.
The reaction from QMH to the criticisms seems to have been one of surprise.
'It's been alright for years, what's wrong now?' was the way one adviser
characterised the company's response.
By November the group realised UK profits were coming in lower than
budgeted. The company guided the market's profit expectations towards Pounds
80m to Pounds 85m. This was still the number it told analysts it was
comfortable with when it saw them in late December and early January.
Brokers and bankers are amazed that a company could have so little idea of
the true profits - as they turned out - at this stage of its financial year.
'Management controls cannot have been in place,' says one adviser.
Management maintains it did not know that anything was wrong. 'We, sitting
in Romford (the head office), were quite happy that the figures produced on
a monthly basis would add up to the profit we were indicating,' a former
senior director says.
Also during the autumn of 1992 QMH was making urgent attempts to cut debt,
mainly by attempting to do more sale and leaseback deals - although as one
adviser says, that would do no more than shift the debt off balance sheet.
He says QMH 'had a naive belief in the opaqueness of off balance sheet
debt'.
About the same time it began negotiating an incentive scheme with its German
management, eventually signed on the last day of the financial year. Like
the incentive schemes in the UK, this would allow the group to take on day
one profits promised from hotel managers for the following 12 months. This
deal alone would have added Pounds 20m to QMH's 1992 profits.
Pressure was also being applied to the hotel managers, with those on
incentive schemes - where a fee for the year was agreed in advance - given
targets which were increasingly impossible to meet.
Mr Dennis Woodhams, who ran the Falcon Hotel in Stratford-upon-Avon until he
was dismissed last October, says 'they got greedy initially. Later, they
squeezed the managers out of desperation'. He says on one trip to Romford
early last year to discuss delaying his payments he found he was one of six
managers there that day for the same reason.
Also in the autumn, QMH started the lengthy process of renegotiating its
D-Mark multi-option facility. By this time the level of the group's debt had
shot up because sterling's exit from the ERM meant foreign currency
borrowings translated to far higher numbers.
Even so, talks with the banks were going well. But they depended critically
on the Pounds 80m-plus profit forecast.
The comforting messages and the appearance that some action was being taken
to address questions about the board structure helped the share price to
recover from its September low to a high of 59p in early February. It was at
this time that Mr Marcus sold 1.1m shares at prices of 57p and 57 1/2 p,
just before the group's closed period, when directors cannot deal in shares.
Mr Marcus sold his shares through Beeson Gregory, the smaller of the
company's two joint brokers. Mr John Gregory, partner, said his only concern
in handling the sale was to check it was not being made in the closed
period.
The sale raised yet more questions in advisers' and shareholders' minds. One
investor said it was that sale which prompted him to sell. One adviser
speaks of feeling 'incredibly let down' and another says 'we heard about it
through the market'.
By late March negotiations on the MOF had reached the final stages and the
company was due to report 1992 figures on April 7. Directors were still
sticking by the profit forecast it had fed to brokers. One adviser, working
on the presentation of the results, asked Mr Marcus for the final numbers
and was told to use the analysts' forecasts.
Former directors now say that they had not yet seen results from the
continental businesses, which were expected to contribute about half of
group profits. These were being audited as usual by Arthur Andersen and
Coopers & Lybrand, but were late in arriving in Romford.
They finally arrived on Friday March 26. The Romford financial team worked
round the clock that weekend to consolidate them with the UK numbers. But
when they added them up the total came to Pounds 20m less than the
management accounts had led directors to expect. 'It was a big shock,' one
ex-director says.
By the morning of Tuesday March 30 it was apparent the group was Pounds 20m
short of the profit forecast on which the MOF renegotiation depended. And it
would be unable to pay a Pounds 6 1/2 m preference dividend due that
Thursday.
Mr Bairstow insists that the first he knew was when he was told by Mr Allan
Porter, deputy finance director, that the company might not be able to pay
the dividend because of what he thought was a technicality. It was only when
he asked more questions of the finance team he found there was a problem on
profits too.
Mr Bairstow says QMH decided it would not then be appropriate to take in the
Pounds 20m due from the new German incentive scheme. That cut profits to
around Pounds 40m. Mr Bairstow says that once he saw that figure there was
no point trying to come up with an accurate number since the covenants were
already broken. He also says the original Pounds 80m-plus forecast included
around Pounds 20m of 'auditing adjustments' which QMH was accustomed to take
into annual profits. But with these adjustments such as capitalising
interest and expenses, not yet made, profits were nearer Pounds 20m.
He then rang Charterhouse, QMH's merchant bank, alerting them to 'a bit of a
problem on profits' as one adviser put it. Mr Bairstow plays down the
difficulties. 'We had Pounds 110m of unused facilities and Pounds 30m in
cash. It was not a case of a company not being able to write cheques'.
Other advisers were called to a meeting at Charterhouse on the Wednesday
morning and were stunned as they heard the news. One says, Charterhouse said
that instead of the Pounds 80m profits expected there would be a loss,
although the size could not at that point be quantified.
'Everyone was gob-smacked,' says another adviser. Mr Bairstow asserts he was
as much in the dark as outsiders. But one says: 'Bairstow seemed as
astonished as the others - but he was the sort of man who likes to know
everything'.
Shareholders too were astounded. They can blame themselves for not being
more prudent in investing in a company over which so many doubts hung. But
as the group's advisers agree, shareholders could gain no inkling of the
depth and severity of QMH's problems from its published statements.
If, as former directors claim, the board did not know either, this must be
the central question for regulators' inquiries.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931106

