FT933-12646

FT  23 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: Eels and deals in pursuit of a
watertight passage - War of nerves continues to last minute as Maastricht
social chapter issue reaches a stormy Commons climax


   By RALPH ATKINS


MR JOHN MAJOR tried to conjure an image of serene determination. He seemed
to see Maastricht as a stately swan, enjoying an inexorable drift towards
ratification. This he implied, was a day for a spot of fishing or baiting
the opposition parties.
But beneath the surface, government business managers paddled frantically to
stop the ship sinking.
A shaft of July sun through the high windows of the Commons' chamber turned
the prime minister's grey hair to a bright silver.
On the benches opposite sat the menacing figure of Mr James Molyneaux,
Ulster Unionist leader, and - in a eagle's nest position in the gallery -
the bespectacled Mr James Cran, a Tory Euro-sceptic ring-leader.
The drama had begun to unfold earlier. The cabinet met, the whips began
calculations. On the terrace at lunchtime, it was jolly weather for messing
about with votes.
Would Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, have to rise from
his sick bed? Perhaps a boat down the Thames from his Oxfordshire home,
suggested an aide. The nine Ulster Unionist MPs met and discussed tactics,
but remained silent on how they would vote.
Over lunch, Tory Euro-sceptics were confident of victory. Later they were
not so sure. 'The social chapter is difficult for some of our boys to vote
for,' admited one. 'But the whips are running around like red-bummed bees.'
By evening, as Mr Major gave his end-of term pep talk to the 1922 Committee,
there was loud desk thumping. But later news of an emergency cabinet meeting
triggered deep Tory fears that his appeal to loyalty would not be enough.
In the chamber, as rational debate turned to fractious political
point-scoring, it was clear the plot was being hatched elsewhere. Mr Richard
Ryder, the chief whip, was not in his usual seat; Mr Molyneaux held his
order papers to his lips as he confered with colleagues.
But the prime minister's performance was effective nevertheless. Loyal MPs
cheered as Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, was left flustered by
a homely metaphor of a boy fisher catching a wriggling eel. It was Mr Major
on the soap-box - humble but passionate, grateful for support.
'I am always delighted to accept a sinner returning home,' he said as Mr
John Carlisle renounced his links with the Euro-rebels.
With his meek grin and the air of a man staking his political reputation on
the Commons' votes, the prime minister might have chosen words direct from
the Old Testament: 'Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930723

