FT933-12553

FT  23 JUL 93 / Laden ship in less stormy waters: John Plender assesses the
likely price and prospects for the Fayeds' sale of House of Fraser


   By JOHN PLENDER


The controversial Fayed brothers, owners of the heavily indebted House of
Fraser group, have demonstrated remarkable powers of survival through
Britain's recession.
But will the proposed flotation of their stores, other than the flagship
Harrods store in Knightsbridge which the Fayeds intend to retain, generate
enough cash to keep the bankers at bay and ward off the threat of
receivership?
Any judgment hinges primarily on the valuation of the subsidiary that owns
the shops in question, House of Fraser (Stores), where chairman Ali Fayed
stepped down earlier this week in favour of Mr Brian McGowan of Williams
Holdings. In effect, Mr McGowan is working for the group's bankers, who have
tightened their grip on the House of Fraser business empire following a
refinancing of debt at the end of April. As well as extending fixed and
floating charges to the whole group, including Harrods, 11 banks in three
separate syndicates have taken very restrictive covenants governing the
Fayeds' ability to dispose of assets.
The starting point for the analysis must be profit; and the record is
undeniably patchy. After the Fayeds' controversial takeover of House of
Fraser in the mid-1980s, a five-year plan presented to a banking syndicate
led by Samuel Montagu projected profits rising from Pounds 57m in 1986 to
Pounds 181m in the year to January 1991. Instead of this threefold rise, the
Fayeds' stewardship delivered a fall in profits to Pounds 40m at end-January
1992 for House of Fraser including Harrods.
Equally important, there is a credibility problem, arising from a Department
of Trade inspectors' report in 1988 which concluded that, in the course of
their original takeover, the Fayeds 'dishonestly misrepresented their
origins, their wealth, their business interests and their resources to the
secretary of state, the Office of Fair Trading, the press, the House of
Fraser board and House of Fraser shareholders, and their own advisers'. The
inspectors also detailed numerous cases 'where the Fayeds were plainly
telling us lies'.
This inevitably casts a further shadow over the record, which shows that in
the three years to end-January 1993 pre-tax profits of House of Fraser
(Stores), which excludes Harrods, went from Pounds 30.5m to Pounds 18.4m to
Pounds 32.8m. And the figures are not quite what they seem. In 1992, the
last year for which accounts are available at Companies House, more than
Pounds 12m of the Pounds 18.4m profit came from insurance payments for two
store fires, a surplus on the disposal of the company's credit operations to
a financial subsidiary of US General Electric, and a credit from the House
of Fraser pension fund.
Since accounts have yet to be filed for the year to January 1993, it is
impossible to analyse the quality of the Pounds 32.8m that House of Fraser
(Stores) is reported to have made. But on past form the figure may not be a
reliable guide to the sustainable level of profit that the stores are able
to generate.
As for assets, the Fayeds have retained a relatively high proportion of
freehold and long leasehold interests in their 59-store chain, when compared
with rival store groups, which lends apparent strength to their balance
sheet. But the figures raise a number of questions. Frequent revaluations
have produced the paradoxical result that in a period that included the
worst slump in retail property rents and values since the 1930s, and House
of Fraser itself saw a marked decline in its own profitability and dividend
cover, net worth rose from Pounds 503m in the mid-1980s to Pounds 811m in
1992. Even allowing for redevelopment and refurbishment, this looks
astonishing. It is also fortunate for the Fayeds, in that House of Fraser's
covenants to its bankers included a requirement to increase net worth by 5
per cent a year.
Taking House of Fraser (Stores) itself, property was in the books at Pounds
245m which, coincidentally, is the same as the company's net worth. But this
is on the basis not of an independent valuation, but a valuation by the
directors after taking 'independent professional advice'. The outcome, in
the year to January 1992, when property market conditions were exceptionally
depressed, was a revaluation surplus credited to reserves of Pounds 9.3m.
Against this background it seems unlikely that House of Fraser (Stores)
could be floated at anything near the average stock market rating for the
stores sector, where shares are valued at about 21 times earnings. For
purposes of illustration, assume a price/earnings multiple of 15, a
sustainable level of profit of Pounds 30m and earnings after tax of about
Pounds 20m. That profit figure may sound high, but after allowing for an
improving trend in UK retailing, the elimination of management charges from
the holding company, rationalisation benefits and other adjustments, it may
be plausible. A flotation might then be expected to bring in Pounds 300m -
not far from the Pounds 290m figure rumoured for a management buy-out that
failed to materialise earlier this year. How helpful would this be in
relation to the Fayeds' debt burden?
Working from data in documents recently filed at Companies House it is
possible to calculate that the House of Fraser group companies' loan
facilities and overdrafts after the refinancing on April 30 amounted to at
least Pounds 668m. Assume, for the sake of argument, that the Fayeds sell
the assets of another affiliate which they propose to retain, House of
Fraser Property Investment, which consist chiefly of the Barkers Centre in
Kensington, London, for close to their 1992 valuation of Pounds 122m; assume
equally generously that they make other disposals to bring total debt down
to Pounds 500m; and the result, after a flotation next year, would be a rump
of debt of Pounds 200m.
The move to float means that a decision has to be taken as to how much of
that debt should go into the balance sheet of House of Fraser (Stores). At
least half of the Pounds 200m could probably safely be included without
producing a ratio of debt to equity that would scare investors - quite
possibly more. The question would then be whether Harrods on its own could
service the rump of outstanding debt.
It ought to be possible for Harrods to raise operating profits before
interest, after writing back pension credits, from the Pounds 27m reported
in 1992 to at least Pounds 30m. That would be ample to service any plausible
interest rate on Pounds 100m of borrowings in today's market conditions. In
other words, there would be no difficulty in servicing the debt. That, of
course, is still on generous assumptions; and the leverage in the figures is
considerable. If market conditions called for a less generous price/earnings
ratio on House of Fraser (Stores) of nearer to 10, earnings came out way
below expectations and the asset disposals failed to generate the requisite
cash, then Harrods' operating profits might still have some difficulty
covering borrowing costs.
The Fayeds are not yet out of the wood. And any false move on the path to
flotation would raise, once again, the old question of whether their
personal resources outside House of Fraser Holdings can meet any shortfall
of profit against interest, which has been running at Pounds 26m before
exceptional items and tax in the last two reported years.
All that can be said here is that, in the few areas where information is
available, the going is getting harder - most notably at the Fayeds' Paris
Ritz Hotel, whose accumulated losses since acquisition in 1979 exceed Pounds
112m at today's exchange rates on the basis of the last filed accounts. Bank
borrowings at the Ritz were due to start being repaid in February this year.
There are countless imponderables in the equation. But given that the banks
have been prepared to refinance House of Fraser and that the economy has
turned, the odds are looking more favourable for the Fayeds' survival than
for some considerable time. It is certainly less likely that Tiny Rowland of
Lonrho, whose legal pursuit of the Fayeds grinds on in the courts, will have
the satisfaction of seeing an early forced sale of Harrods.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930723

