FT932-3101

FT  16 JUN 93 / Inner-city proposals extended


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


THE government yesterday named eight further construction projects it would
like developed jointly by private and public-sector interests, and published
guidelines for companies wishing to fund and develop projects traditionally
financed by the public sector.
The eight, expected to cost a total of several hundred million pounds, are
all inner city projects in the Midlands, and in north-west and north-east
England.
They include two in Coventry and two in Rochdale as well as schemes in
Liverpool, Gateshead, Sunderland and London Docklands where 70 acres of land
in the former Royal Victoria dock are being offered for development.
Much of the land identified for development is owned by public authorities,
such as local authorities or urban development corporations.
The London Docklands Development Corporation announced yesterday that it
proposed, for its land in the Royal Docks, an exhibition centre of 100,000
square metres 'to provide London with a centre of national importance and
allow it to compete in the international exhibition market'. The proposal
attracted immediate hostility from Mr Terry Golding, chief executive of the
National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham.
The environment department guidelines, announced by Sir George Young,
construction minister, would allow public authorities to hand over land free
of payment to private developers in return for a share of future profits.
The latest schemes are in addition to a list of 21 costing more than Pounds
1bn which Mr John Redwood, then environment minister, earlier this year
identified as candidates for public/private-sector joint ventures.
These included a new airport for Sheffield, a power station for London's
Docklands and a road tunnel under the River Tyne.
Sir George said the Nunnery Square development in Sheffield, involving
Sheffield Development Corporation and the Glenlivet Property Company,
provided a good example of how public/private partnerships could work.
The development corporation would receive no initial payment for its 11
acres of land but would receive a share of the profits as the 130,000 sq ft
office development was let. On the back of the deal, Glenlivet had been able
to raise Pounds 3m from 10 private investors including pension funds,
individuals and other financial institutions. As a result, no loan finance
had been required for the development.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930616

