FT931-4085

FT  12 MAR 93 / Leading Article: Taurus done to death


OVER THE past decade and a half, the business of running a stock exchange
has undergone a dramatic transformation. Instead of being cosy, monopolistic
utilities run by club committees, most exchanges now operate in
internationally contestable markets. They have less power over their members
and less ready access to their members' pockets; to survive, they have to
demonstrate credible managerial skills. Against the background of this harsh
new market discipline, the London Stock Exchange's botched attempt to
introduce a paperless settlement system, Taurus, suggests that the shelf
life of this august body may be rather less than previously assumed.
To say that the exchange was over-ambitious with its computer plans
laughably understates the case. Nor is the cost of the debacle restricted to
the Pounds 400m or more that has gone into preparations for Taurus in the
City and in industry, where listed companies have incurred expenditure in
anticipation of paperless trading. The antediluvian system that now gains a
new lease of life is administratively inefficient for investors, brokers and
companies, and needlessly ties up capital in the securities system. It falls
woefully short of the target set by the Group of 30, an influential think
tank of former policy makers, for three-day rolling settlement.
Given that the development of this computerised system constituted a crucial
challenge for the exchange's chief executive Mr Peter Rawlins, it is
appropriate that he should have tendered his resignation. In the City,
unlike the cabinet, it seems that the buck does actually stop somewhere. The
question is how much damage has been done.
International role
As far as the City's international role is concerned, there will no doubt be
celebration in Paris and Frankfurt, but no great gain in business. While
settlement is important - and better managed in those two continental
European cities - it is not the central factor in deciding where securities
business is done.
Institutional investors attach more importance to liquidity, dealing costs,
research and other services. A recent survey by the London Stock Exchange
into dealing costs in other markets suggests that London remains the most
competitive centre for large transactions, even without the reduction in
stamp duty that the government had promised, to coincide with the
introduction of Taurus.
Despite the shortcomings of settlement in London, the stock exchange's SEAQ
International dealing system claims to have 90 per cent of Europe's
cross-border equity turnover. If settlement were crucial, trading in
overseas stocks would not account for 50 per cent of the London Stock
Exchange's business.
London's strength
London's real strength in securities trading is not on its organised
exchanges but in over-the-counter markets trading in eurobonds, swaps,
currency forwards and the rest. Here the service providers range from
information technology groups like Reuters to international banks. They
constitute as great, or possibly a greater competitive threat to the London
Stock Exchange, than the market authorities in Paris and Frankfurt.
The decision to ask the Bank of England what to do makes some sense.
Settlement is not unlike a public good: the incentive for the potential
beneficiaries is not sufficient for them to set up a system on their own
initiative. Cooperative effort is therefore needed. The snag is that the
Bank of England was deeply involved in trying to reconcile the conflicting
interests in the system that went so disastrously wrong by trying to
accommodate too many of their demands.
Whether the collapse of Taurus will give the Bank new leverage to persuade
bank registrars, companies and securities houses to make sacrifices in the
wider interest remains to be seen. But it would seem, at the very least,
that the task of developing a new system should be offered around more
widely. There is plenty of expertise in payments and settlements in the
international banking fraternity and elsewhere. The poor light cast on the
Stock Exchange's management by the Taurus disaster suggests that a
diminished role for the exchange would be in order.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930312

