FT933-10237

FT  05 AUG 93 / Management: The man with no name - Bernard Simon on a
Canadian retailer's crusade to outsell established brands with generic
products


   By BERNARD SIMON


A glance at the bank of computer screens in Dave Nichol's Toronto office is
enough to appreciate how the power in North American supermarkets is
shifting away from brand-name groceries.
With a few clicks of his mouse, Nichol, president of Loblaw International
Merchants, the marketing arm of Canada's biggest food retailer, calls up the
latest weekly, brand-by-brand sales of ketchup in 200 Loblaw stores across
Ontario.
The top performer, as is the case most weeks, is President's Choice,
Loblaw's own brand. Products made by HJ Heinz, the name synonymous with
ketchup, are bunched further down the list.
The rows of data on the computer screen also explain Loblaw's determination
to keep things that way. Every penny of profit from ketchup sales during
this particular week came from President's Choice products. The average
margin on Heinz and other manufacturers' brands was negative.
Nichol and his colleagues are in the forefront of a 'brand-busting' crusade.
Their confidence stems from signs that shoppers around the world are
deserting the products promoted by powerful manufacturers, such as Procter &
Gamble, Unilever, Coca-Cola, Philip Morris and Nestle, in favour of
high-quality but cheaper brands controlled by retailers.
Retailer-controlled brands are known by various names, including generic,
private label and no-name. What they have in common is that their pricing,
shelf space and promotion are entirely in the hands of the retailer, not the
manufacturer.
Nichol is among those predicting doom and gloom for the old-style,
manufacturer-controlled brands, also known in North America as national
brands.
In a fiery speech, which he delivers every few weeks somewhere in North
America, he maintains that food manufacturers are facing a 'brand tax
revolt' as consumers 'slash away at all their traditional shopping habits to
get better value for their money. Massive, bloated marketing and advertising
budgets (are) designed to disguise the fact that (national brands) are
nothing more than commodities masquerading as unique products'.
Nichol predicts that 'retailer-controlled brand penetration in excess of 40
per cent is inevitable in the US. Traditional food retailers who do not
achieve these levels in the next 10 years will not survive'.
In creating their own brands, Nichol and his boss, Richard Currie, president
of Loblaw Companies, the parent organisation, readily acknowledge their debt
to such European retailers as Marks and Spencer and Sainsbury in the UK, and
France's Carrefour.
Loblaw has recruited managers from M&S's Canadian subsidiary, as well as
from South Africa's Woolworths (not related to the FW Woolworth group),
whose products and marketing strategies are closely modelled on M&S.
Retailer brands have a far higher market share in Europe than in North
America. Saturation advertising on US television helped boost consumer
awareness of national brands in the 1960s and 1970s. Furthermore, the food
retailing business is more fragmented in North America and for many years
the manufacturer has held the balance of power.
European retailers are still widely admired for their product development.
But the struggle to take market share away from national brands has given
North American chains such as Loblaw the edge in marketing and promotion. 'I
don't know whether anyone can match Dave Nichol as a salesman,' says George
Rosenbaum, president of Leo Shapiro & Associates, a Chicago market research
company.
Loblaw's biggest breakthrough was the campaign that propelled President's
Choice Decadent chocolate-chip cookies past a Nabisco product to become
Canada's most popular biscuit. President's Choice overtook Nabisco by using
butter instead of shortening, putting in 50 per cent more chocolate chips,
and selling at a lower price.
The achievement is especially remarkable because President's Choice products
are available at only about one-fifth of the supermarkets that stock Nabisco
brands.
Loblaw's success in chocolate-chip cookies has wider implications. 'If you
want to buy Canada's best-selling cookie, you have to come to one of our
stores,' Nichol says. 'When you have 100 unique products that have a
franchise like the Decadent and are available only in your store, you're
unbeatable.'
One of Loblaw's most effective marketing tools is its 16-page Insider's
Report, inserted in newspapers across Canada three or four times a year. The
report advertises dozens of President's Choice products with the help of
cartoons, a friendly, informal text and large slabs of yellow highlights on
each page. Loblaw estimates that each edition of the Insider's Report
generates sales of CDollars 30m-CDollars 50m (Pounds 15.60m-Pounds 26.00m).
Nichol also appears as the face of President's Choice in television and
radio ads. Unlike most manufacturers, however, Loblaw has no outside
advertising agency and uses its own studio. According to Nichol, the company
produces its President's Choice television commercials for less than
CDollars 10,000 apiece - a fraction of the cost of an ad for a typical
national brand such as Coca-Cola.
Loblaw recently started selling President's Choice recipe videos and has
begun publishing an Insider's Report cook book, in which all the recipes
have at least one President's Choice product as an essential ingredient.
The success of President's Choice in Canada has led Loblaw to start
exporting its product-development and marketing expertise. It has helped
Wal-Mart, the big US retailer, launch a variety of Sam's American Choice
groceries, and other US chains sell products under the President's Choice
label. Coles Myer, the largest Australian food retailer, last month
introduced Australia's Choice snacks, juices and cookies (including
Decadent). President's Choice products will appear on the shelves of Hong
Kong's Park 'n Shop chain later this year.
These chains pay Loblaw a development fee. Currie and Nichol decline to
reveal how much, beyond saying that it is far below what any retailer would
pay to develop its own brands from scratch.
These licensing agreements are the start of what Nichol predicts will be a
growing web of international alliances among retailers, determined to weaken
manufacturers' influence on supermarket marketing and pricing strategies.
Loblaw and its licensees in the US and Australia are co-ordinating their
orders this Christmas for several million dollars of chocolate-covered
biscuits from Delacre, a Belgian manufacturer. The chances are that they
have extracted much better terms by pooling their purchases than any one of
the companies could have negotiated by itself.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930805

