FT932-144

FT  30 JUN 93 / Arts: Good sports come dressed to kill - Television


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


Moving News At 10 means the end of serious commercial television, according
to Sir David Nicholas, who was for many years the inspirational chief
executive at ITN. But the truth is surely the other way about: the ending of
serious commercial television in Britain is leading inevitably to the moving
of News At 10. Argument continues about where to put ITV's main bulletin
within peak time (between 6.00 and 10.30) but commercial forces demand that
the ten o'clock slot be cleared so that 'adult' drama and movies can be
screened uninterrupted - except by commercials, of course - after the nine
o'clock watershed, and commercial considerations are now paramount in ITV.
That, among other things, is what the British people have consistently voted
for over the last 15 years. As promised, successive Conservative
administrations have pursued a market philosophy, forcing commercial
competition into everything from health to transport. Broadcasting was a
particular target. Now, having destroyed the benign, albeit fortuitously
conceived, duopoly system which provided such an extraordinary flow of high
quality programmes from the BBC and ITV, the government, with its new rules
for broadcasting, has ensured that News At 10 will cease to be. The only
alternative is to reverse the entire thrust of recent broadcasting
legislation, replace 'light touch control' with a statist rod of iron, and
force ITV to stick with a ten o'clock news. Having sown the wind we are
reaping the whirlwind. It was all quite foreseeable and predicted here:
public service broadcasting in the commercial sector is going down the
tubes, Gresham's law is operating, bad is driving out good, and tabloid
telly is taking over.
Watching this week's tennis, athletics and boxing makes you wonder what
television's ideal sports personalities will be like in the year 2003.
Television has already made them peculiarly boastful and startlingly sexy:
how much further down that road can matters proceed? That television is now
the chief driving force behind virtually every development in sport seems
unmistakable, and, just as members of the Flying Squad began to imitate the
characters they saw on screen in The Sweeney, so sportsmen and women today
clearly seem to take the pictures they see on television as the pattern upon
which to model themselves.
In the old days you would have known how Stanley Matthews looked if he
happened to play for your local team, and anybody anywhere might have known
his face from a cigarette card. But to most of the world the details of his
body below the shoulders would have been a mystery. Today we are all
intimately familiar not only with John Regis's pectoral development, but
with the precise delineation of his primary sexual characteristics: you can
hardly miss them as he comes hurtling into the camera covered only in a
thin, tight layer of Lycra. Among women athletes matters have gone even
further. Some at the Rome meeting extensively covered over the weekend by
the BBC favoured a brief top and skin tight pants, leaving the navel bare,
like the presenters on the satellite rock video channel, MTV. Others opted
for one-piece Lycra outfits, much like the modern bathing suit, cut high on
the thigh, low on the bust, and explicitly close in the crotch. The
assertion that this sort of tight-fitting outfit is more comfortable than a
conventional pair of shorts and a loose vest would carry more conviction if
lipstick, nail varnish and ear rings were less in evidence; and if hair
stylists are not actually attending in dressing rooms these days, they must
be lurking close by. The reasons are hardly difficult to guess: people such
as the German long jumper Heike Drechsler are now paid huge sums in
endorsement fees, and advertisers prefer their heroes and heroines to look
sexy and photogenic. Heike sprinting into the lens with baggy shorts
flapping will sell fewer carbonated drinks, presumably, than Heike flaunting
her all like something out of Penthouse. And once the Heike Drechslers have
set the trend other athletes, even if lacking endorsement contracts, copy
the look, Sweeney like.
As for boastfulness, it can reach embarrassing levels, perhaps because
sportsmen, encouraged to be self-confident, now use in the first person
singular the sort of descriptive passages they have heard from television
commentators and coaches who speak, of course, in the third person.
Interviewed on BBC2 on Sunday after his magnificent win in the 5000 metres
at Rome, Rob Denmark said inter alia: 'I was really pleased with the way I
ran it, I was cool, I was composed . . . I kept thinking 'You're better than
all the others' . . . I just ran the perfect race . . . I was very pleased
with the way I ran it . . . I ran a very brave race and it's an
understatement to say I'm absolutely delighted . . . I think it shows my
maturity that I'm confident enough to do that.'
The days of the strong, silent, sporting hero are apparently over. With
television calling the shots and creating the personalities which are wanted
by the marketing chaps, the sports stars of the future will have to
complement their weight training with media management courses to handle all
the stadium interviews and personal grooming lessons to prepare them for the
cameras. This is not exaggeration. The interview beside track, court or ring
is now an integral part of the television presentation; television
interviews are written into Wimbledon contracts. When Loyd Honeyghan fought
Vinnie Pazienza on ITV on Sunday the former wore some sort of black
loincloth and the latter matching shorts and boots covered in umpteen layers
of shimmering gold.
Given this transformation of sport into an arm of television marketing, it
seems a pity that television continues to be so poor at righting the balance
a bit by organising series which keep a journalistic eye on the subject. The
latest, ITV's Sport In Question, turns out to be a sequence of saloon bar
arguments in which, as ever, the panel of 'experts' and 'celebrities' are
given the lion's share of the time, and the members of the studio audience,
as ever, hardly get a look in. The development of sport, marketing and
television into a single seamless entity appears at present to be
irresistible.
Any defender of freedom of expression would want to champion the BBC's right
to dramatise DH Lawrence's Lady Chatterley which ended on Sunday, but how
embarrassing if we have to defend Ken Russell's production. A mixture of
playfulness and banality, it offered neither a faithful version of the
printed original nor an outrageous Russell romp. The real Russell is a
big-screen image maker, and there were occasional reminders of this: however
much of a visual cliche, the shot of Connie in pure white searching a
glistening black coal tip for her lover was momentarily breathtaking, and
the carefully reversed shots showing her return to Wragby Hall, first from
below the steps, then from inside the porch, made a pleasant change in a
medium which cares so little about mise en scene.
But too often it made you cringe. Russell will insist on acting in his own
works these days, and then turning in weirdly ham performances, this time
playing Connie's father as a cross between John Bull and Father Christmas.
His willingness to exchange Lawrence's heart searching for schlock fiction
emerged most clearly in the absurd happy ending where Mellors, gazing sadly
into the steamer's wake as he leaves for a new life in Canada, hears the
tannoy announcing 'Lady Jane is waiting for Sir John Thomas on the upper
deck, please come' (nudge nudge) 'immediately'. The odd thing is that
Russell's past work suggests he believes as much as Lawrence did in the
redemptive power of sexual passion, yet you would never guess it from this
work.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930630

