FT932-13320

FT  23 APR 93 / International Bonds: French franc sector generates interest
as currency stabilises


   By SARA WEBB


THE French franc sector of the Eurobond market continued to draw issuers
yesterday as borrowers were keen to take advantage of the new-found
stability of the French currency as well as the prospect of falling interest
rates.
The EIB and Credit Local de France both launched FFr2bn bond issues
yesterday. The EIB bond, lead-managed by CCF, has a 6.75 per cent coupon and
matures in 1998.
Priced at 10 basis points over the 1998 government bond, the spread widened
out to 12 basis points by late afternoon because of the strong rally in the
government bond market, the lead manager said.
However, CCF pointed out that the sector remained an attractive one as the
recent general election result had led to stability of the currency while
yesterday's cut in German interest rates had raised hopes that the Bank of
France would be able to follow suit soon.
Peninsula & Oriental Steam Navigation (P&O) launched a Pounds 150m 10-year
convertible bond issue with a 7.25 per cent coupon.
The deal was seen as aggressively priced. UBS, the lead managers, said the
bonds, which were launched at par, later traded at 100 3/8 .
The Republic of Iceland also tapped the sterling sector with a Pounds 100m
8.75 per cent 10-year bond with a coupon of 8.75 per cent - the country's
biggest public bond issue.
Iceland has not tapped the sterling market since 1981 when it issued a
35-year bond. Last year, it tapped the Eurobond market with a DM225m issue.
Yesterday's deal was launched at a yield spread of 90 basis points over the
8 per cent 10-year gilt, and the spread narrowed to 88 basis points on the
bid side, according to JP Morgan, the lead manager. Demand for the bonds
came mainly from the UK, and about a quarter of the issue was placed in
continental Europe.
Mitsubishi Corp Finance tapped the Euroyen sector with a 4.5 per cent Y30bn
four-year deal led by Morgan Stanley. The lead manager said the proceeds
would be swapped into floating rate yen and the funds would be used for
general corporate purposes such as paying off maturing debt.
Mitsubishi Corp Finance, which has been preparing to launch its bond issue
for some time, went ahead yesterday because of what it sees as the
favourable market conditions - in particular the international demand for
yen assets and low interest rates.
Yesterday saw the launch of the first Chinese deal in the Euromarkets - a
Dollars 150m floating rate note from Guangdong International Trust &
Investment Corporation (Gitic), a development arm of the government of
China's fastest-growing province. The issue, led by Union Bank of
Switzerland, had a five-year maturity and is priced at 55 basis points over
six-month Libor.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930423

