FT933-10156

FT  05 AUG 93 / International Company News: Inheriting an unwieldy empire -
Haig Simonian assesses the legacy of the Gardini conglomerate


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


AT just 24, Ivan Gardini, the son of Mr Raul Gardini, the Italian
entrepreneur who commited suicide last month, suddenly finds himself at the
helm of a ill-fitting industrial empire with sales of about L3,000bn
(Dollars 1.9bn) and debts estimated at almost half that figure.
It is not Ivan's first experience guiding a big company. In November 1990,
his father arranged that his son replaced him as chairman of Ferruzzi
Finanziaria (Ferfin), the quoted holding company controlled by the Ferruzzi
family into which Mr Gardini married.
The period spent at Ferfin by Ivan, just 21 at the time and better-known for
his passion for basketball than business, was brief. Within weeks of the
Gardinis' June 1991 'divorce' from the Ferruzzis, he was deposed from Ferfin
in favour of his uncle Arturo, and the Gardinis and Ferruzzis went their
separate ways.
Armed with the L505bn paid by the Ferruzzis to his wife Idina for her 23 per
cent stake in the Serafino Ferruzzi holding company, Mr Raul Gardini began
building a new industrial empire. After his unexpected death, and this
week's court action by Ferruzzi's new bosses to sequester up to L500bn in
assets, it may be up for grabs.
The new Gardini concern was being built on agricultural products,
commodities trading and branded food and drinks - much the same pillars as
those on which Ferruzzi expanded after Mr Gardini took management control
following the death of its founder, Serafino Ferruzzi, in 1979.
Like Ferruzzi, its growth has been surprisingly fast. Leveraging the pay-off
for his wife's Serafino Ferruzzi shares, and using privileged contacts in
foods and commodities, the indefatigable Mr Gardini was able to assemble his
new interests breathtakingly fast.
The dependence on borrowing and existence of established business links may
explain why much of his group was based on partnerships. None more so than
with Mr Jean Marc Vernes, the French industrialist who created the
Beghin-Say sugar group, now controlled by Ferfin, and a sizeable business
empire in France.
The link with Mr Vernes is one of the Gardini group's main assets. Mr Raul
Gardini's 'come-back' began with the purchase in September 1991 of a stake,
now up to 36 per cent cent, in Societe Centrale d'Investissement, the
cash-rich French concern controlled by Mr Vernes.
SCI is in turn the 80 per cent shareholder in Gardini et Associes (GEA), the
investment group which Mr Gardini used to spearhead his first acquisitions.
Again, he chose his partners carefully. Archer Daniel Midland, the US
agri-business group, Tate & Lyle of the UK and CIP, a Luxemboug-based
holding company which controls large starch interests in Europe, took 5 per
cent each, while Mr Raul Gardini retained 5 per cent directly.
The takeover trail began in December 1991, with a 16.6 per cent stake in
Sucres et Denrees (Sucden), the debt-laden French commodity trader. Mr Raul
Gardini also bought controlling stakes in three industrial units from
Sucden: Barry, its cocoa bean processing arm and the world market leader;
and Vital and Sogeviandes, France's largest meant trading and processing
companies.
Emboldened by his successes, Mr Gardini soon reversed his vow not to do
business in Italy. To lead his Italian acquisition drive, he formed Garma,
another partnership, this time with Mr Giulio Malgara, the former European
chief of Quaker Oats,
Garma, 84 per cent-owned by the Gardini group, started life with L200bn in
capital. Although its first potential deal, to buy the Quaker Oats edible
oils business, was unsuccessful, Garma soon struck again.
In July 1992, it paid about Dollars 300m for the parent company of the
popular Levissima mineral water brand. Shortly after came the purchase of
four smaller brands. Together, the purchases gave Garma about 20 per cent of
the Italian mineral water market - Europe's biggest. In February, Garma
expanded in foods with 35 per cent of a new joint venture, creating Italy's
third-biggest frozen foods group.
Mr Raul Gardini also showed he had not lost his flair for spectacular stock
market raids. In October 1992, the Milan bourse was convulsed with rumours
that he was set to launch a takeover, eventually aborted, for the SME foods
group, having secretly built up a significant minority stake.
The intention, according to analysts, was to force the then-Amato government
to sell the state's controlling interest to the raiders, who would have
broken up the company and kept only those parts that fitted in with their
new empire.
Such financial acrobatics will be far from the thoughts of Ivan Gardini,
appointed chairman last week, and Mr Roberto Michetti, a former Ferruzzi
executive who is managing director.
Mr Raul Gardini may have hoped to give his empire greater coherence through
further takeovers, which could eventually have created one of Europe's
biggest foods and commodities concerns. It is up to his son and Mr Michetti
to ensure that the ill-fitting edifice constructed by its founder does not
come tumbling down on his heirs.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930805

