FT932-3407

FT  15 JUN 93 / Major tries to end cabinet dispute on tax and spending


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR'S office yesterday sought to put an end to cabinet disarray
over the government's tax and spending policies by insisting it could reduce
public borrowing without breaking its election pledges.
Downing Street's stance reinforced the impression that Mr Major wants Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the new chancellor, to avoid both increases in income tax
and draconian cuts in welfare spending in the November Budget.
It came as the 92 group of Tory backbench MPs indicated last night that the
right wing of the party would oppose fiercely any increase in direct taxes.
The influential group also launched a strong attack on Sir Norman Fowler,
the party chairman, for his public criticism last week of Mr Norman Lamont,
the former chancellor.
Senior Whitehall officials stressed nothing has been ruled out ahead of the
Budget. But Mr Major appears determined to stress the priority of sustaining
the economic recovery and of maintaining tight spending controls, thus
downplaying the possibility of further tax increases.
The prime minister said last week that about 70 per cent of the Pounds
50bn-a-year deficit could be attributed to the impact on spending and
revenues of the recession rather than to 'structural' imbalances in the
government's finances.
His insistence yesterday on sticking to the manifesto followed conflicting
ministerial statements on how the government might square the apparent
circle between pledges to hold down taxes, increase spending and reduce
borrowing.
In an apparent left-right split in the cabinet, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade
and industry secretary, suggested at the weekend that pre-election
commitments could no longer be regarded as sacrosanct. But Mr Peter Lilley,
social services secretary, and Mr John Redwood, Welsh secretary, both
rejected the idea that the government could renege on its income tax
pledges.
Mr Clarke will underline his determination to curb the borrowing requirement
in his first keynote speech to a City audience at the Mansion House this
evening.
On Thurday the cabinet is expected to endorse public spending ceilings for
the next two years at least as tough - if not tougher - than the Pounds
253.6bn and Pounds 263.3bn cash totals agreed last autumn for 1994-95 and
1995-96.
Senior officials said that the prime minister's reaffirmation of manifesto
commitments did not foreshadow any relaxation of the prospective squeeze on
spending. Mr Major will this morning meet Mr Michael Portillo, chief
secretary to the Treasury, and Mr Lilley, to press forward with plans to
curb the Pounds 6bn-a-year-budget for invalidity benefit.
The vague terms in which the manifesto was framed allowed significant
latitude on both spending and taxation changes, the officials said.
But in a significant change in rhetoric both Mr Major and Mr Clarke are now
emphasising the pre-eminent role in tackling the deficit of sustained
economic recovery.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930615

