FT932-3174

FT  15 JUN 93 / Russian stock market link urged


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


RUSSIA should start planning a national stock exchange system now before the
market is fragmented by the spontaneous proliferation of stock exchanges
across the country, according to a report financed by the European
Commission.
The report, by consultants Garside Miller Associates and solicitors Norton
Rose, also makes a series of recommendations to protect investors from
fraudulent practices likely to emerge with the market's rapid growth.
Although few company stocks are traded at present, their number is likely to
grow rapidly as the government sets about trying to privatise about 6,000
state-owned enterprises this year alone. Existing rules and a proposed
securities law which has yet to be adopted by parliament do not, for
instance, prohibit 'market manipulation' - the practice of trading solely to
induce others to buy or sell an investment.
With Russia on the verge of its first takeover battles, the report also
calls for rapid implementation of a takeover regime and more stringent
disclosure requirements.
Because Russia spans 10 time zones, and existing exchanges are in fierce
competition with each other, the Russian Stock Market Development Plan
recommends the US model of linking competing exchanges in one common
regulatory system.
Such a system would include provisions such as different computer systems
being compatible. It would also institute common dealing rules and
self-regulatory bodies to help police the market - although self-policing
would have to be reinforced by an independent state agency.
The alternative system of a single stock exchange with different branches
simply could not be implemented in Russia, although the report hopes that
competition will eventually reduce the excessive number of exchanges - 80
are now registered with the authorities.
The report also warns of external risks to the securities market, such as
the weakness of the banking system. It recommends that authorities urgently
put together new and more extensive capital adequacy regulations to limit
the risk of trouble in the banking sector spilling over into banks'
securities operations.
As the report notes in its dead-pan fashion, 'there is little respect for
the rule of law in Russia'. But it stresses the need for one international
agency, such as the World Bank's International Finance Corporation to
co-ordinate help so it is not wasted. For this purpose, it suggests the
development of a 'map' of the state of development of the market and
external aid to it.
The report, available in Russian and English, can be obtained upon written
request to Mr E Freyer, EC Co-ordination Unit, Radisson Slavyanskaya Hotel,
Berezhkovskaya Nab. 2, 121059 Moscow, or by sending fax to Ms Gerlinde
Niehus at EC Commission in Brussels (fax 2951432).

The Financial Times


International Page 3

930615

