FT933-12585

FT  23 JUL 93 / Names face writs to recover losses


   By RICHARD LAPPER


LLOYD'S of London may issue writs in the next few weeks on four Names
unwilling to pay losses, the first such legal actions since the spring of
last year.
In another sign that attitudes towards rebel Names could be hardening, Mr
Peter Middleton, chief executive of Lloyd's, was sharply critical of an
alternative business plan for the market circulated by Mr David Springbett,
a former insurance broker.
Explaining the legal move, Mr Middleton said the insurance market's
authorities were targeting those Names - individuals whose assets support
the insurance market - who 'can pay but won't pay'.
Lloyd's is continuing to work on a debt-recovery policy, after the end of a
six-month moratorium on writs against Names in April this year.
Mr Middleton described the Springbett plan, which envisages the transfer of
all Lloyd's liabilities up to this year to a new company, as 'commercially
naive'. New investors would then pay a slice of future profits to help the
company meet these claims. Mr Middleton said this would reduce Lloyd's
capacity to pay dividends to investors.
'Why would anybody want to invest in such a vehicle? Why would anybody be
interested? You could expect a negligible response from corporate
investors,' he added.
Mr Middleton was also critical of Mr Springbett for advising Names to vote
against a resolution supporting the present management in the postal ballot
which was organised following an extraordinary general meeting of Names this
month.
'If the resolution is not passed corporate capital will shrink back from
investing in Lloyd's,' he said. The advice was 'solidly illogical'.
Separately Mr David Rowland, the market's chairman, said that Lloyd's agents
were now becoming more confident that more Names would be able to continue
underwriting next year and that capacity - the amount of capital available
to support insurance activities - might not decline below its present level
of Pounds 8.7bn.
Earlier this year it was widely expected that capacity would fall by at
least 25 per cent next year, with Names resigning or being forced to stop
underwriting.
Lloyd's is nevertheless continuing its efforts to persuade individuals and
institutions to invest in new corporate Names, with UK merchant banks,
including BZW and Samuel Montague, now involved. US banks such as JP Morgan
made most of the initial running in supporting Lloyd's corporate capital
initiative.
Meanwhile Lloyd's announced that it is to appeal against a ruling by the
Charity Commissioners that refused to award charitable status to the Lloyd's
hardship fund, which helps Names to avert bankruptcy.
More than 2,000 Names have applied for hardship, but only 181 offers have so
far been made and 81 accepted.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930723

