FT931-4222

FT  11 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russia inaugurates second
joint-venture diamond polishing factory


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


RUSSIA'S SECOND joint-venture diamond polishing factory was inaugurated
yesterday as part of an effort to modernise the country's stone-cutting
industry.
The Intertrade joint venture is 60 per cent owned by a Moscow city-owned
construction organisation and Russia's Committee for Precious Stones and
Metals. The rest is owned by Belgium's Kaszirer Diamonds and Oltuski Spira
Diamonds, which have invested some USDollars 6-Dollars 7m in the project.
Western diamond experts said that Kaszirer had been suspended from De Beers'
Central Selling Organisation last year in connection with its purchases of
rough diamonds from the Committee for Precious Metals and Stones. De Beers
has a five year agreement with Russia expiring in 1995 under which the
Russians can sell only 5 per cent of their rough diamond output on
international markets. But they are free to sell diamonds for domestic
diamond-cutters.
Mr Anatoly Kondrashev, Intertrade's deputy director, said the factory had
started operating in November but that the official opening had been delayed
until yesterday so that the joint venture could show off its achievements
after a few months work. The Moscow factory, employing 100 people, aimed to
process up to 450,000 carats of rough gems a year.
He said the joint venture also wanted further down the line to contract
other Russian diamond-cutting factories to cut rough stones for it. 'We have
more capacity to sell than we have to cut,' Mr Kondrashev said. He said the
factory was paying dollars for stones provided by the Committee for Precious
Metals and Stones. It would sell the polished diamonds it produced in
Belgium.
The other diamond-cutting joint venture is an Israeli-Russian venture called
Ruisdiamond, which has imported western equipment and is teaching Russian
workers to polish the most difficult type of rough stone. But while
Intertrade is partly-owned by the Committee of Precious Metals, Ruisdiamond
is close to Almazy Rossii-Sakha, the Russian state diamond producing
conglomerate. The latter's president, Mr Valery Rudakov, then head of the
old Soviet gold and diamonds conglomerate, was involved in concluding the
1990 agreement with De Beers in return for which the Soviet Union got a
Dollars 1bn dollar loan.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930311

