FT932-237

FT  30 JUN 93 / Solidarity seeks life outside factory


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


   WARSAW


FOUR years after the Solidarity alliance of workers, intellectuals and the
Catholic church led Poles to a sweeping victory over the ruling Communist
party, its former core trade union element has decided to test its support
by standing alone in national elections scheduled for September 19.
The decision, taken at a union congress in Zielona Gora in western Poland
over the weekend, is logical, given the political traditions of the union.
However, it could be a risky gamble, forcing the organisation back to a more
traditional union role.
At the moment the Solidarity Union MPs are riding high. It was their
no-confidence motion which led to the government's defeat last month and the
calling of elections.
But the result could provide a rude awakening to the movement if it fails to
garner 5 per cent of the national vote required to enter parliament.
Such an outcome would be greeted with relief by some union veterans like Mr
Jozef Polkowski at the Belchatow brown coal mine who is happy to support the
congress decision. 'If we win, good, we get into parliament and can defend
our members there,' he says. 'And if we lose, all the better because then
we'll become an effective trade union.'
That sums up a trade union movement whose instincts have always been
political. The union grew into a 10m-strong national movement which was
forced undergound by martial law. It re-emerged in 1989 to fight and win the
first semi-free election in June 1989. Shortly after assuming power, the
stress of pushing through harsh economic reforms soon revealed the internal
divisions which broke up the national movement into a myriad political
parties, including the Solidarity Union.
But the trade union has been weakened as many top advisers and leaders have
drifted to other parties.
The list includes Solidarity's former leader, now President Lech Walesa,
whose election campaign the union backed in 1990 but with whom it has now
split. By voting to stand alone in the elections, delegates at the congress
showed they wanted nothing to do with Mr Walesa's 'non-party bloc for
supporting reform'. The bloc is being organised by the president to
strengthen his influence in parliament. It can be expected to do well in the
election. But, in a fit of pique, Mr Walesa, who had expected to win over
the delegates, refused to address the congress once he had read the hostile
signals.
If Solidarity is to have a future as a union it will have to take more
notice of officials like Mr Andrzej Kaminski who works at the Wedel
chocolate factory in Warsaw, now controlled by PepsiCo of the US.
Mr Kaminski led the 400 unionists at the 2,000-worker plant through the 1991
transition to the private sector. He is less than complimentary about the
support he received from union leaders during a year-long struggle,
completed this week, to get what he calls a 'decent' pay deal.
'Solidarity will have to become more professional if it is to deal with
situations like mine where I have to get such commitments honoured,' Mr
Kaminski says.
In his view the current focus on electoral politics is really a sign that
union leaders have yet to come to terms with the need to build a modern
union capable of operating in a privatised economy where politics is less
important than performance.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930630

