FT934-8687

FT  13 NOV 93 / Books: Motivated by the heroic and the erotic - Rodin and
his monumental works


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


RODIN: THE SHAPE OF GENIUS
by Ruth Butler
Yale, Pounds 19.95, 591 pages
TOWARDS THE end of his career Rodin acquired a following among famous and
fashionable people in Edwardian England. One of the earliest to perceive his
genius was the poet WE Henley, coiner of the phrase 'bloody, but unbowed' -
a highly Rodinesque sentiment. Rodin carved portraits of prominent Tory
politicians like George Wyndham and Charlotte Shaw commissioned Rodin to
make a bust of her playwright husband. The Shaws went to Rodin's studio at
Meudon and despite the language barrier the two geniuses got along
splendidly.
Rodin's young secretary, who happened to be the German poet Rilke, marvelled
at Shaw's energetic way of posing, '. . . his whole personality seems to
become concentrated essence'. Rilke invited the American photographer Alvin
Langdon Coburn along. Not content with just having his portrait sculpted,
Shaw insisted on posing in the nude in the manner of Rodin's 'The Thinker'.
Coburn's photograph of this piece of Shavian effrontery is reproduced in
Ruth Butler's thoughtful new biography, Rodin: The Shape of Genius.
The photograph may be seen as an icon of the whole Rodin story. Shaw
believed zealously in the Superman, and it was Rodin who gave the idea of
the Superman palpable form in his public monuments, blending realism and
grandeur. Some of these were of heroic figures from contemporary life,
Victor Hugo and Balzac. Others from episodes in French history, the
'Burghers of Calais' surrendering to Edward III, or from classical legend
and literature. 'The Thinker', the most famous statue of the 19th century,
has its origin in Dante's Divine Comedy.
Rodin was commissioned to carve the bronze doors to the entrance to a
projected Musee des Arts Decoratifs in Paris. He conceived a grandiose
scheme whereby the panels would represent scenes from the Inferno, and
towering above them, he placed the brooding figure of Dante. As this figure
developed it ceased to be merely that of the poet and became a super-genius,
Rodin himself, pondering all the ills of the world.
In the end the Museum was never built but Rodin worked on at his panels,
known now as 'The Gates of Hell'. Other figures from the Gates that acquired
a separate existence are those of 'The Kiss', originally Dante's Paolo and
Francesca, banished to Hell for their illicit love.
The heroic and the erotic - these were the drives that motivated Rodin in
his re-creation of the human form from his time as an apprentice to his
death in 1917. He was fortunate to live during the Third Republic when
France became obsessed by the need to put up public monuments to honour its
outstanding men of genius but the commissions always involved tiresome
monitoring by committees responsible to those who had contributed the
funding.
Rodin's relations with these committees and with the arts ministers who
headed them were often conducted at breaking-point. He was incorrigibly bad
at meeting deadlines. This was because he tended to take on too many
commissions at once; and because he liked to ponder a major work for years
making preliminary sketches and maquettes.
Above all, the candour of his conceptions frequently affronted the
sensibilities of his employers. His 'Monument to Victor Hugo' depicting the
poet's body in the nude was luckily acclaimed when it was shown at the
Salon, but his version of Balzac - a phallic-shaped white hulk, shrouded in
his coat, gazing heavenwards through dark glasses - was too much for the
Society of Men of Letters who had commissioned it. Bernard Berenson said it
looked like a polar bear standing on its hind legs. Rejected, it ended up in
Rodin's garden.
Butler goes at great length into the long wranglings that surrounded the
creation of these masterpieces and her accounts make melancholy reading. We
could have done with more about the works' ultimate importance in the
history of art. Rodin's relations with women (dealt with very fully in the
earlier biography by Frederic Grunfeld in 1987) are just as depressing.
Butler regards the early death of Rodin's supportive and purposeful elder
sister, Maria, a nun, as the crucial trauma. Rodin found a substitute in his
first pupil, Camille Claudel, sister to Paul Claudel, a fine sculptor and
early feminist. Their affair ended suddenly in a brutal separation.
There were many other mistresses. Some were rich patrons like the
American-born Princesse de Choiseul; others were artists who sat at his feet
like the English painter Gwen John. But with none of them did Rodin manage
to sustain a satisfactory lasting relation. There is something sadly
touching in Rodin's refusal completely to discard his earliest mistress, a
low-class model, Rose Beuret.
Rose became his servant, putting up with his absence for months on end. But
he did continue to provide for her and the dim-witted son he had by her and,
somewhat surprisingly, at the age of 77 he married Rose while on his
deathbed. The nature of his private fantasies about women may be seen in the
large collection of erotic drawings discovered after his death. His work as
a whole is permanently on view in the Musee Rodin in Paris (formerly the
Hotel Biron occupied by Rodin at end of his life and bequeathed by him with
its contents to the city).
No admirer of Rodin can afford to neglect this biography which gives a
fuller account of his life than any previous one. But the writing is not
always elegant and the reader will need to look elsewhere for an appraisal
of the works. In addition to the notes and bibliography, a full chronology
of the life should have been included.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931113

