FT932-7064

FT  26 MAY 93 / Taiwan's Dollars 300bn 'publicity stunt' is cut down to
size: A look at the island's infrastructure development plan


   By SIMON DAVIES


TAIWAN'S six-year development plan announced two years ago was filled with
sound and fury, with its USDollars 300bn (Pounds 194.8bn) spending spree to
drag the island's infrastructure into the 21st century; it is becoming
rapidly apparent that it signifies less.
The government is discussing a substantial cut in the TDollars 786bn (Pounds
19.8bn) budget for the plan next year in the face of a borrowing squeeze. It
will also soon announce the results of a review of the plan, which will
postpone work on a number of grandiose projects.
This looks set to turn the plan back into a collection of projects that were
already under way in 1991, before Mr Hau Pei-tsun, then prime minister,
announced 771 separate project proposals to be undertaken during President
Lee Teng-hui's six-year term.
It seems now it was little more than a publicity stunt, but a successful
one. It has raised Taiwan's international profile through the offering of
politically leveraged deals to recession-hit western nations, and it has
helped Taiwan weather a property, stock market and investment slump.
The 1991 plan was for a TDollars 8,200bn investment programme that would
channel Taiwan's notoriously speculative capital flows into infrastructural
projects.
At the time, the government said: 'Let us work hand in hand for the
happiness of all our citizens and let us exert ourselves for the future of
our nation.' Two years later Taiwan's citizens are viewing the plan with a
less than happy cynicism.
The Northern Section highway was budgeted to cost TDollars 58bn, but
difficulties in land acquisition have led to a final cost of TDollars 178bn.
The government had to negotiate with 10,000 landowners.
Taipei's much-needed TDollars 444bn Mass Rapid Transit system has also been
mired by corruption investigations over contracts and by a recent incident
in which a train carriage burst into flames during a test run.
In the end, the biggest problem is of a more fundamental nature - money. Mr
Tsai Hsung-hsiung, vice-chairman of the Council for Economic Planning and
Development, which co-ordinates the project, said: 'From a macro point of
view the resources are there. The problem is channelling these resources
into the projects.'
The government, in spite of its legendary Dollars 82bn (Pounds 53bn) foreign
reserves, is having difficulty finding its portion of the finance. 'We
expected a current account surplus of about TDollars 200bn in 1991. The
actual figure was around a quarter of what we expected,' said Mr Tsai.
The government has expanded its bond issuing programme. Outstanding bonds
will account for about 21 per cent of gross national product by the end of
the year to June 1994, up from 5 per cent in 1991. However, bond issues have
a ceiling in relation to government expenditure, and this has virtually been
reached. The government is also facing opposition from MPs who have to
approve financing for the scheme. As one merchant banker said: 'It has been
slowed down by the fact that it has happened at the same time as the economy
is being democratised.'
Mr James Wen, vice-president of China Securities, said: 'They were too
aggressive in the beginning. They are now being more practical and focusing
on what they can actually accomplish.' He predicts that 40 per cent of the
projects will be put off, leaving the TDollars 4,940bn-worth of projects
that were already on stream when the plan was announced.
This would result in the postponement of a TDollars 426bn high-speed
railway, a TDollars 170bn nuclear power station, five mass transit systems
for provincial cities, and some of the 12 improbable east-west highways that
had been proposed.
However, the remaining projects in the spending programme - a quarter of
which are leftovers from the '14 key projects' plan of the mid-1980s  -
still tower above other Asian infrastructural programmes.
Taiwan, whose financial muscle has historically been in inverse proportion
to its international standing, has not been shy in tempting recession-ridden
western governments with construction opportunities.
'Every major project has had a political price tag,' said one foreign
businessman, and this has been reflected in an increase in the stature of
diplomatic visitors to Taipei since the plan was launched.
It is deemed to be no coincidence that France's sale of Mirage jets to
Taiwan followed Matra's winning of the construction contract for one line of
Taipei's MRT system and at a time when GEC-Alsthom's TGV train was highly
favoured to win the contract for Taiwan's now-postponed high-speed rail
system.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930526

