FT932-3160

FT  15 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: PowerGen and NRG in eastern
German mine agreement


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BERLIN


BRITAIN'S PowerGen, and NRG of Minneapolis, the Anglo-American consortium
which has sole negotiating rights until next month for Mibrag, the giant
brown coal fields in eastern Germany, has secured a mining partner for the
open-cast pits.
The agreement, forged last weekend between the consortium and Morrison
Knudsen, the Idaho-based mining experts, means that PowerGen and NRG, whose
main interests are in utilities, will be in a position to tap the efficiency
of the mines.
The mines, which are expected to produce between 15m and 20m tonnes a year,
are being sold by the Treuhand, the agency charged with privatising eastern
German industry. PowerGen and NRG won sole negotiating rights for the mines
last January after a decision by the Treuhand to put Mibrag out to tender
the previous month. The consortium's purchase of Mibrag is linked to buying
a share of a 800 Mw plant at Schkopau, near Leipzig.
'We really are pleased to have Morrison Knudsen on board. They will optimise
the efficiency of Mibrag,' said Mr Peter Jones, managing director of NRG'S
project development arm. It is expected that Morrison Knudsen will hold a 33
per cent stake in Mibrag after it has been sold to PowerGen and NRG. The
consortium's new mining partner, however, will not take over the daily
mining of the pits - which will continue to be carried out by Mibrag
employees - but will instead focus primarily on planning and strategy.
PowerGen and NRG are evaluating Mibrag's assets, which range from pits and
power generation, to wax works and lines for producing briquettes.
Before 1989, Mibrag employed more than 54,000 people, but that has fallen to
below 16,000 after reduced capacity. The mines have already a viable
commercial basis because they have signed coal contracts, spread over forty
years, to supply an annual 15m tonnes to Schkopau, and Lippendorf, a large
1,600 Mw power plant.
Yesterday Treuhand officials said they were increasingly confident that the
Anglo-Americans would acquire Mibrag.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930615

