FT933-9987

FT  06 AUG 93 / Arts: Strauss celebrated - Opera in San Francisco


   By TIMOTHY PFAFF


It is a great pity that the Celebration of Richard Strauss that has just
ended is, for budget reasons, the last San Francisco Opera summer season for
the foreseeable future. Since, despite a high level of singing, there were
no standout performances in major roles, the company's orchestra emerged the
festival's 'star.' Now it seems that without this valuable performance and
rehearsal time with its new music director, Donald Runnicles (who conducted
Salome and Capriccio), and principal guest, Charles Mackerras (who led Der
Rosenkavalier), the opera orchestra can only suffer.
The ensemble's alert responses to early, middle and late Strauss, as well to
three conductors (Andrew Davis led two concert performances of Daphne), was
appreciable. But its versatility shone brightest in adversity: having to
sound at full cry for Salome while holding back to accommodate the severely
compromised performance of Maria Ewing in the title role.
The old question of whether it was wise for Ewing to take up the role for
the by now much-travelled Peter Hall production seems answerable in an
unambiguous 'No.' Not only can the Ewing soprano no longer soar over the
full orchestra at climaxes, it skips over many of the 'little notes' that
lend the role so much of its musical interest. From performance to
performance (I heard two), Ewing recomposed the part for her comfort; little
wonder that, her famous strip to the buff notwithstanding, the most
memorable part of her Salome is her pout.
The Herods fared far better, with both Robert Tear and Leonie Rysanek giving
sophisticated, richly detailed vocal and dramatic readings - and Rysanek
sounding as if she could have sung the title role with ease. If Tom Fox's
Jokanaan lacked a certain aura of mystery, it was still strong and
impressive - even if the often misguided restaging by Jeanette Aster gave us
a prophet who could not keep his eyes off the sultry princess.
What Runnicles' Salome offered in sound and fury, his Capriccio delivered in
subtlety and nuance. Except for some occasionally faulty intonation from the
strings his players produced a shimmering tapestry of sound. Revisions to
the Mauro Pagano production, similarly familiar to London audiences from a
previous Covent Garden outing, will be revealed in a live video recording.
In general it seemed improved by Thierry Bosquet's period costumes,
replacing the misogynist Versace designs that lent visual confusion to the
original production.
Kiri Te Kanawa sounded better too; by now having learned the role in its
particulars, she is singing it half-ardently. Still, opulent sounds and
arching phrases were not enough to convince one that she had strong, let
alone conflicted, feelings about either words or music. The production's one
genuinely touching performance was Michel Senechal's Monsieur Taupe. Hakan
Hagegard, as the Count, and Victor Braun, as La Roche, made similar, if
paler, impressions compared with their first outings in this production.
While David Kuebler caught neither the character of Flamand nor his music,
Simon Keenlyside compensated with a beautifully inflected, deeply
sympathetic Olivier. Still, the most fullest, most rewarding
characterisation was Tatiana Troyanos' text-savoring, handsomely sung
Clairon.
The already grateful pairing of Capriccio and Der Rosenkavalier was further
enhanced by a similarity in production style. Lotfi Mansouri's 'new'
Rosenkavalier sought to recreate both the Alfred Roller designs of the
Dresden premiere and the original staging as reflected in the production
book. The sets emerged breath-catchingly, absorbingly beautiful, the
direction a bit by the numbers and characteristically broad and physical.
Felicity Lott introduced an accurate, well-defined, patrician and ultimately
unmoving Marschallin; Frederica von Stade her well-known, urgent Octavian
(though a bit vocally constricted and, well, more mannish than boyish in her
late San Francisco debut of the role); and Christina Schaefer a perky if
small-voiced Sophie. Eric Halvorson's sumptuously voiced Ochs seemed
otherwise generic.
Musically, the show belonged to Mackerras, who seemed unerring in his
choices of what to accent in this busiest of scores - while making sure that
all its music told. His sympathy with the singers seemed sometimes
finer-grained than theirs with their characters.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930806

