FT932-7171

FT  25 MAY 93 / International Company News: Barlow Rand holds dividend
despite fall in half-way earnings


   By PHILIP GAWITH


   JOHANNESBURG


BARLOW Rand, South Africa's largest industrial company, yesterday announced
it would maintain its interim dividend at 54 cents per share despite a 5 per
cent fall in earnings per share to 196 cents in the six months to March from
207.3 cents a year earlier.
Although the company predicted a sharper decline in profits in the second
half, Mr Warren Clewlow, chairman, said he remained confident that the total
dividend would be maintained at 173 cents per share. The results were in
line with market predictions and followed a warning in January from Mr
Clewlow that profits were likely to be down.
Mr Derek Cooper, managing director, said the results - Barlow accounts for
about 10 per cent of South African GDP - showed that the economy was
'certainly not buoyant'. It was difficult to see any improvement in the
economy before 1994, and he cited business confidence and a political
settlement as the key ingredients in any upturn. He said he 'remained
optimistic that the politicians are on a path of reasonable settlement.'
Turnover rose by 10 per cent to R18.7bn (Dollars 5.9bn) from R17.1bn, but
pressure in virtually all sectors manifested itself in a 5 per cent drop in
operating profits, before interest, to R1.3bn from R1.37bn. Interest paid
fell by 9 per cent to R279m from R305m as a result of lower interest rates
and reduced borrowings following the sale of Middelburg Steel in December
1991. Attributable profits fell by 4 per cent to R384m from R400m.
Results across the group were patchy. Some sectors performed well, notably
packaging, pharmaceuticals, paint and motor interests and electronics. Other
areas such as food, white and brown goods and earthmoving equipment
struggled. A breakdown shows the main contributors to attributable earnings
were:
Mineral resources (mostly coal) - 23 per cent;
Industry - 32 per cent;
Packaging and textiles - 16 per cent; and
Food and pharmaceuticals - 18 per cent.
Mr Cooper said a feature of the results was that about 43 per cent of
attributable profits came from consumer-oriented companies compared with 30
per cent three to four years ago. The main strategic thrust of the group in
recent years had been to move away from commodities and closer to the
consumer, seen to be the main growth area in future years as urbanisation
continues.
Finanzauto, Barlow's recently-acquired Caterpillar dealership in Spain, was
badly affected by the decline in the Spanish economy and traded at a
'substantial loss'. Mr Cooper said Finanzauto's losses would continue for
the rest of the financial year, but said Barlow's management and information
systems were now in place and he anticipated an upturn in the new year.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930525

