FT932-259

FT  29 JUN 93 / International Company News: PacTel acquires 51% of Swedish
telecoms group


   By HUGH CARNEGY and MARTIN DICKSON


   STOCKHOLM, NEW YORK


THREE Swedish companies - Volvo the vehicle maker, Trelleborg the mining
group and the high-tech company Spectra-Physics - are to sell a 51 per cent
stake in NordicTel Holdings, a mobile Swedish telecommunications group, to
Pacific Telesis of the US for Dollars 153m.
For Pacific Telesis, the deal represents another significant move to
establish itself as an important presence across Europe in mobile
communications.
The sale will raise around SKr340m (Dollars 44m) for Volvo and
Spectra-Physics and SKr200m for Trelleborg. All three companies will remain
shareholders in NordicTel, each with an 8 per cent stake.
NordicTel is one of three companies in Sweden operating a digital cellular
GSM telephone network. This offers superior voice quality to traditional
analog services and allows subscribers to receive and send calls in other
European countries with the same technology.
NordicTel, which began service late in 1992, operates under the name
Europolitan and has still to complete its network, which covers about 80 per
cent of the Swedish population. It also owns a 20 per cent stake in the
private Danish GSM operator Dansk Mobiltelefon. It has absorbed a total
investment of SKr1bn to date and is not expected to be profitable at least
until next year.
Britain's Vodafone mobile communications group owns a 25 per cent stake in
NordicTel which is unaffected by the transaction.
Mr Lee Cox, chief executive of PacTel, the Pacific Telesis subsidiary making
the acquisition, said Scandinavia was a very attractive cellular market,
with one of the highest subscriber penetration rates in the world, and the
deal would fit well with the group's other European wireless ventures in
Germany, Spain and Portugal.
Pacific Telesis owns a 26 per cent stake in Mannesmann Mobilfunk, which owns
and operates D2 Privat, which claims to be the world's largest digital
cellular network.
Mr Cox said the deal would increase both the scale and scope of the group's
European operations, which, for example, would help it in the purchase of
GSM handsets and in rapidly applying lessons learnt in one country to
another.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930629

