FT934-11513

FT  30 OCT 93 / Books: From killer to conservationist - J D F Jones
considers Peter Scott's biography


   By J D F JONES


PETER SCOTT: PAINTER AND NATURALIST
by Elspeth Huxley
Faber Pounds 17.50, 361 pages
IT is remarkable how some of our most famous conservationists learned their
trade - discovered their passion - in the killing fields.
Here is Peter Scott ('Because of him, more than any other single person,
animals that 40 years ago seemed doomed to extinction still exist' - Sir
David Attenborough) at play before the war: he and two friends shot a score
of ducks at Leighton Moss, rushed to the Lake District to kill two stags,
then charged back to the marsh for another 100 geese before supper.
He saw nothing untoward in this. 'They were man's traditional quarry,' he
wrote, 'and it was part of man's instinct to hunt: it was part of the birds'
instinct to be hunted' (my emphasis). To which I can only say, balderdash
and humbug.
Eventually - slowly - the sinner repented, and by the early 1950s Peter
Scott had sold his guns. Gavin Maxwell had trodden the same path, just like
those professional white hunters in Africa who, today, have become game
wardens. Perhaps our own king-in-waiting will one day follow their example
as he attends to his duties as president of the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust
which, successor of the original Severn Wildfowl Trust at Slimbridge, is
Peter Scott's most concrete legacy.
But peaceful co-existence between hunters and bird-watchers was very much on
Scott's mind in the early days of the Trust. He had observed in America the
benefit of partnership between shooters and savers.
So long as a species was not endangered, the trust's annual reports could
talk about 'the notion of wildfowl as a natural resource which can be
harvested like any other crop'. It still sounds pretty rum to me, coming
from a man who committed his life to, and built his international fame upon,
a passion for geese.
Peter Scott was a famous man for 40 years. His father, of course, was even
more famous, and everyone has always assumed that it must have been a
problem for Peter to be automatically associated with the gallant Captain
who died on the way back from the South Pole.
In fact, according to this authorised biography, there seems to be next to
no evidence of a complex. On the contrary, Peter throughout his life found
every door open to him, and he had the energy to take full advantage of his
role as a golden boy of the Establishment. Elspeth Huxley's thesis is that
his father's fame was a double-edged legacy: it smoothed his path but also
confronted him with the need to achieve the highest standards. That sounds
about right.
From babyhood he mixed with the good and the great, thanks to his formidable
sculptress mother, Kathleen. At Cambridge he managed a pass degree by the
skin of his teeth - he was never an intellectual - but it was there that he
discovered wildfowl. He had a facility for drawing and, as we all know, he
became a painter, a trade which was to fund him for much of his life. The
biographer is polite: 'Although his paintings tended to be ignored or
patronised by avant-garde critics, they sold well and continued to do so for
many years to come, affording pleasure to his patrons and a comfortable
income for himself'. The print called 'Taking To Wing' sold 355,423 copies
between 1934 and 1959. Later on he saved himself exertion by making
cardboard stencils of geese in flight which he could pin to his landscape
canvases in the appropriate position.
He had a good war, in destroyers in the North Atlantic and then commanding a
steam gunboat; he also made an important contribution to the technique of
camouflage. A first marriage to the teenaged Elizabeth Jane Howard quickly
failed (his portrait of that distinguished future novelist was to grace the
jacket of Paul Gallico's best-selling The Snow Goose which he illustrated).
He almost became a Tory MP. And he was a sportsman - skating, sailing,
gliding - of world class; at the ripe age of 55 he was the British Open
Champion glider.
The war matured him, says his biographer, which hardly seems surprising. It
might be worth underlining (as she does not) that his powerful mother died
soon after. In 1945 he discovered Slimbridge, on the south bank of the
Severn, where Whitefronted geese arrived in immense numbers from Russia
every winter. This time he did not shoot. He transferred his own collection
of birds, which he had started in 1933, and the Wildfowl Trust was born.
Portly, balding, bespectacled, Peter Scott became first a national figure
and then an international committee man and lobbyist. He was a pioneer of
television nature programmes, which turned him into an indefatigable
globetrotter, but Slimbridge (and its later satellites) was his first and
true mission as he churned out the canvases to pay the bills. He was a
mighty pioneer of the Green Movement and it was inevitable that in 1961 he
should have been centrally involved in setting up the World Wildlife Fund
(now the World Wide Fund for Nature). All this, be it noted, before we knew
about acid rain and ozone holes and global warming. A voice before his time,
he wrote: 'I personally believe that all other species of flora and fauna
have as much right to their place on earth as does Homo sapiens'. It was his
lifelong crusade.
This is not a book that calls for detailed criticism. Huxley has told a long
and interesting story lucidly - no mean achievement for a writer in her
mid-80s whose first biography, the definitive life of the Kenyan Lord
Delamere, goes back nearly 60 years. She has evidently enjoyed a trusted
relationship with the family (15 years ago she wrote a biography of Captain
Scott). Peter, knighted, a Companion of Honour, Fellow of the Royal Society,
is an Establishment hero and Huxley is not the biographer to scrutinise the
emperor's clothes.
Once she asks whether he was 'too good to be true', but she prefers not to
chip too deeply into the inner man. She is unnecessarily discreet about
Kathleen's uninhibited life and, unsurprisingly, coy about the son's private
concerns, but these things need not matter: the tale of a busy, worthwhile
life, so superior in its achievement to that of the famous father, will
carry you happily through a couple of winter evenings.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931030

