FT934-11529

FT  30 OCT 93 / Fashion: Dressing for the Dolce Vita - Ralph Shandilya
contemplates the style of Gianni Agnelli


   By RALPH SHANDILYA


ONE MAY have had bad habits in the old days, but never bad quality.' So said
Gianni Agnelli, thus succinctly encapsulating his personal views on life and
living - views that will be immediately recognisable to anybody who has
followed his career during the last 27 years, when as well as being chairman
of his grandfather's empire, he established his reputation as a notably
stylish dresser. He sensed, with finer antennae than almost anybody else,
that an important part of life's drama is acted out on the level of style.
In the land of La Bella Figura, where how you dress matters more than almost
anywhere else in the world, he carved a special niche for himself.
In republican Italy, L'Avvocato, or Il Re, as he was variously dubbed,
became a potent myth for the masses and one of the most charismatic figures
in Italian public life for many a long decade. When Gianni Agnelli wore his
watch on the outside of his cuff, thousands of would-be snappy dressers did
likewise.
When Gianni Agnelli tied his tie with a thick and glossy knot, so did young
men the length of Italy.
Where this famous style began it is hard to say. His childhood influences
(which include an English governess, an Anglo-American princess mother and a
formidably powerful grandfather) must all have played their part. Rich,
pampered, brought up in many-splendoured mansions, his tutelage in dressing
began early. 'The Agnelli children,' Alan Friedman tells us in his biography
of Agnelli, 'were always dressed as sailors - blue for winter, white and
blue in the spring and autumn, and white in summer. At lunch the little
Agnellis changed into formal and elegant clothes: with short silk socks.'
After war and military duties were over, with an annual income of around
Dollars 1 million and the world his oyster, Agnelli took to heart his
grandfather's words - 'Have a fling for a few years, get it out of your
system'. He embarked on the serious business of driving fast cars and
chasing beautiful women.
Over the years he developed a personal style that became a national
trademark. His great leonine head, the skilful way he has mastered the art
of wearing a permanent tan, his taste for a sober elegance enlivened with
just the right touches of elan, have combined to give him almost cult status
among the fashion cognoscenti. All over Italy his stylistic foibles are
noted - his wearing of Brooks Brothers' shirts with the collar buttons
undone, his turning up at business meetings with old-fashioned suede
after-ski boots with the laces undone, for pairing dark shirts with light
ties, gangster-style.
As Robert Graham, our Rome correspondent puts it, 'Some people wear clothes
like a male model, others like a charmer and Gianni Agnelli wears them like
the real charmer that he is. He has that seductive way of concentrating on
you and what you are saying that all true charmers have. Another part of his
charm is the way he seems to run his business - more like a bailiff guarding
the family inheritance than a go-getting, cost-cutting businessman.' Franca
Sozzani, editor of Italian Vogue, is a longstanding devotee of Agnelli's
style. 'He really is the only businessman I admire. He is effortlessly
stylish and this style emanates through the smallest details.'
Quite how it is and why it is that a 72-year-old man, who really wants to
retire but has been ordered by his bankers to stay on, can still command the
attention of the paparazzi and the followers of fashion is something of a
mystery - but command it he does. Agnelli-style still sets a standard of
masculine elegance that many want to emulate.
Here RALPH SHANDILYA analyses the essential ingredients of Agnelli style.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

931030

