FT934-10274

FT  06 NOV 93 / Prospects dim for BAe deal in Taiwan


   By DANIEL GREEN and DENNIS ENGBARTH


   LONDON, TAIPEI


PROSPECTS of a successful deal between British Aerospace and Taiwan
Aerospace Corporation receded further yesterday as TAC said it wanted to
cancel plans for the co-production of BAe's existing regional jet aircraft,
the RJ.
TAC said it was still interested in work on a new generation of aircraft,
the RJ-X, and that more talks were possible.
But BAe has long insisted that there should first be a deal to produce the
RJ. Only then should a new model be considered. It said yesterday that
'nothing had changed'.
BAe and TAC, which is 29 per cent owned by the Taiwan government, signed a
pact to create a joint venture company in January. If it goes ahead it could
help save about 3,000 jobs in BAe's loss-making regional jet aircraft
business.
TAC's announcement came after the company's first board meeting since talks
with Mr John Cahill, BAe's chairman, in Taiwan three weeks ago.
Mr Earle Hou, TAC chairman, said that the board 'arrived at a consensus in
principle that the RJ-X is very important, but that since conditions have
changed over the past year, a serious re-evaluation of the RJ is necessary'.
Mr Chu Hsing, TAC's acting president, said the company had proposed to BAe
that they should abandon plans to co-produce the RJ. The TAC board also
decided to continue talks with BAe, in response to a letter sent to the TAC
chairman by Mr Cahill earlier this week. No date had yet been set for the
next set of talks. BAe said yesterday no progress was likely before
Taiwanese elections at the end of the month.
Taiwan wants to enter the civil aviation market with the help of BAe
know-how. Its caution over the existing model results from a patchy sales
record, although orders have improved in recent years.
Some Taiwanese officials have also questioned whether the RJ's capacity and
range are best suited to the fast-growing east Asian markets.
The RJ performs well on 300-500 mile trips but on longer journeys becomes
progressively less economical than competitors such as the Fokker F-100 and
the smallest of the Boeing 737s.
Opposition to the RJ model is only the latest in a series of objections
raised by TAC or Taiwanese banks lending money to the joint venture, called
Avro.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931106

