FT932-3176

FT  15 JUN 93 / Italy's telecom corruption probe widens: New arrest drags
state-run group Stet further into the scandal


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


ITALY'S huge Stet public sector telecommunications group has been dragged
further into the political corruption scandal with the arrest yesterday of
Mr Francesco Silvano, managing director until earlier this month.
The detention of Mr Silvano, who gave himself up to Milan police, takes the
investigations into the telecommunications sector a further rung up Stet's
management ladder. Earlier arrests had involved executives of Stet
subsidiaries.
Telecommunications have become one of the most active areas of investigation
as magistrates pursue a number of leads involving contracts with the former
ASST state telecom agency. Inquiries are also believed to be proceeding on
suggestions that some telecom companies may have rigged bids. Last month,
police arrested Mr Luigi Montella and Mr Salvatore Randi, managing directors
of Stet's Sirti and Italtel subsidiaries.
Sirti handles network engineering while Italtel, in which AT&T of the US has
a 20 per cent stake, is responsible for equipment manufacturing. The
chairman and managing director of Stet's small AET subsidiary have also been
detained.
Separately, Rome magistrates made three arrests following allegations of
corruption at the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications. The inquiries
involve ASST, formerly controlled by the ministry, and broadcasting.
Magistrates also warned Mr Giorgio La Malfa, former leader of the Republican
party, and Mr Oscar Mammi, a senior Republican MP and ex-posts minister,
they were under investigation on allegations of receiving illicit funds and
illegal funding of political parties.
One of the three men arrested, Mr Giorgio Medri, was a Republican MP and
senior party official until last year. The arrests and warnings follow
recent leaks that the posts ministry was a big source of funds for the
political parties via kickbacks on telecommunications contracts and the
reorganisation of broadcasting frequencies. Mr Davide Giacalone, a former
assistant to Mr Mammi, is believed to have told magistrates L9bn (Dollars
6m) in kickbacks was paid between 1987 and 1990 to Mr Mammi. It is further
alleged that two of the three arrested men demanded kickbacks from a small
company, Federal Trade Misure, commissioned by the posts ministry to advise
on the frequency reorganisation. The allocation of such a complex and
sensitive task to an unknown company has already attracted the attention of
magistrates.
In another line of investigation, magistrates arrested Mr Ugo Montevecchi, a
former managing director of Fiat's Impresit construction arm, on allegations
of corruption and rigged bidding for contracts. The arrest marks a blow for
Fiat, which has been gradually returning to normal after the detention of a
number of top executives in recent months, most of whom are now back at
work. Mr Montevecchi had already been interrogated by Milan and Turin
magistrates investigating other leads in the corruption scandal.
The latest allegations reportedly refer to kickbacks from Fiat Impresit to
politicians for restoration projects at Italian museums.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

930615

