FT934-8720

FT  13 NOV 93 / How To Spend It: A true British Original - Lucia van der
Post welcomes a rival to the Banana bunch


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


ALL THOSE who remember the early days of the catalogues put out by Banana
Republic will mourn their passing. The combination of quirky text,
idiosyncratic drawings and the plain usefulness of the products made them
unmissable. I still sometimes read them just to cheer myself up when I think
the whole world has gone mad over logos and fancy labels.
Alas, the Banana Republic of today has gone all posh, with lots of very
smart safari clothing and no quirky catalogues. If you miss them as I do
then I think you will like the British company, Rediscovered Originals by
Harry Brown.
Though the company is only a few years old, the catalogue looks as if it has
been around for years. Harry Brown is the mythical setter of its style, the
chap who is out there travelling the world sourcing the products that fit
the image.
What Harry Brown comes back with are the sort of classic products that all
of us need at some stage in our lives. There are plain leather belts, soft,
friendly briefcases, sweatshirts and felt hats, Moleskin waistcoats and
convict shirts - as most of you will not be acquainted with these let me put
you in the picture: they are tough indigo striped cotton shirts with metal
studded buttons, patch and flap pockets and double cloth shoulder yokes and
they sell at Pounds 19.98.
There are cult products such as Doctor Martens boots, baseball caps (Pounds
6.98), Levi 501s (Pounds 35), biker jackets and the PLO Scarf (Pounds 4.98).
Then there is a really useful duffle ('discovered by Harry Brown whilst on a
fleeting visit to India') which 'is not a Louis Vitton (sic), it is not a
Gucci, it is a good old honest Harry Brown'.
Prices are good, too, with a classic leather belt selling for Pounds 14.98,
a Chambray denim shirt for Pounds 14.98, the Harry Brown duffle for Pounds
39.98 and a leather Western jacket for Pounds 139.
Harry Brown understands, too, our preference for things that do not look too
new. 'Be prepared for adventure in this strong, rugged, scarred jacket,' he
writes in the catalogue about the Indiana leather jacket (Pounds 184), while
there is also a specially battered and scarred belt (Pounds 19.98.).
Sketched here is the Harry Brown Duster Coat, Pounds 78 - 'made from special
pigment dyed cotton canvas (not waxed), it has undergone an ageing process
to give it a lived in, distressed 'been there, done that' appearance.' And
no, Rediscovered Originals doesn't sell the Harley Davidson but Adam Machell
of Adams Gym, Leeds will.
Rediscovered Originals now has shops in Leeds, Sheffield, York, Chester,
Hull, Thurrock and Newcastle. For a free copy of the catalogue write to
Rediscovered Originals, Springfield Mills, Town End, Bramley, Leeds LS13
3LY, tel: 0532-564416.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

931113

