FT934-10239

FT  06 NOV 93 / It's hell in the aisles / Examining the growing threat of an
all-out war between UK supermarket chains


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES and NEIL BUCKLEY


The threat of an all-out grocery price war moved a step nearer this week
when J. Sainsbury, Britain's largest food retailer, threw down the gauntlet
by cutting prices on 300 of its private-label lines, accounting for a tenth
of its total turnover.
The immediate impact was to increase turmoil in the food retailing sector
and set off a further slide in the already weak share prices of Sainsbury's
and other leading supermarket groups. 'All hell has broken loose and nobody
has a clue what will happen next,' said one stockbroker's analyst yesterday.
The biggest question is whether Sainsbury's has simply joined the reaction
to fiercer price competition, or whether its move marks a decisive turning
point in the fortunes of an industry which appeared until recently to be
defying the laws of economic gravity.
By setting no time limit to its promotion and saying it expects to sacrifice
gross margins to win volume, Sainsbury's appears finally to have accepted
what many industry observers have warned for some time: that from now on,
low prices are the name of the game in food retailing.
Many industry observers believe Sainsbury's move is shrewdly calculated, and
that by emphasising the quality as well as the price of its private label
lines, it has made a bold bid to consolidate its position as the industry
leader. Some also think that, by turning up the heat, it hopes to shake
weaker players out of the market.
However, it is far from clear how well the gambit will succeed. Most
observers think all the leading food retailers are keen to avoid being
sucked into a self-destructive price war of the kind which raged in the late
1970s. However, few doubt competition is set to become fiercer still.
Behind the increasing hostilities on the high street lie not only the
recession, but profound structural changes in food retailing. Mr David
Sainsbury, chairman of the supermarket group, acknowledged as much this week
when he said its sales growth was set to slow during the 1990s.
That marks a distinct shift from a few years ago, when food retailers
embarked on huge investments in superstores, in the apparent belief that the
consumer spending boom of the late 1980s would continue indefinitely. Behind
the more cautious approach lie three factors:
Falling inflation means supermarkets can no longer earn easy profits by
raising prices to consumers faster than the prices they pay their suppliers,
as they were able to do during much of the last decade.
The supermarkets' historically high profits have attracted new competitors
into the market, in the form of grocery discounters. Many, such as Aldi of
Germany, are large and powerful groups with a long-term commitment to
increasing sales in the UK.
J. Sainsbury, Tesco and Argyll, the three biggest supermarkets, have
invested Pounds 10bn in superstores since the mid-1980s. That has led to a
huge increase in retailing capacity in some parts of the country, which will
grow if they continue expanding sales area at recent rates.
The supermarkets' desire to protect these investments is the biggest
argument for them wanting to avoid an all-out price war. But for exactly the
same reason, the damage they would suffer if things really got out hand
could be even more devastating than during the late 1970s.
Most of the Big Three's growth in the past few years has come from new
superstores. However, this growth has depended heavily on achieving
exceptionally high levels in sales per square foot and the big profit
margins needed to finance investments in still more stores.
However, the economic arithmetic behind this formula looks far less certain
in current consumer markets. As a consequence, all the big supermarket
groups, to varying degrees, face the same dilemma.
To keep their big stores profitable, they cannot afford to lose sales to
discount grocers. However, if they respond by competing too heavily on low
price, they risk devaluing the carefully-cultivated brand image which is
essential to high margins.
While most observers believe Sainsbury's has so far successfully straddled
this divide, many are much more doubtful about Tesco. They say the group
seems increasingly uncertain about its future direction, and that by
launching cheap, lower quality, 'tertiary' brands, it is sending confusing
messages to consumers.
Some in the industry argue that if such muddled policies continue for long,
they could nullify Tesco's huge efforts in the past decade to move its brand
image up-market and make it hard to regain a reputation for quality once
economic recovery comes.
The current turmoil could squeeze some weaker chains, such as Gateway,
Waitrose and the Co-ops, out of the market. However, not only have such
groups shown remarkable staying power until now; but some other retailers
fear their disappearance could make conditions worse, not better.
According to one senior retail executive, if a store chain closed, its
floorspace would probably be sold cheaply to a discounter or a foreign
chain. 'That would make complete nonsense of the billions we have all spent
on expansion in the past few years,' he said.
A more probable outcome is that the industry may be obliged to accept
margins far lower than the 7-8 per cent return on sales which the leaders
have grown used to. In that case, the pressures on one or more of the
biggest groups to scale back dramatically investments in new superstores
could become overwhelming.
That seems unlikely to happen soon. Not only are long lead times built into
store opening programmes - typically three years. But no group wants to be
the first to take a step which would involve serious loss of face and raise
grave doubts among investors about its future growth potential. On the other
hand, some industry analysts are convinced that things have got so tough
that if one big chain announced it was chopping back its investment plans,
others would quickly follow suit.
However, if recent pressures continue, supermarkets will be unable to put
off hard choices indefinitely. Many still seem to be hoping the current
price war will be short-lived, and that they will be rescued by an economic
recovery next spring. But even if that happens, it is likely to be a long
time, if ever, before the industry returns to go-go years like the 1980s.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931106

