FT934-8731

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Bank backs down - Casebook


   By KATE BEVAN


IT IS possible to battle your bank and win. I hold an Abbey National
investment account which I opened earlier this year with Pounds 2,500 and
which allows two penalty-free withdrawals in a 12-month period. The terms
and conditions state: 'For account holders with a balance under Pounds
10,000, you can make up to two penalty-free withdrawals (subject to daily
withdrawal limits) in each account year.'
With this in mind, I planned to make two such withdrawals to pay for a
holiday and, later, travellers' cheques. I wanted the first withdrawal of
Pounds 1,300 to be divided into two cheques, one for Pounds 1,075.75 and the
second for Pounds 224.25.
But the cashier was adamant that this constituted two withdrawals and that I
would lose 90 days' interest on the next withdrawal, which I planned to make
the following week because I could not give 90 days' notice.
I spoke to the branch manager, who agreed that the terms and conditions were
vague on what constituted a withdrawal. My point was that this was one sum
being withdrawn at one go, and that splitting it into two cheques was an
administrative issue. Furthermore, I argued that there was nothing in the
terms and conditions to make me think otherwise. We agreed that he would get
in touch with head office and check the position.
I later received a letter from him saying: '. . . Having checked with my
head office, I confirm that this effectively represents only one withdrawal
from your account and, therefore, you are able to effect another
penalty-free withdrawal from your account between now and 1st June 1994.'
Needless to say, there was no apology for having been misled in the first
place. And although Abbey National's head office has confirmed that such a
transaction represents one withdrawal, there is no guarantee that future
customers will not be given similarly incorrect advice, given the initial
reactions of the cashier and manager.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

931113

