FT934-10157

FT  06 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: High hopes for high-tech / A look at
the Henderson TR Global Technology fund - Unit Trusts


   By BETHAN HUTTON


TECHNOLOGY could be the west's antidote to competition from emerging markets
in Asia and Latin America, according to Brian Ashford-Russell, manager of
the Henderson TR Global Technology fund.
'Technology is what is going to allow developed countries' manufacturing
industries to compete with emerging markets. I see no other way whereby
industry in the west can really compete against the low labour costs you are
going to get in China, India,' says Ashford-Russell.
He sees technology as the foundation for 'emerging industries', which have
greater growth potential than more established sectors.
The fund's performance appears to bear out this view. It is near the top of
its sector - international equity growth - over the last few years. Over
five years it is fifth out of 112 funds, with growth of 170 per cent (offer
to bid, net income reinvested, source: Micropal); over three years it is
fifth of 139 funds, though it has slipped to number 26 out of 153 funds over
one year, with 37 per cent growth.
The fund is relatively small, at just under Pounds 30m, and it is managed by
the two-man team of Ashford-Russell, who has been with the fund since it was
launched in 1984 (at Touche Remnant), and Michael Bourne, formerly with
Prolific's technology fund.
Their definition of technology is fairly broad, covering information
technology, health care, manufacturing, some environmental technology,
high-tech aerospace components, defence, and new telecommunications, such as
cellullar communications.
Leisure and entertainment technology, such as games software, is included,
but ordinary consumer electronics is not.
According to Ashford-Russell, technology accounts for 20 per cent of world
stock market capitalisation, but the fund deliberately concentrates on three
main markets: the US, UK and Japan.
'In some ways it is better to stay with what you know best, and feel
confident about. On average we have 20 per cent exposure to the UK. The UK
does not represent more than 5 per cent of world technology, but that does
not mean you cannot make very good money from it.'
The largest portion of the fund is invested in North America, with 65 per
cent at the moment; the UK has 17 per cent and Japan 9 per cent, with the
balance in cash. 'The US really drives the trust,' says Ashford-Russell. He
sees most important consumer and industrial trends as starting on the west
coast of the US, and gradually filtering through to the rest of the country
and then the world.
The lack of any investment in Europe apart from the UK, or Asia apart from
Japan may seem odd. 'Europe has been something of a minefield for technology
investors,' he says, and has no current plans to try again there.
Missing out on the boom in south-east Asian stock markets is a source of
some regret, however. 'That has been one of the penalties of remaining
rather pure in terms of specialisation,' he says.
'If you go into technology companies in emerging markets the first problem
you come up against is that most are relatively low-technology sub-contract
or assembly operations.' However, Ashford-Russell is planning a trip to the
far east to look for promising companies in Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore and
Taiwan.
Both product and company life cycles are short in the technology sector.
This has meant high turnover in the fund - up to 400 per cent a year, though
that has now slowed to 75-100 per cent. The rapidly changing nature of the
business also increases the research load. Between them, Bourne and
Ashford-Russell see 1,000 companies a year.
They tend to be small to medium-sized companies - the smallest would have a
market capitalisation of Dollars 20m - and the fund usually holds 60-70
stocks. The ten largest holdings at the moment are: TR Technology investment
trust (UK, managed by the same team); Misys (UK); Seagate (US); Tadiran
(Israel/US); Cygnus (US); Marshall Industries (US); Arrow Electronics (US);
Software Toolworks (US); International Cabletel (US); Newbridge Networks
(Canada).
With rapidly changing markets and products, mistakes are inevitable.
Ashford-Russell describes them as 'torpedoes' - disasters that appear from
nowhere and sink you before you have seen them coming.
'We regard ourselves as doing very well if we get away with a quarter
without a torpedo,' he says.
However, torpedoes can turn around. One high-profile disaster
Ashford-Russell remembers was Micro Focus, the software company. On one day
in 1984 its share price fell by more than half, and kept on falling.
But in 1988, on a trip to the US, Ashford-Russell started hearing good
things about the company, and on his return went to visit it.
'I don't think they had seen any UK investors for a long time, but they were
operating in an area of the market which was not really terribly well
understood over here,' says Ashford-Russell.
'I picked up Micro Focus at about Pounds 1.50, and sold it over the last 18
months or two years on average at about Pounds 20.'
Timing is also important. Nintendo and Sega have revolutionised the computer
games market, but Ashford-Russell missed the best of both of them.
Charges. The initial charge is 5.25 per cent and the annual 1.5 per cent;
the bid-offer spread is 6.5 per cent. The minimum investment is Pounds
1,000, and there is no savings scheme or Pep attached to the fund.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

931106

