FT932-6567

FT  27 MAY 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Summers fails to curb yen


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE YEN continued its power-ful surge against the dollar in yesterday's
European trading, pushing the US currency to an historic low in spite of
attempts by officials in Washington to curb the trend, writes James Blitz.
The Japanese currency has enjoyed a considerable bout of strength in the
interval between the recent announcement of a larger than expected US trade
deficit and today's trade talks between Tokyo and Washington, where US
officials are expected to call for a stronger yen.
At the end of Wednesday's Tokyo trading, the yen had risen to a record high
against the dollar of Y108.64 following a US Treasury report which
underlined that a strong yen could curb the Japanese trade surplus.
As US trading opened, Mr Lawrence Summers, Treasury undersecretary for
international affairs, watered down the impact of the report, saying the US
was not seeking an appreciation of the currency.
But this had little effect. The dollar fell further in London before
finishing at Y108.60; in New York it ended at Y108.45. The D-Mark also
declined to an all-time low against the yen of Y66.51 from a previous
Y67.25.
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief currency strategist at Citibank in London, believes
the yen will still have a strong upside after today's meeting. 'Dollar/yen
has Y100 written all over it,' he said. He thinks that the announcement of
another rise in the Japanese trade surplus is inevitable in the next month,
underpinning the Japanese currency.
Miss Wendy Niffikeer, an economist at IBJ International in London, also
believes the yen has a strong upside but that it could retrace in the summer
as Japanese economic weakness haunts yen holders.
In Europe, attention focused on the peseta, which suffered a sharp fall
following an allegedly poor performance by Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the Spanish
prime minister, in a pre-election television debate. The peseta fell to a
close of Pta77.88 from a previous Pta76.28. In the exchange rate mechanism
grid, its divergence indicator dropped dramatically from plus 55 per cent to
plus 24 per cent.
The fall might have been more dramatic had the D-Mark not been weak.
Yesterday, the currency lost ground against sterling, closing a full pfennig
weaker at DM2.5225. It also ended more than  1/4 pfennig easier against the
dollar at DM1.6320. In New York the US currency closed at DM1.6285.
Once more, the critical issue is that the D-Mark is weakening in spite of
unchanged interest rate policy from the Bundesbank, which left its repo rate
at 7.60 per cent yesterday.
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank vice-president, also failed to push the
D-Mark up or German bond yields down with hawkish comments yesterday.
Instead, the German currency dropped to minus 26 per cent against its ERM
divergence indicator, its lowest level since the Yes vote in Denmark.

The Financial Times


London Page 41

930527

