FT934-11635

FT  30 OCT 93 / A very British clash: Two society cultures that refused to
gel


   By CHRIS TIGHE


However sudden the abandonment of the Leeds Permanent - N&P merger may have
seemed, it came as no surprise to many employees in Yorkshire's close-knit
building societies.
From the outset the proposed deal was viewed with scepticism locally. How,
one employee of a rival society asked this week, could the conventional
Leeds ever have merged with a society which allowed a middle-ranking
employee to buy a four-year-old Porsche, using a company scheme?
'Most Yorkshire societies,' he said, 'would very strongly dissuade the
employee from it.'
Some of the financial gossip in Yorkshire may be a little extravagant in
describing the yawning gap between the two societies' management styles -
'feudal' and 'off the wall' were among the epithets used to characterise,
respectively, the Leeds and the N&P.
But there is no disguising the glaring difference between the sober culture
of the Leeds, said to be 'hierarchical', by one employee, and the more
innovative approach of N&P, where staff are 'players', the executives are
the 'direction management team', the marketing department is called the
'customer requirements process' and meetings are styled 'events'. N&P has
three 'role levels' of staff; Leeds has 15 grades.
N&P's unorthodox management style has even fostered a witticism. 'At these
events, they go on talking until there are no more challenges to proposed
changes,' says one insider. 'It gives a new meaning to 'three-day
eventing'.'
'It's just not British. It's an American-based system of equality,' says Mr
David Holmes, Yorkshire Building Society's communications director. 'A lot
of the stuff seems like gobbledegook science fiction. We all know the
realities of working for large organisations.'
He adds, however, that Mr David O'Brien, N&P chief executive, termed
'messianic' by some rivals has created a strong body of disciples among his
staff, committed to his approach. 'The people who work there find it
invigorating,' says Mr Holmes.
At the Leeds' imposing new headquarters many employees including middle
management - a level the N&P calls 'managers of implementation' - were
evidently not ready to follow a new messiah. 'There were a lot of people
celebrating in the pub on Tuesday night,' says a Leeds middle manager.
After the announcement, staff at both organisations were instructed not to
talk to the media. But a few, anonymously, were willing.
'When I heard the merger had been called off, I had mixed feelings,' says
one Leeds HQ employee. 'It was good news because it was 1,600 jobs saved,
and that's 1,600 families. But on the other hand the merger would have made
us stronger and better able to compete against the Halifax.'
At N&P, the staff association chairman, Ms Janet Wojtkow, says 'players'
were relieved, although some were disappointed too, having seen in the
merger the opportunity for career progression.
'We remained to be convinced the merger was in the interest of the staff,'
she adds. 'Our feelings have been proved right.'
For the N&P, the merger debacle has produced some unflattering comment on
its management style. 'Our customers don't see us as some kind of wacky
organisation,' said the company's spokesman.
The feeling that N&P was not 'British' reflected, he suggested, the British
wariness of change. 'While the rest of the world is looking at new ways of
working, we don't adopt them. N&P has implemented them successfully.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931030

