FT933-5115

FT  04 SEP 93 / Arts: The factory Bacchae - Opera


   By DAVID MURRAY


THE FIRST thing to say about the new Opera Factory version of Euripides'
Bacchae is that it is a 'play with music', just as billed. In the wake of
Henze's Bassarids (libretto by Auden & Kallman) and John Buller's BAKXAI
(mostly in the 'original' ancient Greek - however that may have sounded,
which nobody really knows) at the Coliseum, you might have expected another
opera: not so.
Though the modern Greek architect - mathematician-composer Xenakis has
supplied music for the extensive choruses (in Greek) and some eruptive
orchestral punctuation, David Freeman's show is basically words-and-sights.
The English text, in the poet C K Williams' translation, is crisp and
modern, delivered with brio by the actor-principals. The sights - well, that
is where Freeman's plan becomes problematic.
His programme-note declares The Bacchae 'one of the most savage plays ever
written'. So it is, in a sense, but it is no Titus Andronicus: in ancient
Greek tragedy the visible action is always of the plainest, and violent acts
occur strictly offstage - to be reported later, of course, in scarifying
verbal detail. The reason why the original play is much more discussed now
than performed, despite its appalling, fascinating, suggestively ambiguous
story, is that in practice it is all choral singing and talk.
There are fraught dialogues between Pentheus, the severe young King of
Thebes, and the disguised god Dionysus who comes to draw Theban women
(including the King's mother Agave) away to nameless Bacchic rites on Mount
Kythaeron; and later a fine, agonised scena for Agave, upon learning that
she herself led the frenzied dismembering of her son when he spied upon
their rites in female garb. Yet the guts of the action - rather literally -
remain in decent obscurity. Freeman's solution is to have them vividly
enacted, even while the ghastly facts are narrated.
Partly that works, partly not. Sometimes it marginalises Euripides'
story-telling, which is potent enough on its own; on the other hand, what we
see is inevitably milder than what we're told. Thus, the Bacchantes'
hauling-down of Pentheus from his pine-top vantage is strikingly represented
 -but in desperate flight all his limbs are visibly hale, when we know
already that an arm has been torn from his body.
Gory Grand Guignol would be quite wrong, but the mismatch is distracting
amid Freeman's relentless insistence on raw physical involvement. Again,
when he understandably wanted the trophy that poor, dazed Agave cradles in
her arms - she thinks it a lion's head: it is her son's - to be more than a
papier-mache bust a la Strauss's Salome, he had his Bacchantes bury the rest
of Pentheus's naked, supine body under huge stones first. Balsa-wood they
might be, but among the audience (at least the male half) that operation
probably induced more gut-dismay than Agave's dreadful recognition later.
Still, Veronica Duffy's Agave is brilliantly taut-to-breaking-point, and as
Pentheus Peter Sullivan has all the right youthfully haughty, truculent,
self-righteous vulnerability. Grandfather Cadmus and ancient, near-gaga
Tiresias are sharply captured by Derek Smith and Jerome Willis, with David
Hobbs a staunch Messenger. The variety of Xenakis's choruses, attentive to
Euripides' prosody, is somewhat diminished by unvaried accompaniments -
ritualised, very high and low winds, asymmetrical bursts of percussion,
though the Premiere Ensemble under Nicholas Kok drives them cleanly home.
Dionysus is the dark, towering, muscular Joe Dixon: charismatic, yes, but
hardly the teasingly androgynous ephebe of the play - nor the Stranger of
the King Roger it inspired from Szymanowski, nor of the Henze and Buller
operas. Nevertheless Freeman's production has a rare strength: he gives
equal, dispassionate weight to all the other factors in this extraordinary
piece.
For a 20th-century audience, it ought to have some implicit moral: about the
repression of women, or the impotence of moral authoritarianism, or the
allure of losing oneself in the divinely pre-rational. Every such tidy
thesis is undermined and controverted by the text itself; by the end
everyone loses horribly but Dionysus, who has by then come to seem a
monster. Yet what happens here is simply what happens; if we find it
uncannily disturbing, we have to decide for ourselves why it should be so.
That is a salutary experience.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

930904

