FT931-4147

FT  12 MAR 93 / The Taurus Collapse: Resignation of Rawlins considered 'a
good thing'


   By ROBERT PESTON, Banking Editor


MR PETER RAWLINS, who resigned yesterday as chief executive of the Stock
Exchange, has said he subscribes to the General Custer management method:
'Run fast enough to stay ahead of the arrows.' In the end he was trampled by
a bull called Taurus.
'It is a good thing that he has resigned', said the head of one of London's
biggest investment banking houses. 'He has lost credibility on too many
issues.'
He was brought in to the exchange in 1989 in part because he was thought to
have expertise in developing computer systems. There were already fears that
the proposed new system was too ambitious, and it was hoped the new
technocrat would sort them out.
He may have been at fault in not abandoning Taurus earlier, but his Achilles
heel has been his knack of making enemies.
It was inevitable that he would face some opposition if he was to carry out
the task he had been set by the chairman, Sir Andrew Hugh Smith, of
modernising the exchange.
It had become a huge, inward-looking and unwieldy organisation, not sure
whether it was a regulator, a trade lobby group, a commercial business or a
provider of market services. It employed around 3,000 bureaucrats, and
strategy was the preserve of some 90 committees and sub-committees,
typically made up of superannuated stockbrokers who had only reluctantly
acceded to government pressure to deregulate the market in the Big Bang of
1986.
Mr Rawlins, now 42, had little direct experience of the stock market. He
trained as an accountant at Arthur Andersen. He had also worked for Sturge,
the insurance broker, and had been seconded to the Lloyd's insurance market
in the early 1980s as personal assistant to Mr Ian Hay Davison, then chief
executive.
He lived up to his reputation as a tough cost-cutting manager. There are now
just 16 exchange committees, while staff numbers were reduced to 1,400 - and
were cut yesterday by a further 220.
He has also tried to make the exchange more responsive to its customers by
inviting industrialists and fund managers to its main board.
Much of the City old guard and many exchange employees were incensed. But
those who ran the big securities houses were behind him.
Although he has since alienated many supporters, one leading broker says:
'In the beginning, he was definitely the right man for the job.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930312

