FT934-11427

FT  01 NOV 93 / Government forced to extend rail franchises


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


THE government has bowed to pressure to extend the duration of franchises
for parts of the British Rail network, it emerged yesterday.
Bidders could be awarded franchises that last as long as 15 years, more than
twice the length of time previously expected, Mr John MacGregor, transport
secretary said.
The short anticipated duration of the franchises, which had previously been
expected to run for only five to seven years, has acted as a disincentive to
potential private bidders.
If a bidder is willing to put in sufficient capital investment, the
government would be prepared to to consider awarding franchises of '10 years
and beyond' and possibly up to 15 years, Mr MacGregor said on BBC
Television's On the Record.
Mr MacGregor said franchisees would not need large amounts of working
capital because they would have the revenues from their operations and, if
these were loss-making, a government subsidy.
The minister left open the possibility of further increases in the
government's subsidy to the railways. But he denied that it would rise to
Pounds 2bn in 1994-95 from Pounds 850m this year, as suggested by an
internal government report obtained by the BBC. He said that the figure of
Pounds 2bn was 'not necessarily true' and would certainly not apply to
1994-95, when the government expected the Gatwick Express to be the only
franchise operating under private ownership.
Mr John Prescott, the former shadow transport secretary who was switched to
the employment portfolio last month, said bigger subsidies would be needed
if BR's operations were to achieve the 8 per cent rate of return required by
the government. He said it was cynical of the government to cut subsidies
when BR was in public ownership but increase them to help it go private.
Asked about suggestions that the need to reduce government spending would
lead to delays in starting work on two projects - the high-speed rail link
to the Channel tunnel, and London Crossrail which will link Paddington and
Liverpool Street stations - Mr MacGregor said neither scheme was as far
advanced as the Jubilee Line extension to London's East End, which was given
the go-ahead on Friday.
'We can't tell what the final deadline date will be because there are so
many processes to go through,' he said.
Union Railways, the BR subsidiary charged with launching the high-speed link
from London to the the Channel tunnel at Folkestone, presented the results
of a six-month public consultation on the route to the government on Friday.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931101

