FT932-13412

FT  23 APR 93 / Arts: Schiller's 'The Robbers'


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


It amazes me, again and again, that you can so often find rarely-performed
cornerstones of world theatre in London's pub theatres. Right now, in the
Grace Theatre, up above The Latchmere in Battersea, you can see Friedrich
Schiller's first play, The Robbers (Die Rauber, 1780). Liberty] Equality]
You are hurled headlong into a world far from Battersea, far from 1993 - and
yet you know, as you watch, that plays like this, written in a blast of
proto-Romanticism before the French Revolution, helped to create the world
we know today.
It is a double amazement to find such a play in these circumstances, because
Schiller is a mighty hard playwright to bring off in performance today. His
brow is heavy, his tone earnest, and, in The Robbers, he is quicker to
plunge us into a climate of Sturm und Drang and moral/philosophical dilemmas
than he is to create a living, detailed, stage world.
Schiller knew his Shakespeare - as FJ Lamport's Penguin translation (used
here), underlines. The plot opposes two brothers, very much like Edgar and
Edmund in Lear. The younger, Franz, plots against both his brother, Karl,
and their father - wanting not only power but also Karl's beloved Amalia.
Karl, banished, takes to brigandry, using violent methods to destroy the
corrupt rich; and so, ironically, he becomes more criminal and sinful in
practice than his wicked brother.
Both become prey to conscience. Near the play's denouement, they alternate
in soliloquies, like Shakespeare Richard III and Richmond: but their
concerns are right, wrong, justice after death and the soul's immortality.
As Schiller turns either brother's position into anguished metaphysical
speculation, he comes close to such playwrights as Tirso de Molina or (his
near-contemporary and friend-to-be) Goethe. And The Robbers, which has often
seemed an over-lofty play, as it climbs into yet loftier regions,
surprisingly transcends itself, and becomes, in the last resort, wholly
absorbing.
It would take a remarkably sophisticated team of actors to manage the
melodramatic heroism in which Schiller steeps this drama. Paul Miller's cast
consists chiefly of young, good-looking actors. Several of them attend too
much to surface details - brightly intense facial expressions and stiffly
fidgety gestures - and too little to the fomenting Romantic energies
beneath.
But, as Karl, Dominic Taylor delivers a superb performance. He is
marvellously economical and controlled, absolutely in control of every
climax, thrilling in outcry, movingly sincere in quiet reflection. There are
areas of Romantic despair and tragic distraction that he does not yet fill
out, but he shows you the grand shape of this dark hero's mind with power,
virility, stillness, and even wit. And as the play proceeds, it sweeps
everyone else up to his level.
At the Grace Theatre, SW11, until May 1

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930423

