FT934-11435

FT  01 NOV 93 / Fear of redundancy rises steeply despite fall in jobless
total


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff


MORE THAN half of British workers fear that they could lose their jobs in
the next 12 months despite falling levels of unemployment, the latest MORI
monthly survey for the Financial Times has found.
Fear of redundancy and unemployment rose sharply over the past few weeks to
53 per cent of those in full-time or part-time work after falling to 43 per
cent in September, the survey indicates.
Anxiety about prospects has grown most among women, part-time workers and
the young.
Mr David Martin, editorial director of Industrial Relations Services, the
independent pay and conditions group that commissioned the series of monthly
surveys, said: 'Confidence is key to the strength of any economic recovery.
'Fear of job loss has grown dramatically, and those interviewed do not
believe that unemployment has peaked and that confidence in the pace of
recovery remains fragile.'
According to the series of surveys, which started in April, fear over the
possibility of redundancy had a first peak in July when 51 per cent of those
in work said they were either 'very concerned' or 'fairly concerned'.
In August 47 per cent were of the same opinion and in September the figure
was 43 per cent. This decline was in spite of the possibility of job losses
in the public sector because of an announcement by the government that any
pay increases must be funded by increased productivity.
October's level of anxiety among part-time workers contrasts with six months
ago. In April only a third of part-time workers expressed concern over
redundancy, but last month the figure was 45 per cent.
Mr Bob Worcester, MORI chairman, said people 'read that businessmen are more
bullish but then they look around among their friends and nothing has
changed. In addition, the government has talked on so many occasions about
green shoots that they have become cynical.'
MORI interviewed 930 adults aged 18 and over who work full-time or
part-time. Interviews were conducted face-to-face in the period October
21-25.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931101

