FT932-6743

FT  27 MAY 93 / Criticism of Civil Service is rejected


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


A RECOMMENDATION by two top government advisers that 'considerable'
overcapacity and overmanning in Civil Service research establishments should
be reduced by removing them from the control of Whitehall departments is
rejected by the white paper.
In a study on government spending on science and technology published
yesterday, Sir Peter Levene, the prime minister's efficiency adviser, and
Professor William Stewart, government chief scientific adviser, say that
there is potential for 'significant savings' through greater competition for
government research contracts.
The study recommends faster privatisation of government research
establishments. Where research establishments cannot be privatised, their
ownership should be taken away from departments to separate the purchaser
and provider along similar lines to other public services such as health and
the social services.
The white paper accepts that privatisation is a realistic prospect for some
establishments. But it promises only a sector-by-sector review of the
organisational and managerial structures of research establishments which
are not to be privatised - in spite of the study's conclusion that
significant savings would result from greater competition for government
research contracts.
The study says that Civil Service research activities are insufficiently
exposed to competitive tendering because Whitehall departments treat their
research establishments as fixed costs. The result is that the overheads are
excessive - the proportion of administrative staff is 50 per cent higher in
government research establishments than it is in industrial research
establishments.
Most government departments are spending a higher proportion of their
research budget in-house than five years ago, the study says. The Scottish
Office, for example, has increased its in-house spending from 14 per cent in
1986-87 to 19 per cent in 1990-91. The in-house share of the Department of
Trade and Industry has risen from 7.6 per cent to 11.8 per cent over the
same period. This contrasts with the research councils, which have switched
more of their spending to universities and have reduced their staff by 9 per
cent in the same period. The number of civil servants engaged in
non-military research and development is rising - from 7,501 in 1986-87 to a
planned total of 8,633 in 1994-95.
Rationalisation of defence research activities has already led to the
closure of a large number of sites and a reduction in staff of 2,000, the
study says.
A similar approach in other departments could not only increase the amount
of research for the money but also help the research establishments bid more
competitively for other work.
Civil servants involved in science and technology should in future be
employed on fixed-term contracts to improve the flexibility of research
establishments, the study says.
Among the reasons cited by departments for protecting government research
establishments from competition are the need for a quick response when
emergencies arise, for example, in relation to health or safety. However,
the study says that the response of defence companies such as Royal Ordnance
in the Gulf War suggests that this need not be a problem.
Review of Allocation and Use of Government Expenditure on Science and
Technology. HMSO. Pounds 10.15.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930527

