FT931-3876

FT  13 MAR 93 / Leading Article: Politics and the markets


THE DAMAGE inflicted on John Major's government by the anti-Maastricht Tory
rebels is real enough. But it is questionable whether anyone outside Britain
is giving it much thought. This is a month in which momentous events are
unfolding across the developed world.
In the US and Germany, important battles are being fought over fiscal
policy. The political complexion of France is about to change in the
forthcoming election in ways that could have fundamental importance for the
exchange rate mechanism and for Europe itself. Italy is being turned upside
down by efforts to purge a corrupt political system. In Japan, also beset by
scandals, the state of a shaky banking system will be clarified when the
fiscal year ends on March 31. It is the level of the stock market on that
date which will dictate in good measure the value of bank capital.
More disturbing still is the growing uncertainty over the fate of Mr Boris
Yeltsin. Yesterday's nervousness in continental European markets was
prompted partly by the fear of what might happen if he goes. Current
assumptions about the appropriate level of defence spending in the US and
Europe would have to be revised, with obvious consequences for fiscal
policy. This thought will no doubt be at the back of the minds of
representatives of the Group of Seven, as they consider what to do about
Russia this weekend.
So political instability is playing a larger role in world capital markets.
Once again, the nervousness of British equities yesterday over next week's
Budget has echoes elsewhere, especially in Germany. Negotiations between the
German government, the opposition and the federal states over the
post-unification solidarity pact continue to drag on against a background of
declining economic activity, falling corporate profits and labour unrest.
With many forecasters expecting economic declines this year of between 1 and
1 1/2 per cent, the fiscal pressure will increase so long as the haggling
persists.
Nationalism in Europe
Also disturbing were the advances made by extreme right republicans in the
local and city elections in Hesse last weekend. So far, the lack of a
plausible leadership has meant that the nationalist tendency in Germany has
seemed less threatening than it might. But nationalism in Europe is set to
become more dangerous as long as the European economy remains stagnant.
The key to recovery in Europe lies largely in the hands of the Bundesbank.
Members of the Bundesbank council will once again be under considerable
political pressure to reduce rates at their meeting next week, not least
because the French franc has been sinking within the Exchange Rate
Mechanism. The Bank of France was rumoured to have intervened yesterday to
support the franc, and may well have to intervene throughout the period of
political uncertainty. The franc could continue to pose problems for
Europe's central banks once the elections are out of the way, since the
anti-European Gaullists in Mr Jacques Chirac's party will be a more potent
force in the National Assembly after the socialist defeat which seems
inevitable.
There are limits on what the Bundesbank can do to accommodate the franc, but
there is a growing feeling in the markets that it will wish to cut interest
rates again in any case for its own domestic reasons. With the German fiscal
argument unresolved, the cuts may come more slowly than the rest of Europe
now hopes. In the meantime, the French banking system is wilting under the
pressure of high short term rates.
Buoyant equities
With so much uncertainty around, it might seem odd that several of the
world's equity markets have been buoyant for so long. The easiest case to
rationalise is Japan, where buoyancy in part reflects the flood of public
pension fund money that is being pumped into the market before the fiscal
year-end in order to help the banks. The movement has become self-feeding,
since investors are aware of the importance of a successful market rigging
operation to the government. The question is whether the rally will survive
into the next fiscal year.
In the United States, market buoyancy appears to reflect extraordinary
confidence in President Clinton's budget programme. Despite offering a
package of measures that will still leave a substantial structural budget
deficit, he has prompted a euphoric rise in bond prices that has also lent
support to equities. It may be overdone. Yet the present level of prices
also derives backing from a more fundamental factor, namely the penalty
incurred by investors who abandon equities or long-dated bonds for low
yielding cash and money market instruments.
The same thing applies to the UK, where the yield curve has steepened since
last autumn, with short term rates substantially below long rates. That is
the best reason for thinking that, even if there are short term setbacks
arising from political uncertainties around the world, the British market is
still in a bull phase.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930313

