FT933-12815

FT  22 JUL 93 / Personal View: Challenge of balancing power in Bosnia


   By MATE BOBAN


The general perception that the new political proposal for Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the demise of the republic is simply wrong. Rather, the
proposal to create a confederal form of government between the three
constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina represents a real hope for
peace, and possibly a last opportunity to prevent a permanent division of
the country.
The new plan is a variation on the Vance/Owen plan. It is being formulated,
as was the earlier plan, under the auspices of the international community.
Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg are mandated by the European Community
and other parts of the international community to guarantee that the plan is
fair to all three sides.
The Owen/Stoltenberg plan will ensure the integrity of the Bosnian state,
while accepting the reality that has divided the country along three lines.
It will be a middle road between the two extremes: the yearning by the
Bosnian president, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, for a strong centralised state and
earlier claims by Mr Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, that
Bosnia and Herzegovina should not exist at all.
The Owen/Stoltenberg plan will also have some fundamental elements of the
Cutilliero plan - creation of a confederate state delineated along ethnic
lines. The Cutilliero plan was signed by all three sides in Lisbon in March
1992. Regrettably, Mr Izetbegovic later rescinded his signature.
The eight-point Cutilliero criteria for delineation will be used.
Territorial distribution will focus on economic value rather than on surface
area. Under this formula, Moslems could receive two units, the Bihac area
and the Sarajevo-Tuzla-Zenica triang1e. The industrial production capacity
of these represents a proportion of Bosnia's gross domestic product that is
greater than the Moslem proportion (44 per cent) of the population.
The Owen/Stoltenberg plan will accept the reality that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can exist only as a voluntary union of its three constituent
peoples. Calls for a multicultural and multinational Bosnia and Herzegovina
are lofty goals and should be the ultimate objective, but the reality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is that its electorate chose to belong to purely
ethnic parties and to vote along ethnic lines - Croat, Moslem and Serb.
This reflects not so much a lack of commitment to democracy and the
tolerance of diversity as the deep-seated fear of government in a society
conditioned by a legacy of ethnic-based oppression. Four centuries of
domination by the Ottomans were followed by the post-first world war
dictatorship of the Serbian monarchy and then by the Serbian-dominated
communist Yugoolav government.
Ethnic dominance is a particular concern to Bosnian Croats, who are the
smallest of the three groups. This should concern Mr Izetbegovic as well.
One often overlooks the fact that, given the casualties in this war, it is
almost certain that the Serbs will emerge as the largest population group
and possibly a majority in Bosnia and Herzegovina after the war.
In a country where the largest ethnic group dominates, the challenge,
therefore, is to devise a political system that creates a credible balance
of power between the three peoples.
In some respects the Owen/Stoltenberg plan will resemble the first
constitutional arrangement of the US. Confederation was the foundation of a
democratic model of government widely considered the best in the world. The
Articles of Confederation of 1781 formed the nucleus of trust and
co-operation between the autonomous-minded 13 colonies which had differing
needs, interests and political aspirations. No other initial form of
government could overcome the mistrust in a centralised government's ability
to respect individual, group, religious and economic rights.
For those who insist that, no matter what it is called, this is the end of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, I say: you are absolutely wrong. This is the only
way that Bosnia and Herzegovina can survive - as an arrangement that allows
for balance of political power. Confederation is the way to prevent what
would become one-party rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We must not build what could became an ethnic party dictatorship in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We should look to build a genuine and sustainable democracy
instead. Confederation will do that. At the moment, just as in 1781, nothing
else can.
The author is leader of the Bosnian Croats. A Personal View by Mohamed
Sacirbey, Bosnian ambassador to the United Nations, will be published soon.
An article by Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, appeared on
June 9

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930722

