FT931-4174

FT  12 MAR 93 / Japan ponders shift in business ties: Changing relationships
brought about by the recession


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


THE WEB of long-term relationships upon which Japan's industrial success has
been built may be starting to unravel.
Large companies offer lifetime employment to their full-time workers. They
forge close relationships with a pyramid of loyal sub-contractors and depend
upon the patient, intimate involvement of banks to fund their long-term
investment plans. Corporate relationships are underpinned by cross
shareholdings between companies.
These links are widely credited with creating a long-term outlook at
Japanese companies which helps them to ride out sharp cyclical swings in
economic activity.
However, the downturn which began last year is proving so severe that these
relationships are being recast in ways which will change the character of
the Japanese economy.
Suppliers. Manufacturers are rethinking their relationships with
sub-contractors as they cut costs to stave off a fourth year of declining
profits. It is not simply that manufacturers are demanding steep cuts in
component prices. They are rationalising and diversifying.
Most car manufacturers plan to cut the number of parts they use and the
variety of models they make by between 30 and 40 per cent. Fewer parts will
probably mean fewer suppliers.
Some of these suppliers will be highly privileged business partners.
According to the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti),
manufacturers are strengthening their ties to key sub-contractors which have
high technology.
However competition is likely to intensify among suppliers of commodity
items. Manufacturers are likely to change these suppliers more frequently,
forcing sub-contractors to seek to supply a wider range of customers.
A recent Miti survey found the proportion of sub-contractors dealing with
less than five customers is expected to fall from 70 per cent in 1987 to
about 51 per cent within five years.
Workers. The famed lifetime employment system, is starting to fray at the
edges as companies cut personnel costs.
The terms of the lifetime employment contract are being amended. Workers
over the age of 50 are increasingly likely to be encouraged to retire early,
foregoing some of their peak earnings late in their careers.
Banks. The 1980s wrought a fundamental change in the relationship between
Japanese companies and their banks which could have important implications
for their response to the downturn.
In 1931 only about 10 per cent of funds supplied to industry came from
banks. In the three decades following the war, when Japanese industry was
growing most rapidly, banks accounted for about 87.5 per cent of industrial
investment.
In the 1980s manufacturers increasingly turned away from banking
relationships to the capital markets for funds.
The Bank of Japan says large manufacturing companies used bonds and equity
for about 52 per cent of the finance they raised in 1989, up from 27.5 per
cent in 1980. Long-term bank borrowing fell from 13 to just 4 per cent. In
the 1970s manufacturers accounted for about 50 per cent of bank lending. In
1990 it was 16 per cent.
Banking relationships became less stable. Between 1984 and 1989 a fifth of
large Japanese companies changed their main bank for short-term borrowing,
up from 5 per cent between 1980 and 1984.
The Bank of Japan concludes that weakening relationships significantly
loosened the financial discipline of industrial companies. As a result, the
companies invested so heavily in the late 1980s that most now carry heavy
depreciation charges for past investment which has merely created
overcapacity.
Although the Tokyo stock market is deeply depressed, with few issues of new
equity, it is unlikely that old banking relationships will be reformed.
Corporate liquidity is being run down as profits head for their fourth
consecutive year of decline next year.
Cross-shareholdings. In their search to ease financial pressures, companies
will have to consider breaking other relationships - traditional
cross-shareholdings which cement the links between companies. Selling
securities is one of the favourite methods companies use to boost their
profits.
Companies hold shares in one another partly to cement business
relationships. In the 1980s boom when the stock market soared they also had
the incentive of large capital gains to encourage them.
Yet corporations can no longer rely on these shareholdings, according to Mr
Jiro Ushio, chairman of Ushio, the lamp manufacturer and a leading member of
the Association of Business Executives. As he puts it: 'With share prices in
a freeze, businesses can no longer count on stable shareholdings by friendly
banks and business associates.
'Increasing shareholdings was not just a gesture of mutual support but an
economically sensible investment because companies wanted capital gains,' he
says. 'The stock market depression jeopardises the cross shareholding
practice.'
Many of the main customs and practices of the Japanese economy, such as
lifetime employment and close relationships between banks and manufacturers,
were created around the time of the second world war. Their character is not
fixed in stone.
In the next few years the traditional long-term, stable, hierarchical
relationships will probably be confined to a tighter-knit group of select
banks, workers, sub-contractors and shareholdings.
For the rest, life will become more volatile, short-term, fluid and
uncertain.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930312

