FT932-6568

FT  27 MAY 93 / Money Markets: Gloom on Germany


   By JAMES BLITZ


DEALERS IN German interest rate futures reverted to a fairly bearish outlook
on Bundesbank rate cuts yesterday, as evidence accumulated that Frankfurt
was concerned by the weakness of the D-Mark, writes James Blitz.
The Bundesbank left its repo rate, with which it provides weekly funds to
commercial banks, unchanged yesterday at 7.60 per cent.
That decision had been well anticipated by the market, but a greater source
of bearishness was a speech from Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank
vice-president, who echoed the rather hawkish tone on rate cuts made by
colleagues earlier this week.
Mr Tietmeyer said that the gradual easing in German monetary policy had
enjoyed a certain success but that monetary growth was 'still rather high'.
He also underlined that long-term rates were more important than short-term
rates in the formulation of policy. This compounded the bearish mood on a
day when 10-year German bond yields rose from 6.87 per cent to 6.90 per
cent.
All these factors helped to bring the September Euromark contract down 13
basis points to a close of 93.39. The June contract finished 12 basis points
lower at 92.65. With three-month money at 7.43 per cent yesterday, the
latter contract priced in little change over the next few weeks.
French futures barely responded to the move, with dealers biding their time
to see how far the decoupling of French and German rates can go. The
September Pibor contract closed more or less unaltered at 93.32.
Portugal appeared unaffected by the unchanged policy in Germany yesterday,
again reducing its key 'mop-up' rate by 100 basis points to 12 per cent.
There was more bullishness in sterling futures markets as speculation
intensified that the UK might have a new chancellor in the next few weeks.
Two dealers said that they were mystified by a market assumption that a new
chancellor could cut rates soon after taking office. However, the September
contract rose 6 basis points on the day to close at 94.22, a level that
assumes 25 basis points off three-month money by the autumn.
Three-month money ended  1/16 softer at 5 29/32 per cent. A morning shortage
of Pounds 1.15bn was easily despatched.

The Financial Times


London Page 41

930527

