FT932-3341

FT  15 JUN 93 / Opposition to ITV rules change dwindles


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


THE INDEPENDENT television industry's resistance to relaxing the rules on
takeovers began to weaken yesterday as the four biggest companies were
joined by others supporting change.
By the end of a 90-minute meeting with Mr Peter Brooke, the national
heritage secretary, companies controlling more than 70 per cent of ITV
advertising revenue had made it clear they were prepared to accept takeovers
among the nine largest companies.
Mr Michael Green, chairman of Carlton Television, holders of the London
weekday licence and the largest ITV franchise holder, said after the
meeting: 'The majority view - by my calculation a minimum of 70 per cent of
ITV - stated that there was a need for change and the secretary of state
certainly heard this loud and clear.'
Mr Green added: 'The minority are looking for protectionism which is always
a short-term answer.'
The main case for change was put by the four largest companies, Carlton
Television, Central, London Weekend, and Granada Television. They were later
joined by Mr Clive Leach of Yorkshire TV and Mr Bill Brown, chairman of
Scottish Television, although both made qualifications.
Yorkshire TV and Scottish TV would have preferred an extension of the
moratorium on takeovers of ITV companies which runs out at the end of this
year. Mr Brooke made clear that a moratorium extension was unlikely. The
main reason he gave was the pressure on parliamentary time.
Mr Leach was reported to have told the meeting he would accept non-hostile
takeovers if there was no extension of the moratorium.
Mr Brown of Scottish TV said his company would accept takeovers among the
nine as long as a minimum of four separate ITV companies survived.
The need for immediate change in ownership rules was opposed by Anglia, HTV
and Meridian Broadcasting.
Mr Louis Sherwood, chairman of HTV, the ITV company for Wales and the west
of England, told Mr Brooke he would rather his company was controlled from
Europe or the US than Birmingham. Outside ownership would mean greater local
control of regional programming.
Sir Peter Gibbings, chairman of Anglia, last night conceded that there were
many in favour of change, but only after a moratorium extension had been
ruled out.
Mr Brooke said he would reflect on all the proposals put to him but did not
give a timetable for any decision.
If there is to be a change in the ownership rules it would have to come this
autumn. From January 1, European Community companies will be able to take
over ITV companies subject to the approval of the Independent Television
Commission.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930615

