FT932-6883

FT  26 MAY 93 / Money Markets: Euromarks retrace


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE bearishness towards the prospect of more interest rate cuts in Germany
continued yesterday, although German interest rate futures reversed their
recent trend and rallied slightly, writes James Blitz.
In recent days, the D-Mark's weakness in the wake of Denmark's ratification
of the Maastricht treaty has made investors think that the Bundes-bank might
not be so willing to cut interest rates.
Comments from Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, and Mr Otmar
Issing, the Bundesbank chief economist, have also under-lined the new
caution on German rates.
Both men yesterday raised new doubts about the pace of rate cutting, warning
that such reductions could undermine confidence in the D-Mark.
There appears to be less certainty over when the Bundesbank will next lower
official rates.
One London-based dealer said yesterday it was now fairly certain that there
would be no reduction in the discount rate at the next two Bundesbank
council meet-ings. The repo rate is also unlikely to be cut in today's money
market operation.
Call money was tight yesterday at 7.80 per cent due to end-of-month
liquidity difficulties for banks. The Bundesbank would probably prefer to
add extra funds through paragraph 17 rules or the Lombard rate, rather than
the advantageous repo rate.
However, German interest rate futures enjoyed a mini-rally yesterday, partly
as a result of a technical retracement following a week of heavy falls.
The September Euromark contract rose 10 basis points from its previous close
to finish at 93.52. The June contract continued to be traded far less
heavily, and ended at 92.77, up four basis points on the day.
Sterling interest rate markets enjoyed a rally yesterday following
continuing rumours that Mr John Major's cabinet might be reshuffled.
The September short sterling contract gained 10 basis points on the day to
close at 94.16, while the June contract was up 4 basis points at 94.04.
In the sterling cash market, three-month sterling cash was slightly firmer
at 5 15/16 per cent yesterday, from a previous close of 5 7/8 per cent. The
Bank of England forecast a shortage of Pounds 650m, and the overnight rate
of lending dropped to 3.50 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930526

