FT932-296

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (3): Land of many export opportunities -
European and US companies are slow to move in on this dynamic region /
Malaysia


   By KIERAN COOKE


A MALAYSIA-based executive of a German company looks out from his office
over the Kuala Lumpur skyline. 'I'm sure those skyscrapers were not there
last year,' he says. 'Every day this country grows some more; people in
Europe or the US just don't realise what is happening in this part of the
world.'
It is a familiar refrain. The Malaysian economy has grown at an annual rate
of more than eight per cent over the past five years. And south-east Asia is
one of the most dynamic economic regions in the world.
Japan recognised the region's potential long ago. But still only a
relatively small number of European and US companies have grasped the
opportunities offered by the area's soaring economic growth rates.
Buoyed by its economic success, Malaysia is pressing ahead with ambitious
development plans. It aims to be a fully industrialised country by the year
2020. In 1998 Kuala Lumpur plays host to the Commonwealth Games.
The dates signal many opportunities for foreign exporters and traders. But
companies should move quickly, whatever the sector:
Power generation: the lights have been going out in Malaysia in recent
months. Tenaga Nasional, the country's partially privatised electricity
utility, has seriously underestimated fast growing power demands - caused by
rapid economic growth.
Malaysia currently has an installed capacity of 5,600MW. The government
estimates that to keep pace with economic growth, power output has to expand
more than five times over the next 25 years, involving the expenditure of
MDollars 100bn (Dollars 40bn).
To avoid massive investments in power by the government, Malaysia has been
one of the first countries to invite independent power producers (IPPs) to
take part in the electricity industry. Foreign participation, in terms of
equipment, consultancy services or equity, is critical to the expansion of
the power sector.
Already Britain's National Power and Asea Brown Boveri, the European
engineering consortium, are involved in multi-million dollar joint venture
power projects. But other opportunities for exporters, whether in goods or
services, are available.
Oil and gas: government policy is to switch from oil to gas-fired power
generation. Extensive gas pipelines are being laid throughout the country.
This not only means opportunities for foreign energy companies, it also
offers openings for substantial sales of heavy equipment and other ancillary
products.
Malaysia is known in the oil industry as a tough customer: its production
sharing contracts are among the most financially stringent in the world.
But in order to encourage more exploration and drilling activity there are
signs that Petronas, the state oil company, is introducing more lenient -
and financially attractive - production sharing agreements.
Telecommunications: the government has recently moved to break up the
monopoly on telecommunications services enjoyed by Telekom Malaysia,
recently partially privatised. New rival networks are being set up. While
Malaysia's telecommunications industry has developed fast, there is still a
big market for imported high technology products and consultancy services.
Infrastructure: the array of infrastructure projects being undertaken over
the next few years is boggling to many observers. But the government is
adamant that airports, ports, roads and railways will all be built.
The big prize at the moment is the contract for the new Kuala Lumpur
international airport, to be built on a site 50km south of the capital. The
cost of the project, including a high speed rail link between the airport
and Kuala Lumpur, is estimated at MDollars 13.8bn.
An Anglo-Japanese consortium, including Trafalgar House and Balfour Beatty
of the UK and Marubeni of Japan, has devised a masterplan which it thinks
could win a substantial share of the airport work.
But availability of British and Japanese concessionary finance is a key
issue. There are also suggestions that Malaysia might seek to link awarding
contracts to other issues - officials have signalled that in return for
contracts Britain should grant more access and pick-up rights to Malaysia
Airlines, the national carrier.
Plans are underway to modernise much of the national rail network. This
includes double tracking of lines stretching most of the length of
Peninsular Malaysia. A rapid transit system is planned for Kuala Lumpur,
which, in only a few years, has been transformed from a sleepy colonial
style city into a bustling - and traffic clogged - metropolis.
Sceptics point out that for all the discussion of the mass transit system,
little seems to have been done so far. There are also concerns about the
viability of government plans to make a privatised mass transit system
self-financing: many believe a degree of government financing is essential
on such projects.
Given the scale of infrastructure development - and the speed at which the
government wants such projects completed - there are many exporting
opportunities available.
But seeing is believing. 'Europe is so tied up in its own problems it
doesn't understand the potential out here,' says the German executive.
'People have to come here and look at things. Only then will they appreciate
the scale of development going on.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930629

