FT932-6679

FT  27 MAY 93 / Arts: Bad behaviour made good - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


BAD BEHAVIOUR (15) Les Blair
MADAME BOVARY (PG) Claude Chabrol
JACK THE BEAR (12) Marshall Hershkowitz
BEING AT HOME WITH CLAUDE (18) Jean Baudin
COP AND A HALF (PG) Henry Winkler
VACAS Julio Medem
Noel Coward once wrote an acerbic lyric about people's behaviour away from
Belgravia. In Bad Behaviour the place is Hampstead, Belgravia's gipsy
sister, and people's behaviour there, as depicted in Les Blair's brilliant
improvised comedy, is colourfully and wittily appalling.
'Twas often thus, of course, in Hampstead: a place known for its searing
struggle between yuppification and Bohemianisation. Take town planner Gerry
and his wife Ellie (Stephen Rea, Sinead Cusack): a gentle, cultured, unkempt
couple who fall out with casual acquaintance Howard Spink (Philip Jackson)
when he, Howard, proves a heartless spiv with a cordless telephone. H. goes
around offering 'free advice' on building firms and then charging a
three-figure consultancy fee plus VAT. Even the builders he uses hate him.
They are the Nunn Brothers, identical cockney twins played by a
never-in-the-same-shot Phil Daniels.
Other walking wounded of NW3 include neurotic single mum Jess (Clare
Higgins) and Jess's permanently shellshocked daughter Rosie (Emily Hill).
Plus a sea of children, casual friends, a dog or three. But the wonderful
thing about this film, which resembles a Mike Leigh comedy notched up half a
social class by Alan Ayckbourn, is that the canvas never seems overcrowded.
Gerry and Ellie are the still centre of paralysed social mobility: a
liberated couple who dream of movement but cannot decide on up, down or
sideways. In the meantime their bathroom is a prey to the Nunn Brothers'
drills and chisels; their sitting-room fills up with the mad, bad and
dangerous, a surgery for the emotionally maimed; and outside, the frightful
Howard roams the land using his Cellnet as an instrument of torture.
Escape is urgent for everyone, even Jess who wants to clear off for a
weekend of spiritual uplift. ('It's a Buddhist monastery in Hemel Hempstead
and you have to book'). But this being North-west London, escape only ever
takes place in the mind: along with several other healthy human activities -
sex, murder, revenge - that should get out more but in Hampstead keep
vanishing up cerebral cul-de-sacs.
Director Les Blair, who began as an editor-producer for Mike Leigh (Bleak
Moments) and then shaped improvised tele-gems like Newshounds and Honest
Decent And True, finds a perfect comic rhythm for this social-satirical
foxtrot. Slow, slow, quick, quick, slow, with sudden shifts to manic
overdrive (Howard) or Celtic narcolepsy (Gerry).
Though the whole cast is a joy, we must pick out the mop-headed charm and
beatific distractions of Stephen Rea. He looks like an overgrown sheepdog;
he acts as if he has just got out of bed and wants to go back; and even his
hatred of the Irish-hating Howard has a frazzled illogic. 'Just knock off
the references to racial origin, you big limey bastard.' Bad behaviour as
inventive as this can give good behaviour a bad name.
Gustave Flaubert wrote a famous novel about bad behaviour and named it after
his culprit-heroine. Claude Chabrol's film of Madame Bovary sallies forth
once more to the blighted marriage bed, the dreams of romance, the horrors
of 19th century French provincial life: all those things that made Emma take
refuge first in adultery, later in arsenic.
The magnificent Isabelle Huppert plays her as a chalk-faced sphinx with
saucer-wide mouth and eyes prone to sudden shock or crimson-rimmed tears.
This woman has something worse than ennui: spiritual asthma. You believe she
is suffocating in the loving, boring arms of Charles (Jean-Francois Balmer);
that infidelity is an adventure as heady and unreal as those fictional
passions she has read; and that shopping her way to bankruptcy is for Emma a
way to turn invisible emotion into hard, clinking barter.
Ten out of ten for Miss H. But around her the film is Bovaryesque in the
wrong way. Instead of the crisp-edged satiric pessimism we expect from
Chabrol - who used to light the edges of his scripts in films like Le
Boucher and La Femme Infidele and watch the smoke get up our eyes and noses
 -here is a TV-style costumer as stuffy as it is static. The camera stands
on one side of the room, the characters on the other and the Great Dialogue
(taken verbatim from the book) flaps over as regularly, ineluctably as an
airport departure board.
Sometimes the blood quickens - how could it not in a 2 1/2 -hour film? The
tragedy of Justin's foot has the right curdled horror; and later Chabrol
catches the breathless desperation of a life lived between small town and
large town, between small lie and larger self-deception. But mostly this
Madame Bovary is game, set and match to Mlle Huppert, her victory made
somewhat hollow by the fact that there is no one the other side of the net.
Danny DeVito is everyone's favourite Dad in Jack The Bear. We know this
because the saccharine piano score tells us so. It goes 'Plinky plink plink'
while the images of bygone American suburbia (Oakland, California, early
1970s) sigh with golden-lensed recall. De Vito, who hosts a late-night TV
horror show, is the life and soul of the neighbourhood and at home acts the
perfect MC whenever his young son (Robert J. Steinmiller Jr) - whose voice
narrates the film - brings home a blushing girlfriend.
'He was an artist' coos Sonny's voice-over on one such night; 'what he was
creating was the perfect evening.' What director Marshall (thirtysomething)
Hershkowitz and writer Stephen Zaillian create, adapting a novel by Dan
McCall, is 98 minutes of consummate schmaltz. There has always been an
attraction, like opposite hues on the colour-wheel, between picket-fence
tweeness and Gothic menace. (See David Lynch's Blue Velvet). But here the
theme of innocence under threat, from the playtime gore of DeVito's TV show
to the flesh-and-blood fears provoked by neo-Nazi neighbour Gary Sinise,
becomes an ever more contrived contest between boyhood bliss and
bargain-basement bugaboos.
Being At Home With Claude begins as a movie but soon stiffens into the stage
play, by Rene-Daniel Dubois, on which it is based. We open with a
nerve-shredding montage of sounds and images: groans of seeming human pain
heard over black-and-white shots of a cityscape; blurry, scarce-decipherable
close-ups of two men making love; a wine-glass and knife shuddering off a
kitchen table; a splash of red blood across a fridge door.
Nasty but compelling. Thereafter, though, director Jean Baudin switches off
the arc-lamps and switches on the stage footlights. A theatric two-hander
unfolds as the supposed murderer (Roy Dupuis) is quizzed, endlessly, by the
dogged detective (Jean Godin) in a single-room setting occasionally
ventilated by flashbacks. Acted as if to the back of the gallery, the movie
should empty the front stalls in no time, rolling back the audience as the
minutes drag on.
For the rest, it is a clear choice between Cop And A Half starring Burt
Reynolds and Vacas starring a cow. The first is a Hollywood law-and-order
comedy with an ageing star wearing a wig, a police uniform and a look that
says 'This was the wrong movie to choose for a comeback.' TV ex-Fonz Henry
Winkler directs. Vacas is a Spanish allegorical fable about war, in which
the eponymous cow stands for - for - well, for about an hour and a half.
Obscure, but please be patient. Debut director Julio Medem escorts us
through over 60 years of Spanish history, delineating a Basque family whose
members splinter off into history much like the bits and pieces that fly up
from the early log-splitting contest. Or, indeed, like the movie's own
style: a dancing, fizzing, restless Magic Realism in which only the title
animal - representing Spain? God? Destiny? - offers a sure and sacral
immobility, a large-eyed, large-viewed wisdom.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930527

