FT932-275

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (19): Corruption crisis calls for change - SACE,
like other export credit agencies before it, is reducing its exposure in
heavily indebted markets - and could turn its attention elsewhere / Credit
Cover in Italy


   By JON MARKS


THE ARREST of a high profile businessman would normally hang in the
headlines for weeks. But not in Italy, where such a crisis seems an everyday
occurence.
Even the Tangentopoli crisis with the arrest in March of Roberto Ruberti,
general manager of Italy's government-owned credit insurer, Sezione Speciale
per Assicurazione del Credito all'Esportazione (SACE), did not appear to
have ruffled the discreet world of export credit agencies (ECAs).
Mr Ruberti was later joined in jail by his deputy and others allegedly
involved in abuses relating to SACE operations. Investigations centred on
some of Italy's largest foreign contracts.
With Italian business in turmoil, exporters felt the events acutely. Phones
in senior SACE officials' offices were no longer answered. Decisions on the
allocation of export credit dried up. Contracts were put on hold for lack of
insurance as the board of SACE and the inter-ministerial credit committee,
Cipes, were unable to meet.
SACE, along with Mediocredito Centrale (MCC), the state medium-term lending
institution, played a key role in the development by Italian industry of
strong exports in difficult markets. More than 50 per cent of all SACE
guarantees are provided in the industrial heartland of northern Italy which
triggered the export boom of the 1980s. But by 1992 it was clear all was not
well. Mario Draghi, the incoming Italian Treasury general manager, appointed
accountants KPMG to investigate SACE after hearing allegations of
irregularities.
There was concern about SACE operations before the Tangentopoli crisis. The
agency's high levels of exposure to heavily indebted markets, led by
Algeria, Russia and Iran, led the Amato government to reconsider its export
credit policy. In the last period for which figures are available,
January-June 1992, 58 per cent of SACE insurance was for projects in less
developed countries (LDCs) and another 36.9 per cent went to East Europe and
Asia. Only 5.1 per cent of SACE insurance was placed within the OECD.
Italian companies are anxious that SACE should return to business as usual.
'We need a strong SACE if we are to export ourselves out of our current
problems,' a Milan banker says. It is not just Italian companies and banks
that will be relieved when the crisis abates. SACE is one of the few ECAs to
allow international banks to bid for mandates backed by its guarantee.
An experienced Treasury official, Adalberto Rubino, was appointed interim
general manager in April to get the agency back on its feet.
Exporters increased pressure for credit approvals to resume. In early May,
Mr Rubino confirmed delays were occurring on indemnity payments, but this
was not due to SACE financial difficulties. 'Such a thing cannot exist
because SACE is guaranteed by the state,' he said. Rather, delays were
caused because contracts were affected by corruption investigations.
It says much for the priority given to exporting by Italian business and
political leaders that, by June, credit decisions were again flowing. SACE
was battered, but, with new management finding its way, had weathered the
storm.
Italian exporters underplay the effects of the crisis, arguing that it
involved a few very senior officials and only a tiny proportion of
SACE-backed contracts. Nevertheless, the crisis blocked the machinery of
credit and insurance approvals. It was not until May that SACE even started
to tackle a backlog of approvals. In some cases, such as a Dollars 34.5m
order for Gico Costruzione to build a stay-cable bridge in western Algeria,
this delayed work starting when companies needed only basic insurance,
rather than wider credit support. Gico required only standard SACE insurance
for a project otherwise funded by Japan.
Serious questions about the future must now be tackled. Even before the
Tangentopoli crisis, a potentially radical reassessment of how Italy should
provide finance and allocate aid outside the OECD was under way. This
started when, in line with EC recommendations on the future of European
credit insurance markets, Italy placed much of its short-term export
insurance into the private sector, where Societa Italiana Assicurazione
Crediti (SIAC) is the leading player.
According to a Rome banker, 'we urgently need to continue the modernisation
of our procedures, and the crisis may force the authorities to accelerate
that process'.
This could lead SACE to a greater concentration on OECD and financially
viable emerging markets in Asia and other growth regions. Well before
Algerian contracts were associated with corruption allegations, questions
were being asked about the level of support for Algeria, a country seen by
Giulio Andreotti, Bettino Craxi and Gianni De Michelis as a priority for
Italian foreign policy. The Amato government put plans for a new Dollars
4.2bn credit package for Algeria on hold - which, if disbursed, could raise
SACE exposure to a massive Dollars 9bn  - and resisted renewing the
'reprofiling' (bilateral rescheduling) of trade debt worth Dollars 2.7bn.
SACE will now take a prudent line in such risk, officials say. Cipes has
recommended that Algeria should obtain some new credits, which have been the
subject of robust lobbying by Italian export groups. But these will be
linked to repayments, with only up to 50 per cent of the amount repaid to be
made available as new credit.
The Cipes recommendation on Algeria suggests that SACE, like other ECAs
before it, is reducing its exposure in heavily indebted markets and could
turn its attention elsewhere. Officials refuse to comment on whether such a
pattern is emerging.
Also to be decided is whether new institutional structures should be
created. These might bring SACE and MCC together again, to create a
structure not unlike the US Eximbank. Other Italian 'peculiarities', such as
the provision of state short-term political risk insurance for periods of up
to 24 months and the advantageous cover given for civil works projects,
could be brought into question. Exporters in rival countries are waiting to
see if average SACE premiums will rise. Low SACE premiums have been
criticised by UK and other exporters as providing unfair competition.
Change will come, stimulated by the wider debate on Italy's role in the
world. This has been heralded by the attention paid to criticism of the
government's aid programme in studies by the OECD and by IRI, the state
holding company. These show that Italy has the most tied aid of any of the
industrialised countries.
A report compiled for the Foreign Affairs Ministry showed that only one of
13 recent aid-assisted projects in Egypt could be considered a success.
Success levels in other countries were also low, with criticism focusing on
tendering procedures and alleged abuses in publicly funded dealings with
Somalia, Sudan and other less-developed countries.
The OECD's Development Assistance Committee (DAC) in May said Italy's aid
programme had failed to adopt effective management procedures, a
well-organised project management cycle and solid evaluation capacity.
Changes are planned, and across the range of Italian aids for exporters,
things will not be the same again.
But Italy seems set to remain a keen purveyor of export finance to secure
contracts. Even in a difficult case like Russia, there is a guarded
enthusiasm to get on with business not found in some other agencies. For all
Russia's debt problems, an official notes, 'our credit lines have been
negotiated - we are waiting to open them up as quickly as possible'.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

930629

