FT934-10233

FT  06 NOV 93 / A tiger trapped in a gilded cage: Carlo De Benedetti's fall
to earth


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


A year ago today, Carlo De Benedetti could have been stepping off a private
jet in New York's Kennedy airport or climbing into a limousine at the Place
Vendome in Paris.
Today, he is confined to his apartment in Rome, a caged tiger subjected to
the scrutiny of magistrates investigating the 21-month corruption scandal
that has cut a swathe through Italy's political and business elite.
Admittedly, it is a gilded cage. After almost spending Tuesday night in
prison - Mr De Benedetti was released at 11.35pm after nearly a full day's
grilling - he is under house arrest at his luxurious pied-a-terre.
The apartment, a stone's throw from the Piazza Navona with its famous
fountain, has been transformed into a working office for the restless
Olivetti chairman. Two secretaries have flown in from the company's Ivrea
headquarters to back up the one assistant permanently on call in the
capital.
Mr De Benedetti, one of Europe's wealthiest and most incisive entrepreneurs,
is lucky that the restrictions on his freedom are fairly lax compared with
the constraints imposed on some businessmen under investigation for alleged
kickbacks to politicians and civil servants. He can use the telephone and
receive visitors. His lawyers hope he will be able to return to the office
on Monday.
Mr De Benedetti is the latest victim of the corruption scandal, which has
already led to about 1,000 arrests. Rather than thinking about how he might
wreak revenge on the prosecuting magistrates, he is concentrating on his
business responsibilities. Apart from Olivetti, of which he is chairman and
joint managing director, his interests include industrial companies in Italy
and France and financial interests from Barcelona to Budapest.
However, it is as one of Europe's most daring business leaders in the 1980s
that he is best known outside Italy. In the decade of the 'mega deal', he
galvanised stockmarkets with a string of takeovers, extending his interests
from computers to car components, fashion to high finance. His cross-border
business ambitions, reinforced by his fluency in Italian, French and
English, and some German, reached a peak in his late-1980s bid to buy
Societe Generale de Belgique, Belgium's industrial and financial group.
Having the audacity to try to seize SGB provoked an outcry from the Belgian
business establishment. His eventual failure to win the prize cost Mr De
Benedetti dear. However, he did not waste time licking his wounds. He
sensed, earlier than most, the sea change from the booming 1980s to the
recessionary 1990s and started to pull in his horns.
A rationalisation strategy has helped Mr De Benedetti concentrate on
Olivetti, the ailing typewriter maker he turned around in the early 1980s.
In the past three years, the group has been buffeted by the turmoil in the
information technology business, with plunging product prices and cut-throat
global competition.
However, it is Olivetti that is behind Mr De Benedetti's present plight.
Earlier this year, he admitted to Milan magistrates investigating political
corruption that the company had paid more than L10bn (Pounds 4.15m) in
bribes to officials at the Italian post office. Like many other businessmen
caught up in the corruption inquiries, Mr De Benedetti claimed the payments
had been essential to gain access to state contracts. Obtaining a foothold
in Italy's big public-sector market was vital to secure jobs and convince
public administrations in other countries that Olivetti was a serious
contender, he maintained.
Mr De Benedetti's comprehensive testimony, which provided new information,
was welcomed by the Milan judges, who rested their case against him. Since
then, however, responsibility for the post office inquiries has shifted to
the Rome judiciary.
Last Saturday, they issued a warrant for his arrest. The magistrates claimed
new evidence had come to light, suggesting that Mr De Benedetti had been
economical with the truth in Milan. At dawn on Tuesday, Mr De Benedetti
returned to Italy after a long holiday weekend to give himself up. By late
morning, he was under interrogation in the capital's rambling Regina Coeli
prison on the banks of the Tiber.
It was a sobering experience. In some ways, Mr De Benedetti's ordeal echoes
that of the hero in Tom Wolfe's novel, Bonfire of the Vanities, another
1980s master of the universe who falls to earth.
Mr De Benedetti's brush with justice was much briefer than that of the
fictional character. 'My father only spent 2 1/2 hours in his cell, with the
rest of the time taken up in prison formalities or formal interrogations,'
says his son Rodolfo, who manages the family's Cir holding company.
After protesting his innocence, he struggled to gain his release before
midnight. 'My father fought like a lion because he wanted to go home. He
didn't want to sleep there,' says Rodolfo.
Mr De Benedetti's friends say he is understandably angry about what took
place. Surprisingly, however, he is not bitter. A maverick in the Italian
political and business establishment, Mr De Benedetti entered prison
convinced he was being made a scapegoat by his political and business
enemies.
One close associate says: 'He was pleased to discover there was no political
element involved. The magistrates behaved quite correctly in their
questioning, and were just trying to ascertain the truth. The trouble was
they didn't seem to realise how big companies work, or the business and
financial impact of putting him in jail.'
However harrowing, Mr De Benedetti's friends contend this week's experience
was mild compared with the legal battle over his brief stint as deputy
chairman of Banco Ambrosiano, the Milan bank that almost collapsed in the
early 1980s.
Those close to Mr De Benedetti are convinced the six-year jail sentence he
received in 1992, against which he is appealing, was politically motivated.
Mr De Benedetti was a staunch critic of the Christian Democrat-led
government of Mr Giulio Andreotti, prime minister when the sentence was
handed down, and of Mr Bettino Craxi, the disgraced former head of the
Socialist party.
La Repubblica, Italy's biggest-selling newspaper, and L'Espresso, the
second-biggest news magazine, which Mr De Benedetti owns, frequently
provided a platform from which Mr De Benedetti broadcast his views.
His readiness to criticise the political elite, now largely discredited by
the corruption scandal, reinforced Mr De Benedetti's image as an outsider in
the Italian establishment. In spite of his wealth and childhood spent partly
with the quasi-regal Agnelli family, owners of Fiat, the country's biggest
private company, De Benedetti remains a dangerously unpredictable figure for
many business colleagues.
'No one doubts he's clever. But not so many people trust him. And there is
always the danger he will allow himself to become emotional and say
something he shouldn't,' says one banker who has worked closely with Mr De
Benedetti.
Isolation from the political establishment has not dulled the De Benedetti
family's political antennae, however. 'Italy is going through a revolution,'
says Rodolfo. 'Revolutions can be bloody or peaceful. If bloody, they're
usually short. If peaceful, they tend to take more time. The risk of
confusion as a result is usually very high, and I see my father's experience
as part of that confusion.'
When will the arrests and turmoil end? 'One day, there will be a political
solution,' he says. That means some form of amnesty, he suggests, linked
with fines and a veto on some politicians holding public office. 'But it
can't be put through by the current, discredited, parliament. We have to
have elections as soon as possible.'
For now, though, all his father can do is wait.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931106

