FT934-8446

FT  16 NOV 93 / Palestinians, Israel start economic talks


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   PARIS


ISRAELI and Palestinian economists were set to begin talks in Paris last
night to determine economic relations between Israel and the new Palestinian
self-governing authority which will take over administration of the Gaza
Strip and West Bank area of Jericho next year.
Mr Avraham Shochat, Israeli finance minister, was expected to meet Mr Ahmed
Qurie (Abu Ala), PLO economics chief, for the first face-to-face economic
negotiations since the two sides signed the historic Israeli-Palestinian
peace accord two months ago.
Among issues to be discussed are an Israeli proposal for a customs union and
harmonisation of customs duties and taxes, rules on trade between the two
entities, migrant Palestinian labour to Israel, the tax regime of the
'autonomy', aid and development projects and currency, and banking and
financial sector policies.
The meetings coincide with resumed talks in Cairo on Israeli withdrawal from
Gaza-Jericho, seeking to define the territorial delimitation of 'Jericho'
and agree how many Israeli troops can remain in Gaza to protect up to 5,000
Jewish settlers. The economic agreements and all matters on the withdrawal
from Gaza-Jericho must be agreed in a protocol in less than four weeks.
At the heart of the Paris talks, which begin formally this morning, is the
customs union. Israel wants the Palestinians to accept one, along with
harmonisation of all external customs and taxes. The Palestinians have
criticised the proposal, saying adopting Israel's customs duties would make
consumer goods too expensive for Palestinians, with a per capita income of
Dollars 1,500 (Pounds 993)-Dollars 1,800, against Israel's Dollars 13,000.
Israel has warned that if the Palestinians reject a customs union, the
Israelis would have to put heavy controls on border crossings to stop cheap
untaxed goods passing from the Palestinian economy into Israel.
The Israelis also want curbs on Palestinian exports into Israel of farm
products such as eggs and poultry. The Palestinians say any such curbs would
result in Palestinians taking measures against Israel's industrial exports.
The Palestinians will focus their demands on winning greater access for
Palestinian migrant labourers to the Israeli economy and on better terms for
those workers. Israel and the PLO have expressed considerable scepticism
about the possibility to bridging the wide gap on these issues.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931116

