FT933-12789

FT  22 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Warburg seeks Pounds 91m via bond issue


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


SG WARBURG Group yesterday launched an Pounds 80m convertible bond, quickly
increased in size to Pounds 91m, in its first capital raising exercise since
1987.
Mr Simon Leathes, chief financial officer, said that while the group has no
pressing need for capital, 'we were concerned that two years from now we
might want additional capital and market conditions may not be right'.
He did not specify how the group intends to use the funds except to say it
will probably be devoted to the investment banking division, where Warburg
hopes to expand its trading for its own account and its derivatives
business.
The offering will count as Tier 2 capital for regulatory purposes, raising
the total capital for Warburg in that category to Pounds 240m.
Warburg does not publish its capital ratios for regulatory purposes, the
internationally accepted measure of a bank's balance sheet. But Mr Leathes
said the group is 'well above' regulatory minimums.
However, the ratio of Warburg's shareholders' funds to gross assets, an
important measure of balance sheet strength, fell in the past year from 5.9
per cent to 4.6 per cent. Mr Leathes said that the ratio at the end of 1992
had been unusually high by historical standards. When all the shares on the
new issue are converted, that ratio will rise to just above 5 per cent, he
said.
In the year ended March 31, Warburg earned a return on capital in the
investment banking division of 10.3 per cent, 8.7 per cent after
discontinued operations. That is lower than the group average return on
capital of 14.7 per cent for the year just ended.
Warburg's brokers, Cazenove, had sounded out institutional shareholders in
June but found there was limited support for such a capital raising exercise
at that time.
The securities, which may be called at par by Warburg in 1998, carry a
coupon of 6.5 per cent and are convertible into Warburg shares at 854p, a
premium of 18 per cent above the share price at launch of 729p.
Warburg's shares yesterday closed 10p lower at 719p.
If all the shares are converted, they will dilute existing shareholders'
stakes by just under 5 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930722

