FT932-3334

FT  15 JUN 93 / Councils use more private companies


   By JOHN AUTHERS


PRIVATE COMPANIES have won 31.9 per cent of current local authority
contracts, worth almost Pounds 300m, a report published yesterday by the
Local Government Management Board shows.
The Institute of Public Finance, the research arm of the Chartered Institute
of Public Finance and Accountancy, said the figures showed that 'with each
new tranche of contracts that passes, private contractors appear to be
winning a greater share of the contracts'.
However, the management board, which is financed mainly by local
authorities, pointed out that 154 authorities had still awarded all their
current contracts to their own direct service organisations.
Mr John Sutcliffe of the management board added that DSOs' share of
contracts by value remained healthier at 83 per cent than their share by
number.
But he said: 'In labour-intensive, low technology work like cleaning and
maintenance, direct service organisations are slipping back quite a lot.
There's also a regional differentiation. DSOs are losing more ground in
London and the south-east than in other places.'
The report says that the success of private companies varied according to
sector. They took 48.5 per cent of building cleaning contracts, but only 9.4
per cent of catering for schools and welfare services.
Mr Tom McGuirk, manager of the Institute of Public Finance's competitive
tendering information service, confirmed that there was 'almost no
private-sector interest at all' in catering services.
Overall competition was healthy, with an average of 11.4 applications for
each contract, of which on average 5.8 were invited to tender and 2.9
tendered. More than 94 per cent of contracts were awarded to the lowest
tenderer.
CCT Information Service Survey Report No. 7. Local Government Management
Board, 41 Belgrave Square, London SW1X 8NZ. Pounds 16.00 (Pounds 8.00 to
authorities, Pounds 11 to registered chari-ties and educational
establishments).

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930615

