FT932-3100

FT  16 JUN 93 / Many 21-year-olds fail simple numbers tests


   By JOHN AUTHERS


ONE IN FIVE of the UK's 21-year-olds is innumerate while one in seven is
illiterate, says research by the Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit.
These people were classified 'functionally' innumerate or illiterate after a
30-minute assessment of their skills, not because they could not read or add
up at all, but because the requirements of industry have risen.
Mr Peter Davis, chairman of the unit, said: 'Even very simple jobs are
becoming more complex. Skills need to rise and the needs of employers are
rising generally faster than the people's skills.'
The unit suggested that an extra 25 per cent needed help with literacy,
while an extra 33 per cent needed help with mathematics.
The survey, the most detailed of its kind yet in the UK, broadly confirmed
previous estimates that about 6m adults in the UK have difficulties with
their basic skills, and that 40 per cent of teenagers entering further
education needed help with basic skills.
The survey showed that 21-year-olds with poor basic skills were much more
likely to be jobless - 35 per cent of men with low literacy, and 25 per cent
with low numeracy, were unemployed, in spite of 13 per cent unemployment for
the whole sample.
Mr John Patten, the education secretary, addressing the unit's annual
conference in London, announced that he was granting an extra Pounds 250,000
for pilot schemes in family literacy. These mirror schemes to improve
literacy in the US.
He pointed to the unit's finding that poor literacy and numeracy correlate
strongly with poor basic skills in parents. Of those whose parents were in
the lowest attainment group, without educational qualifications, 61 per cent
had low literacy scores and 52 per cent had low numeracy scores.
If parents' skills were improved, they would be more likely to pass them on
to their children, Mr Patten argued.
He also said the adult illiteracy problem 'shows why it is essential to
press ahead with testing' in schools. He said: 'We cannot afford to wait
until our pupils become adults before we identify and tackle their needs.'
Ms Ann Taylor, Labour's education spokesman, said: 'After 14 years of
Conservative government the situation is clearly worsening. Government
policy reinforces disadvantage.'
The survey was conducted in 1991 by City University, which interviewed a
representative sample of 1,650 people born between April 5 and April 11
1970.
The study excluded dyslexics, people for whom English was not a first
language, and all those with mental disabilities.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930616

