FT932-289

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (5): Rich pickings ahead for UK industry - UK
privatisation has been painful, but reward for restructuring is near /
Telecommunications


   By ANDREW ADONIS


TELECOMMUNICATIONS is one of the world's fastest growing industries. In the
UK, however, growth has moved hand-in-hand with liberalisation, exposing
established suppliers to unprecedented competitive pressures.
The privatisation of British Telecom in 1984 marked the end of the old
client relationship between operator and supplier. And the growth of
Mercury, cable TV companies, long-distance competitors like Energis, and
mobile operators led by Vodafone and Cellnet, has helped transform the
national telecoms industry.
To service this new industry, overseas manufacturers have moved in to the UK
 -buying existing suppliers or establishing subsidiaries which in turn
become exporters to markets abroad.
Motorola, the US electronics group now has five manufacturing facilities in
the UK employing nearly 5,000 people, 45 per cent of the company's European
workforce.
Annual sales are above Pounds 750m, of which Pounds 450m is exported to 23
countries. Manufacturing of communications equipment, semiconductors,
cellular systems (handsets and infrastructure) and silicon integrated
circuits is carried out in Basingstoke, Swindon, and two Scottish plants,
East Kilbride and Easter Inch.
'Britain is an excellent base for penetrating the European market,' says Mr
Don Burns, managing director of Motorola's European Cellular Subscriber
Division. 'The UK is a vibrant market, our workforce is motivated and
flexible - and we are expanding far faster than expected.' The concentration
of manufacturing in Scotland is deliberate. 'Levels of skill training and
local support are excellent,' Mr Burns adds.
Most of the Motorola's UK jobs have been created in the past three years,
and Mr Burns expects 'significant levels of recruitment' over the next two.
Infrastructure demand is strong with the adoption across the continent of
the pan-European GSM standard for a new generation digital network. The
company is therefore planning to exploit a central and eastern European
telecoms market for products and services, expected to exceed Dollars 30bn
within a decade.
The leading UK telecoms equipment suppliers, GPT (a joint venture between
GEC and Siemens) and STC (bought two years ago by Canadian supplier Northern
Telecom) have had to sell hard abroad while re-structuring at home.
Change has not been painless. Last year Northern Telecom cut more than 500
jobs, mainly in Northern Ireland, blaming the recession. At the same time,
GPT closed a telephone equipment-making plant at Kirkcaldy, Fife, with the
loss of 250 jobs, citing the recession and 'newer technology'. The closure
followed the announcement that GPT had lost market share in a Pounds 926m
batch of orders for modernising BT's network, to Sweden's Ericsson which
took Pounds 346m. The loss would have been inconceivable before BT
privatisation.
UK companies which have kept pace with technology and liberalisation have
achieved impressive results. STC Submarines, which lays undersea
telecommunications equipment, this year has won the Queen's Award for
Exports for the third time. The award to STC, which employs 1,100 in the UK,
is based on exports 88 per cent up on the the past three years. And it
currently has orders worth Pounds 265m, including two transatlantic systems.
About 95 per cent of the division's revenue comes from exports.
The disparate location of its projects highlights the international
challenge facing suppliers. Its largest of recent deals is a Dollars 370m
contract to build the first fibre-optic cable linking Canada and Europe,
secured last October. Dr. Saul Lanyado, STC Submarine's managing director
says: 'de-regulation of the telecoms market has made our business even more
competitive than before and we have needed a very pro-active marketing
approach.'
STC's 'pro-active' style is illustrated by its successful pitch to supply a
cable network around the Gulf of Thailand. 'What really clinched it,' says
Dr Chris Lilly, the company's business development manager, 'was our ability
to offer a novel financial package through a joint venture with a Thai
telecoms company.' Under a build, transfer, operate (BTO) contract,
Thailand's telecoms authority will lease the new system from the joint
venture, and will not have to buy it outright until it starts generating
revenue.
'This involved a big change for us,' says Dr. Lilly. 'We were used to having
the likes of BT banging on our door and paying hard cash. Now we have to be
prepared to organise the finance. BTO-style projects are the pattern of the
future.' STC's new marketing slogan is: 'we can make it happen for you'.
Another company also making it happen abroad is GPT, which has 13,000
employees at Coventry, Liverpool, and Nottingham plants. Like many equipment
manufacturers, it is working hard at the Chinese market. It has recently won
a Pounds 2m contract to provide a complete telepoint network for the city of
Ningbo, including, it says, the world's first cordless PABX. Telepoint, one
of the least expensive but least flexible of mobile systems, has attracted
many users in the Asia-Pacific region.
The greatest opportunity for British suppliers, however, could soon be near.
EC plans to liberalise 'voice' services by 1988 will force wide open western
Europe's closed and regulated telecommunications markets, offering rich
pickings to a UK industry attuned to competition. If, for instance, claims
that Deutsche Telekom is paying two to three times as much as BT for
comparable German equipment are true, more Queen's Awards could soon be on
the way.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930629

