FT933-10046

FT  06 AUG 93 / Daf offshoot sold in Pounds 50m deal


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


MULTIPART, the spare-parts business of the failed Leyland Daf group, has
been acquired from the receivers by a management buy-in team in a deal worth
'in excess of Pounds 50m', according to Mr Alan Simpson, former managing
director of Land Rover Parts and leader of the acquisition team.
The management team is being backed by Pounds 17.3m in equity capital
provided by Phildrew Ventures, the UK venture capital arm of Union Bank of
Switzerland. National Westminster Bank is providing a long-term loan of
Pounds 20m.
The deal is the final significant step in the rescue of the various parts of
the former Daf group in the UK, the Netherlands and Belgium, which went into
receivership at the beginning of February.
It is understood that the joint administrative receivers in the UK, Mr
Murdoch McKillop and Mr John Talbot of Arthur Andersen, the accountancy
firm, expect to raise more than Pounds 120m when the disposal of the
different parts of the failed Leyland Daf is completed.
The parts business, based in Chorley, Lancashire, had a turnover last year
of about Pounds 140m and has a workforce of 331.
The venture led by Mr Simpson beat a bid from a management buy-out team at
Chorley as well as strong interest from Unipart, the vehicle-parts
distributor and engineering group.
The management buy-in team includes Mr Les Wharton, a former managing
director of Austin Rover and Leyland Trucks, who will become non-executive
chairman, and Mr David Benson, a former managing director of Leyland Parts,
who will become a non-executive director.
Multipart has long-term supply contracts with all three manufacturing
companies that have been salvaged from the failed Daf group - Leyland Daf
Vans in Birmingham; Leyland Trucks Manufacturing in Leyland, Lancashire; and
Daf Trucks in the Netherlands - all of which are separately owned.
Mr McKillop said yesterday that the receivers were in negotiations which
could lead to the sale next month of the two Leyland Daf components
manufacturing businesses, the Albion axle plant in Glasgow and the
components plant in Leyland.
The other remaining parts of the former Leyland Daf group in receivership
are a test track and technical centre at Leyland, and an engine and gearbox
refurbishing plant at St Helens, Lancashire.
The Leyland van and truck assembly plants have been acquired by separate
management buy-out teams, while the Leyland Daf truck sales and marketing
arm was taken over by Daf Trucks of the Netherlands.
To date about 2,160 jobs have been saved from the former Leyland Daf's
workforce, which stood at 5,500 when the company collapsed.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930806

