FT933-12557

FT  23 JUL 93 / Letters to the Editor: Aerospace seeks investment not
subsidy (2)


   From Mr RICHARD CABORN MP


Sir, Your editorial attacking the trade and industry committee's
recommendations concerning the aerospace industry would have benefited from
a reading of the report, instead of just the summary of the recommendations.
The Pounds 100m of proposed expenditure is nothing to do with 'old-fashioned
industrial policies' or picking winning technologies. It would be for
maintaining a technological edge in the UK aerospace industry as a whole
across a range of technologies on which the industry's present and future
competitiveness depends. Moreover, launch aid is not a subsidy at all but a
loan repayable with interest, and is provided because of the market's
inability to fund viable long-term aerospace projects. In 1992-93 repayments
exceeded new aid by Pounds 27m.
Far from triggering an international subsidy war, the committee's measures,
all of which are consistent with the EC-US agreement, would simply bring the
UK industry into line with competitors; Pounds 100m a year is a tiny sum
compared with the subsidies given in the US. We do not share the optimistic
view that the EC-US agreement will keep in check government hand-outs,
especially as it does not cover aero-engines or smaller aircraft.
Your belief that the health of the UK aerospace industry can be judged from
present market share and new orders is astonishing. Its present situation
results from research and technology acquisition during the past 10-20
years. Its 'underlying position in world markets' is only as strong as the
effort it will be able to put into technology acquisition in the next decade
or so; hence the importance of the UK government matching the assistance
given to competitors.
Your call for multilateral agreement to push back subsidies is in line with
the committee's recommendation that the EC-US agreement be extended to
aero-engines.
What the committee opposes is the unilateral restriction of government
assistance in the UK to a level far below that available to foreign
competitors. The committee recognises that the UK aerospace industry has to
operate in the world as it exists, rather than in the world the FT would
like to exist.
Richard Caborn,
chairman,
trade and industry select
committee,
House of Commons,
London SW1A 0AA

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930723

