FT932-3202

FT  15 JUN 93 / Survey of Retail Chain Management (4): New challenge for big
brands - Factors underlying the growth of private labels


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


FEW ISSUES have excited as much controversy in western consumer goods
industries recently as the growth of sales by retailers of private-label
products and the implications for branded manufacturers.
In one sense the issue is not new. In the US and much of western Europe,
private-label ranges have long had a share of the grocery market. However,
several developments have lifted the phenomenon further up the industry
agenda.
The most dramatic was the decision in April by Philip Morris, the world's
largest tobacco manufacturer, to slash the US price of Marlboro, hitherto
considered one of the world's strongest brands, in an effort to stem loss of
market share to the cheaper private-label cigarettes.
Though the nature of the product and Marlboro's previous policy of raising
prices much faster than inflation made this a special case, it focused
attention on the wider private-label challenge faced by other branded
consumer goods producers.
The recession has also boosted private-label products by making consumers
more price-conscious. Though some observers see this as a cyclical phase,
many others believe it is driven by structural changes in the consumer goods
sector and by a longer-term switch in consumer attitudes.
A third factor has been the success of large UK retailers such as Marks &
Spencer and J. Sainsbury in developing private label into a category which
competes not only on price but also increasingly on quality and
sophistication.
In response to this other supermarket groups, notably groups in continental
Europe, have eyed enviously the handsome profits which British chains have
earned from this formula.
But behind the private-label trend lies a much broader shift, under way for
at least two decades.
As the retail trade has grown more concentrated, it has steadily gained
power at the expense of manufacturers, the biggest of which once dominated
it completely.
The speed and characteristics of this shift in power differ between
countries, reflecting a wide variety of local economic, social and business
factors. So, too, does the nature of the private label business and the
retailer strategies underlying it.
In the US and most continental European countries, private-label has
traditionally held a dowdy, bargain-basement image and has classically been
applied to commodity items which sold largely on price.
According to McKinsey, the management consultants, the retailers' main
motive behind their use of private labels has often been 'vindictive', to
eliminate small competitors and curb the power of branded manufacturers.
At the other end of the scale, leading British supermarkets derive a much
higher proportion of their sales from private label - more than half in
several cases - than their counterparts abroad.
They also view the private label business as a means to increase their
margins, differentiate between products and enhance the power of their own
brands.
In the process, they have not just captured sales from manufacturer brands,
but have asserted growing strategic control over the development, quality
standards and marketing of the products they sell.
The assertive lead taken by UK retailers has several origins:
Marks & Spencer's success in building a 100 per cent private-label business,
first in clothing and later in food.
Historically high commercial property prices, which have stimulated
retailers to seek new sources of profit to cover the cost of their
investments.
Development by leading retailers of highly efficient, centralised
distribution systems which have greatly expanded their control over the
supply chain.
Heavy investment in electronic point-of-sale and ordering systems to enable
close monitoring of sales patterns. Lack of competition from the small
quality food retailers common on the Continent, where they are often heavily
protected by regulation.
It is unclear how far other countries can follow profitably the pattern of
the UK trade, when the combination of influencing factors does not exist:
the only chain outside the UK to have successfully taken private-label
up-market is Loblaw's of Canada.
However, several other non-UK retailers are trying. In the US, Wal-Mart, the
big discount retailer, recently launched a range of private-label foods and
drinks designed to compete directly with manufacturer brands, while in
France similar moves are being led by Carrefour and Auchan.
At the same time, the structure of food retailing is being increasingly
attacked in Europe by hard discounters, such as Germany's Aldi, which offer
a narrow range of products at exceptionally low prices.
It is too early to judge whether increased competition from the hard
discounters will prompt conventional supermarkets to respond in kind or to
defend themselves by moving further up-market. But either way, the
private-label challenge promises to confront branded manufacturers with
increasingly difficult choices, not least because Aldi and some other hard
discounters sell predominantly private-label goods.
At present, manufacturers are divided on how to respond. A few international
brand leaders, such as Kellogg's, Coca-Cola and Mars, refuse to make
private-label products at all. Others, including Unilever and Nestle, do so
on a limited basis, largely to fill spare capacity.
Britain's United Biscuits, in contrast, has built a large specialised plant
for private-label production, which generates about a third of its total UK
sales. And many other smaller companies are dedicated exclusively to
private-label production.
For some manufacturers, the decision to produce private label is dictated by
weak market positions, which make it the only way to maintain sales volumes.
But for the stronger companies, the choice involves a delicate calculation
of advantage. If they make private-label products, they risk weakening their
own brands by setting up direct competitors.
But if they refuse to do so, they risk turning away profitable business
which will be snapped up by competitors.
How this balance is struck in fact depends on a wide variety of factors,
peculiar to individual products and companies. Furthermore, evidence
suggests that many multinationals do not yet have a clear and consistent
policy across Europe.
However, given the recent growth of private-label, and the changing
relationship between retailers and manufacturers which underlies the growth,
making the right choice seems likely to be of increasing importance to
branded producer strategies.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930615

