FT931-4192

FT  12 MAR 93 / Call for action on digital HDTV


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


THE European Community was pressed yesterday to move quickly to develop
transmission standards for digital high-definition television.
In a letter circulated to EC governments, Mr Helge Israelsen, Denmark's
director general of post and telecommunications, warns of 'chaos' if swift
action were not taken to set digital standards.
By emphasising the development of digital television technology, Denmark -
current president of the Community - hopes to break the political impasse
holding up an EC strategy for wide-screen, cinema-quality television.
Britain is blocking agreement on a five-year Ecu500m (Pounds 413m) EC
funding plan, on the grounds that digital television technology, already
under development in the US and the Community, could soon overtake analogue
HDTV standards supported by the draft funding plan.
The Danish initiative is not intended to promote an exclusive technology,
competing with US digital systems, but to prevent rival standards springing
up within the Community.
Mr Martin Bangemann, EC industry commissioner, has suggested that the EC
does not need to develop exclusive digital standards because European
manufacturers, notably Philips of the Netherlands and Thomson of France, are
already involved in the race to produce a digital television standard for
the US.
The Commission will today clarify its position today, by indicating that US
digital TV technology could not be adopted directly by the EC, although
Community digital standards would probably have several elements in common
with non-EC technologies.
The compromise circulated by Mr Israelsen appears to go a long way towards
meeting the UK's objections to the original EC strategy. It suggests the
Community should:
use funding to encourage the production and broadcast of wide-screen
non-HDTV television programmes over the next four years, irrespective of
transmission standards;
revise and expand existing legislation so that it allows different
technologies to be used for wide-screen transmissions;
initiate plans for development of a single digital television standard, or a
'family' of standards.
The Danish presidency wants the Commission to propose a revised directive on
transmission standards and a strategy for digital television by September 1,
and will seek ministers' backing for the compromise at the
telecommunications council on May 10, if not before.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930312

