FT931-4121

FT  12 MAR 93 / Management: Paying the price for a decade of excess -
Executive salaries are being frozen and companies are waiving bonus schemes


   By LUCY KELLAWAY


Shareholders are becoming mutinous; employees resentful; John Major has
issued a warning and the press is ready to pounce. Britain's bosses are
under pressure from all sides to restrain, freeze or even cut their pay. The
economy is in the worst recession since the 1930s, wages are rising at the
lowest rate for decades and nearly every day brings news of thousands of job
losses.
Slowly the message is getting through to the boardroom, where a decade of
excess seems to be drawing to a close. According to the latest estimates
from Hay management consultants, directors are increasing their total pay at
the rate of about 8 per cent, compared with about 13 per cent last summer.
'The turn has come, the rates of increase are falling, and are going to come
down perhaps to 5 or 6 per cent by July,' says Anthony Williams, director of
executive renumeration at Hay.
Yet many argue directors are still paying themselves too much. On Hay's
numbers board directors are getting increases twice as large as middle
managers and professionals, and more than three times as much as employees
generally.
Howard Davies, director general of the CBI, this week complained: 'The
recent record on senior management pay is not easy to defend'. He pointed
out the reasons trotted out for big increases in top pay - closing the gap
with better paid European counterparts and adjusting to the fall in marginal
tax rates - no longer applied. 'Much-needed adjustment has now taken place,'
he said, warning any future rises would be taken in bad spirit.
As the annual reports for 1992 start to appear, more scrutiny than usual
will be given to the section on directors renumeration. The first storm can
be expected tomorrow with the publication of BP's accounts. Robert Horton,
the ex-chairman who was ousted last year after falling out with the
company's non-executive directors, is expected to receive Pounds 1m to
Pounds 1.5m for his pains.
Such a large sum is bound to increase the pressure for an overhaul to the
present system which appears to give particularly large rewards for failure.
Directors are entitled to full compensation for pay and benefits for their
contract period (three years in Horton's case) adjusted for the speed with
which they are likely to find a job on similar pay. When the company is
large and the fall from grace public, that may be a long time - and the
pay-off will be accordingly great.
The question of severance pay is a special issue; when it comes to pay rises
for directors that remain at their posts, companies are realising they
cannot afford another public storm. British Gas, which staged a public
relations disaster last year when it announced an 18 per cent pay rise for
its chairman Robert Evans, is hoping to earn brownie points this time
around. The chairman's pay is likely to fall by 20 per cent, as the bonus,
which accounted for last year's rise, will fall away. The pay of other
directors will be frozen.
British Gas will not be alone in waiving its bonus this year. Most large
companies' bonus schemes are tied to corporate profitability - usually to
growth in earnings per share - so that last year's poor corporate
performance in some sectors will be reflected in this year's pay awards.
According to Monks Partnership, a top pay consultancy, some 80 per cent of
main board directors are eligible for bonuses, but of these some 40 per cent
will not be getting anything this year. Of those that do get bonuses the
amounts will vary from a few percentage points to over 50 per cent of total
salary.
Meanwhile, other companies are taking steps to tie total reward more closely
to performance. Grand Met recently announced it was redesigning its share
options so that directors could only exercise them if the share price
out-performed the FT-SE100 for more than three years. This was in response
to the concern of shareholders that share options can provide windfall
rewards for any rise in the share price.
A more marked change this year will come less in the absolute levels of pay
than in the presentation of directors' pay in the report and accounts. Under
the Companies Act only the combined pay and bonus of the chairman and
highest paid director need be disclosed.
The Cadbury Committee on corporate governance has recommended that after
June companies should offer more information. The report advises companies
to split out the performance element in total directors' pay and do the same
for the pay of chairman and highest-paid director. Companies are also
expected to explain the basis of any incentive scheme and offer information
on the make-up of the remuneration committee.
According to Monks Partnership, only 16 per cent of the FT-SE100 companies
met these recommendations with their last annual reports. Although Cadbury's
recommendations are not binding, most big companies are likely to fall into
line this year.
Whether the modest increases in disclosure will effect pay awards is a moot
point. According to Steve Totton of Incomes Data Services it can be argued
either way. Perhaps companies have only been able to get away with paying
such large sums because they have not revealed precisely what they were
doing. Or, if they explained themselves more fully, everyone would
understand why the rises were so large and the heat would be taken out of
the issue.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930312

