FT934-10130

FT  06 NOV 93 / Travel: Across the roof of Russia - Nick Haslam treks
through some of the most impressive terrain in the central Caucasus


   By NICK HASLAM


AFTER FOUR hours of hard climbing, we paused for breath. High above us,
shrouded in mist, lay the jagged wall of Ullu Tau.
At over 4,000 metres it is one of the most difficult mountains in the
central Caucasus to climb. Deeply fissured glaciers cling to its
near-perpendicular sides, and occasionally in the still mountain air we
would hear a crack and rumble as stones cascaded down the screes.
Below, the Adyr-su valley wound like a narrow corridor under a ceiling of
cloud. Our guide, a slender Russian girl called Galia, pointed to a
snow-covered pass which climbed above the other side of a wide grey glacier.
'That leads to Georgia,' she said. 'But without crampons, we cannot go on.'
It was just as well, for ages in our group of 10 walkers ranged from 28 to
70, and the thin air was beginning to take its toll.
A natural barrier between the steppes of central Russia and Iran, the
Caucasus have witnessed countless tribal migrations. By the early 20th
century, more than 50 languages were spoken in the Caucasian region, and the
tribes that inhabited its steep valleys had a reputation for fierce
independence. Stalin had attempted to quell opposition by deporting entire
populations to Siberia and central Asia.
But many returned following his death, and with the collapse of the Soviet
Union long-buried ethnic rivalries are surfacing once more. It was strange
to think that only 200 kilometres from where we sat on the silent mountain
side, civil war was breaking out on the Black Sea coast of Georgia.
We had lunch in a refuge at 3,500m. Around the steel-clad hut, high cliffs
dropped sheer to the glaciers. Brown-haired ibex with long curved horns eyed
us curiously, taking flight if anyone came near, vaulting effortlessly over
vertiginous drops to land on ledges that seemed only centimetres wide.
The high mountain pastures were rich in flowers and, as we walked down,
Galia picked a large bunch which she said would make an excellent tea when
dried. Suddenly I heard her laugh. She came over. She was clutching a
strange-looking grass with long white tuberous roots.
'It's called Yatrishnik,' she said, 'brought here by the Mongols centuries
ago and very good for a man's - ' and she hesitated, searching for a word '
 -potation.' We looked puzzled, and then she made an unmistakeable gesture.
'You mean potency,' I said. She smiled, and then with a wicked laugh
proffered me the plant, saying: 'You never know when you might need it.'
That night we stayed in a simple mountain lodge run by Galia's friends, and
a group of Russian mountain climbers joined us at supper. We toasted each
other in vodka, and they told us that the mountains each contained a spirit
which cared for the souls of mountaineers killed in accidents.
They had come to the Adyr-su valley to commemorate the death of a famous
Russian climber killed on Ullu Tau the year before, and we were shocked to
learn that he had been Galia's husband. In the morning, as we left the
valley, the road passed by the simple cemetery at the foot of the mountain,
and we saw the climbers and Galia standing in silence around a granite
headstone.
That day, we travelled 550km by bus down to the south-eastern end of the
Caucasus in the republic of Dagestan. The wide, dusty, poplar-lined road was
empty, save for the occasional cart so laden with grass that it looked like
a moving haystack.
We crossed through the newly autonomous republics of North Ossetia and
Ingoushetsia and at the border tension was palpable. Hastily constructed
blockhouses confronted each other across a no-man's land of gleaming new
razor wire, and nervous young soldiers trained heavy machine-guns. We
changed buses shortly afterwards; our driver told us he had to return to
Adyr-su before sundown because several buses on that road had been hijacked
at night and the drivers murdered.
In Dagestan the southern Caucasus had lost the lush alpine feel of the
Adyr-su valley. High jagged petrified waves of limestone loomed over rolling
terraced hills where peasant women in headscarves were erecting stooks of
recently-cut corn.
For three days we walked along the high mountain tracks, occasionally
crossing the Old Silk Road, which centuries before had been the quickest
overland route between China and Europe.
Villages on rocky hilltops, which were once fortified, looked little
changed, with houses piled upon each other and wide glassed-in verandas
giving stupendous views over the deep valleys below.
We stayed overnight in village homes, eating and drinking with our hosts
late into the night. They were generous and eager to talk, for westerners
were rare in this part of the world. In the mountain village of Kumuk, the
school teacher said he had little time for the recent changes. For him,
Russia was turning its back on its former satellite states. 'A kilo of meat
now costs 1,000 roubles (Dollars 1),' he said. 'My salary is 30,000 roubles
a month; perestroika is all very well, but you can't feed a family with it.'
At our last village in the Caucasus a wedding feast was taking place, and
dancers whirled around the bride and groom who were seated at a long table
in the shade of a vine. As we arrived, tired and dusty from the day's walk,
the tamada, or toast master, was making a speech. When he heard we were
British, he found places for us at the table, and caused a long series of
toasts to be drunk to friendship between Great Britain and the people of
Dagestan.
It was surprising how quickly vodka can overcome fatigue. Despite having
walked nearly 20km that day, we were all soon practising Dagestani dance
steps to the music of accordion and whistle played by three villagers.
On our last day we wound down from the mountains and caught our first
glimpse of the coastal plain of the Caspian sea. It was good to rest on a
beach, and swim. That night we built a fire and sat in silence under the
stars. Former travellers would have embarked here to cross the Caspian for
Kazakstan and China beyond. It was galling to think that for us, the slow
journey to the east was over and that tomorrow we would be on the morning
flight to Moscow.
Nick Haslam travelled to the Caucasus with Exodus Expeditions: 9 Weir Road,
London SW12 0LT. Tel: 081-675-5550. The company's 17-day 'Caucasian
Explorer,' which includes a day in Moscow and two in St Petersburg, costs
Pounds 1,200, including flights from London. 'Russia is a buzz area for us,'
said an Exodus marketing person.
'We have 18 Russian itineraries, ranging from historic buildings to remote
trekking. Dates for the Caucasian Explorer trip in 1994 are July 1 to
mid-September. Other tours are more generally available.'

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

931106

