FT934-8717

FT  13 NOV 93 / How To Spend It: At last, a showcase for real talent -
Britain's young designers have finally won the kind of backing their unique
work deserves


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


PETA LEVI has been involved in design for many years. She started as a
journalist but, as she began to see more and more of the difficulties that
face the 13,000 students who come pouring out of British design schools each
year, she went into the business of organising exhibitions. 'What I have
tried to do,' she says, 'is to bridge the gap between Britain's graduating
designers and industry. Most new designers have such trouble getting started
and they need a place to show their wares.'
Now that her annual exhibition for the work of the best of them - at the
Business Design Centre in Islington, London - has taken off she has moved on
to the next stage. 'So many of their new young businesses were failing, not
because they lacked talent or interesting products, but because they did not
have the proper means to market their wares or places where they could be
seen,' she says.
She has therefore begged and borrowed funds and warehouse space to enable
her to open the first permanent gallery where their wares can be seen and
bought. She provides her own efforts free, Cathy Hatgis, an interior
designer, has offered her time so that it can open to the public every
Wednesday and Wolff Olins, the interior and industrial designer, has
provided the premises in the shape of a converted warehouse in his offices
near Regent's Canal.
The result is that there is now an ever-changing selection of the work of
some 60 designers. Though most of the time the work is primarily aimed at
the trade in the shape of buyers, architects, specifiers and interior
designers, the certainty that Christmas will shortly be here and with it the
need for presents that are interesting, original and not to be found
everywhere, means that many readers might well like to take time out to
visit the showcase.
The range of talents includes most of the design disciplines - everything
from textiles, furniture design, glass, ceramics, wood and metalwork to
jewellery, plastics, lighting and flooring. Here anybody interested can see
the full range of work and, if there is nothing that meets their precise
needs, they can commission a special piece.
For the season running up to Christmas, however, there is an exhibition
aimed at the more casual shopper - in other words a good selection of
smaller, take-away wares that will sit happily under the tree until the big
day.
For under Pounds 100 you could choose from hand-painted and printed silks by
Modern Primitives - hankies at Pounds 18, ties at Pounds 35, cushions for
Pounds 65 and scarves for Pounds 80.
Then there are hand-blown glass egg-cups by Marianne Buuf for Pounds 18 and
lots of mirrors for under Pounds 30 by Caroline Musson, Ashley Hall and
Keira Baldwin. Or what about hand-painted porcelain mugs at Pounds 15 by
Brenda Taylor, deep blue or maroon brass and nickel napkin rings by Clare
Thatcher for Pounds 25, or matching candlesticks from Pounds 18.75?
Those who are looking for finer or more expensive things might like to know
that Jenny Maddock does lovely silver pens for just over Pounds 100, Paul
Gower has a CD rack for Pounds 195 and Jessica Ball has produced a highly
decorative porcelain tea service for two, on its own tray, for Pounds 200.
For members of the public the showcase is normally only open on Wednesdays
from 11 am to 4 pm, although they will open by appointment on any other day.
The special Christmas exhibition with plenty of smaller, less
exclusively-priced present ideas, is on Wednesday November 24, but there
will be lots to choose from on every Wednesday from then on until Christmas.
However, although Christmas may be a chance to introduce the designers' work
to a wider range of customers, the main purpose of the showcase still
remains to encourage the notion among us all that original, creative,
one-off pieces are well worth initiating and commissioning.
A visit to the showcase gives the visitor a chance to see a large selection
of all sorts of work and helps to refine our eye and focus our taste.
Instead of buying a mass-produced dining-table, for instance, or rummaging
round the antique shops, why not consider commissioning your very own piece?
For a sum not very different from what you would pay for a routine piece in
a department store you could have the designer, the wood, the shape and the
size of your choice.
There is no need to settle for a fabric, a mirror, a piece of glass or
silver or jewellery that doesn't meet your needs and desires in every way.
At the business showcase there is a chance to catch up with some of the most
talented designers around and see whose tastes and skills most aptly suits
your needs.
The New Designers in Business Showcase is at Wolff Olins, 10 Regent's Wharf,
All Saints Street, London N1.
It is open to the public every Wednesday (from 11 am to 4 pm except during
the Christmas period when it is open from 11 am to 6 pm), other appointments
can be made by telephoning 071-435 4348 or faxing requests to 071-435 5487.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

931113

