FT933-5163

FT  04 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: BES tax warning


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


JUST UNDER 1,000 investors in Bulldog Premium Growth I and II loan-back
business expansion schemes, stand to lose tax relief following a warning
from the Inland Revenue.
The investors have been told by Charterhouse Tilney, the sponsors, that on
August 25 the Inland Revenue had taken 'the provisional view' that the
companies' shares were not issued before midnight March 15. The abolition of
loan-back BES companies was announced in the Budget.
The 960 investors in the Bulldog Companies have therefore been warned by
Charterhouse Tilney that they may get back only 75p for every 100p invested,
if they take the loan from Barclays bank. The deadline for take up of the
loan facility has been extended beyond the original September 15 date until
after the result of the Revenue's appeal against two other BES loan-back
schemes.
The Revenue is appealing against a High Court judgment reversing the
Revenue's decision that National Westminster bank's Homeshare scheme and
BZW's Gracechurch companies are ineligible for tax relief. The hearing is
not expected until October.
There has been a rash of new issues this week. Sponsors Capital Ventures has
launched three BES schemes. Cambridge Collegiate II seeks to raise Pounds
29.85m for Fitzwilliam, New Hall, Robinson and St Catherine's colleges. The
cash-backed contracted exit price is 122.5p, equivalent to an annual return
after five years of 14.3 per cent.
Queens' College Tenancies and Lady Margaret Options are both FT-SE
100-linked schemes. The first seeks to raise Pounds 17m for Queens' College,
Cambridge. The contracted exit price is 121p or investors can choose a
variable geared return of a minimum of 60p after five years plus 2.5p for
every 1 per cent increase in the FT-SE to a maximum of 40 per cent growth in
the index. There is a lock-in facility once the index rises by 25 per cent.
Lady Margaret Options aims to raise Pounds 17m this time to buy properties
from St John's College or Lucy Cavendish College, Cambridge and is for those
with a more bullish view of the FT-SE. The fixed exit option is 121p or
investors can choose a 60p return plus 2p for every 1 per cent increase in
the index limited to a 70 per cent rise. The lock-in is at 35 per cent
growth.
The minimum investment in all three Capital Ventures schemes is Pounds
2,000.
Hodgson Martin is launching the University of Oxford Accommodation
Companies, the first BES offer by the university itself. The aim is to raise
Pounds 15m for accommodation to let to graduate students on an assured
tenancy basis. The exit price is 123p and the minimum investment is Pounds
3,000 (Pounds 2,000 for Oxford graduates, benefactors and staff).
Hodgson Martin is co-sponsoring an issue with Allied Dunbar to raise Pounds
17.5m for accommodation for St Catherine's Jesus and St Hilda's Colleges,
Oxford. Allied Dunbar Stockmarket BES takes a different approach to the
FT-SE linked schemes to date by promising to lock in 72 per cent of any
annual growth in the index and locking out subsequent losses. The minimum
return is 75p per 100p invested.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930904

