FT932-6898

FT  26 MAY 93 / International Capital Markets: Emerging market investors
avoid local currencies


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


INTERNATIONAL institutional investment in emerging bond markets remains
largely concentrated on Eurobond issues and Brady bonds, or other
restructured bank loan vehicles, rather than on the local currency markets.
According to a survey of 30 institutional investors active in the emerging
markets - by Kleiman International, a US-based consultancy - Mexico,
considered the most mature of the markets by both debt and equity investors,
is the only one to attract large-scale investment from overseas.
In other emerging markets, local currency markets remain dominated by
domestic and expatriate investors, but all respondents expect local markets
to grow quickly over the next 12 to 18 months.
Ninety per cent of the institutions surveyed have holdings in Mexican Cetes
(Treasury bills) and/or adjustobonos (fixed real interest rate adjustable
bonds) while only 24 per cent hold local currency bonds in any other market.
One-fifth invest in Argentina - in both peso and dollar-denominated
instruments issued locally - while just over 10 per cent hold Venezuelan
paper, mainly central bank zero-coupon bonds. Despite the highly developed
capital markets in Chile, the investor base remains domestic.
In Asia, only 16 per cent have holdings in local markets, mainly in Malysia,
Thailand and the Philippines.
The survey showed that investors' primary concerns are for the
macro-economic and political situation; the next big consideration is the
currency, since a sharp devaluation can wipe out even high bond yields. A
clear government exchange rate policy is necessary for fixed-income
investments, according to those surveyed.
Investors also focus on credit risk, although risks across markets can be
difficult to compare. The governments of Mexico and Colombia mandate local
credit ratings, which are viewed as a useful guide.
Local currency corporate bonds with higher yields than government paper are
starting to attract significant interest, the survey found. Although viewed
as riskier than government paper, investors believe that companies will
benefit more quickly than governments from economic reform.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930526

