FT933-12619

FT  23 JUL 93 / Life insurance dispute laid to rest by Treasury: A probable
solution to a thorny problem of disclosure


   By NORMA COHEN


THE TREASURY has app-arently laid to rest one of the thorniest issues
regulators have had to handle in the seven years since the passage of the
Financial Services Act. What should life insurance companies be required to
tell prospective customers about their products?
Successive regulators, seeking a consensus with the life insurance industry,
failed to devise a regime which would also satisfy consumers and the Office
of Fair Trading. Under the act the OFT is required to decide whether the
disclosure rules are enough to promote true competition in the industry.
In March the OFT ruled that regulators' latest efforts to set disclosure
rules had 'significantly anti-competitive effects' and should be altered.
Those rules allowed companies to present industry-average charges to
prospective customers instead of disclosing their own costs, and only
required them to show the effects of early surrender for the first five
years.
The rules also said that sales agents did not have to tell customers how
much commission they received for each sale, and that all of a single
company's sales agents had to charge customers the same price for the same
products.
The Treasury, which is responsible for overseeing regulation of financial
services, yesterday backed the OFT almost to the hilt and went even further
on the issue of disclosure of commission payments made to sales agents.
Not only should independent financial advisers - who sell the products of
many companies - be required to disclose how much commission they receive
for each sale, but so-called tied and direct sales agents who sell the
products of a single provider should be required to do so as well.
The Treasury has ordered the Securities and Investments Board, the City's
chief regulator, to draft new disclosure rules by the end of the year to put
in place three of the OFT's main recommendations. On commission disclosure,
the SIB is to come up with recommendations on how to calculate payments to
sales agents by the same time.
The other main points of the Treasury ruling are:
Life insurance companies are to clearly disclose the surrender value of
policies in each of the first five years. For later years they are to give
enough information about the value of a policy surrendered before maturity
without appearing to guarantee a sum which cannot be counted on. The SIB had
proposed showing surrender values only up to the fifth year of the policy.
Companies must tell prospective customers by how much their own charges will
reduce the projected investment returns of any given policy. The SIB had
proposed allowing companies to show industry-wide average charges.
Lower-cost sales outlets, such as large chains of building societies, should
be allowed to charge less for the products they sell. This is intended to
help customers choose lower-cost outlets and reward efficient sales agents.
Mr Anthony Nelson, Treasury economics secretary, said he expected the rules
on commission disclosure to result in lower commission payments overall.
'Because of the size of commissions and the scope this gives for bias in
advice we feel the need for commission disclosure is great,' he said.
Since the OFT made its recommendations in March the Treasury has been
subject to intensive lobbying by the insurance industry, supported by its
self-regulating bodies.
Mr Nelson said he was mindful of the potential commercial effects the new
rules could have on the industry. 'I have no reason to believe that life
products which have offered good benefits and mutual value will not continue
to be sold,' he said.
'But if the new rules lead to changes in the industry, it is only responding
to consumer choice,' he added.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930723

