FT931-4225

FT  11 MAR 93 / International Company News: Empire-builder sets up his Wall
St dream - Sanford Weill's bid for the Shearson broking business


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


THERE was a certain symmetry to the news this week that legendary Wall
Street dealmaker Mr Sanford Weill is negotiating to buy the Shearson stock
brokerage operations from American Express.
After all, it was the buccaneering Mr Weill who built the Shearson empire
from scratch during the 1970s, and who sold it to American Express in 1981.
It was also Mr Weill who resigned as president of American Express in 1985
after two difficult years as the second-in-command to chief executive Mr Jim
Robinson. And it was the same Mr Weill who attempted to buy back Shearson in
1990, only to see his plans fall apart at the eleventh hour.
Now Mr Weill is on the verge of realising a long-cherished dream of creating
a Wall Street brokerage powerhouse to challenge the biggest in the US
securities industry. In rescuing Shearson from its troubled parent, he is
returning to his roots and exacting a small measure of revenge for the
frustrating years he spent at American Express.
If the negotiations are concluded successfully, Mr Weill will merge Shearson
into the Smith Barney broking operation of his diversified financial
services company, Primerica. The new entity will have more than 11,000
brokers, almost 500 branches, combined revenues of over Dollars 13bn, and
will rival Merrill Lynch as the country's largest securities firm.
The acquisition of Shearson should cement Mr Weill's reputation as one of
the pre-eminent empire-builders on Wall Street.
The Brooklyn-born Mr Weill, displayed his ambitions at an early age. In
1960, five years after starting on Wall Street as a Dollars 65-a-week
trading clerk and at the age of just 27, he set up his own securities firm
with three friends.
Over the next two decades Mr Weill's business expanded rapidly. In 1974, the
firm, then named Hayden Stone, bought Shearson Hammill, doubling in size. In
1979, it acquired Loeb Rhoades, and by the start of the 1980s the firm,
known by then as Shearson, was the second-largest securities brokerage in
the US.
In 1981, Mr Weill, believing broking houses would only prosper if they were
backed by large amounts of capital, sold Shearson to American Express for
Dollars 930m. The sale made him a fortune, and provided him with a senior
position at the travel and financial services giant.
Although he became the group's president within two years, the aggressive,
entrepreneurial Mr Weill never fitted into the American Express bureaucratic
corporate culture, and in 1985 he left the company. After an abortive
attempt to take over BankAmerica, he briefly concentrated his energies on
fund-raising (he was the prime force behind the Dollars 60m restoration of
Carnegie Hall in New York).
It did not take long for Mr Weill to return to the fray. His next vehicle
was the ailing financing group Commercial Credit, which he bought cheaply
from Control Data in 1986. Two years later, he used it to launch a
successful Dollars 1.5bn takeover bid for Primerica. Along with Primerica,
Mr Weill got the retail brokerage house Smith Barney - he was back in the
business he knew best.
Under Mr Weill, Primerica has thrived. Its earnings have grown at a compound
rate of between 25 per cent and 30 per cent, and the shares have almost
tripled in value. Today, the company has three main businesses: the consumer
finance arm Commercial Credit, the financial services unit which sells term
insurance and mutual funds to middle-income families, and Smith Barney.
All three divisions are profitable, which has much to do with Mr Weill's
vigorous approach to managing costs. Last year, the consumer finance
business brought in Dollars 193.5m, the insurance business Dollars 187.3m,
and the brokerage Dollars 170m. Primerica's total operating earnings in 1992
were a record Dollars 593m.
Mr Weill has been busy in the past year. Keen to concentrate Primerica's
energies on its three core businesses, he recently completed the sale of the
group's interests in the mail order company Fingerhut and the credit insurer
Voyager.
Then, last autumn, Primerica paid Dollars 772.5m for a 27 per cent stake in
the lossmaking insurance group, Travelers, which Mr Weill is now helping to
turn around. The deal was typical of Mr Weill - he paid Dollars 19 a share
for a big holding in a company with a book value of Dollars 40 a share.
Since his arrival, Travelers' stock has risen from under Dollars 17 to
almost Dollars 30.
Now, the proposed Shearson deal is winning Mr Weill new praise. Mr Perrin
Long, of First Michigan, who has followed Mr Weill's career closely over the
past three decades, says: 'I think it's a good deal for Sandy - he would
acquire for Dollars 1bn something that would have cost him much more than
Dollars 1bn to build from ground zero.'
The acquisition would fit the pattern of most of Mr Weill's previous deals.
As Mr Long explains: 'Generally, he has gone after companies that are
basically over the hill . . . This is the Sandy way of doing things. He will
take the best of Smith Barney and the best of Shearson and put the two
together. Anything that is not the best gets left at the kerb.'
Although Shearson has its problems (in particular, its costs have been
rising faster than earnings), Mr Weill is likely to leave the most troubled
parts of the business - the struggling Lehman investment banking division,
the bad property investments and the legal liabilities - with American
Express.
Analysts believe the remainder should fit nicely with Smith Barney, once the
costs of the newly-combined business have been scaled back.
There is plenty of room for savings, says Mr Long: 'There is a considerable
amount of fat in the top layers of Shearson, and there are a number of
departments where trimming could take place, particularly in the back
office.'
If all goes well, Mr Weill has once again pulled off a smart deal. As Mr
John Keefe, an independent analyst with Keefe Worldwide, says: 'I think
Shearson is a great operation. It has a good customer base, a productive
broker force, and good products they sell to people. It just needs a little
extra management.'

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930311

