FT932-13483

FT  23 APR 93 / Further criticism of US over rising yen


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


JAPANESE business leaders, senior government officials and politicians
yesterday stepped up their criticism of US economic policy towards Japan as
the yen rose to another post-war high against the dollar in Tokyo.
The dollar closed at Y110.20, down Y0.15 from its Tokyo close on Wednesday.
The yen has appreciated rapidly in the past week mainly driven by comments
last weekend by President Bill Clinton that a stronger yen would help to
reduce Japan's trade surplus with the US.
The yen's continued rise is confounding the hopes of Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the
prime minister, that the appreciation would run out of steam with the help
of intervention by the Bank of Japan. If the yen continues to rise Mr
Miyazawa will come under increasing pressure to take a tougher line to
resist US demands for Japan to adjust its economic policies towards US
priorities.
Mr Masaru Hayami, chairman of the Japan Association of Corporate Executives,
said Mr Clinton's remarks were 'strange', 'indiscreet' and 'difficult to
understand', terms of criticism in the language of Japanese politics. Mr
Hayami said the slump in the dollar would damage the US economy by fuelling
inflation and increasing pressure for higher interest rates.
A senior official at the Ministry of Trade and Industry echoed Mr Hayami's
remarks. Mr Yuji Tanahashi, Miti vice minister, said the yen's rise could
stifle the recovery in the Japanese economy, which the US has urged to
create higher demand for imports, as one of the most important ways to cut
the Japanese trade surplus.
Meanwhile, Mr Kabun Muto, the recently appointed foreign minister, is fast
establishing a reputation for outspoken criticism. Mr Muto, who on Wednesday
described Mr Clinton's remarks as deplorable, yesterday attacked US trade
policies designed to open up the Japanese market.
Mr Muto said the US market for manufactured goods was more closed than the
Japanese market. He said the increase in the value of the trade surplus was
partly due to the rise in the yen and Japanese companies' decision to
increase the price of their exports to avoid anti-dumping actions by the US
government.
The frailty of the Japanese economy was underlined by a 3.4 per cent fall in
household spending in February compared with the year before. Average
spending by salaried workers fell 0.7 per cent while that of non-salaried
households fell 8.4 per cent.
Spending on transport and communications rose 13.6 per cent, and spending on
clothes just 1.5 per cent. However spending on food, health care, furniture
and household appliances fell, with education ex-penditure down 15.8 per
cent and that on housing 13.8 per cent lower. The slide in consumer spending
was reflected in sharp profit falls at several leading retailers yesterday.
The machinery industry forecast a 0.7 per cent increase in sales for the
year to the end of next March, reflecting the prolonged slowdown in
corporate investment.
Meanwhile, regional officials of the Finance Ministry, meeting in Tokyo,
forecast the economy would begin to recover, albeit modestly, from the
second half of the financial year.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930423

