FT934-10298

FT  06 NOV 93 / Yeltsin scraps election pledge: Term of parliament's
deputies cut as Russian leader looks to make his position impregnable


   By JOHN LLOYD, DMITRI VOLKOVIN and REUTER


   MOSCOW


PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin has secured a deal with Russia's regional leaders
designed to make his position and powers unassailable before the end of
1996, according to a close aide.
Mr Boris Zolotukhin, his aide on the constitution, said yesterday Mr Yeltsin
had withdrawn his pledge to hold presidential elections next year and had
cut the first term of parliamentary deputies from four to two years.
The agreement reached this week between the president and leaders of the
country's 88 republics and regions appears to seal his total authority over
the country for at least two years. It will appear in an addendum to the new
draft constitution, due to be published next week, and will take effect if
approved by a simple majority in a referendum, due at the same time as
parliamentary elections on December 12.
The agreement will:
limit the period of the first parliament, or federal assembly, to two years
rather than the four previously announced;
see members of the upper house, or federation council, elected for the first
session only - thereafter the upper house will be composed of delegates
nominated by the regions;
let ministers who are elected as deputies keep both their ministerial and
deputies' seats, at least in the first parliament;
include in the constitution a clause saying the republics and regions are
'sovereign', but only so that this 'sovereignty' does not weaken the
sovereignty of the federation or other regions.
This clause was included to save face among the republics, but is seen by
the presidential side as meaningless. The net effect of changes will be to
strengthen both the presidency and the regions, at the expense of the as-yet
voiceless parliament.
It also makes a presidential election next June 'very unlikely', according
to Mr Yeltsin's close advisers.
However, the presidential press office said it had no official confirmation
of this, and that the position remained that he would stand for re-election
next June. Mr Mikhail Mityukov, head of the presidential Commission for
Legal Projects, told the Sevodnya newspaper that if the constitution was
approved by the referendum 'any question of pre-term elections of the
president falls'.
The addendum to the constitution defines a two-year 'transitional period',
throughout which the president must carry out his functions, Mr Mityukov
said.
Mr Yeltsin has already heralded agreement with the regional leaders on the
main body of the draft constitution.
Reuter adds: The US will not press Mr Yeltsin to run for re-election in
June, Mr Warren Christopher, secretary of state, told the House foreign
affairs committee yesterday. The US regarded the referendum and the
parliamentary elections as the important events, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931106

