FT934-8625

FT  15 NOV 93 / De Klerk settles below bottom line on safeguards: S Africa's
constitution has no built-in bulwark against majority domination


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


FROM THE day President F W de Klerk set out to transform South Africa, he
promised one thing: to prevent the abuse of state power, at the root of
Africa's decline, by refusing to let majority domination replace minority
rule.
He may yet achieve this: but if he does, it will be the result of luck and
the goodwill of the African National Congress rather than the new
constitution, which was to have been the chief bulwark against domination.
That document, due to be finalised within days, falls well short of Mr de
Klerk's goals. Though some important matters remain to be agreed, the
outline is becoming clear: unless there is a wholesale revision at the last
moment, the ANC (which represents the black majority) will not be forced to
share real power with minority parties.
It may well choose to do so anyway, conscious of the power of the ruling
National party in the civil service and the security forces. But the bottom
line is that the National party, guarantor of minority interests, would find
it difficult to use the constitution to force the ANC to change course.
National party negotiators believe they will not need entrenched
constitutional provisions to play a powerful role in restraining the ANC:
they believe the ANC's assurances that it does not wish to govern alone (and
does not believe it could do so effectively); and they judge their electoral
strength will permit them at least some blocking power (though they may need
as much as 40 or 45 per cent to block decisions in cabinet, and latest polls
show NP support at 13 per cent).
But several government negotiators do not dispute that the National party
has settled below its bottom line on crucial issues; they insist it had
little choice. As a minority government whose power diminishes by the day,
negotiators clearly calculated that a deal done now would be preferable to
that available next month or next year. They recall that the National party
would have had significantly stronger blocking powers under the constitution
nearly agreed last year in the Convention for a Democratic South Africa
(Codesa). Some believe the government blundered by refusing a deal then,
only to accept a lesser package now.
That package fails to deliver several of the checks and balances which the
National party had insisted were essential. The party's 1991 constitutional
proposals called for political power to be divided between three tiers of
government - central, regional and local - with each tier to have 'original
and entrenched authority with which other tiers of government may not
interfere'.
In fact, central government retains wide powers to 'interfere' with regional
governments: though the regions (to be called 'provinces') are to be granted
primary responsibility for areas such as primary and secondary education,
housing, health, and policing, central government reserves the right to
intervene in these areas to impose uniform national norms and standards, to
ensure proper regulation, to protect the national economy or national
security, and where there are implications for national economic policy. In
short, the constitution authorises central government to intervene in terms
so vague as seriously to undermine regional autonomy.
Though government officials insist that provinces will have 'all' powers
over primary and secondary education, it is understood that a national
curriculum, probably including compulsory languages, will be imposed from
the centre and that the central education ministry in the new government
will retain almost all the powers of the current ministry - yet no one would
dispute that South Africa is now a highly centralised state.
In the crucial area of regional policing - perhaps a regional government's
most important power - the party has compromised its demand for regional
police forces. According to a deal yet to be finalised, there is to be only
one national police force; government sources say this is merely a symbolic
concession, because powers will be devolved from the centre to regional
commissioners of police responsible to reg-ional, and not central
government.
But according to joint ANC/NP proposals, the president will have veto powers
over appointment of regional commissioners; and central government will
retain control over public order and internal stability. One ANC negotiator
called this 'a national police force with federal trimmings'.
Much will depend on how the constitution will be interpreted by the
constitutional court, which will adjudicate disputes between the regions and
the centre and do much to shape the future state. But here too, the
constitution leaves room for abuse. According to joint ANC/NP proposals, the
new president (likely to be from the ANC) will, in effect, control the
appointments of all 11 Constitutional Court members. He must consult the
multi-party cabinet before deciding, but no other party is likely to be able
to muster sufficient support to overrule him.
Exactly what percentage vote would overrule the new president in cabinet
remains to be agreed; but the latest proposal calling for 55 per cent
support for most decisions, and 60 per cent for budget and security matters,
falls far short of Mr de Klerk's original demand for a 'collective
presidency' where leaders of the three major parties would take decisions by
consensus.
His promise of 'no domination' has always been based on ensuring real
power-sharing between parties in cabinet, and between the centre and the
regions; only time will tell whether such power-sharing develops
voluntarily. The constitution does not prevent it - but it does far less
than expected to ensure it.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931115

