FT933-12466

FT  23 JUL 93 / International Bonds: Attractive swap conditions spur Dollars
300m in FRN issues


   By SARA WEBB and AP-DJ


COLLARED floating-rate notes were the flavour of the international bond
market yesterday, as two borrowers - CSFB Finance and Commerzbank - launched
substantial new issues while a third, San Paolo, decided to increase its
recently-launched deal.
Dealers said attractive swap conditions yesterday prompted borrowers to go
for collared FRNs. Meanwhile, investor demand remains healthy because the
minimum coupons mean investors receive a fairly generous pick-up over
short-term dollar interest rates.
CSFB Finance launched a Dollars 150m, 10-year collared FRN with a coupon of
six-month Libor minus 12.5 basis points. The floor was set at 5.5 per cent
and the cap at 9.5 per cent.
CSFB, lead manager for the deal, reported strong demand for the bonds. It
said the price rose from 99.875 at issue to 100.75 by late afternoon. Market
participants agreed the deal went well, pointing out that retail investors
in Switzerland and the Benelux countries were familiar with the borrower's
name.
One US house said the appeal of the deal lay in its high cap, relatively
high floor, and its below-par pricing.
The market has seen a steady flow of collared FRN deals since last summer,
with the most recent issues generally having a 12-year maturity, a floor of
5 per cent and cap of 8 per cent.
Commerzbank launched a Dollars 150m, 12-year collared FRN late in the day,
setting the coupon at Libor minus 25 basis points with a floor of 5.25 per
cent and a cap of 8 per cent.
Meanwhile, San Paolo increased the size of its 10-year collared FRN deal by
Dollars 50m to Dollars 200m in response to strong investor demand.
Activity in other sectors of the international bond market was muted given
the approach of the holiday season and further bouts of turbulence in the
European exchange rate mechanism. There was some speculation that LKB
Baden-Wurttemberg was preparing to launch a Pounds 250m, five-year deal.
Credit Lyonnais, the French state-controlled bank, has placed Dollars 350m
in preference shares with US institutional investors, AP-DJ reports. The
shares were issued by Credit Lyonnais Capital, registered in Luxembourg, and
are considered to be a minority stake.
The preference shares have a nominal yield of 9.5 per cent, with a quarterly
dividend guaranteed by Credit Lyonnais. They are perpetual but can be
reimbursed in 10 years.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930723

