FT931-3919

FT  13 MAR 93 / Yeltsin's deputy seeks help from G7 in Hong Kong: The west
ponders how to initiate the tight economic policies needed to ensure aid to
Russia is not wasted


   By IVO DAWNAY and LEYLA BOULTON


   LONDON, MOSCOW


A FLURRY of nervous behind-the-scenes diplomatic activity was under way last
night as Mr Boris Fyodorov, a Russian deputy prime minister, flew to Hong
Kong for an unprecedented meeting with officials of the Group of Seven
leading industrial nations.
In spite of broad public declarations of support for President Boris Yeltsin
in recent days, the G7 nations have stopped short of offering unconditional
backing for him.
Instead, a senior British diplomat said in London that the G7 would only
draw conclusions at the end of the two-day Hong Kong meeting, when it was
hoped political developments in Moscow had become clearer. 'It is an
extremely serious situation,' he said.
The G7 meeting was due to look at ways the industrial powers can maintain
the reform process in Russia, including the question of further economic
aid. But as the showdown between Mr Yeltsin and the Congress of People's
Deputies has come to a climax, the agenda is certain to have taken on a more
overtly political tone.
Both France and Germany have indicated that they favour an emergency G7
heads of government meeting, to be convened before the scheduled Tokyo
summit in July. However, with the balance of power between Mr Yeltsin and
the Congress still uncertain, the US and the UK remain cautious.
A more likely outcome will be a meeting of G7 finance and, possibly, foreign
ministers to assess the outlook. That could be convened at short notice in
order for its work to be completed before Mr Yeltsin's scheduled meeting
with President Bill Clinton in Vancouver on April 3-4.
Despite a call from Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the French premier, on Thursday for
more US and Japanese financial aid for Russia, many diplomats believe that
economic support will have little bearing on what is now essentially a
political power struggle.
As President Boris Yeltsin's political troubles help focus western minds on
the need to accelerate assistance for his economic reforms, the question of
how to deliver help becomes more urgent than ever.
One reason why the west has not produced large-scale finance for Russian
economic reform is because of doubts that it would achieve its purpose. The
banking and distribution systems are extremely primitive, capital flight and
corruption are big problems, and the bureaucracy is slow and inept.
Even Mr Boris Fyodorov, the deputy prime minister for economics and finance
who arrives in Hong Kong today for talks with the Group of Seven countries,
agrees that stopping aid from being wasted is the biggest headache. Without
tight economic policies, all would be lost.
The stakes are high. If the aid does not reach its targets, the risk of a
political backlash against reform in Russia is heightened. If aid is not
controlled, it might just provide a financial cushion to delay reform.
There is also pressure for aid to go beyond new loans. Much of the Dollars
24bn (Pounds 17bn) package promised by the west last year was limited to
loans guaranteed by western governments for imports of western goods and
equipment. A new emphasis would target western cash at projects to show
concrete benefits and even help Russia generate hard currency.
The World Bank would lead such efforts, which include, for example, a plan
to finance equipment to cap gas flares in Russia's oil industry.
This thinking is even being applied to the International Monetary Fund, last
year charged with administering western financial assistance to Russia in
return for reforms which never materialised.
Diplomats say the G7 is now considering the creation of a special fund, to
be run by the IMF, to finance specific programmes. One - approved by the
Russian premier, Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin - would organise five model
bankruptcies in key sectors. This would warn enterprises squandering state
support and instruct officials and judges on how to implement Russia's first
bankruptcy law in 70 years.
Another idea is for the IMF to take on the burden of subsidies at present
provided by Moscow to the former Soviet republics through the issue of
credits from the Russian Central Bank. Mr Fyodorov says that last year
Russia spent the equivalent of Dollars 18bn subsidising the former
republics.
Technical assistance might also draw more on examples which have worked well
so far. One model is the work of the International Finance Corporation, the
World Bank's private sector development arm, which is working in the
provinces to help local authorities privatise shops, big enterprises, and
even land.
Mr Mikhail Gurtovoi, who last year headed a government commission to fight
corruption until it was disbanded, suggests that plants equipped with
western machinery but not completed under inefficient state management
should simply be given to western companies. Completed and run by
westerners, they would provide models of efficiency and jobs.
Man in the News, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930313

