FT934-11118

FT  02 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Norway banks see a brighter day - Lower
interest rates helped Christiania Bank and DnB return to health a year after
they were on their knees


   By KAREN FOSSLI


Christiania Bank and Den norske Bank, Norway's two biggest banks, were
forced to their knees last year under the burden of large losses. In
desperation, the state threw them life-lines in the form of funding to
enable capital adequacy requirements to be met.
One year later, the banks are on the road to recovery and planning share
issues which could net the state large windfall gains.
Analysts have warned the government against dumping its shares in the market
at the same time as the banks' issues are launched.
At current prices, the state's shareholdings in the two banks are worth
about NKr17bn (Dollars 2.4bn).
According to Mr Ole Lund, DnB's chairman, the bank is approaching the 'sunny
side of life' but is not yet there. DnB's high volume loan losses and
non-performing loans are still lingering at unacceptable levels.
Hopes are to reduce the level of credit losses during the next 1 1/2 years
by 50 per cent to about NKr1.3bn.
On Tuesday, DnB published a record result since being formed from a merger
in 1990 between Den norske Creditbank and Bergen Bank. Pre-tax profit of
NKr720m for the nine months to September was achieved, against a pre-tax
loss of NKr2.45bn last year. CBK is due to report nine-month results on
November 4 and could, on the same day, announce the details of its planned
share issue.
The sharp improvement in the banks' health is due mainly to the low level of
domestic interest rates, a marked rise in the domestic stock market, steady
recovery of Norway's economy and emerging results of the past five years'
hard slog of consolidation and restruc-turing.
'Nobody last autumn would have believed we would have had the level of
interest rates which we see today and if it had been suggested, the
forecaster would have been quickly escorted to the nearest hospital for
examination,' Mr Lund said.
Norway's central bank has cut the important overnight lending rate 13 times
this year, to 7 per cent from 11 per cent.
The three-month domestic money-market rate has fallen by nearly 50 per cent
in the past year to 5.6 per cent after hitting a high last December of 21.6
per cent during turmoil within the ERM.
Mr Lund concedes that last autumn was a low point for the banks. 'We had
tremendous losses, turmoil in the currency and stock markets and the
collapse of UNI Storebrand (Norway's biggest insurer) and Investa (the
Bergen-based investment group).'
However, the banks' operating environment has since brightened.
Inflation is at 2.3 per cent, its lowest level in three decades, and
economic growth is forecast to accelerate to 3.0 per cent next year from 1.3
per cent in 1993.
The two banks' planned share issues will have to be co-ordinated carefully
so as not to destroy the market. And there is the matter of what the state
intends to do with its shareholdings in the banks and its rights to convert
preference capital to shares.
Analysts have forecast that DnB would try to raise up to NKr2bn in one issue
but that CBK would make an initial issue and seek a listing in an attempt to
improve the bank's market valuation before a second tranche is launched.
CBK earlier this year said it intended to launch a public offering before
1994 but Mr Lund says DnB will have to first publish 1993 accounts and,
preferably, have first-quarter results behind it before making a similar
move.
DnB wants to expand the bank's foreign ownership quota to 33.3 per cent from
12.5 per cent.
Domestic and foreign analysts believe it advantageous for DnB to be the
first off the mark because it is stronger and better known internationally
than CBK and has the added benefit of a listing on the Oslo bourse.
DnB's A-shares have increased five-fold to about NKr20 each since the end of
1992 as the Oslo bourse bank sub-index soared by 160 per cent during the
same period.
At current share prices the state's DnB stake is worth about NKr3.5bn,
excluding preference capital which, if converted to 350m shares at the
bank's current share price, would be worth about NKr7bn.
The state's shareholding in Den norske Bank thus equals about NKr10.5bn
compared to the NKr6.4bn which it has injected into the bank.
On the other hand, analysts say, if CBK's share issue is a success the
likelihood of DnB achieving good fortune with its issue would be bolstered.
The state holds a 69 per cent stake in DnB which would be increased to above
80 per cent on a fully diluted basis if preference capital was converted to
shares.
The state virtually owns CBK, but the 7 per cent held by private investors
is traded outside the bourse at about NKr17 a share.
A sale, even at this price, would net the state a handsome return. It would
underline how light has pierced the gloom of Norwegian banking in the past
five years.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

931102

