FT931-3907

FT  13 MAR 93 / Japan grows by 1.5% in 1992


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S economy grew by 1.5 per cent last year, the slowest rate of growth
in 18 years, after domestic demand continued to weaken in the final quarter.
The news prompted further calls yesterday for an emergency economic package.
Much of the growth for the year was generated by an increase in exports, as
the slim 0.1 per cent expansion in the October to December quarter came in
spite of a 0.5 per cent contraction in personal consumption and private
investment.
But the annualised 0.5 per cent growth during the final quarter did prevent
Japan from experiencing a second quarter of negative growth, and thus
falling technically into recession. The economy contracted by 2.4 per cent
during the third quarter, the first such decline in three years.
The Economic Planning Agency conceded yesterday Japan was unlikely to reach
its official target of 1.6 per cent growth for the fiscal year which ends
this month, and hinted further stimulation would be needed if the target of
3.3 per cent growth next year was to be met.
Japan is under pressure from trading partners to meet these goals, as
sluggish domestic demand is blamed for the country's surging trade surplus.
Exports are continuing to increase by 2 to 3 per cent each month, while
imports are falling by an average 6 per cent.
It is likely the country would have slipped into recession without a boost
to public spending during the final quarter, when a Y10,700bn (Pounds 62bn)
government package began to take effect. During the same period, private
non-residential investment was 3.1 per cent lower, reflecting cuts in
capital spending.
The weakness of private consumption and a continuing increase in personal
savings have fuelled debate within the government over whether tax cuts are
needed to encourage consumers to spend. The government is also considering
incentives for home buyers and a new package of infrastructure spending.
Mr Kenneth Courtis, senior economist at Deutsche Bank Capital Markets Asia,
suggested Japanese contractors 'can't dig ditches or build bridges fast
enough'.
'If you look at the figures, Japan has been exporting its way out of
recession, and something more must be done to stimulate domestic demand,' Mr
Courtis said.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930313

