FT932-3107

FT  16 JUN 93 / World Trade News: Crossed lines over telecoms trade-off -
Contentious US-German pact


   By QUENTIN PEEL and ARIANE GENILLARD


   BONN


GERMANY'S negotiators with the European Community say the affair of their
alleged 'secret non-aggression pact' with the US over EC trade sanctions is
an unnecessary, but embarrassing, storm in a teacup.
It illustrates how lines of communication within the Community can get
tangled over years of complex negotiations. It also shows how dangerous
megaphone diplomacy can be in the delicate art of trade negotiations.
There is even an element of sloppy drafting, or possibly mistranslation,
thrown in to create further crossed lines between Bonn, Brussels and other
member states. There is more than a hint that ministries in Bonn may have
failed to talk to each other.
Last week the European Commission demanded an explanation from Bonn for its
apparent refusal to implement trade sanctions involving government
telecommunications contracts against the US, unanimously agreed by the 12
member states on June 8.
The trade sanctions are token - affecting about Ecu15m (Pounds 11.85m) of
contracts - but the principle of common action is seen in Brussels as
paramount.
Mr Gunter Rexrodt, German economics minister, retorted that Bonn would not
apply the sanctions as it was covered by an 'opt-out clause' written into
the June 8 decision. Brussels professed amazement, and Paris suspected
treachery by its closest EC ally.
The story goes back to October 1990, when Article 29 of the EC's Utilities
Directive was first agreed, giving a 3 per cent price preference for EC
companies when bidding for any government contract.
Germany insisted then a clause be inserted stating this move was 'without
prejudice to (existing) obligations of the EC and its member states towards
third countries'.
A Bonn official said: 'We stated very clearly at the time that this meant
someone who has a treaty with a third country does not need to put this
article into effect.'
The move already contained the seeds of future conflict: some English
translations said the article would apply 'notwithstanding' existing
obligations, instead of 'without prejudice to' them: the German word
unbeschadet can mean both.
The second step came in the wings of the OECD ministerial meeting in Paris,
when Mr Rexrodt stopped to chat to Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade
representative. 'It was simply an informal conversation in the sunshine
before lunch,' they say in Bonn. 'This was in no way negotiations.'
Nonetheless, Mr Rexrodt had a point to make. The US was not implementing its
own sanctions against Greece, Spain and Portugal, because they were not
implementing Article 29. So why was Washington imposing sanctions on Bonn?
'Mr Kantor said he didn't know we were not implementing the article. They
went away and checked and found it was true,' says Bonn. 'So Mr Kantor
agreed we would also be excluded (from sanctions).'
The trouble was, he went straight back to Washington, and announced the
'deal'.
The third step came on June 8, when EC foreign ministers agreed without
debate to impose EC sanctions on the US on a handful of public procurement
contracts, in retaliation for the equally token gesture by Washington to
restrict EC access to about Dollars 19m (Pounds 12.3m) of contracts there.
The same clause was inserted in the decision which was in the original
Article 29: it was 'without prejudice to existing obligations'.
'We believed everybody knew what that meant,' a Bonn official said
yesterday. 'But the others did not realise that it applied to Germany.'
Finally, the US asked for the German agreement in writing, and Bonn has
balked at that. It will only give such a statement 'in agreement with the
Commission'. In the current atmosphere, that seems unlikely.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930616

