FT934-8837

FT  13 NOV 93 / Civil engineers warn Clarke not to cut building projects


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


A FRAGILE and hesitant civil engineering recovery would be reversed if the
government announced spending cuts in road and rail construction in the
Budget this month, industry leaders warned yesterday.
A survey of 139 companies conducted last month showed a sharp rise in the
number of companies being asked to tender for work compared with 12 months
ago.
Thirty-one per cent of companies reported a rise in tender invitations
compared with 26 per cent reporting a fall. The balance of those reporting
increases over falls was the third highest in the 14 years that the
Federation of Civil Engineering Con-tractors has been conducting its survey.
On the other hand 37 per cent of companies expected orders to fall during
the next 12 months, compared with only 8 per cent expecting orders to rise.
Mr John Hackett, federation director-general, said the apparent conflict in
the findings was due in part to 'a fear that government, by cutting road and
rail programmes, would upset the fragile recovery which appears to have
begun in parts of the market'.
Clients had also increased the size of tender lists in the hope that
increased competition would force prices even lower. Due to a shortage of
big projects large national contractors were bidding for smaller works which
they might have ignored previously.
Mr Hackett said: 'The clearest signs of better times ahead are coming from
our members in London and the south-east which have seen relatively the
greatest decline in workload during the recession.
'In general large firms are doing better, while smaller firms are holding
their own. Middle-sized firms, by comparison, are continuing to have a very
rough time.'
The number of houses sold by Britain's biggest estate agencies in October
was the lowest monthly total this year according to a survey published
today.
The survey by the industry-appointed Board of the Ombudsman for Corporate
Estate Agents covered 26 companies representing 4,200 branches. Mr Peter
Constable, group chairman, said that sellers had become extremely cautious
ahead of the Budget.
Mr Constable warned Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, not to make any
further reductions in mortgage tax relief in his Budget.
The rate of relief, available only on the first Pounds 30,000 of borrowings,
is already planned to be cut from 25 per cent to 20 per cent from next
April.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931113

