FT934-8500

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Texas (2): Second-biggest industry in the US -
Agriculture


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


THE first sight of Texas can come as a shock to those brought up on episodes
of The Lone Ranger, an American television series depicting the adventures
of the eponymous Texan hero and his faithful Indian friend Tonto. While the
image firmly etched in people's minds is that of a barren landscape
punctuated only by the occasional cactus, the reality turns out to be
somewhat different.
True, there is dryness and dust in the west of the state for those who go
out of their way to find it, but the rest of Texas is predominantly fertile.
How else, after all, would its agricultural industry have become the
second-biggest in the US, surpassed only by California's?
Although the energy industry still ranks as the number one contributor to
the Texas economy, agriculture is not far behind. Some 78 per cent of the
state's total land area is in agricultural production, and about 20 per cent
of the workforce is in agriculture-related employment. Income from farm
sales was Dollars 11.6bn last year.
The biggest single farming activity is ranching. Texas, famously, is cattle
country: at the last count it had 14.3m head of cattle and calves, more than
twice as many as any other state, and cattle sales account for more than
half the state's annual agricultural income.
The other agricultural activity for which Texas is best known is cotton
production. In this, too, it ranks as the biggest US producer, with annual
sales accounting for 13 per cent of agricultural income.
But beyond these two dominant farming activities lie a myriad others. The
sheer size of Texas means it encompasses an unusually wide variety of
climatic conditions, and this in turn has given rise to an unusually varied
agricultural output.
In addition to cattle and calves, livestock rearing in Texas extends to
horses, sheep, goats, pigs and poultry: while crop production extends beyond
cotton to peanuts, rice, wheat, oats, sorghum, soybean, vegetables and
citrus fruits.
Even so, the Texan agricultural industry is subject to the same economic
pressures afflicting farming throughout most of the western world. Increases
in yields and productivity have led to agricultural surpluses and,
inevitably, a steady decline in prices. Profits have come under pressure and
farmers have had to become more efficient to survive - though many, in Texas
as elsewhere, have been protected from the full force of the market by
government intervention of one sort or another.
In Texas, the result of these economic pressures has been a small but
nevertheless perturbing decline in farming activity. The number of farms in
the state has fallen from 188,000 to 183,000 in the last five years. In some
cases, the farms have been acquired and merged into other, larger,
operations as part of the continuing pressure for efficiencies of scale. But
the total acreage of land in production has fallen, too - from 133m acres to
130m acres over the last five years: and last year's farm income of Dollars
11.6bn represented a 5 per cent decline on the previous year's Dollars
12.2bn.
One way in which Texas is fighting back is through diversification into new
agricultural markets. One example is fish farming: the state has 143
commercial catfish farms with 1,400 acres of water in production. Another is
bees: Texas produced Dollars 6m worth of honey last year. Deer, meanwhile,
are becoming increasingly popular for their meat, and other breeds starting
to make an appearance include ostriches and emus.
The reason why these new breeds are important is that they enable small
farmers to make money. Some 67 per cent of Texas farmland is owned by
farmers with holdings of 200 acres or less, and it is nowadays increasingly
difficult for them to make money out of the few head of sheep or cattle that
such a small acreage will support. Deer, however, require far less land per
head than cattle and their meat fetches much higher prices, so holding out
the prospect of a return to profitability.
However, according to Mr Rick Perry, the Texas commissioner for agriculture,
there is a much more important issue at stake than diversification into
unusual breeds, and that is the need for Texans to become food processors as
well as food producers.
As Mr Perry explains, out of the vast quantities of food produced each year
in Texas, only a small proportion is actually processed in the state. The
rest goes elsewhere in the US and all over the world for processing: cotton
to Carolina, for example, leather to Italy, wool and mohair to England.
'We never were a British colony but we certainly act like one,' Mr Perry
says. (Texas joined the Union after Independence). 'We only process 8 per
cent of what we grow. All the rest we send away to have the value added by
someone else.'
Mr Perry sees the introduction of more food processing as vital to the fight
against rural decline. As part of the effort, the Texas Agricultural Finance
Authority has been established to guarantee loans to new or expanding
businesses in the food processing industry. In the two years since its
formation, it has underwritten 34 loans totalling Dollars 25m and claims to
have created, or at least retained, some 4,700 jobs.
Mr Perry says his family has been ranching in Texas for five generations, so
he understands production well. 'But I also recognise that the days are past
when we could stay above the tumult of the increasing costs of doing
business simply by increasing production. For 40 years we have been doing
that, and we have just about reached the apex in terms of introducing new
varieties and achieving increases in production.
Processing has to be the answer, he says - even more so if the North
American Free Trade Agreement is signed, for increasing prosperity south of
the border is whetting the appetite of better-off Mexicans for processed
American foods.
'Some day agriculture in Texas will overtake oil in dollar receipts if we
concentrate on processing as well as growing,' Mr Perry predicts.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

931115

