FT932-7148

FT  25 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Udokan development plan is
being renegotiated


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


THE RUSSIAN winner of the Russia's first international mining tender is now
renegotiating almost every aspect of plans to develop the country's biggest
copper deposit, including the buy-out of its foreign partner.
Mr Andrei Chuguyevsky, whose Arter group holds 35 per cent of the Udokan
Mining Company which won the tender, is acting partly under pressure from
the Russian authorities, who now want the copper concentrate to be smelted
in Russia, rather than in China as initially proposed.
This is one of the reasons why Mr Chuguyevsky says he is currently
negotiating to buy out Mr Eddie Wong, the Hong Kong businessman who holds 45
per cent of UMC and set up the Chinese end of the deal.
Mr Chuguyevsky has also begun looking for alternative sources of financing
for the project, which was to have relied partly on the sale of 200,000
tonnes of concentrate a year to China. He intends to dispense with the
services of Allen & Co, the private New York investment bank lined up by Mr
Wong to raise some of the capital, and has started talking to other western
banks, including Morgan Grenfell, as well as the International Finance
Corporation, the World Bank's private investment arm.
Having defeated major western mining companies in a tender organised by
Goldman Sachs, Mr Chuguyevsky's challenge now is to raise western finance
for an all-Russian project. The turnabout illustrates how everything, to
quote a western banker, is 'negotiable' in Russia's investment climate.
The licence agreement stipulated that he appoint a world-class western
company as project operator. This was widely expected to be Fluor Daniel,
the US mining company which helped draw up a pre-feasibility study on the
Udokan deposit. But Mr Chuguyevsky has begun talking to Australia's BHP, one
of his competitors in the tender. He said he would appoint a project
operator only after a feasibility study which would take more than a year.
One problem was that though foreign companies were keen to extract
guarantees of tax concessions from the Russian government, these would not
be forthcoming in advance. Five Russian enterprises have already undertaken
to smelt the copper.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930525

