FT933-5109

FT  06 SEP 93 / Whitehall battle looms over move to cut Youth Training


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff


THE Department for Education is to call for Youth Training, the Pounds
850m-a-year work-based training programme, to be cut to the bone in favour
of a rapid expansion of further education.
The department wants to divert the bulk of the Department of Employment's
Youth Training budget to help fund its plans to expand college-based
training.
The proposal, to be submitted to the Treasury in the next few days, will set
the scene for a fierce Whitehall battle over the programme which is the
centre piece of the government's training effort. It would mark a sharp
shift in policy away from work-based training for young people.
The plan will antagonise business leaders who have been encouraged by the
government to run the 82 Training and Enterprise Councils, which have been
developed in the past two years.
The DFE's initiative, which is being led by Mr Tim Boswell, the further
education minister, would be strongly resisted by Mr David Hunt, the
employment secretary. It is likely to be a major cause of controversy during
the current public spending round.
The government guarantees a place on YT to all 16 to 19-year-olds. It offers
them a combination of work and college-based training.
About 220,000 young people are on the scheme, down from about 300,000 a year
ago, largely because the numbers staying in full-time education have risen
sharply.
Youth Training is the largest single programme run by the Tecs. The
government allows the councils to use surpluses made from YT to fund other
activities, particularly the promotion of better training of people in work
and the creation of new jobs. Youth Training is the first step in their plan
to develop programmes for 'lifetime learning.'
The Confederation of British Industry last month endorsed a letter, written
by Tecs' representatives, to Mr Hunt.
The letter, published today in Tec Agenda, the regular bulletin for
directors of Tecs, said they believed work-based training was essential for
large numbers of young people who, it said, would enter dead-end,
low-skilled jobs rather than go to college.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930906

