FT934-8583

FT  15 NOV 93 / The Week Ahead: Recovery poser for Clarke near Budget -
Economics


   By EMMA TUCKER


THIS week's string of UK economic releases provides Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, with his last chance to gauge the strength of the recovery ahead
of the Budget.
The big imponderable is whether or not he will cut interest rates on or
around budget day. Wednesday's retail prices index may give a clue. The
headline inflation rate has risen for four consecutive months, albeit from
the lowest level for a generation.
The underlying rate, which excludes mortgage interest payments, has also
crept upwards prompting some commentators to suggest that another round of
monetary easing now would be precipitate.
Official retail sales figures are also out in the UK this week. In September
they rose 0.5 per cent on the month to stand 3.5 per cent up on a year ago,
lending weight to evidence that consumer spending is the driving force
behind the recovery. The consensus forecast is for a slightly smaller
monthly increase in October of 0.3 per cent.
In the US, the big event of the week is the crucial Nafta vote in the House
of Representatives. Rejection of the treaty would severely disrupt progress
on Gatt and US-Japan bilateral trade agreements.
The Federal Open Markets Committee meets in Washington tomorrow. In spite of
a 0.4 per cent rise in the October consumer prices index, it is assumed that
the Fed will maintain a neutral stance on monetary policy.
The rest of the week's economic releases follow. The figures in brackets are
the median of analysts' forecasts from MMS International, the financial
information company.
Today: US, October industrial production (up 0.6 per cent), October capacity
utilisation (82 per cent), September business inventories (unchanged),
October Atlanta Fed Index, auto sales Nov 1-10, truck sales Nov 1-10.
Japan, October WPI (down 0.1 per cent on month, down 3.1 per cent on year).
Germany, Five Wise Men publish autumn economic report, Bundesbank sets repo
a day early.
Spain, October CPI (up 0.4 per cent on month, up 4.6 per cent on year).
Australia, September housing finance (up 2 per cent).
Tomorrow: US, FOMC meeting in Washington, Johnson Redbook week ended
November 13.
Japan, September industrial production, shipments, October
trade balance (Dollars 11.5bn surplus).
Germany, Bundesbank repo results announced in Frankfurt.
UK, October PSBR (Pounds 2.4bn).
Australia, September manufacturing prices.
Wednesday: US, House votes on Nafta; October housing starts (1.36m), October
building permits.
Germany, Public holiday - markets closed; Bundesbank November monthly report
released.
France, October INSEE survey on investments released; Bank of France reform
to be relaunched.
UK, October RPI (up 0.3 per cent on month, up 1.7 per cent on year),
excluding mortgage interest payments (up 3.2 per cent on year), retail sales
(up 0.3 per cent on month, 3.4 per cent on year).
Canada, September manufacturing new orders (up 0.7 per cent on month),
manufacturing shipments (down 0.3 per cent on month); September building
permits (down 3.4 per cent on month), October advance department store sales
(down 0.1 per cent).
Thursday: US, FOMC minutes of September 21 meeting released; Asia-Pacific
Economic Co-operation conference in Seattle; initial claims week ending
November 13 (349,000), state benefits week ended November 6, November
Philadelphia Fed Index, money supply data for week ended November 8.
Japan, October money supply (up 2.2 per cent on year), October broad
liquidity.
Germany, Bundesbank council meeting.
France, day of protest in the public sector.
UK, Queen's Speech at the re-opening of parliament; Governor of Bank of
England gives speech at LSE; October unemployment (down 5,000), September
average earnings (up 3.5 per cent on year), September unit wage costs (down
0.3 per cent on year), October M4 (up 0.4 per cent on month, up 3.6 per cent
on year), M4 lending (up Pounds 2.5bn), October building society net new
commitments (Pounds 2.5bn).
Canada, September wage settlement increases (up 0.7 per cent).
Australia, September export prices.
Friday: US, September merchandise trade balance (Dollars 10bn deficit),
merchandise exports (Dollars 38.4bn), merchandise imports (Dollars 48bn).
Germany, Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England to speak at
Frankfurt European Banking Congress.
France, August trade balance (FFr7bn), September industrial production (down
0.2 per cent on month), Q2 GDP detailed results.
UK, October GDP, revised (up 0.6 per cent on quarter, up 2 per cent on
year), October non-EC trade balance (Pounds 0.9bn deficit).
Canada, September merchandise exports (up 0.5 per cent on month),
merchandise imports (up 1 per cent on month), merchandise trade balance
(CDollars 689m surplus).
During the week: Germany, October WPI (down 0.1 per cent on month), October
PPI (flat on month, down 0.3 per cent on year), October M3 (up 6.7 per
cent).
Italy, September industrial production (down 0.3 per cent).

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931115

