FT932-6734

FT  27 MAY 93 / Shell to derecognise unions at refinery


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


SHELL will next month derecognise trade unions at its Haven refinery in the
Thames estuary in an effort to introduce sweeping changes in working
practices.
Mr Fred Higgs, the TGWU transport union's national oil industry officer,
yesterday accused oil companies of 'collusion to achieve a union-free
environment'.
Shell says it is imposing the move to cut its operating costs, improve
efficiency and maximise its investments in a depressed but competitive
European refining market.
BP and Esso have already made moves to derecognise unions in parts of their
operations while last year all the main oil companies except Mobil ended
collective bargaining agreements in oil distribution. Mr Higgs said: 'It
fits in with their ideological objectives. Through a mixture of inducements
and intimidation they want workers to accept individual contracts of
employment.'
Shell intends to cut the Haven workforce by 100 posts to 350 by the end of
1994. It believes this will mean compulsory redundancies. It also intends to
push through sweeping changes in working practices for those who remain.
Teamwork will be introduced with the abolition of demarcation lines. All
workers will have their terms of employment, benefits and salary structure
brought into line with staff in the rest of Shell.
Shell also plans individual appraisal of workers to determine pay, career
development and range of work. The company also intends to contract out
canteen and security services and possibly maintenance work as well.
Workers will still be able to remain union members, but all formal
negotiating agreements with the unions are to be scrapped.
Shell argues that traditional collective deals are no longer relevant to the
company's needs because they are a drain on resources and take up too much
of the company's time and effort.
In a confidential briefing document for its managers Shell says it intends
to make the Haven refinery virtually strike-free as well: 'Any industrial
action, including strike action, would require the company to decide whether
or not an individual continues in employment. If the decision is not to
retain employees, then there is no obligation on the company to pay
redundancy or severance money to those who are on strike.'
Mr Higgs said he and the shop stewards at Haven would meet the workforce
next Tuesday to decide how to respond to Shell's leaked plans.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930527

