FT934-8392

FT  16 NOV 93 / Management (The Growing Business): Where the UK's venture
capitalists have failed / A look at a report which makes the case for
government backing of new technology-based firms


   By TIM DICKSON


Something has clearly gone wrong with the UK venture capital industry.
A decade or more ago this infant financial sector seemed set to turn
Britain's rich base of scientific discoveries into a gushing commercial
success. Imaginations fired by the success of early-stage risk investment in
the emerging computer, semiconductor and biotechnology industries, disciples
of the US model were intent on exporting its magic properties across the
Atlantic.
As outlined in a report* written by Michael Hay of the London Business
School and Steven Abbot of Abbot Consulting, however, investors outside
North America have grown averse to young, technology-based firms.
In 1992, they say, just one in six disbursements by UK venture capital firms
were made to seed, start-up or early-stage firms, against two in five only
four years previously. The 1992 figure in the US, by contrast, was between
one in three and one in four.
Hay and Abbot argue that the problem is not just lack of supply, brought
about by the way the industry's reward structures favour larger and less
risky deals such as management buy-outs and expansion financings. They claim
that within the UK the difficulties facing new technology-based firms are
compounded by the high cost of long-term capital.
Drawing on work carried out by two economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, they show that in 1988 the real cost of capital for an R&D project
with a 10-year pay-off lag in the UK was 60 per cent higher than that in
Germany and about three times that in Japan. The gap, they believe, is not
likely to be much different today.
The main purpose of the report, which uses simplified quantitative models
and qualitative analysis, is to make the case for additional tax incentives
to encourage early-stage NTBF investment. Some of these are designed to fill
the gap which will be left at the end of the year when the much-abused
Business Expansion Scheme finally disappears, but levelling the cost of
capital 'playing field' and easing the exit route for venture capitalists.
Hay and Abbot go to some lengths to demonstrate the scale of the financial
benefits of NTBFs for the country as a whole. Their research estimates that
roughly 27 per cent of the present value of an NTBF's future sales accrue to
the exchequer via taxes, although the net benefit could be as high as 50 per
cent if job creation is also taken into account. They also cite analysis by
the Department of Trade and Industry of its existing 'Smart' award scheme
and of the similar German TOU scheme, which would appear to offer a generous
payback.
The report says the government is likely to get 'the biggest bang for its
buck' by concentrating relatively small sums on seed, start-up and
early-stage investments rather than on established firms, and this is in
line with official policy as outlined in May's White Paper on realising the
potential for science, engineering and technology.
The six proposed taxation reliefs are:
Equity investment relief. This would be a tax credit for the benefit of the
firm, which would be highest at the seed capital stage, but decline over the
first three years after start up. One advantage of this approach, against
giving an immediate, fixed-tax credit to the investor is that the NTBF would
have to earn the cash before it claimed the incentive. The income foregone
by the exchequer would be scaled down for unsuccessful investments.
Since the vast majority of tax generated by NTBFs are employment taxes -
notably National Insurance contributions - the authors claim that to some
extent this relief is based on the extent of employment creation.
Capital gains tax relief. This would be available to existing NTBF
shareholders, equivalent to the amount of tax paid by the company and its
employees over the course of its trading history.
Portfolio relief. Put simply this would allow capital losses incurred as a
result of investment in one or more NTBFs to be offset against capital gains
generated in one or more similar investments.
See-through relief. Its provisions would be similar in many ways to those
already allowed under the S corporation election in the US and via silent
partnership formation in Germany. NTBF equity investors would be allowed to
benefit from the immediate 'pass-through' of the company's net operating
losses to their own individual returns.
Interest relief. At present entrepreneurs borrowing money to buy shares in
their new firm are allowed to offset interest charged on those funds against
earned or unearned income, provided the company is either 'close' or
employee controlled. This proposal would extend that relief by allowing all
equity investors to do the same and by exempting exempt from tax interest
received by medium and long-term lenders.
Illiquid company shares relief. The lack of liquidity in small company
shares has prompted many proposals, but this one would reduce, initially to
zero, capital gains tax on ICSs. Qualification would be by reference to the
'total' and 'free' market capitalisation of a company's equity and the
average daily trading volume, by value, over the preceding year, as measured
by the London Stock Exchange.
*Investing for the Future (Pounds 25 inc postage and packaging) was
commissioned by Advent, a London-based, venture capital company. Available
from Julie Allen, Advent, 25 Buckingham Gate, London SW1E 6LD. Tel: 071
630-9811.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

931116

