FT932-3386

FT  15 JUN 93 / East Ukraine flexes its muscles: A strike with an overtly
political intent


   By CHRYSTIA FREELAND


WERE IT not for the signs denouncing President Leonid Kravchuk, at a rally
in the central square of the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk yesterday
could have been mistaken for a massive civic picnic.
Many of the 35,000 demonstrators who converged on October Square to show
their solidarity with striking coal miners carried brightly coloured
parasols against the summer sun. Miners, distinctive in red hard-hats and
coal-blackened faces, reclined on the lush lawns surrounding the square to
enjoy an open-air brunch.
The festive mood was facilitated by a thoughtful local government. The riot
police and truncheons one might expect to see at a demonstration of militant
coal-miners were nowhere in evidence. The regional government even gave the
strike committee offices in its massive white granite building and allowed
the miners to use the steps as a podium.
But for all that, the wave of industrial unrest triggered by the miners'
strikes which began last Wednesday has been an effective flexing of the
muscles of industrialised eastern Ukraine.
The strikes, which have stopped work at 228 of the Donbass region's 253
mines and been joined by workers at some metallurgical and machine-building
factories in the area, have pushed the political demands of the east to the
top of the political agenda. The miners of western Ukraine, as hard hit by
last week's five-fold leap in food prices as their eastern comrades, have by
and large not joined the strike.
But, according to observers in eastern Ukraine, unlike previous miners'
strikes which have focused on pay increases for the coal sector, the main
goal of this round of industrial action has been to give eastern Ukraine,
which is predominantly Russian-speaking, greater political power.
'This is eastern Ukraine's political revenge,' said Mr Hryhori Nemyria, a
professor of political science at Donetsk University. 'After many years of
the recruitment of Ukraine's political elites from the Donbass, it is
western Ukraine which is now prominent. The current strike is an effort to
turn the tables back again.'
The first winner in this struggle is Mr Ekhim Zvehilsky, catapulted from his
job as mayor of Donetsk to the critical post of first deputy prime minister.
The links between his overnight political promotion and the strikes are
strong: the normally quiescent Zasiadko mine, where he used to work as
director, was the first to take to the picket lines. Moreover, one of the
strike leaders is his top political aide.
Mr Zvehilsky wasted no time in using his new job to push the main demand of
the striking miners: a national referendum on whether to hold new
presidential and parliamentary elections.
'Our young state is in jeopardy,' Mr Zvehilsky said to the emergency session
of parliament convened yesterday afternoon to debate the miners' demand for
a referendum. 'If we do not decide today to hold a referendum, then in three
or four days there will be no reason to meet at all.'
He warned that failure to meet the miners' demands could spark a wider
strike which would halt the national economy.
By late yesterday, parliament had not yet taken a decision on whether to
hold a referendum. If it does, the resultwould be difficult to predict. The
ex-Communist-dominated parliament is widely discredited and a referendum
could be expected to result in parliamentary elections.
The president's position is more ambiguous. Ukraine's collapsing economy and
escalating tensions with Russia have pushed his rating down in the opinion
polls, but Mr Kravchuk is a skilled politician with a strong network of
regional representatives, and, like his Russian counterpart, could manage to
pull off a vote of confidence.
That would not please the miners of Donetsk, whose region voted strongly in
favour of Mr Kravchuk, then perceived as a moderate alternative to
nationalist politicians from western Ukraine, in the 1991 presidential
elections. 'Kravchuk cannot lead and he does not understand the economy,'
said Mr Iuri Makarov, co-chairman of the strike committee. 'People have now
understood that he is not able to do anything for the state.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930615

