FT932-3096

FT  16 JUN 93 / BBC halts night output growth


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


THE BBC is to scrap its expansion plans for the BBC Select subscription
service.
The corporation has invested more than Pounds 10m in the service - which
involves broadcasting subscription services to adapted video recorders at
night - but has decided that it cannot afford to develop it further.
The corporation has given assurances that it will honour existing contracts
and continue to broadcast the three subscription services created so far -
the Executive Business Club, Accountancy Television and Legal Network
Television. But no new money will be invested and no new subscription
services will be created.
Mr John Radcliffe, managing director of BBC Select, who is retiring next
month, said yesterday: 'This is essentially a matter of financial pressure.'
The BBC bought 30,000 Selector receivers from Thomson Consumer Electronics
in a multi-million-pound deal. It still has about 29,000 and intends to make
them available at a large discount. Redundancies are expected at BBC Select.
The BBC will continue to broadcast 'open access' and educational programmes
in the early hours.
The service Voluntary Sector Television was launched earlier this month.
Unlike subscription television, open access programmes are available free
and can be recorded without an adaptor.
BMH, a company set up to broadcast annual meetings and presentations of
companies, will also continue.
At one stage the BBC was hoping that it could quickly launch at least 15
subscription services - including programmes aimed at ethnic minorities,
film buffs and professional groups. But the development of such services
took longer than expected, mainly because of the recession.
Professor Graham Robinson, managing director of the Executive Business Club,
said yesterday he was disappointed by the decision. But he did not think it
would affect the development of what was a niche service. The club has a
seven-year contract with the BBC.
BBC Select was set up in the wake of government pressure on the corporation
to use the night hours or risk losing the authority to do so. The government
also wanted the BBC to explore alternative means of finance to the licence
fee.
Mr Radcliffe said yesterday the subscription technology had proved itself.
'We could not be allowed to go on costing money in the present climate,' he
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930616

