FT933-5176

FT  04 SEP 93 / Markets: Paradise is not quite here - The Bottom Line


   By MAGGIE URRY


AS THE interim results reporting season gets under way, stockbroking
analysts have their pens poised to adjust profit forecasts for this year and
next.
A serious reduction in earnings forecasts for the market as a whole could
put pressure on share prices, while a more optimistic outlook would underpin
the recent run up in the Footsie index.
The past week has seen a number of corporate results and statements, some of
which have been poor, while company chairman are reaching for adjectives
such as 'fragile', 'patchy' and 'fitful' to describe their view of the
economic outlook. There appears to be a dichotomy between corporate
statements and those from politicians and economists who talk of recovery.
A profit warning from Tate & Lyle, the sugar and sweeteners group, on
Wednesday, led to analysts cutting forecasts from around Pounds 235m to
Pounds 220m for the year to end September. Also on Wednesday, Simon
Engineering slumped into a first half loss of Pounds 52.6m and passed its
dividend, while Courtaulds Textiles' interim profits fell 16.5 per cent.
On Thursday Bowater, the packaging and industrial films group, reported
sharply higher profits but the chairman said orders were slackening and
'confidence remains fragile'. Ladbroke profits were lower.
While this sort of news was coming out, the Footsie was retreating from its
3100-plus level reached the week before.
But it may be too simplistic to say that poor trading statements have led to
a fall in the market, although individual share price falls such as Tate's
drop of 25p to 375p on Wednesday and Bowater's 21p fall to 494p on Thursday
are included in the Footsie.
Mixed with the bad news were some encouraging signs. Vickers, the
engineering group, and Sun Alliance, the insurance company, returned to
profits, while others such as Cookson, Senior Engineering, Burmah and Rolls
Royce, Reckitt & Colman, as well as Bowater, lifted profits. Even Courtaulds
Textiles chairman said 'we are basically bullish about the British recovery'
blaming the profit fall largely on continental Europe.
Rather than concentrating on earnings, many market commentators believe the
fall has more to do with receding hopes of early interest rate cuts.
Michael Hughes, strategist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities, says 'the
market is much more interest rate sensitive than earnings sensitive'. Nick
Knight, of Nomura Research Institute, concurs, saying, 'the market is 1 per
cent about earnings, and 99 per cent about the US long bond'.
Neither is cutting his forecast of earnings growth from the market as a
whole for 1993 and 1994. Hughes is forecasting a 15 per cent rise in
industrial group earnings in 1993, and has increased his forecast for 1994
from 15 to 17 per cent.
However, he says there has been a slight tendency by BZW's sector analysts
to mark estimates down a bit. BZW tracks the proportion of downgrades out of
total changes in forecasts for large companies. Since 1989, more than half
the changes had been reductions until May this year when upgrades exceeded
downgrades. Recently the trend has headed slightly lower again with
downgrades over 50 per cent again in August.
A contrary view is taken by Bob Semple, strategist at NatWest Markets.
Although not changing his earnings forecasts after this week's news, he is
warning that the market may start getting worried about earnings prospects.
He points out that companies can no longer guide analysts' profit forecasts,
leaving a greater margin for error.
Knight of Nomura is expecting 30 per cent growth over the two years, without
being specific over the split between 1993 and 1994. He says that the
benefits of sterling leaving the ERM last September, and the interest rate
cuts which have followed, were bound to take time to work through to
companies. 'This reporting season was the very first opportunity to see any
improvement in earnings. If there is a six month delay it is not out of line
with the logic. It is just paradise postponed.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

930904

