FT934-8712

FT  13 NOV 93 / Fashion: The designer muzzle, it's a must - Critics face
unfair pressure from peevish couture houses


   By JANE MULVAGH


THE STARS and the press pushed through the foyer of the Ritz and converged
on the ballroom, converted by Versace into a polystyrene and cardboard
mock-up of Caligula's palace for his 'couture' show. Push, shove, yell:
'Look, Madonna]' Scratch, elbow: 'Polanski]' Barge, plead: 'Elton]'
The uninvited were sequestered outside, along with Suzy Menkes of the
International Herald Tribune. She was banned by Versace and Ferre at Dior
for criticising their previous collections. Like peevish children, designers
will not admit unmuzzled writers for fear of . . . what? The truth? Banning
is nothing new - Chanel loved to oust trouble-makers - but it is now
commonplace as designers try to control what is written about them. Come in
if you will write a eulogy, stay out if you really intend to exercise your
professional rights as a critic. One minute, they are chasing journalists to
boost scent, hosiery and boutique sales, the next they cold-shoulder a
dissenting voice.
In the days when the publicity-shy Cristobal Balenciaga failed to issue an
invitation, journalists might be furious - but they could not accuse him of
fawning over them one moment and rejecting them the next. His manner was
consistently distanced and, therefore, professional.
Now, press / designer relations have reached comic extremes. Any semblance
of propriety or subtlety has been jettisoned. Its quid pro quo: write a good
feature and your office or home turns into a funeral parlour; you cannot see
the desk for the blooms. Write a criticism and you are persona non grata.
Change your mind next season and everything is blooming marvellous again.
One pre-requisite in this industry is a short memory.
Shamefully, the press does, with some exceptions, buckle under the pressure
of fashion empires, especially when the Italians start ganging up. The next
season, the designer's handwriting might not have changed but the
journalist's reading of it certainly has.
The problem is that fashion and beauty writers are offered sweeteners:
discounted clothes, a momentary glance into the high life, and so on.
Judgment is clouded, opinions become bias. Guffaws could be heard from New
York to Tokyo when a television expose of the industry, The Look, filmed
interviews with editors denying they were ever given gifts.
Some opinion-formers stand their ground. Consider the case of Women's Wear
Daily and designer Geoffrey Beene. When WWD sent an assistant rather than
John Fairchild, the chairman, to view a show, Beene took umbrage. The
magazine retaliated; as far as it was concerned, Beene no longer existed. He
was ignored and even air-brushed out of photographs.
Beene can get terribly peevish. When Kennedy Fraser criticised not only his
collection but his design direction in the New Yorker in the 1970s, she was
banned for several seasons. But Fraser, no pedestrian critic, not only
pointed out the faults but also constructively offered an alternative
course. Beene later re-considered his impetuous snub and now acknowledges
publicly his debt to Fraser for changing the path of his design - for the
better.
In many ways, the press is to blame for the antics of designers, having
built them into gods who are invited to pontificate not only on what we
should wear next season but also on how we should lead our lives. Endless
profiles have accorded dress-makers the role of pop-philosophers. Should we
really be so amazed that Benetton has the hubris to 'educate' us about Aids
while advertising its jerseys?
London is the bottom of the rung as far as the Milan / Paris / New York
collections' status is concerned, for none of its designers has a big
advertising budget. Perhaps it is a cynical view but one wonders why British
fashion writers flex their critical muscles so energetically when reviewing
British designers. Could it be that advertising revenue will not be affected
while, having felt frustratingly muzzled in the other capitals, they let rip
in London? It is little wonder that the British designers complain that the
British press do not support them.
Non-fashion journalists have viewed the fashion press askance for some time.
This attitude hardened late in the 1960s when the counter-culture
journalists were trying to taking on the Establishment and ask difficult
questions.
The more judicious news journalists were suspicious of the fashion editor /
designer symbiosis in the glossy 1960s colour supplements. But the rot
really set in in the 1980s when the glossies and newspapers became
style-obsessed and filled their pages with designer profiles. Now, their
Frankenstein has come home to bully them.
But informed critics - not, of course, to be confused with tabloid
sensationalists - should stand firm. A ban should be read as a badge of
integrity, proof that the journalist has spoken his or her mind (correctly
or incorrectly). Besides, designers can hardly ban everyone.
Maddening though it is, we can be thankful that fashion reporting is not as
venomous as some theatre reviewing. There is a Broadway legend of an
impresario who responded to a bad review of his play by sending the critic a
tarantula in a box. It was alive.
Perhaps we should watch out for what might lurk in those blooms.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

931113

