FT934-8602

FT  15 NOV 93 / Private ambition still open to public question: The case for
nuclear sell-off is still not proved


   By DAVID LASCELLES


NUCLEAR Electric's desire to be privatised is one thing. Whether the
government can make it happen is quite another. Only four years ago, the
nuclear industry had to be dropped from the electricity privatisation
programme because the City thought it was too risky. How much has changed
since then?
On the purely commercial front, quite a lot. Under Mr John Collier, its
chairman, and Mr Robert Hawley, its new chief executive who came from
private industry, the company has slashed costs and sharply improved the
performance of its power stations. Nuclear Electric now generates nearly a
quarter of the electricity in England and Wales. Its aim to make a profit
excluding receipts from the annual Pounds 1.3bn 'nuclear levy' by 1995 is
said by analysts to be realistic. However it is not clear whether there have
been enough changes to revive the case for privatisation.
For instance, Nuclear Electric's liabilities for waste disposal and
decommissioning are put at about Pounds 10bn. Mr Collier says these have now
'all been capped and provided for' but merchant bankers and analysts say
that the government would still have to underwrite the risks to achieve a
successful sale.
The main reason for privatising Nuclear Electric would be to enable it to
raise private-sector finance for a new power station, which would be
Sizewell C, a 2,600MW giant costing Pounds 3.3bn.
Mr Hawley says that Britain will need new nuclear power stations early next
century as old ones close and dwindling oil and gas supplies drive up the
cost of other fuels. He also points to the environmental advantages at a
time when the government is trying to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and
other harmful gases from fossil fuels. But others doubt that Britain needs
new plants because of its huge surplus of generating capacity, and the
diversity of its existing fuel mix. Without a new station to build, Nuclear
Electric would become a wasting asset.
Although Nuclear Electric executives say it has good commercial prospects,
they concede that the government would have to play a strong supporting role
in guaranteeing nuclear power an adequate proportion of the market. Mr
Hawley says Britain would have to make a commitment to build several nuclear
power stations so that economies of scale could be achieved.
Mr John Reynolds, who covers the electricity industry for James Capel, the
stockbroker, said five conditions would have to be fulfilled before Nuclear
Electric could be sold. It would have to become fully cost-competitive, and
have total commercial freedom, including the right to enter new businesses.
The government would have to put a cap on decommissioning costs, and be
liable for the cost of any catastrophes. And Nuclear Electric would have to
build a commercial and safety track record with its stations.
A further point for ministers is whether public opinion would tolerate
further expansion of nuclear power. As the debate over the opening of the
Thorp nuclear reprocessing plant has shown, the environmental lobby has
little trouble whipping up opposition to nuclear projects. The industry
itself is also, to some extent, split on privatisation. Mr James Hann,
chairman of Scottish Nuclear which runs two nuclear stations in Scotland,
has now dropped his plan to privatise it - he now wants to make it more
commercial.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931115

