FT934-10255

FT  06 NOV 93 / Insolvency figures leave vital questions unanswered: The
controversial business of predicting economic recovery


   By ANDREW JACK


THE LATEST figures from the British Chambers of Commerce showing a 2 per
cent rise in company insolvencies in the third quarter of the year cast some
doubt on the extent of business recovery.
They also raise questions about how far insolvency statistics can be used to
predict the future rate of failure.
Mr Mark Homan, head of insolvency at accountants Price Waterhouse, warns
that the figures are of little use in predicting recovery. 'People are too
willing to draw conclusions from the figures he says.
'That is like trying to steer a ship by looking at its wake, or guessing the
number of parties by watching a bottle bank. They are a lagging not a
leading indicator.'
Many commentators have traditionally believed that there is a delay of about
18 months between economic recovery and a decline in the number of business
failures. That does not seem to be the case this time.
Mr Steve Hill, an insolvency partner with Coopers & Lybrand, says the
figures may be 'more in synch with the economy' because of the different
nature of the recession of the late 1980s, and because of changes to
insolvency legislation which have provided new mechanisms for rescuing
insolvent companies.
He warns there may still be 'another ripple to come' with rising failures,
as companies take on new orders during the recovery without being able to
secure adequate finance to support this expansion.
But Mr Ian McIsaac, restructuring partner at Touche Ross, calls the 18-month
lag 'mythical' and not borne out in either of the past two recessions. He
says the decline in failures is closely correlated with changes in gross
domestic product, and expects failures to rise again in the short term.
'It is change that wrong-foots companies,' says Mr Homan. 'At the moment
they are bumping along at the bottom.' He uses the insolvency figures as a
broad indicator of the future recruitment needs of his department. As a
result, he stopped hiring at the start of this year.
Part of the problem is that there are at least five sets of insolvency
statistics, all compiled in varying ways to measure different things:
Touche Ross receivership and administration appointments. Based on monthly
notices in the official London and Edinburgh Gazettes. These do not show
liquidations, and many of the companies they record may be rescued or be
sold as operating businesses.
British Chambers of Commerce/Department of Trade and Industry company
insolvencies. These show records of companies wound up on orders made by the
courts, and voluntary liquidations requested by the company. They are based
on records filed at Companies House.
Lord Chancellor's Department petitions. These are based on winding-up
petitions made by companies or their creditors in the courts. Not all the
petitions are granted, and the figures record potential failures earlier
than those finally registered at Companies House.
Dun & Bradstreet business failures. These include company liquidations, as
well as bankruptcies of sole traders and partnerships, based on a wide range
of sources. The data is used as the basis for failure figures circulated by
accountants KPMG Peat Marwick.
Trade Indemnity business failures. These are based on collapses as recorded
by customers who have notified Trade Indemnity, the trade credit insurance
group, of defaulters.
None of the different sets of figures give any indication of scale: they do
not show the value of the companies that fail, nor whether the company
ultimately survives and continues to trade in some form. The collapse of a
complex business with many hundreds of subsidiaries - such as the Maxwell
empire - can cause severe fluctuations.
The figures' predictive value may be limited, but they do all provide stark
evidence of the enormously destructive effects of the recession over the
past few years.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931106

