FT934-10067

FT  08 NOV 93 / Japan makes wartime apology


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S coalition government has issued a clear apology to South Korea for
the brutal occupation of the Korean peninsula, ending many years of dispute
over the vague expressions of regret by past Japanese leaders, writes Robert
Thomson in Tokyo.
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's prime minister, told Mr Kim Young-sam, the
South Korean president, that Japanese forces were 'assailants', and that he
had 'heartfelt remorse' for the suffering inflicted on Koreans during the
colonial occupation from 1910 until 1945.
He said Japan had inflicted 'intolerable pain and sorrow' on Koreans when
'they were deprived of being able to learn their mother tongue', ordered to
adopt Japanese names, and forced to submit to sex with Japanese troops.
Many past Japanese apologies have included obscure language that did not
make clear which country was responsible for aggression and did not specify
the types of suffering inflicted on Koreans, as Mr Hosokawa did in his
meeting with Mr Kim in South Korea.
Mr Kim said the new Japanese prime minister had done what leaders of the
Liberal Democratic party, which governed Japan for 38 years, 'did not dare
to do', and relations between the two countries had begun a fresh chapter.
He said the two nations should now be able to view each other as real
neighbours. cally distant.
The two men see each other as leading their countries into a new era, as Mr
Kim's election ended a long line of military leaders in South Korea, while
Mr Hosokawa's coalition replaced the long-serving LDP and is attempting to
overhaul the Japanese political system.
Since taking office, Mr Hosokawa has argued that Japan must make clear its
wartime guilt before the country can play a larger political role in Asia,
where many countries have remained wary of Japanese intentions.
Apart from dealing with the past, the two leaders encouraged North Korea to
submit to international inspections to end lingering suspicions about its
alleged programme to develop nuclear weapons.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

931108

