FT932-6550

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (4): The voucher-led revolution - The
emergence of a new class of shopkeepers


   By EDWARD BALLS


THE RUSSIAN radicals' reform rhetoric sits uneasily alongside the rather
messy and unsatisfactory reality, with one notable exception: the
government's mass privatisation programme.
If an economic revolution has truly begun in the former Soviet Union, which
many doubt, the driving forces propelling it forward are the mass auctions
of small-scale state enterprises, and, more recently, the sale of shares in
medium and large-scale enterprises to their managers, workers and the
general public.
'Privatisation itself is the creation of a Russian bourgeoisie,' said Mr
Anatoli Chubais, the deputy prime minister with responsibility for the
privatisation programme in a recent interview. With more than 33,000
small-scale former state enterprises auctioned off to new owners last year,
about half the total employing fewer than one hundred employees, the
creation of a new class of Russian shop-keepers is under way.
Officials at the headquarters of GKI (GosKomImushchestvo) - the state
property committee managing the privatisation programme - say sales this
year suggest that the momentum behind the small-scale auctions may be
slowing. The best enterprises have already been sold, while the continuing
confusion over the privatisation of land and real estate are making life
difficult for new small businesses.
Maxim Boiko, a senior adviser to Mr Chubais, points to the proliferation of
street kiosks selling imported goods on the streets of Moscow and many other
large cities as evidence of the appetite for private enterprise and
obstacles to future progress. 'The kiosks are a good thing,' he says. 'But
they also indicate that the real estate market is not working.'
But while the small-scale effort has wearied, the privatisation baton has
been handed on. Last summer, the government announced it would auction
medium and large-scale state enterprises by issuing vouchers to the general
public by the end of the year.
In December, when voucher auctions for medium and large-scale companies
began with the sale of Moscow's Bolshevik cake factory, 18 companies were
sold. In April, 558 enterprises in 54 regions were up for tender. The
reformers' target of 5,000 sales by the end of the year is beginning to look
realistic.
In total, 1,547 of the 26,000 companies which employ more than 200 workers
or have assets valued over Rbs1m, had been sold by the end of April. Of
these, 372 enterprises employ more than 1,000 employees and account for 86
per cent of total employment in privatised enterprises.
Most privatised enterprises are largely owned by the workers and managers,
who generally choose to exercise their right to purchase 51 per cent of the
available shares. A further 30 per cent of equity is sold to the general
public using voucher auctions while the state generally retains a minority
stake.
Russians in most regions have been issued with rouble privatisation
'vouchers', which have a nominal face value of Rbs10,000 - a sum that can be
topped up with cash. The vouchers can be sold for cash, used to purchase
shares in their place of work, placed as a bid for a limited quantity of
shares in the companies during the two weeks they are up for sale at auction
houses in large cities, or 'invested' in one of the emerging investment
trusts which hold individual company shares on behalf of their investors.
Not surprisingly, privatisation has run into opposition from federal
bureaucrats and parliamentarians who have most to lose from the sale of
state assets. Prime minister Victor Chenomyrdin has been especially sharp in
his criticism of the programme. Rumours that Mr Chubais is about to be
sacked constantly circulate in Moscow and the provinces.
IN the regions, however, governments - and to a less extent local
parliaments - are increasingly supporting the Chubais programme, with 71
regions, out of about 90, organising auctions this month.
In Volgograd, 600 miles south of Moscow, Mr Konstantin Ogloblin is the
director of the state property fund that sells property on behalf of the
local GKI. He was appointed by, and answers to, the local oblast parliament
but is unequivocal in his support for voucher privatisation.
The biggest problem he faces is opposition from the federal property fund,
appointed by the Russian parliament in theory to sell federal property on
behalf of the GKI, but in practice is an attempt to slow the privatisation
process.
'We agree much more with the central GKI than the central property fund,' Mr
Ogloblin says, explaining that if the federal fund does not act fast enough
to sell off the enterprises then the GKI has the power to take control over
them. Despite federal opposition, the Volgograd fund has managed to sell off
a number of large factories, including the giant Volgograd tractor factory
with 26,000 employees. 'We advertised the sale of the tractor factory in the
central fund bulletin,' laughs Mr Ogloblin.
Yet the mass voucher privatisation programme does not receive universal
support from reformers. Critics, including the reform economist Grigory
Yavlinsky, doubt that privatisation will produce either new investment or
restructuring, particularly if worker-shareholders prevent managers from
laying off surplus workers.
Sergey Alexashenko, director of the Russian union of industrialists and
entrepreneurs and a reform sympathiser, agrees: 'In my opinion the
government has not chosen the right way,' he says. 'The main aim should not
be rapid privatisation but effective privatisation. We need effective owners
who exercise control over their enterprises. Voucher privatisation is a
mistake because it is completely ineffective.'
At the heart of the debate is the uncertainty about the nature of the
property rights that have notionally been transfered from the state to
shareholders. In theory, the management has the right to sack workers,
shareholders have the right to sack management, and new domestic investors,
perhaps with foreign partners, can take control by buying out existing
shareholders.
IN practice, the managers remain firmly in control of the newly privatised
enterprises - no factory directors have lost their jobs. Anecdotal reports
suggest that lay-offs occur but only rarely. And while foreign investment
banks are believed to be buying up parcels of shares in enterprises, they
have not yet attempted to exercise the property rights these shares
theoretically represent.
'Privatisation is a step in the direction of private firms,' says one senior
World Bank official in Moscow. 'But even in five years these 'privatised'
enterprises are not going to look like western companies.'
Officials at GKI accept that the next few years will produce new problems as
these newly acquired property rights become better understood, traded and
tested. But they argue that such criticisms miss the point.
In its early stages, the aims of the mass privatisation programme are
primarily political: to undermine the power of federal bureaucrats while
building a mass constituency of shareholders who have a stake in the
continuation of reform. 'In a limited number of cases, privatisation is
allowing people who have ideas about restructuring to get on with it,' says
Jonathan Hay, a western adviser based at the GKI in Moscow. 'But the
separation of the state and industry is the only realistic thing that
privatisation can achieve in the short-term.'
The reformers point to the support for economic reforms in President Boris
Yeltsin's recent referendum, and the opposition of federal bureaucrats, as
evidence that this strategy is working - 'privatisation is about taking away
the assets that federal bureaucrats used to control,' says Maxim Boiko. 'No
wonder they are not co-operative.'
Anecdotal evidence suggests that, with a typical mixture of enthusiasm and
cynicism, the Russian population is prepared to give this new capitalist
'game' a go, although the fact that the market value of privatisation
vouchers hovers around half their face value suggests they are prepared for
disappointment.
Interrupted while filling out an application form in the Volgograd auction
house and asked why she was buying shares, 20-year-old Lena Bruzgunova
reacted sharply: 'What would you do if you were given a voucher?' she asks.
And what can she expect in return for it?
'The voucher is too little,' she replies, 'But maybe the shares will pay
some interest some day. Privatisation may stop in a few months, but it may
be the basis of our future. We don't know what the future holds.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930527

