FT932-3310

FT  15 JUN 93 / Business and the Law: Jurisdiction of EC courts revised -
European Court


   By BRICK COURT CHAMBERS


   BRUSSELS


On June 8, the EC Council of Ministers adopted a decision extending the
jurisdiction of the Court of First Instance to all direct actions brought by
natural or legal persons. The decision follows a request by the European
Court of Justice in October 1991 for the CFI's jurisdiction to be extended.
At present the jurisdiction of the Court of First Instance is limited to
competition cases, cases involving staff of the European Community
institutions and certain cases under the European Coal and Steel Community
Treaty.
The effect of the decision will be to set up a proper second level of
jurisdiction within the Community legal system and allow the quality and
effectiveness of judicial review in the Community to be maintained. The ECJ
will be free to concentrate on its main tasks of ensuring the uniform
interpretation of Community law and safeguarding the institutional balance
within the EC.
It is also hoped that relieving the ECJ of the burden of hearing direct
actions will speed up the time it takes to decide cases, particularly
preliminary references on points of law from national courts, which will
still be heard by the Court of Justice.
The decision will come into force on the first day of the second month after
publication of the decision in the Official Journal. This should mean it
will come into force on September 1, except for anti-dumping cases. The
actual date for the transfer of jurisdiction in anti-dumping cases has yet
to be agreed by the Council. After September 1 all direct actions brought by
natural or legal persons must be brought in the CFI; cases pending before
the Court of Justice will also be transferred to the CFI after that date.
Greece in breach of obligations
The failure of Greece to abide by a European Commission decision calling for
the repayment of illegal state aid could not be excused on the grounds that
one of the ways in which the aid could have been repaid was contrary to the
Greek constitution, the Court of Justice ruled last week.
The case involved a Greek law under which company profits arising from
exports were exempt from a certain tax. The Commission decided this was
unlawful state aid and ordered it to be repaid. The Greek government did not
challenge the decision but the aid was not repaid. The Commission brought an
action against Greece for breach of its Rome Treaty obligations.
The Greek government argued the Commission decision was unlawful and in any
event impossible to carry out. It said repayment of aid would have to take
the form of a retroactive tax which was incompatible with the Greek
constitution.
The court ruled that, as Greece had not challenged the Commission decision,
the only available defence was that it was impossible to carry out the
decision correctly.
However the court rejected the arguments put forward by the Greek
authorities because they were based exclusively on the hypothesis that the
only way repayment could be made was by imposition of a retroactive tax. The
Greek authorities were simply under an obligation to ensure the companies
which had received the aid repaid it. There was no requirement for the
imposition of a retroactive tax.
The court said the companies could not plead that the obligation to repay
the aid was in breach of their legitimate expectations as such a possibility
would deprive the Rome Treaty's state aid provisions of all useful effect.
The court said that in cases such as this member states were under an
obligation to collaborate with the Commission in good faith in order to
overcome the practical difficulties of ensuring repayment.
C-183/91: Commission v Greece, ECJ FC, June 10 1993.
Opinion in PVC case delayed
The opinion of Advocate General Walter Van Gerven in the PVC appeal case due
last week has been put back to June 29. The appeal brought by the Commission
challenges a decision of the Court of First Instance which ruled that the
Commission's original decision in the PVC case did not exist because of
procedural irregularity.
C-137/92-P: Commission v BASF.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930615

