FT934-11647

FT  30 OCT 93 / Employers' abuse of casual work laws attacked


   By RICHARD DONKIN


ABUSE OF employment law by employers was in danger of creating an
'industrialised peasantry' of casual workers, the director-general of the
Institute of Personnel Management said yesterday.
Mr Geoff Armstrong told the institute's annual conference in Harrogate that
companies which dismissed workers just before they qualified for employment
protection were abusing the law.
His fears were supported by a MORI poll of conference delegates. Most of the
senior personnel managers canvassed said their organisations had increased
part-time working, temporary work and fixed-term contracts for individuals.
More than half of the managers believed that the desire to cut overheads by
avoiding the legal terms and conditions due to full-time workers, might
influence decisions to introduce flexible working patterns.
Mr Armstrong said that while flexibility in organisations should be
encouraged there was a need to make a stand against abuse. He said: 'The
creation of a permanently casualised industrial peasantry, with little
protection and no stake in the future, can't be in the interests of
organisations or society.'
He added: 'Paying women less than men, when they are contributing equal
value for the same employer can't be justified.'
His comments underlined recent findings by the National Association of
Citizens' Advice Bureaux, which reported a big rise in the number of people
complaining to its branches about abuse of employment laws by the companies
that employed them.
He urged a reduction in the threshold at which workers received employment
protection from the current two years in most cases to six months. This
would help to dispel the 'notion that when you have worked a year and 11
months you get fired'.
Failure to introduce such reforms risked creating a permanent underclass of
disaffected employees who had 'no stake in anything', he said.
Employers should invest more in skills training, to give workers the
necessary skills to enable them to find alternative employment if they lost
their jobs.
Mr Armstrong, a former group exective director of Standard Chartered bank,
also criticised the government's funding squeeze on Acas, the conciliation
service.
'Cutting Acas back to a level of penny-pinching which impedes its ability to
operate as a respected, independent and authoritative defender of employment
rights is short-sighted and counter-productive,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931030

