FT933-9954

FT  06 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Barclays making heavy charges for US assets


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


THE US Transition business announced yesterday by Barclays follows a review
of operations which started last summer and discovered three groups of
assets that the bank decided were probably not worth book value.
The review was led by Mr Richard Webb, who was appointed US chief executive
in January after Mr John Kerslake retired. It led to doubtful assets being
isolated, although executives insist that it is not simply a poor asset 'bad
bank'.
First element is Barclays/American Mortgage. This has the right to receive
fees for processing the mortgage books of other lenders. But as interest
rates have fallen, many borrowers have paid off mortgages to refinance them
at lower rates.
This has reduced the value of the earnings stream, and the bank has made a
Pounds 60m specific provision against this. It hopes to develop the business
by originating new mortgages and securitising them through its BZW
securities arm.
Second is a book of poorly-priced corporate loans which the bank made in the
late 1980s, some on margins as low as 15 basis points. Although they are
performing it has made a Pounds 108m general provision to prepare them for
sale.
Third is a book of non-performing corporate loans, mostly in real estate, on
which Barclays has made a Pounds 107m specific provision. The final Pounds
10m of the Pounds 285m total loss for the business came from items such as
staff costs.
The Pounds 275m provision contributed to a total of Pounds 997m (Pounds
1.05bn) in the first half of 1993. UK specific provisions fell to Pounds
657m (Pounds 825m), helped by fewer large corporate provisions, but French
problems lifted EC provisions to Pounds 81m (Pounds 31m).
The core banking division, including UK branch banking and corporate and
institutional banking, raised profits to Pounds 407m, against Pounds 98m.
This was despite a fall in lending volumes, particularly in the corporate
sector.
Net interest income in corporate banking increased due to a Pounds 102m fall
in provisions, many on property-related lending, wider lending margins and
cost reduction efforts. Barclaycard, the UK credit card arm, improved
'substantially'.
The bank maintained its margin on interest-bearing assets at 3 per cent, and
raised the spread between interest earned on loans and paid on liabilities
to 2.5 per cent (2.2 per cent). This was achieved by hedging of liabilities.
The core tier 1 capital ratio was 5.6 per cent (5.9 per cent). It raised
Pounds 634m of tier 2 capital, increasing the capital adequacy ratio to 9.7
per cent (8.9 per cent).
Post-tax return on equity was 7 per cent, and Mr Andrew Buxton, chairman,
said the target remained 15 per cent. It was content with a target below
National Westminster's 17.5 per cent because it did not want to take on
excess risk.
Mr Buxton said the bank was maintaining its market share of lending, but
this was not vital. 'We can afford to lose a bit of market share as long as
we come out with a better business,' he said.
Earnings per share rose to 11.7p (losses 3.7p) and the interim dividend is
cut to 6.5p (9.15p).

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930806

