FT933-10075

FT  06 AUG 93 / Summer scrutiny for Paris bankers keen to advise


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


THE MERCHANT banker confessed: 'I haven't been this nervous since my
university exams.' Then he set off for an appointment at the French Finance
Ministry on the bank of the River Seine in eastern Paris.
His anxiety, shared by about 100 counterparts in international corporate
finance over the past two days, was caused by the prospect of a rigorous
oral examination by a panel of five senior French bureaucrats and financial
experts.
The aim is for one's merchant bank to be chosen for an advisory role in the
French government's ambitious privatisation campaign, to be launched in the
autumn with the sale of the state's shareholdings in Rhone Poulenc, the
chemicals group, and Banque Nationale de Paris. The challenge is to survive
the peculiarly French selection.
'It isn't easy,' said one member of a hopeful corporate finance team. 'They
can ask you pretty much anything - what you think cash flow will be in two
years' time, who founded the company and when, or what effects the widening
of European exchange rate bands will have on profit margins.'
They may not feel it but the visitors to the treasury over the past few days
are the lucky ones, having already passed a written examination, which
reduced the number of merchant bank applications from more than 60 to fewer
than 20, and which laid out the claimants' case for selection. Written
submissions were limited to 50 pages - 20 of text and 30 of footnotes -
after the previous privatisation programme, when a series of massive tomes
was delivered to the treasury.
As the total has been shrunk so the the competition has been intensified.
The selection panel is expected to name only a few winners.
The rewards, initially at least, are not expected to be big. 'The treasury
doesn't pay much for an adviser,' said one member of a five-man team seeking
selection, 'but there is a lot of prestige attached.'
Companies selected as advisers, and even those that come close, also stand
an excellent chance of being picked for the underwriting syndicates which
sell the privatisation share issues. There, the financial rewards become
very big.
'You can count on a 2-3 per cent commission on your share of the sale,' said
one banker. With the government's 73 per cent of BNP worth up to FFr29bn
(Pounds 3.3bn), and its 43 per cent share of Rhone Poulenc valued at
FFr12bn-FFr15bn, that could mean substantial returns.
The treasury panel is expected to announce the winners within a week.
Meanwhile, Paris will be home to a lot of nervous merchant bankers this
weekend.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930806

