FT932-7154

FT  25 MAY 93 / Government Bonds: Bund prices fall as hopes of further rate
cuts recede


   By SARA WEBB, PATRICK HARVERSON and AP-DJ


   LONDON, NEW YORK, PARIS


GERMAN government bonds closed lower as hopes of further cuts in interest
rates receded and the market prepared for more medium-dated supply.
Bund prices fell in reaction to comments from Mr Lothar Mueller, Bavarian
state central bank president and Bundesbank Council member, over the
weekend. Mr Mueller said that in view of the pace of money supply growth and
the public sector debt, the Bundesbank would have to pause before easing
rates further.
The 6 3/4 per cent bond due 2003 opened at 99.18 and fell to 98.89 and the
Liffe bund futures contract dropped from a high of 93.80 to 93.68 by late
afternoon.
Dealers said the market remains bearish and investors would be waiting to
see the latest inflation figures, which are expected this week. Also
contributing to the market's poor mood is the prospect of new supply today ,
with dealers expecting DM4bn to DM6bn of four-year notes to be issued.
THE SURPRISE announcement of another cut in French interest rates yesterday
helped to lift French government bond prices at the short end, while other
maturities closed lower on profit-taking.
The Bank of France cut its key rates by a quarter point, which left the
intervention rate at 7.5 per cent and the five to 10-day rate at 8.5 per
cent.
'The franc seemed reasonably steady on the back of it,' said Mr Philip
Tyson, economist at Yamaichi International, adding that the market would be
looking for further rate cuts over the next few months.
The spread of 10-year French bonds over comparable bunds has narrowed to 27
basis points from 32 basis points, compared to 62 basis points at the end of
March. Among shorter-dated bonds, two-year notes now yield 6.43 per cent,
down from 6.44 per cent.
HIGHER-yielding markets continued to benefit from switching out of Germany
in the wake of the Danish referendum result.
In Spain, market participants will be watching for further signs of easing
this week. The Meffsa futures contract slipped from 88.48 to 88.40
yesterday.
In Italy, the short end remained firm while longer-dated issues weakened,
with the BTP futures contract falling from 99.72 to 99.53.
ACTIVITY in the UK government bond market remained muted ahead of tomorrow's
auction.
JAPANESE government bonds tumbled yesterday on fears of higher short-term US
interest rates and concern about the forthcoming Japanese bond auction.
The September futures contract dropped from its high of 106.60 to a low of
105.98 in Tokyo and continued to fall in London trading to reach 105.88.
Dealers said the market was upset by news reports suggesting the US Federal
Reserve may allow short-term interest rates to rise.
The finance ministry is expected to hold its auction of 10-year government
bonds today, and there was considerable speculation in the market about
whether the auction stock would be a further tranche of the existing No 153
issue or a new bond.
Dealers point out that a further tranche of the No 153 issue would help to
establish it as the new 10-year benchmark.
The No 153 has a 4.8 per cent coupon, but some dealers maintain that the
Japanese market has fallen back so much in recent weeks that the new auction
stock should carry a coupon of 4.9 per cent to reflect the shift in yields.
The yield on the No 145 opened at 4.64 per cent and closed at 4.665 per cent
after touching 4.735 per cent.
TALK of a possible tightening of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve
depressed prices at the short end of the US Treasury bond market yesterday.
However, it no impact on the long end, where bonds posted solid gains in the
wake of falling gold prices and some short-covering by dealers.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  21/32 at 101
21/32 , yielding 6.986 per cent. At the short end of the market, the
two-year note was down  3/32 at 99 7/16 , to yield 4.163 per cent.
After declining on foreign markets overnight, longer-dated securities
recovered when trading opened in New York as some dealers covered their
short positions in anticipation of a rally and others took the opportunity
to complete yield curve-flattening trades. Later in the day, bonds rose
further, aided by declining gold prices.
Short-dated securities, however, failed to rebound from early weakness,
which was the result of selling on press reports that policymakers at the
Fed's Open Market Committee meeting last week had voted to shift the
emphasis of monetary policy toward higher short-term interest rates because
of concerns about revived inflation.
THE French government is likely today to announce a special bond issue to
raise as much as FFr20bn, AP-DJ reports from Paris.
'If it's less than FFr10bn, that wouldn't be good. But if it's FFr20bn or
more, that would be considered a major success,' said a source close to the
government.
'You have to remember that, originally, the government was hoping to get
FFr30bn this year from privatisation receipts.'
A report in the French press yesterday claimed that prime minister Edouard
Balladur planned to announce the debt issue today.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930525

