FT932-7031

FT  26 MAY 93 / Scots Office to review verdict of 'not proven'


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


THE SCOTTISH OFFICE is to review the passing of 'not proven' verdicts which
are used in Scottish courts when juries do not wish to find an accused
person either guilty or not guilty.
The review, announced yesterday by Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary,
follows increasing public concern about the verdict, culminating in a
60,000-signature petition seeking its abolition. A private member's bill to
abolish the 'not proven' verdict has been put down by Mr George Robertson,
MP for Hamilton and a Labour frontbench spokesman on European affairs.
Since 1728, juries in criminal trials in Scotland have been able to choose
between returning verdicts of guilty, not guilty and 'not proven'. A 'not
proven' verdict counts as an acquittal and, like a not guilty verdict, means
the accused cannot be tried again for the offence.
It is said officially to be appropriate when the prosecution has not proved
its case beyond reasonable doubt and where the jury is not prepared to say
that the accused is innocent. But the family of a Glasgow girl who was
murdered last year started campaigning for the abolition of the verdict
after the man accused of murdering her walked free after a 'not proven'
verdict was returned.
Mr Lang told the Scottish grand committee in the Commons that he would
review the verdict as part of a wider look at the functions of the jury in
criminal trials. The review will also look at jury size and the size of the
majority needed for acquittal.
Scottish juries consist of 15 jurors and are allowed to reach a verdict by a
simple majority immediately. In England and Wales, juries can reach a
majority verdict only after telling the judge that they cannot agree on a
unanimous verdict. The criminal justice system in England and Wales is being
examined by a Royal Commission. Scotland has a separate legal system and
judicial procedure.
Mr Lang said he would soon propose ways of reducing the waste of time for
witnesses who attend trials that do not take place or who give evidence that
is not contested.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930526

