FT932-13495

FT  23 APR 93 / BNL in Atlanta funded arms for Iran: Documents reveal more
secret loans from scandal-hit branch of Italian bank


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


   NEW YORK


THE Atlanta branch of Italy's state-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL) -
already embroiled in scandal over Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3.2bn) of loans that
helped fund Iraq's war machine - also provided secret loans to finance arms
sales to Iran.
Italian government documents obtained by the Financial Times show that BNL
Atlanta made Dollars 2bn of loans to countries including Iran, the former
Soviet Union, Turkey and Jordan. Like the clandestine Iraqi loans, a large
number of these additional loans were made without any formal notification
to BNL's head office in Rome.
Some of the money was used to help finance shipments of militarily useful
equipment from US and European companies to Tehran, according to a US
government official familiar with the case. Some of the shipments would have
violated the United Nations ban on arms sales to Iran and Iraq during their
1980-1988 war.
The additional loans, made in the mid- and late-1980s, extend the scope of
the BNL scandal well beyond the bank's Atlanta branch and the issue of the
Iraqi loans.
Earlier this week it emerged that US investigators are also looking at BNL's
Argentine operations to see if any of its funds in Buenos Aires were used to
help finance Iraq's Condor 2 nuclear-capable missile project.
BNL has said it is unaware of any links between its Argentine branch and
companies that worked on the Condor 2 missile project. Last night the bank
said it was unaware of the loans to Iran from Atlanta.
However, a senior BNL executive said yesterday that at the time of the FBI
raid on BNL's Atlanta branch on August 4 1989, a total of Dollars 735m of
exposure resulting from non-Iraqi loans was discovered, of which Dollars
417m was US government guaranteed.
He said he could not rule out that other non-Iraqi loans had been made by
the Atlanta branch and already repaid by the time of the raid.
In Venice, meanwhile, an Italian state prosecutor investigating the BNL
affair has asked a court to convict and jail Mr Nerio Nesi and Mr Giacomo
Pedde, the former BNL chairman and director-general, for allegedly illegal
BNL-funded arms sales to Iran. These were unrelated to the Atlanta loans and
were financed from Italy during the 1980s.
Mr Felice Casson, the prosecuting magistrate, has also alleged that Italian
intelligence agents were involved in the BNL-funded arms transactions.
Both Mr Nesi and Mr Pedde have pleaded not guilty in the Venice trial, which
has been under way for several weeks.
It was also learned yesterday that a team of US prosecutors from Atlanta is
planning to travel to Rome next month in order to question several BNL
executives. This would mark the first time that Atlanta investigators have
gone to Rome and comes three months after the US Federal Reserve re-opened
its investigation of the BNL affair by sending officials from Washington and
New York to Rome.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930423

