FT934-11603

FT  30 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Flotation expected to value Azlan in excess
of Pounds 40m


   By ALAN CANE


AZLAN GROUP, a distributor of advanced computer networking systems based in
Wokingham, Berkshire, is expected to have a market capitalisation in excess
of Pounds 40m when it comes to market later this month.
The pathfinder prospectus was published yesterday and impact day is November
12. Dealing in the shares will start on November 24.
The placing and intermediaries offer is designed to raise some Pounds 7m,
out of which Pounds 1m will be accounted for in expenses and Pounds 1.3m
will be used to redeem preference shares held by existing institutional
investors. The balance of Pounds 4.65m will be used to strengthen the
group's capital base, enabling it to exploit future business opportunities.
Azlan also published results for the half year to September 30 yesterday. It
made pre-tax profits of Pounds 1.88m on turnover 69 per cent up at Pounds
28.5m. For the year to March 31 pre-tax profits were Pounds 2.9m on turnover
of Pounds 41.2m.
Azlan was formed in 1984. In 1991 Mr David Randall, the current managing
director, led a management buy-out supported by a group of institutional
investors including CINVen.
The company has taken an approach to networking distribution which demands
that it adds significant added value to the 500 or so products it sells.
Distributors are now faced with choosing between selling high volumes of
product at low margins or smaller product volumes of new and innovative
products which can benefit from Azlan's networking skills.
Azlan aims 'to maximise the sales of a product in the early days of its life
before competition and familiarity with the product erode the initial higher
margins,' Mr Randall says.
The vendors from which it buys products include Digital, Intel, Lotus,
Microsoft and Novell. It is not an easy strategy to follow but one which
should guarantee higher profitability than conventional electronics
distribution. Azlan's skills include network infrastructure and integration,
network management and workgroup productivity.
The prospectus points out that in addition to expanding its market share and
range of products, Azlan intends to establish new businesses in continental
Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931030

