FT931-4011

FT  12 MAR 93 / International Company News: Founder of Posco expected to
resign


   By JOHN BURTON


   SEOUL


MR PARK Tae-joon is expected to resign today as the honorary chairman of
Pohang Iron and Steel (Posco) in a move that could lead to a management
shake-up at the world's third-largest steel company.
Meanwhile, Mr Chung Ju-yung, the founder of the Hyundai conglomerate,
yesterday resumed his position as honorary chairman of South Korea's biggest
group after suggesting that he may dismantle it within a year.
The actions of the two prominent industrialists are related to their
opposition to the election of Mr Kim Young-sam as South Korea's new
president.
Mr Park, who founded the state-run steel company 25 years ago, resigned from
a senior position in the ruling Democratic Liberal party and as Posco
chairman last year after he tried unsuccessfully to block Mr Kim's
nomination as a presidential candidate.
The government recently launched a tax investigation of Posco in what was
regarded as an attempt to force Mr Park to also resign as honorary chairman
and completely sever his ties with the company.
The departure of Mr Park, which is expected to be announced today at Posco's
annual meeting, is likely to cause an exodus of Mr Park's senior aides who
now manage the company.
They include Mr Hwang Kyung-ro, chairman, and Mr Park Tuk-pyo. Likely
successors being mentioned to head Posco include Mr Chung Myung-sik, the
vice-chairman, and the presidents of two other state companies, Mr Ahn
Byung-hwa of Korea Electric Power (Kepco) and Mr Ahn Chon-hak of Korea Heavy
Industries and Construction.
The return of Mr Chung Ju-yung to Hyundai as honorary chairman follows his
failed presidential bid last year and his recent resignation as an
opposition MP.
Mr Chung told the Korean press this week that he planned to break up Hyundai
into smaller independent companies within a year, although he gave no
details. His comments took Hyundai officials by surprise.
Mr Chung may have made the offer to try to persuade the government to drop
an indictment against him and other Hyundai executives for illegal election
practices during the presidential campaign.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930312

