FT932-295

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (4): Demand fears give way to optimism - A
tougher but still growing market offers fresh openings for alert traders /
Mexico


   By DAMIAN FRASER


OVER the past five years Mexico has been a paradise for exporters. An
inefficient local industry, low trade barriers, and an almost insatiable
demand for capital goods and consumer products has increased imports by some
300 per cent since 1987.
A decade ago many middle-class Mexicans shopped in the US, but since Mexico
has joined GATT and slashed quotas and tariffs, supermarkets and discount
stores have stocked a multitude of the latest imported consumer goods. To
survive fierce international competition, Mexican companies have bought
machinery and capital goods from all over the world.
But the party is now over as much of the demand for imports has been met.
And the government, worried about the country's ability to finance a
continuing import binge, has put the brakes on economic activity. It has
pushed interest rates to 8 per cent in real terms, is running a budget
surplus, and has even slapped administrative controls on imports such as
British beef and tariffs of up to 1,000 per cent on Chinese goods.
Importers are therefore feeling the pinch, even though they remain
optimistic about long-term export prospects. 'I am full of confidence about
the future, but I don't know how I am going to get through the next month,'
says Mr Bob Hickman, a British importer of diesel engines and oil-field
industry products for more than 20 years in Mexico.
In the first quarter this year imports grew by 10.3 per cent, against 20-30
per cent in each of the four quarters last year.
Compounding the short-term difficulties are age-old business problems, which
all potential exporters have to grapple with. Diplomats and businessmen with
experience in Mexico say that setting up business can be slow and
frustrating, red-tape pervades and corruption continues.
As and if the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) is implemented,
such obstacles to exporting may disappear, with Mexico adopting many US
business practices. But Nafta poses its own problems for non-American
businesses, since they will face average tariffs of around 10 per cent, but
North American competitors will face none.
Nafta, however, should stimulate Mexican economic growth, pushing up overall
demand for consumer goods, increasing competition for industry, and boosting
demand for new machinery and technology. 'We expect a smaller participation
in a bigger market,' says Mr Hickman, 'and that's better than the current
state of affairs.'
Such optimism is shared by the British Embassy in Mexico, which has drawn up
a list of target sectors for British exports over the next few years. Given
Mexico's environmental problems, the embassy expects pollution control,
water and sewage equipment to offer much business. Two British companies,
North West Water and Severn Trent Water, having already won sizeable
contracts.
Car parts, educational equipment, textile machinery, and clothing could
present good prospects for exports. Mexico's car industry is expected to
flourish under Nafta, the government is giving education an equipment
overhaul, and inefficient textile companies are to buy new equipment to
compete effectively with US and Asian rivals.
But business managers warn that taking advantage of such opportunities is
more difficult than exporting to Switzerland, for example. Mexico's
transport infrastructure is woefully inadequate - it can take longer and
cost more for goods to reach their destination than in developed markets.
While infrastructure spending is now a government priority, and smart
four-lane motorways are being built, ports and railways have barely
improved.
Business culture is also different compared to Europe. 'It's not what you
know, it's who you know. You need to be able to find your way through the
maze of bureaucracy,' says one European commercial attache, echoing an
almost universally-held view.
Good contacts, diplomats and business managers can divulge details of bids
early, enable bid specifications to be tailor-made to requirements or made
incompatible with competitors' bids.
A UK-resident business manager who has done more than Dollars 100m of
business in Mexico and Latin America says: 'In Mexico a decision is often
based on who they know and trust. The technical committee can leak details
of what they are looking for, or withhold such information. It can always
influence the tender.'
For all these reasons, 'you have to be there yourself or have a local man
with an understanding of the market. If you could do it by fax I would be on
the beach,' says another European business manager in Mexico. The UK
business manager says corruption is no worse in Mexico than the rest of
Latin America, but, he adds, it plays a part in his government contracts.
'While I do not pay bribes 'our Mexican agents can share their commissions.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930629

