FT932-3427

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (9): Oiling the wheels of the workers -
The 55m olive trees in Tunisia occupy one third of all arable land


   By FRANCIS GHILES


THE olive tree has been a source of wealth, a symbol of peace and prosperity
since time immemorial around the Mediterranean. In Tunisia, olives were
grown well before Carthage was founded by Queen Dido in 814BC and the very
name Zaytuna Mosque, which dominates the old medina of Tunis and houses one
of the oldest Islamic universities in the world, means 'olive tree'. The
production and trading of olive oil remains a quintessentially Mediterranean
phenomenon.
Some olive oil is produced in Argentina and California but Italy, Spain,
France, Greece and Tunisia - the fifth largest producer - account for the
bulk of the 1.7m tonnes produced in the world every year. Of this figure, 75
per cent comes from southern Europe, the balance from Tunisia, with 7-10 per
cent, Jordan, Morocco and Turkey.
Three sets of figures underline the central importance of this sector to the
Tunisian economy. More than one third of all farms in the country derive
more than half their income from the production and sale of oil; nearly 1m
Tunisians draw part of their income from the same source. Between 1987 and
1992, olive oil accounted for 8 per cent of the value of all Tunisian
exports and 42 per cent of the value of exports of foodstuffs.
The 55m olive trees the country boasts occupy one third of all arable land,
notably in the arid central provinces around the city of Sfax where the poor
soil could not accommodate other crops; the trees also provide one of the
best means of fighting desertification. A further advantage is that the
number of jobs generated by the olive oil industry puts a brake on migration
to the cities.
The production of olive oil does, however, fluctuate strongly from 50,000
tonnes in years of drought to 270,000 tonnes in exceptional years such as
1992. Domestic consumption accounts for about 40,000 tonnes annually. The
balance of requirements, about 110,000 tonnes, is made up by importing much
cheaper sunflower and colza oil. Olive oil is four times as expensive as the
mixture of olive and sunflower oil most Tunisians use for their daily
requirements.
Tunisia cannot export all its surplus oil because its annual export quota to
the EC is only 46,000 tonnes. Nearly 90 per cent of Tunisian exports go to
EC countries. Italy alone absorbs more than two-thirds of Tunisian oil
exports to the EC. Tunisia pays a tariff of Ecu5-10 per 100 kilogrammes of
olive oil, compared to ECU55 for Moroccan and Turkish exports, for which
there is no quota.
The glut of olive oil which followed the 1991-1992 crop has made life
exceptionally difficult for the Tunisian Office National de l'Huile, which
has a monopoly on collecting olive oil in the country and manages virtually
all exports. World production last year reached a record 2.2m tonnes, as all
Mediterranean countries recorded a bumper crop, something which occurs once
in a generation.
Tunisia's record crop was not simply the result of excellent weather
conditions but because of the improved farming methods and replanting of
olive trees encouraged in recent years. Producers have also been encouraged
by the prices paid by the Office National de l'Huile which have increased by
half since 1987-1988.
The office has been obliged to stock olive oil and has been forced to borrow
from Tunisian banks at market rates. Since 1990, the office no longer enjoys
access to subsidised loans, part of the overall policy of rationalising
economic management. Private companies have begun exporting olive oil but
the main burden of selling abroad still rests very much with the office.
The reason why Tunisia cannot gain a bigger quota with the EC concerns the
subsidies EC members are allowed to give their own producers of olive oil.
Subsidies are extended to primary producers and to the olive oil processing
industry.
Subsidies for the export of olive oil outside the EC are equivalent to 50
per cent of the value of exports and the EC has even started promoting the
consumption of olive oil in such far away markets as Japan and Australia.
Italy is also widely believed to provide bogus figures for its own
production of olive oil. It imports Tunisian oil which it re-exports under
Italian labels, notably to the US.
In its annual report for 1991, the EC Court of Auditors criticises the
manner in which subsidies to the olive oil industry are distributed within
the EC and suggests it is 'unreliable'. It also criticises the manner in
which the International Olive Oil Council, which was set up in 1986, is
managed. The EC provides 74 per cent of the budget of the Olive Oil Council.
The EC Commission, however, has rejected such criticism.
The difficulty the Tunisians have in exporting more of what, for them, is a
vital crop, illustrates the conflict of interest between Maghreb and
southern European countries which centres on foodstuffs produced on both
shores of the Mediterranean. But Tunisian officials argue that if the real
figures of EC production and subsidies were available, their country would
be able to gain an increase in its quota without damaging the interests of
EC producers.
The broader question is whether it is morally justifiable for the EC to
close its eyes to certain practices among its own members and at the same
time limit imports from countries in North Africa who desperately require
funds for projects aimed at stopping the advance of the desert and halting
the exodus from the land.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930614

