FT932-3378

FT  15 JUN 93 / World Trade News: Contractors join the new battle of Beirut
 -Andrew Taylor detects growing international interest in plans for city's
reconstruction


   By ANDREW TAYLOR


THE prospect of rebuilding war-ravaged Beirut, 18 months after hostilities
ceased, is beginning to excite the interest of international contractors.
They are anxious to win foreign orders to supplement depressed domestic
order books with much of the western world struggling to escape the grip of
recession.
The extent to which their interest will be translated into structures on the
ground will depend on the ability of the Lebanese authorities to raise the
money to pay for reconstruction.
Last week building and civil engineering contractors were asked to submit
pre-qualifying bids for the Dollars 350m (Pounds 227m) rehabilitation and
extension of Beirut international airport.
According to contractors, finance for the airport is expected to be in the
form of foreign loans and grants, most likely from other Middle Eastern
countries.
The Lebanese Council for Development and Reconstruction responsible for the
project has told construction companies that the airport development has the
personal support of Mr Rafik Al Hariri, the prime minister.
About 70 contractors are expected to seek to pre-qualify to expand the
airport's capacity from about 1.5m passengers a year to 6m. The work, which
includes a third 3,500m runway, is expected to last two years.
It is part of a Dollars 12.9bn reconstruction programme which includes
rebuilding shattered transport, water, sewerage and electricity generation
services as well.
A separate plan for the redevelopment of Beirut, once one of the richest
Middle Eastern cities, has been drawn up by local consultants Dar
Al-Handasah. The rehabilitation of 1.3m sq m, including 660,000 sq m of
private property, in the bombed-out centre of Beirut, is expected to cost
about Dollars 3bn.
The reconstruction programme, says the council, will be paid for out of
foreign loans and aid, Lebanese government finance and private investment
from returning businessmen and Lebanese expatriates. It is estimated that
these hold overseas assets worth Dollars 30bn to Dollars 40bn.
Much will depend upon the success of Mr Hariri, a 48-year-old Moslem
billionaire, in convincing the investment community that he can rally
Lebanon's divided society and reverse the country's balance of payments
deficit.
The long-term solution to the country's political and economic problems will
involve reaching a peace agreement under which Israel will withdraw its
troops from its self-declared security zone in south Lebanon. Without this
accord, it will be impossible for large scale country-wide re-development to
take place.
The first phase of re-development, costing Dollars 2.7bn, from 1993 to 1995
will depend heavily on foreign loans which will account for two-thirds of
the finance with foreign aid accounting for another 21 per cent. Domestic
borrowing will account for about 13 per cent, says the council.
Earlier projects, therefore, will be those which can quickly generate income
from users to repay borrowings. These may include the airport development,
electricity generation, port developments and communications.
Contractors will be looking for as much security as possible from lenders
such as the World Bank. The council toyed with the idea of trying to raise
finance for the air-port from a private sector operator but did not consider
this to be feasible in the current political and economic climate.
Nonetheless, there are signs of activity which have encouraged international
contractors. Lebanese businessmen, as a sign of confidence in Mr Hariri's
new government, repatriated Dollars 700m last year.
Mr Derek Ashburner, business development director of Trafalgar House, the UK
construction, engineering, property, shipping and hotel group, was a member
of a construction industry trade mission to Beirut sponsored by the British
government at the beginning of this month.
'Land costs have risen sharply in recent months and there are reports of
apartments along the coastal strip changing hands at Dollars 1m each, all of
which are signs of returning confidence,' said Mr Ashburner.
'British, French and Italian engineering consultants are already working on
preliminary designs for parts of the reconstruction prog-ramme. We are
hopeful we too will pick up some of the work as this programme develops.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930615

