FT934-8496

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Texas (7): The car remains king - Richard Tomkins
studies prospects for a Dollars 6.8bn high-speed railway


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


THE trouble with Texans is that they don't take trains. Aircraft, yes; cars,
any time. They may even occasionally walk, but the idea of going to a
railway station and catching a train is as likely to occur to them as the
thought of commuting to work by horse.
This, in essence, is the single biggest obstacle standing in the way of the
Texas Supertrain. On the face of it, the plan to link the state's biggest
conurbations with a high-speed rail network makes sense: after all, Europe
and Japan have been doing the same sort of thing for years. But in a land
where people are wholly unused to the notion of catching trains, the private
sector project is struggling to bridge a credibility gap - and without
credibility, it will not attract the necessary finance.
The rationale for the Texas Supertrain seems straightforward. At present,
the main modes of transport in the triangle between Dallas, Houston and San
Antonio are road and air. But the highways and airports are already crowded
and a 1989 study by the Texas Turnpike Authority predicted that total
passenger movements in the triangle would more than triple by the year 2010.
The Texas Supertrain presents itself as the environmentally-friendly
solution to this seemingly intractable problem.
Plans for the high-speed network date back to the early 1980s, but they
began to gather momentum in 1991 when the state-appointed Texas High-Speed
Rail Authority awarded a 50-year franchise for the scheme to the Texas TGV
Corporation - a private sector consortium comprising Morrison Knudsen, the
US construction group, and private Texan interests. The consortium appointed
GEC Alsthom, developer of France's train a grande vitesse, and Bombardier,
GEC Alsthom's North American licensee, to provide the technology.
In the past few weeks the project has taken another step forward with the
publication of Texas TGV's preferred route. A three-spoke network totalling
469 route miles is planned, linking the main conurbations with French-style
TGV trains travelling at 200 mph. The 250-mile journey from Dallas to
Houston, for example, would take 1hr 41mins - much less than an airline
passenger could hope to achieve on the same route, city centre to city
centre.
Now, however, comes the hard part. Texas TGV says it is still working out
how much the project will cost, but the last time anyone did the sums, the
figure came to Dollars 6.8bn including financing costs and inflation to the
date of opening.
The figure might not matter very much if the private sector could be sure of
earning an adequate return. But with no contemporary experience of passenger
train projects in the US, potential backers are understandably wary.
Meanwhile, to add to its burden, the project also faces outspoken
opposition: not only from Southwest Airlines, the Dallas-based carrier that
has made a success out of its expanding network of no-frills, short-haul
services, but from a campaigning group called Derail (Demanding Ethics,
Responsibility and Accountability in Legislation) which speaks for people
who believe their lives, land or property could be adversely affected by the
railway.
Mr David Rece, Texas TGV's president and chief operating officer, believes
much of the opposition is overdone. These days, he says, Southwest Airlines
only makes 12 per cent of its revenues from its Texas routes. And by the
time the Texas Supertrain starts running, around the turn of the century,
there will be more than enough traffic for everyone. As for people directly
affected by the route, he sees no reason why Texas TGV should not be able to
reach satisfactory agreements on compensation in the overwhelming majority
of cases.
But is the project a paying proposition? On the one hand, it links three of
the biggest and fastest-growing cities in the US (Dallas, Houston and San
Antonio); the distances between them are ideal for the high-speed train,
being too long to travel comfortably by road and too short to make an air
journey worthwhile; and the railway's path is not obstructed by physical
barriers such as mountains or seas. On the other hand, Dollars 6.8bn is a
colossal amount of money.
Mr Rece acknowledges that rail travel is an unfamiliar concept to the
average Texan, but says a passenger study carried out by Charles River
Associates, a Boston-based consultancy, shows the TGV network should attract
26 per cent of the Texas inter-city travel market by the year 2010,
equivalent to 14.4m passengers annually. Based on a 3 per cent annual
inflation rate, it should be generating annual revenues of Dollars 1.1bn by
the same year.
'We are convinced that the project will pay back its costs,' says Mr Rece.
'What remains to be established is whether or not it can yield a sufficient
rate of return to attract private capital.'
In one sense, the Texas TGV looks like a project of its time. The climate of
opinion in the US seems to be shifting slowly back in favour of rail:
indeed, the High-Speed Rail Development Bill, presently under consideration
by US legislators, would have the effect of putting high-speed rail on the
same footing as other modes of transport which receive federal financial
assistance.
But whether, in practice, this will make any significant difference to the
Texas TGV remains to be seen. Under the terms of the franchise, the
consortium is required to have garnered commitments to an initial Dollars
170m worth of funding by the end of next month. So far, it has only just
passed the Dollars 30m mark and time is running out.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

931115

