FT934-11243

FT  02 NOV 93 / Unusual comrade at Transport House / A look at why the
country's biggest union has appointed a former finance director of Rover to
be its new chief executive


   By DAVID GOODHART


SORTING out a troubled trade union is much the same as dealing with a
declining business. Both require cost control, improved sales (or
membership), better services to customers and better information flows.
So says someone who should know: Mr Peter Regnier, formerly a finance
director at carmaker Rover and chairman of the Pounds 100m-turnover Chloride
Electronics, who is now chief executive of the million-strong Transport and
General Workers' Union.
It is an unusual journey from the boardroom to Transport House, the union's
headquarters, and it has not been without controversy. Mr Regnier, 48, is
the son of an east London clerical worker who joined the Labour party when
he was 16. His political views did not change as he climbed the greasy pole
and he recalls the pain of having to face beaming boardroom colleagues in
the mornings after successive Labour election defeats.
In spite of taking a large pay cut to go to the TGWU he has disturbed
internal differentials by being paid a lot more than anyone else in the
organisation - including Mr Bill Morris, the general secretary. There has
also been grumbling from the left about the fact that he once reported to
Sir Michael Edwardes at BL and was indirectly involved with a union conflict
at Chloride.
Such sniping has not prevented Mr Regnier feeling at home in the TGWU. He
could be mistaken for a TGWU official. He already talks about 'surplus'
rather than profit and says that the obstacles to efficiency are no greater
than in a hierarchical, profit-driven company.
'You do not have the same authority as in a company,' he says. 'That means
you have to persuade rather than command. But when people have been
persuaded it runs very well. It's rather Japanese.'
Before his arrival Mr Morris had made a start with the shake-up of the union
by commissioning a consultancy report from Mr Adam Klein, a specialist in
trade unions.
The Klein report resulted in a reduction in the number of TGWU regions from
11 to eight and a 'clustering' of the 100-plus district offices.
That was the easy part. Mr Regnier's challenge, signposted in the Klein
report, is to establish proper financial disciplines and a suitable
information technology system in what has been one of Britain's most
politically divided and poorly managed unions.
At least the union's finances are now more respectable and it is no longer
living off its assets. Mr Regnier is also modernising its cashbook
accounting system and using the union's purchasing muscle more effectively.
But the real challenge, according to Mr Regnier, is for the TGWU to 'see
itself strategically'. And to do that it needs a new approach to information
technology and a new political culture.
The ethos of collective bargaining, says Mr Regnier, has been so dominant
(only about 2 per cent of union members are not covered by collective
bargaining) that it has not sold its other services well. For example, it
recovers more than Pounds 70m a year for the 35,000 members with industrial
injuries.
The fact that the administration of membership has been done at regional
level means the union has not had a proper national profile of its members.
'We have used information technology for administrative purposes and not to
understand our members,' he says.
But in 1992 118,000 people left the union and only 32,000 were recruited.
'To stop that drain we have to communicate with people and identify the
benefits of membership. We've got to start being proactive and our new
computer network can help us do that,' says Mr Regnier, who reckons he will
be at the union for another three years helping this become reality.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931102

