FT933-12581

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (4): Bonanza is
some way off - Why the outlook for the industry in Germany is now less
cheery


   By DAVID WALLER


WHILE Germany's manufacturing industry is suffering its worst recession
since the end of the second world war, its construction industry is still an
engine of economic growth - but only up to a point.
As a recent report from the Hypo-Bank economics depart- ment concludes, the
outlook is becoming less cheery here, too, despite boom conditions in
eastern Germany.
The western industry - worth DM320bn last year - still dwarfs the sector in
the east, worth DM57bn. Though growth in the east is set to continue at a
double-digit rate, in the west the recession is beginning to take effect.
Last year total construction activity in western Germany rose by 5.6 per
cent - after growth of 4.1 per cent in 1991 and 4.9 per cent in 1990. The
current year's growth is likely to fall back to less than 1 per cent.
This conceals a sharp turnaround in two out of Germany's three main sectors,
reflecting the depth of the recession and the impact of public spending cuts
in western Germany. Only house- building is set to grow this year, while
industrial and public sector construction are both in decline.
According to the DG Bank, private sector industrial construction in the west
will fall by 2 to 3 per cent - after growth of 4.7 per cent in 1992 and 4.8
per cent in 1991. This reflects a time-lag effect as German companies scale
back their construction plans, after a 2 per cent reduction in investment in
machinery and equipment last year.
In the public construction sector in the west, there will also be a fall of
2 to 3 per cent, the DG Bank predicts. As the Hypo-Bank comments: 'To
approach the goal of reducing debt .. (regional) governments can hardly
avoid reducing public building expenditures  .. the financial strains
imposed by the solidarity pact (between unions, government and business) and
the associated shortage of public funds are becoming increasingly evident.'
The bank expects a drop of at least 2 per cent in real terms in government
expenditure on construction this year.
The third - and still prospering - leg of the west German construction
sector is housebuilding. Growth in this segment of the market, which
accounts for 50 per cent of the western total, is set to be 3 to 4 per cent
this year. This is half the growth rate of 1992 but the fundamentals are in
favour of further, steady growth throughout the 1990s.
One factor is that - in spite of the international brouhaha over the
Bundesbank's monetary policy in the last year - long-term interest rates are
at historically low levels. This acts as a stimulus to private
housebuilding.
However, the main reason for growth here is what Hypo-Bank calls a 'gaping
hole' in the western German housing stock. Some 375,000 units were built
last year but the bank calculates that the unfulfilled need is as high as 2m
units in the west alone.
This reflects high levels of immigration into the country - 438,000
asylum-seekers came to Germany last year and a further 231,000 immigrants.
Social change - the tendency of people to live in ever-smaller family groups
 -also plays a role.
In the east of Germany, there was a substantial drop in the number of new
homes built last year: just 11,500 units were built compared to 62,500 in
the previous year. About 30,000 houses will be built this year. The low
level of activity - to some extent compensated for by high levels of
expenditure on modernisation of old housing stock - reflects social and
economic insecurity as east German citizens worry about mounting
unemployment.
Commercial construction in the new Lander (states) rose by a third last year
to DM26.3bn, about half of the total activity in the east. The pace of
growth is likely to slow as western companies feel the impact of the
recession and many have already cancelled plans for investment in the east.
But Hypo-Bank is predicting growth of DM5bn in this sector this year -
stimulated by a vast array of government incentives including investment
bonuses, simplified write-off opportunities and cheap finance.
The main dynamic for the eastern construction sector will be the state -
partly, indirectly, via subsidies to the private sector - but also directly.
Direct public sector expenditure grew by 38 per cent last year to DM14.3bn
and is set to climb by at least DM3bn this year as the federal and regional
governments fulfil their commitment to bring east German infrastructure up
to western standards.
This will provide a bonanza for the construction sector - for domestic and
foreign contractors, for suppliers of building materials and for skilled
craftsmen. The hope is that this will act as a stimulus for a regeneration
of the eastern German economy as a whole. For the time being, it is enough
to ensure that the German construction industry will avoid the worst of the
malaise currently afflicting the manufacturing sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930723

