FT934-11298

FT  02 NOV 93 / Trade figures for September boost markets, dollar


   By NIKKI TAIT


   SYDNEY


BETTER than expected trade figures for September yesterday gave new heart to
the Australian stock market and dollar, as investors concluded that the
country is moving out of recession with a fairly strong export performance.
The balance of payments deficit in September was ADollars 1.14bn (Pounds
533m) on a seasonally adjusted basis. This compared with a deficit of
ADollars 1.3bn in August, and was below most market forecasts, which ranged
between ADollars 1.2bn and ADollars 1.5bn.
On the trade front, Australia enjoyed a surplus in September, with exports
up 9 per cent to Dollars 5.64bn, while imports rose only four per cent, at
ADollars 5.53bn. This left a ADollars 110m positive balance on merchandise
trade, compared with a ADollars 151m deficit in August.
The news caused the Australian dollar, badly buffeted in the recent stalled
passage of the budget, to close almost one US cent higher, at 67.29 cents
after touching 67.35 cents. On the stock market, shares also rallied
strongly, with the all-ordinaries index closing 20.2 points higher at
2,132.4.
Some analysts, however, cautioned that the trade figures had been boosted by
exceptionally strong exports of gold, and that the previous weaknesses in
the Australian dollar had aided exporters' performance generally. Gold
exports in September jumped 87 per cent.
'There are still some grounds for pessimism about the immediate future of
the current acccount,' warned Mr Chris Caton, chief economist at Bankers
Trust Australia. 'The rest of the world remains quite weak, and we may not
have yet seen all the valuation effects on imports of the lower Australian
dollar.'
Industrial unrest looms again on Australia's notoriously difficult
waterfront after a breakdown in talks between Australian Stevedores and the
Maritime Union of Australia over forced redundancies.
Australian Stevedores announced plans to shed 317 workers several months
ago. This led to a brief national strike in September.
Yesterday Mr John Coombs, national secretary of the MUA, claimed the company
had renewed attempts to sack employees, despite agreement by some 231
workers to take voluntary redundancy.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931102

