FT932-317

FT  29 JUN 93 / Money Markets: French rates fall


   By JAMES BLITZ


FRENCH franc interest rates continued to fall well below German levels
yesterday, as dealers took the view that France was getting increasingly
impatient with the pace of Bundesbank rate cuts, writes James Blitz.
Last week's fracas between Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister and
Mr Edmond Alphandery, his French counterpart, was the dominant issue in
European money markets yesterday.
French politicians have recently called for co-ordinated European rate cuts
to help stimulate the continental economies. Mr Waigel said last week that
German rate cuts were a matter for the Bundesbank alone, and cancelled a
routine quarterly meeting of the France-German economic and finance council.
This tension raised suggestions that France might quit the exchange rate
mechanism in the autumn if German rates do not come down fast enough.
The most spectacular venue for such speculation yesterday was the French
franc futures market, where the September contract was up 20 basis points on
the day to close at 93.70. French cash rates were also sharply lower on the
day, down from 6.94 per cent to 6.82 per cent on the bid side.
These moves widened the spread between French and German prices on a day
when the German market was far less buoyant. The September Euromark contract
was up 5 basis points on the day at 93.16, broadening the spread against its
French counterpart to 54 basis points. Three month German cash was 5 basis
points higher on the bid side at 7.50 per cent.
There is some expectation that the Bundesbank will ease policy at this
week's council meeting. But Mr Adrian James, an economist at NatWest Markets
in London, believes rate cutting could be deferred to the meeting on July
15, when the Bundesbank will have details of the government's budget deficit
reduction proposals for 1994.
Sterling futures markets continued to be very buoyant about the prospects
for another cut in UK base rates.
The September short sterling contract rose 4 basis points on the day to
close at 94.14. The December contract closed 5 basis points higher at 94.32.
Three month sterling cash rates were unchanged at 5 15/16 per cent, despite
difficulties removing a daily shortage of Pounds 1.2m.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930629

