FT933-10117

FT  05 AUG 93 / London Stock Exchange: Losses cut back towards the close


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


ANOTHER cut in repurchase rates by the Bundesbank steadied nerves in the UK
stock market yesterday, but not enough to extend the nine-day bull run in
the FT-SE 100 Index. After falling sharply in early trading, the index made
a strong recovery later to close only 3.7 points off at 2,941.3. London
brushed off the fall of 4 Dow points in early trading in New York.
The calmer performance in currency markets following the interest rate move
in Germany appeared to underline the equity market view that, while rates
will fall in Europe, the pace of such moves will be kept under control; UK
rates may not move until the autumn, say analysts.
Trading volume remained fairly high and the recovery from the early loss of
14.2 on the Footsie featured the interest rate-related stocks which have led
the latest advance in equities. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index continued to power
ahead, closing 11 points up at a peak of 3,349.4. Business in non-Footsie
stocks further increased, making up about 66 per cent of the day's total.
Retail, or customer, volume in equities jumped to Pounds 1.7bn on Tuesday
and yesterday's Seaq-recorded business of 735.8m shares compared with just
over 800m in the previous session.
However, turnover levels were affected yesterday by the completion of the
Pounds 100m programme enacted on Tuesday by UBS. Traders commented that
equity dealing was fairly quiet until UBS began to unravel some of the
positions involved in the trading programme.
London-based securities houses remained optimistic and showered the market
with advice as to which stocks to buy for recovery or on which to take
profits. The banking sector, sensitive to this week's flow of trading
figures from the big names, was encouraged by a substantial increase in
first-half profits at Midland Bank, now part of HSBC.
Dealers said there was some signs that US investors might be returning to
the pharmaceutical sector which they have been selling so heavily this year.
However, yesterday's buyers could not be convincingly tracked down to
transatlantic sources - unless they were acting via some Scottish funds.
There was a late run in some oil issues following suggestions from some
industry analysts that crude oil prices could respond in third and fourth
quarters of the year to the economic strengthening of the leading industrial
nations. The stress fell on some of the oil exploration groups which are
seen as leading any rebound, rather than on the blue chip shares which are
seen as more closely tied to Wall Streeet's prospects.
But the evident slackening of strains in the ERM prompted profit-taking in
some of the retail and consumer stocks which have been leading the charge in
London. Kingfisher, favoured because of its French Darty interests, turned
downwards and Marks and Spencer and GUS gave ground, although the latter
continued to attract buy recommendations from sector analysts.
Overall, equity strategists in London remained convinced that 'rate cuts
favour European equities', to quote Mr John Reynolds at NatWest Securities.
He advises remaining overweight in European financial markets, with the UK
favoured, together with France and Spain.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

930805

