FT932-3080

FT  16 JUN 93 / Small-firms market considered


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


THE LONDON Stock Exchange is studying the creation of a second-level market
for smaller companies. It would have lower listing and regulatory
requirements.
Sir Andrew Hugh Smith, the exchange's chairman, said in his speech last
night that finding ways to direct capital into smaller companies was an
important task for the government and the exchange.
The exchange is said to have set up a panel to look at the creation of an
alternative to the Unlisted Securities Market, which is due to be closed in
1996.
Sir Andrew said that the simple creation of a trading exchange for smaller
companies was not enough to spur greater investment. He said the government
must alter the tax structure, which now encourages private investors to
invest in their own homes or in collective investment schemes.
'This will, I fear, require action by government to correct fiscal
distortions which penalise individual share ownership,' Sir Andrew said.
'Discriminatory tax burdens have encouraged the collectivisation of
individual savings and have given investment in house ownership an advantage
over investment in industry.'
He suggested that the government institute a roll-over rule for capital
gains tax, which would exempt capital gains from taxation if those resources
were reinvested in small companies. He stopped short of calling for outright
abolition of mortgage interest relief.
Sir Andrew said that - while it had become obvious that the withdrawal of
the Business Expansion Scheme had been made necessary by its evolution into
the 'plaything of the tax avoidance industry' - the government needed to
develop sensible alternatives to the scheme.
Institutional shareholders, who control more than 80 per cent of UK capital
available for investment, are not likely to channel funds into small
companies because they need to concentrate their resources on larger
companies, Sir Andrew said.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930616

