FT931-3925

FT  13 MAR 93 / Yeltsin to test nation's allegiance: Threat of chaos and
'civil war'


   By JOHN LLOYD and DMITRI VOLKOV


   MOSCOW


PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin yesterday challenged Russia's conservative-dominated
parliament to a political duel for the allegiance of the country.
Facing further attempts to curtail his power, Mr Yeltsin walked out of the
Russian Congress of Peoples' Deputies to take his cause of a strengthened
presidency, economic reform and constitutional change to the people.
Both his supporters and enemies emphasised the risks being run by their
inability to compromise. Mr Sergei Shakrai, a deputy prime minister and a
close aide to Mr Yeltsin, said the Congress 'has led the country to a
threshold after which lies the road to revolution, chaos and the rule of the
street'.
Mr Sergei Baburin, a leader of the hardline nationalist Russian Unity group,
said that once the question of relative strength was posed between the
president and the parliament, 'then the state is on the verge of a civil
war'.
Concern in the west at events in Moscow was evident in remarks by President
Bill Clinton, who told reporters: 'I support democracy in Russia and the
movement to a market economy, and Boris Yeltsin is the elected president of
Russia.'
The Group of Seven leading industrial nations have, however, so far stopped
short of offering Mr Yeltsin unconditional backing. Mr Boris Fyodorov, a
deputy prime minister, flew to Hong Kong to meet G7 officials exploring ways
to maintain the reform process in Russia, including possible further
economic aid.
Fears over the growing crisis in Moscow also helped push share prices lower
across Europe and the US. At the Congress, when it became plain that
deputies would finally pass a resolution which reduces the presidential
office to one occupied on the sufferance of parliament, Mr Yeltsin took the
rostrum to say that their decision would create 'a power vacuum which would
weaken Russia'.
If his proposed amendments were not passed, said Mr Yeltsin, he would take
'additional measures to retain the power balance in the country'. In spite
of shouts of alarm, he - and later his aides - made clear that what he had
in mind was a referendum, to be held in April, on the supremacy of the
presidency and the private ownership of land.
Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov, the presidential press secretary, said Mr Yeltsin
'understands he has only one partner left with whom he can talk. This is the
people'. He is expected to address the nation on television today.
Mr Shakrai said the referendum was constitutionally valid. The president's
legal service holds that the original pact in December between president and
Congress to go to the people on the nature of the constitution cannot be
repealed. Congress, however, earlier this week unfroze an article of the
constitution which allows parliament to dismiss the president if it
considers he has acted unconstitutionally.
Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, the first deputy prime minister, said last night that
a meeting during the session between Mr Yeltsin, Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the
combative parliamentary speaker, and Mr Valery Zorkin, head of the
Constitutional Court, produced nothing more than an invitation from Mr
Khasbulatov for the president again to address the Congress.
Mr Khasbulatov commanded Congress to sit for a fourth day today because, he
said, 'we should watch most attentively how the executive branch of
government (Mr Yeltsin) observes the constitution'. On the agenda are the
proposed referendum and the possibility of early elections.
Congress or its smaller permanent body, the Supreme Soviet, must either now
respond to Mr Yeltsin's challenge by moving towards declaring his actions
unconstitutional - or attempt to seek an accord with him.
West ponders aid, Page 2
Textbook leader, Page 8
World stocks, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930313

