FT932-7041

FT  26 MAY 93 / Secretive service exposed: How the arms-for-Iraq inquiry has
put pressure on Whitehall


   By JIMMY BURNS and DAVID OWEN


JUST over three weeks after they began, the public hearings of Lord Justice
Scott's inquiry into the arms-for-Iraq issue are already straining Whitehall
nerves and threatening a renewed political storm over an issue the
government may have felt had been confined to history.
Lord Justice Scott was appointed to head the inquiry last November with a
proven track record as a member of the 'liberal wing' of the judiciary who
was quite able, as in the Spycatcher case, to assert his independence from
government pressure.
However, few people could have predicted the speed with which he and his
counsel Ms Presiley Baxendale QC have moved to penetrate the morass of
Whitehall secrecy surrounding the British Iraqgate.
Armed with thousands of documents from within and from outside government
departments, the Scott team has developed an impressive double act of
probing questioning and cross-examination which has at times reduced even
the most disciplined civil servant to a compliant witness.
Lord Justice Scott's determination to use his powers as 'inquisitor' to cut
through political convention and complicity was starkly exemplified during
Monday's oral hearing of Sir Hal Miller.
The former MP suggested it was not appropriate for him to repeat a
conversation he had had in the Commons tearoom with fellow old-Etonian Alan
Clark, the former defence minister. The judge insisted that Sir Hal should
repeat it in the public hearing as the conversation had to do with
government policy on Iraq.
In an earlier hearing, a former MoD official told the judge he could not
answer some of his questions because he did not have the relevant documents.
The official was promptly told to return another day after he had provided
the documents.
With the political storm clouds already gathering over Sir Hal's statements
and the planned appearance tomorrow of Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Scott inquiry
has already had more of an impact than last year's parliamentary inquiry
into the Supergun affair and numerous questions in the Commons. Sir Hal's
evidence comes at an awkward time for the government, which is still
battling to restore its authority after this month's devastating election
results.
But if prime minister Mr John Major had to choose one cabinet minister to be
the first to appear before Lord Justice Scott, then the suave, debonair Sir
Patrick might be his man. A former barrister who has considerably enhanced
his reputation since moving to the Northern Ireland office a year ago, Sir
Patrick is unquestionably a safe pair of hands.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930526

