FT932-13520

FT  23 APR 93 / Jobless fall fuels hopes of upturn


   By PETER NORMAN and EMMA TUCKER


UNEMPLOYMENT fell for the second month running in March, confounding
expectations of a rise in the City and at Westminster and boosting hopes
that the recession is over.
The surprise 26,000 fall in the seasonally adjusted jobless total to 2.94m
last month combined with other upbeat news on the economy and yesterday's
Bundesbank interest rate cuts to give a strong upwards push to the pound.
The latest signs that the economy was strengthening were welcomed by Mr John
Major, the prime minister, who said the fall in unemployment was 'very good
news'. But the Treasury and Mrs Gillian Shephard, employment secretary, were
careful not to sound euphoric about the figures.
Mrs Shephard, while pointing out that 'vacancies are the highest for two
years, fewer people are joining the unemployment count and there have been
falls in unemployment in every region', said it was dangerous to read too
much into any one month's figures. The Treasury, which is waiting for next
Monday's data on first quarter national output before deciding whether it
can announce the end of the recession, said it was still too early to say
whether unemployment had peaked.
Other news yesterday sug-gested economic recovery might continue. Official
figures showed car production in March rose a seasonally adjusted 13 per
cent compared with February, while the Inland Revenue said completed home
sales rose an ad-justed 9 per cent in March after a 7 per cent rise in
February.
A British Chambers of Commerce survey of nearly 9,000 companies found that
domestic and export orders rose in the first quarter while the Federation of
Master Builders said its members also saw a first-quarter improvement in
business that they expected to continue into the second quarter of this
year.
The March drop in the seasonally adjusted total of people out of work and
claiming benefit followed a 25,500 drop in February (revised from a
provisional 22,000 fall) and compared with City expectations of a 30,000
increase last month.
The unadjusted jobless figure fell by 46,000 to 2.99m in March, below the
politically important 3m mark.
The UK unemployment figures and the Bundesbank cuts pushed sterling to
DM2.4875 against the D-Mark in London, some 2 1/4 pfennigs up on the day.
The pound also gained 1.15 cents against the dollar to close at Dollars
1.5480 and rose 0.8 percentage points on its exchange rate index to 80.7
after the Treasury made clear it did not intend to cut UK interest rates. In
late New York trading, sterling was at DM2.462 and Dollars 1.557.
The equity market appeared less enthusiastic about the news. While retail
demand for shares was reported to be strong, the FT-SE 100 index closed at
2,881.1, up just 11.5 points.
The drop in the jobless total reflected a lower number of people joining the
dole queues rather than a marked rise in the number of people leaving the
count.
Some economists believe companies shed too many people at the end of last
year following a sharp decline in confidence as a result of sterling's
departure from the European exchange rate mechanism. 'With firms having laid
off more people than was necessary then, fewer jobs are being lost now,'
said Mr Michael Saunders, an economist at Salomon Brothers.
Yesterday's employment data also showed that average earnings grew by 4.5
per cent in the year to February, the lowest annual rise for 25 years. Unit
labour costs in manufacturing also fell 2 per cent in the three months to
the end of February compared with the same period in 1992 - the largest such
drop since statistics began in 1970.
Little elation over latest fall, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 17
Lex, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930423

