FT933-10016

FT  06 AUG 93 / Technology: A new breed looms large - Waterjet weaving is
bringing greater speed and efficiency to the textile industry


   By DANIEL GREEN


A new breed of weaving machine is sweeping the world of synthetic textiles
manufacturing. It runs at four times the speed of a traditional power loom,
reduces vibration and power consumption and increases safety and
reliability.
The waterjet loom, a combination of precision engineering and a great deal
of water, is helping textile industries in developed countries keep ahead of
low labour cost rivals which still use older technologies.
What waterjet loom designers have done is to abandon the device that dragged
weaving from craft to industry at the start of the industrial revolution.
In 1733, as generations of British schoolchildren learn, John Kay invented
the flying shuttle. Its principle is simple. To make cloth, a weaver pulls a
horizontal yarn (the weft) across vertical yarns (the warp). Kay's invention
was to wind the weft around a bobbin, the shuttle, and fire it like a
slingshot to and fro across the warp. Many of the improvements in weaving
technology since Kay's day have been in finding better ways of powering the
bobbin across the warp.
But the flying shuttle is based on the inelegant principle of accelerating
and decelerating a mass of up to 400g when all that is really needed is to
move the much lighter yarn.
It is also ugly in practice: shuttle looms have to be built like tanks to
cope with the stresses of firing a weight a metre or more across the weft
and stopping it a fraction of a second later. The noise made by a shuttle
loom and the energy that can be released if it breaks down also make it a
health hazard.
The idea of a shuttleless loom has been in the minds of engineers for almost
a century. In the early days, they experimented with, among other things,
commercial vacuum cleaners to try to push the yarn across the warp with a
jet of air.
An airjet loom was patented as early as 1914 and modern versions are now
widely used, especially for weaving natural fibres.
But air jet looms move the yarn at only one-tenth of the speed of the puff
of air that pushes it. This limits the speed of the loom and the width of
the cloth that can be made.
Nor are they good at weaving wet or synthetic fibres, which are denser than
natural fibres and resist the push of air.
The solution is to use a jet of water instead of air. Today's waterjet looms
are much more efficient than their airjet rivals. The yarn picks up most of
the energy in the water and moves at about three-quarters of the speed of
the jet of water. They can also be used with wet yarn, sometimes important
if the yarn has just been chemically treated. Computer control and precision
engineering allow the weft to shoot across the warp at more than 10 times a
second.
Such unequivocal improvements have, not surprisingly, led to a sales boom
for the Japanese companies that developed the technology. Global sales of
waterjet looms rose by 135 per cent between 1988 and 1992, overtaking both
airjet and conventional shuttle looms, according to the International
Textile Manufacturers Federation. Sales of waterjet looms now account for 30
per cent of the world market.
Asia is the biggest market, buying almost 95 per cent of production. This is
partly because of relatively heavy capital investment in textiles generally
in the region and because consumers in the US prefer natural fibre fabrics,
which can be made by airjet looms. Sales in Europe are growing as consumers
learn to like the latest synthetic fabrics such as microfibres, which use
filaments as fine as silk.
Japanese manufacturer Tsudakoma dominates the market. Brisk sales of
waterjet looms last year allowed the company to increase profits at a time
when many companies saw profits fall. Other suppliers are the textiles arm
of motor manufacturer Nissan and Zbrojovka of the Czech Republic, which also
manufactures machine guns.
The technology has its drawbacks. When Toray, Japan's biggest textiles
manufacturer, was looking for a site for its just-opened UK plant, it needed
huge amounts of water to supply a mill of 265 waterjet looms. It chose
Mansfield in Nottinghamshire, partly because it could obtain a contract with
the National Rivers Authority to allow it to draw more than 1m tonnes of
water a year through four boreholes beneath the Pounds 50m factory.
For Toray, the level of automation that can be achieved with the latest
computer-controlled waterjet looms makes the effort worthwhile. It intends
to run the weaving section of its plant entirely unstaffed and it hopes to
be able to switch off the lights in its weaving mill later this year.
The performance of both airjet and waterjet looms is being improved by
booster nozzles that guide and impel the yarn as it shoots across the warp.
Airjet looms have been singled out in the drive to cut the time taken to
change yarns and patterns. This is because expensive garments with short
production runs and more complicated patterns are more likely to be made
from natural fibre fabrics.
The latest airjet machines from Picanol, a Belgian manufacturer, can be
split in two so that prepared modules set up from a different design can be
slotted quickly into place. Similar machines are made by Lindauer Dornier of
Germany and Sulzer Brothers of Switzerland.
Waterjet looms will not replace all their rivals. While they are best for
rapid manufacture of synthetic fibre cloth, airjet looms and other
shuttleless designs remain the first choice for natural fibres.
Even shuttle looms that Kay might have recognised have a place in weaving
traditional cloth and carpets in short runs for luxury markets. Sales of
shuttle looms now account for less than 10 per cent of the market, although
they still account for the majority of working looms around the world.
Textile manufacturing technology moves slowly and inventions more than two
centuries old are still in widespread use. The waterjet loom shows that
technology still has a powerful role to play in what is often regarded as a
traditional industry fit only for low labour-cost countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930806

