FT934-8371

FT  16 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Whitehall farce


THE GOVERNMENT'S drive to shake up the UK civil service appears to be losing
momentum, with numbers of civil servants again rising. Productivity
increases have allowed similar organisations in the private sector to shed
staff despite increasing workloads. Yet the number of white-collar civil
servants has not fallen in 10 years.
Market-testing was supposed to expose the civil service to competitive
pressure by putting central government work out to tender. The programme has
fallen woefully behind schedule, with less than half the target for the
first 18 months completed on time. Savings have been much lower than the 25
per cent predicted at the outset. Contractors have complained that the
tendering process favours in-house teams and discourages innovative bids
which would bring greater savings.
Measures to open the top ranks of civil servants to outsiders have also
stalled. A Cabinet Office efficiency unit report recommended that all senior
jobs should be advertised. This encountered stiff opposition from the
permanent secretaries who make the appointments. It has been rewritten to
preserve the present system.
The treatment of Whitehall is in sharp contrast to that meted out to local
government and the health service. They are forced to contract out much of
their work under rigorous rules designed to discourage anti-competitive
practices. Top jobs in both local government and the health service are
almost invariably advertised and filled by open competition. Different rules
appear to apply to the civil servants who drafted the rules for town halls
and health authorities.
Progress on reforms has been obstructed by top civil servants, according to
Sir Peter Kemp who managed the reform process until he was sacked last year.
He recommends the stimulus of a 25 per cent cut in the staffing of core
government departments. This would remove some 30,000 posts in recognition
that the bulk of civil service work has shifted to executive agencies. Such
staffing targets are crude but effective: they enabled Mrs Thatcher to cut
more than 100,000 civil service posts between 1979 and 1984. It is hard to
avoid the conclusion that the only way of forcing Whitehall to improve its
efficiency is to impose new targets in the future.
As for open advertising of top posts, the present secretive system cannot be
allowed to survive. All public jobs should be publicly advertised unless
there is an over-riding reason for not so doing. As in business, many -
perhaps most - would go to insiders. But new blood would be brought in and
the divide between public and private sector would be narrowed.
Finally, Sir Peter's suggestion that a high-profile individual reporting
direct to the prime minister be made responsible for civil service reform
should be implemented. Reform under the present system seems hopeless. It is
time for a new approach.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931116

