FT932-3214

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Company News: Daiei to absorb three affiliates
as demand slides


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


DAIEI, Japan's largest supermarket chain which is known for its aggressive
expansion, has announced it will absorb three retail affiliates in next
March, pushing annual sales up to Y2,590bn (Dollars 24bn) and widening its
lead over Ito-Yokado, the country's second largest retailer.
The decision comes as Japan's retailers are being hit by a plunge in
consumer demand and increased competition from discount chains and
convenience stores.
The move is expected to accelerate the pace of rationalisation within the
country's complex retail and distribution sector, lowering prices of
consumer goods, including imports. Mr Yuji Tanahashi, vice-minister of the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry, yesterday welcomed the move,
adding that the retail sector would no longer be able to enjoy growth as
strong as in the past.
Daiei will absorb Chujitsuya, Uneed Daiei and Daihana, three smaller
regional supermarket chains. Daiei will issue a total of 167,951,000 new
shares for the merger, alloting 12 Daiei shares for 10 Chujitsuya shares,
and nine Daiei shares for 10 Uneed shares. Daihana, a wholly owned
subsidiary, will transfer its assets to Daiei.
The company will be the first retailer to have a national network from
Hokkaido, the island in the north, to Okinawa in the south.
Mr Isao Nakauchi, president of Daiei, said the merger will lead to a more
efficient operation, through integration of merchandise purchasing,
distribution networks and personnel. He said the company will promote
imports and lower prices.
Daiei bought 41.9 per cent of Chujitsuya, which has a large network in the
Tokyo area, in March last year, from Shuwa, the stock and property
speculator, which was facing severe financial difficulties.
However, the rapid growth of its complex corporate structure has made the
company's true financial state unclear. Among its many acquisitions, the
company bought 34 per cent of Recruit, the publishing and real estate
concern last year.
Meanwhile, Daiei's announcement prompted the Tokyo Stock Exchange to halt
trading in Daiei and Chujitsuya shares, while trading in Uneed, listed on
the second section of the Osaka Securities Exchange, was also suspended.
Ichiken, a construction company in the Daiei group, however, surged Y110 to
Y1,110.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930615

