FT933-9905

FT  06 AUG 93 / International Bonds: Denmark raises record Pounds 1.2bn in
sterling Eurobonds


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


DENMARK yesterday raised a record Pounds 1.2bn in the sterling Eurobond
market to replenish its currency reserves following heavy intervention in
the foreign exchange market to support the Danish krone in July.
The financing led to speculation that other European governments would also
need to raise funds to top up reserves. However, other borrowers may choose
to wait until the Autumn as their needs are not thought to be pressing.
Denmark's financing was split into two tranches: a Pounds 700m fixed-rate
issue, increased from an initial Pounds 500m, of 6 3/4 per cent five-year
bonds priced to yield 28 basis points more than the comparable gilt yield;
and a Pounds 500m offering of five-year floating rate notes paying interest
at  1/8 point below the three-month London interbank offered rate.
The financing was split because Denmark wanted to raise both fixed rate and
floating rate debt. In the event, it was cheaper for Denmark to tap both
markets rather than raise the whole amount in the fixed-rate market and swap
a portion into floating-rate funding.
The fixed-rate portion of the offering was considered fairly priced and sold
well, prompting an increase in size to Pounds 700m.
Dealers were relieved when the launch spread of 28 basis points over the
five-year gilt was announced, as there had been rumours that some banks were
bidding for the mandate at a spread of 25 basis points. The Pounds 500m
floating-rate tranche was less well received. The sub-Libor pricing was
considered ambitious for Denmark, and dealers said sales were slow.
The all-in cost for Denmark was about 3 basis points under Libor for the
floating-rate tranche. Lead-manager UBS accepted that the fixed-rate portion
proved more attractive, but added that joint lead-managers UBS and Warburg
had 'identified a home' for both portions of the offering.
However, some syndicate managers remained unimpressed by the floating rate
portion: 'I saw this financing as a carrot and stick combination,' said one.
The fixed-rate bonds tightened slightly to a spread of 27 basis points while
the floating-rate notes were bid below their fixed reoffer price of 99.725
at 99.65.
In the nascent dragon bond market - the south-east Asian foreign bond market
 -Abbey National Treasury Services became the first UK borrower and the
first bank to tap the market.
The Dollars 250m three-year deal was arranged by Goldman Sachs Asia and
Lehman Asia. The deal followed extensive road shows in south-east Asia to
introduce the Abbey National name.
In the Canadian bond market, three more borrowers launched four-year
Eurobonds priced over the three-year Canadian government bond benchmark,
which has the effect of boosting the yield spread. UBS Australia and Credit
Lyonnais each launched CDollars 150m offerings, while Credit Local de France
launched a CDollars 125m deal.
Elsewhere, the European Investment Bank launched a DM500m issue of 6 per
cent bonds due 1997 via Commerzbank.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930806

