FT931-3935

FT  12 MAR 93 / Setback for General Motors as Lopez resigns key position


   By MARTIN DICKSON


   NEW YORK


GENERAL Motors yesterday suffered a severe setback in its efforts to return
its North American automobile operations to profit, when Mr J. Ignacio Lopez
de Arriortua, head of worldwide purchasing, resigned amid reports he is
joining Volkswagen.
Mr Lopez, who was appointed to the purchasing job only 10 months ago, has
been the key person in a drive by GM to cut costs through a radical
reorganisation in the way it buys parts in North America.
GM's announcement did not spell out where Mr Lopez was going, but reports
from Germany have repeatedly suggested he was joining Volkswagen on March
16, when the company is due to announce sweeping changes in management. Mr
Lopez repeatedly denied this, insisting he was happy at GM.
Mr Lopez, a Spaniard, has a deep knowledge of the European motor industry,
having played a crucial role in the 1980s in turning GM's European
operations from loss to profit. As head of European purchasing, he slashed
the company's costs and improved quality by renegotiating supplier
contracts.
He was brought to the US by Mr Jack Smith, GM's chief executive, last May to
do the same thing in North America. He stirred up immense opposition from
some of GM's parts suppliers, who accused him of demanding unrealistic
improvements in what they claimed were good productivity records and thin
profit margins.
Mr Smith yesterday expressed confidence that the worldwide purchasing team
assembled by Mr Lopez would 'keep the momentum going and meet our aggressive
approach for improved material quality and service, while achieving our
commitments for total material cost savings.'
Analysts said the costs drive was so much a product of Mr Lopez's personal
management style that it was bound to suffer from his departure. GM is
understood to be close to assembling the world's largest ever bank credit
line, totalling nearly Dollars 25bn, to refinance maturing bank lines,
particularly at its finance arm, General Motors Acceptance Corp.
The facility, lead-managed by Chemical Banking, would involve more than
Dollars 20bn in syndicated credits, with about Dollars 4bn more from
individual banks.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930312

