FT932-6877

FT  26 MAY 93 / London Stock Exchange: Picture brightens towards the close


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


AN UNCERTAIN session in the UK stock market yesterday ended on a more
confident note, with a rebound in the trading issues of Zeneca, which will
be formally demerged from ICI next week, relieving some of the equity
sector's worries over current funding pressures. London was also helped at
the close when Wall Street opened firmly in spite of a sharp fall in US
consumer confidence.
However, market strategists hesitated to put too much faith in yesterday's
gain of 12.1 to 2,837.7 in the FT-SE 100 Index in a session featured by the
appointment of an official receiver at Speyhawk, the UK property group
widely involved in office development in the City of London.
Although the stock market was in plus territory throughout the session,
progress was fitful and equities were often driven by development in stock
index futures, where the June contract on the Footsie lost its fair value
premium during the afternoon.
With the bond market facing a Pounds 3bn auction of government securities
today, the big institutions were still inclined to stand aside from
equities. Seaq volume increased to 591.2m shares but analysts pointed to a
retail worth of only Pounds 1.06bn on Monday's Seaq total of 510.5m shares.
Trading in the non-Footsie stocks slackened somewhat, making up only about
54 per cent of the day's Seaq total. Although finally at another new peak of
3,172.7, the FT-SE Mid 250 was ahead only 4.3 points on the session.
Suspension of Speyhawk shares, ahead of disclosure that a receiver had been
appointed, had a relatively mild effect on a stock market well versed in the
overhanging problems of the property sector, and now focusing on recovery
prospects.
The late uptick in Zeneca issues, seen by some analysts as a sign that the
pre-launch selling may be drawing to a close, had favourable implications
for the market as a whole. Similarly positive was evident support for BT
shares as the campaign for the BT3 sale got under way in the City.
The market is still towards the lower end of its existing trading range and
there were no claims yesterday that the corner had yet been turned. However,
if today's government bond auction passes off satisfactorily, then the stock
market will have cleared another of the hurdles which have been restraining
investment confidence over the past six weeks or so.
Uncertainty over the progress of economic recovery in the UK is also likely
to remain unanswered, at least until the next set of monthly economic data
arrives, with the unemployment statistics expected to remain in the
forefront of the market's collective mind.
Most of the features reflected developments in particular stocks rather than
in wider aspects of the stock market - 'a market for stocks, rather than a
stock market,' commented Mr Paul Harrison at Salomon International.
The strength of the Hong Kong market brought buyers in for some Far Eastern
issues. But most of the blue chip internationals traded quietly, the
pharmaceuticals extending the losses of recent sessions.
On the domestic side, brewery shares rallied from the losses suffered in the
wake of last week's trading news from the sector, but retail stores could
make little progress.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

930526

