FT932-82

FT  30 JUN 93 / International Company News: Agnelli shows interest in
Ferruzzi food concern


   By HAIG SIMONIAN and ALICE RAWSTHORN


   MILAN, PARIS


MR UMBERTO Agnelli, chairman of Italy's Ifil diversified holding company,
yesterday raised the possibility of a bid battle for Eridania Beghin-Say,
the Paris-based sugar and foods group controlled by the troubled Ferruzzi
Finanziaria concern.
Mr Agnelli said Saint Louis, the diversified holding company in which Ifil
is a leading shareholder, could be interested in participating in a takeover
of EBS. 'If the restructuring of the Ferruzzi group leads to some sort of
operation at Eridania Beghin-Say, it's possible Saint Louis could take
part,' he said.
By contrast, Mr Agnelli ruled out a bid by BSN, the big French foods group
in which Ifil has a minority stake.
Ifil now has 15.6 per cent of Saint Louis. However, it has an agreement with
Worms - the biggest shareholder with 31.9 per cent - to raise its holding to
a similar level. Ifil also owns 7.1 per cent of the holding company
controlling Worms.
Mr Agnelli's statement comes just days after Mr Jean-Marc Vernes, the former
chairman of EBS, suggested he might be interested in bidding for the group,
possibly with Mr Raul Gardini, the previous guiding light at Ferruzzi.
Saint-Louis made no comment on Mr Agnelli's remarks. However it referred to
a statement by Mr Bernard Dumon, its chairman, saying his group was always
interested in any potential investments in the European sugar industry.
The French company has already collaborated in a number of Ifil ventures,
notably in last year's bid battle for control of the Perrier mineral water
company.
Saint-Louis eventually sold its Perrier stake for a profit to the ultimate
victor, Nestle.
Saint-Louis is the third-largest player in European sugar with interests in
other areas of food and in the paper industry. It recently announced a
modest increase in net profits, from FFr765m in 1991 to FFr774m (Dollars
138.95m) in 1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930630

