FT933-12744

FT  22 JUL 93 / International Company News: Nortel sells UK marine cable arm


   By ANDREW ADONIS and JOHN RIDDING


ALCATEL-Alsthom has agreed to buy STC Submarine Systems, the UK-based
underwater cable business of Canada's Northern Telecom, for about Pounds
600m (Dollars 899m).
If it clears regulatory hurdles in London and Brussels, the acquisition will
form part of Alcatel Cable, creating the world's largest underwater
telecommunications cable group, with estimated total sales of about Ecu800m
(Dollars 727m) last year.
Alcatel-Alsthom said that the deal would expand Alcatel Cable's geographical
coverage in a rapidly growing market. 'It is a very dynamic market as a
result of the growth of international telecommunications,' the company said.
The sale is a further stage in Northern Telecom's rationalisation of its UK
STC business, acquired in 1990. The company, which last month forecast a
second-quarter loss and replaced its chairman, has been under pressure to
focus on core businesses.
Besides STC, Northern Telecom has no other undersea cable activities. In the
past two years it has largely disposed of STC's distribution, service and
cable manufacturing concerns.
Mr Ian Craig, president of NT's European division, said: 'This has been in
prospect for some time. We are concentrating our UK business on switching,
transmission, radio and microwave: this deal means no lessening of our
commitment to the UK in those fields.'
Alcatel stressed the benefits to be gained from pooling the two groups'
research and development activities. With research in undersea cables at the
leading edge of fibre-optic technology, it expects the acquisition to
strengthen other aspects of its business.
The new group's main competitor for undersea cables are AT&T, the largest US
operator and telecoms manufacturer, and Fujitsu of Japan. The purchase
reflects Alcatel's determination to strengthen its European base as the EC's
telecommunications market is opened to competition.
Alcatel Cable has been increasing its market share following the acquisition
at the beginning of 1992 of the cable business of AEG, the German industrial
group.
Analysts in Paris said the purchase would increase the debt of the Alcatel
cable subsidiary, which is estimated at more than FFr5bn (Dollars 862m). But
they did not expect any dilution of earnings this year.
STC Submarine Systems, which is based in Greenwich, London, had sales of
Ecu300m in 1992 and has about 1,200 employees. Alcatel Cable has annual
sales of more than Ecu5bn and employs about 28,000 people.
Mr Craig claimed Northern Telecom got a very good price for the sale. 'We
might have settled for substantially less three years ago.'
In 1990, Northern Telecom paid Pounds 1.9bn for STC, and the submarine
systems division is estimated to account for about 20 per cent of the sales
of the former group. The sale leaves Northern with 5,200 employees in the
UK.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930722

