FT934-8597

FT  15 NOV 93 / Whitehall reform 'obstructed' by top civil servants


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


SENIOR Whitehall mandarins are obstructing civil service reforms, according
to Sir Peter Kemp, the former civil servant who managed the reforms until he
was sacked last year.
Sir Peter says policies such as market-testing, the Citizen's Charter and
the switch to executive agencies have been stalled by opposition from top
civil servants and the failure of ministers to press them forward.
To maintain the momentum of reform the number of Whitehall posts should be
cut by a quarter, senior positions advertised openly and production teams
established to turn policy into action, he says.
Sir Peter calls for the abolition of the fast-stream entry programme, under
which potential high-fliers are given special training and accelerated
promotion. Describing it as 'elitist', he says more efforts should be made
to identify and develop talent among existing staff.
In a pamphlet published today by the Social Market Foundation, the
independent think-tank, Sir Peter says that some of the opposition to reform
is motivated by the defence of self-interest.
'The levers of power are in the hands of those who broadly oppose reform,
including many senior civil servants and some ministers who are often civil
servants manques. The guards are in charge of the escape committee.'
He adds: 'At the centre, in Whitehall, old attitudes and the old guard
prevail. The only heads that have rolled have been among the revolutionaries
themselves.'
Sir Peter, who masterminded the creation of executive agencies to deliver
public services, was sacked 15 months ago after disagreements with Mr
William Waldegrave, the public service minister.
With civil service numbers increasing again a 'cull of posts' is essential,
Sir Peter says. Up to 25 per cent of Whitehall staff could be cut out
following the creation of agencies to bring numbers under control.
A non-politician reporting directly to the prime minister should be placed
in charge of forcing through change, Sir Peter says.
Beyond Next Steps. Social Market Foundation, 20 Queen Anne's Gate, London
SW1H 9AA. Pounds 8.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931115

