FT932-281

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (13): EC attempts to override standards - The
Community plans to introduce CE marking as a sign of conformity but it does
not deter national preference / Trade Barriers


   By TONY BUSH


IT could have been a classic case of Double Dutch for Pitney Bowes, a world
leader in mailing equipment, when Holland proposed a ban on bromine
additives in plastics.
But the company, which has a good market in the Netherlands for its franking
machines, was tipped off 18 months in advance by Technical Help for
Exporters (THE), part of the British Standards Institution. It acted on the
warning by changing the constituents of its plastic mouldings.
The company also received a BSI translation of the new directive from Dutch
to English. Without the warning it may have found its machines were no
longer acceptable imports.
Mr Praha Kanagasabai, Pitney Bowes product safety manager, says: 'If we had
not been geared up for the additives ban, it would have had serious
implications for us, not just in Holland but possibly elsewhere because it's
likely that the directive will become a European standard.
'The early alert allowed our corporate materials group in the US to work out
how to extract bromine additives from plastic, and they have now come up
with a new material similar in cost, performance and characteristics.'
THE has also guided Pitney Bowes' UK and American divisions through the
complex technical requirements of the new European Low Voltage and
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) directives.
Mr Kanagasabai says: 'The EMC requirements in Germany and other parts of
Europe are continuously changing. To accommodate new product design to meet
these directives, our information and data on various countries are
constantly updated by THE, which also advises on transitional requirements.
Another grateful recipient of THE's help is JCB, Staffordshire manufacturers
of excavation, earthmoving and materials handling equipment for the
construction and agricultural industries.
THE has provided the company with what it considers its bible - the Blue
Book for the Mobile Construction Industry - a series of books, comprising
1,500 pages that set out a plethora of detail on directives, legislation and
the minutiae of the industry, from machine vehicle widths to advice on
spindle knobs.
JCB says: 'This is the definitive document for our type of equipment. It's a
very specialised work of reference - available for other industry sectors,
too - that we can use on a day-to-day basis. Naturally, everything's
constantly changing but THE provides us with updates.'
THE ensures exporters and would-be exporters' products comply with technical
requirements anywhere in the world. It also advises on international and
national standards, regulations, codes of practice, certification systems
and testing and inspection procedures.
To encourage companies to use its services, it has recently reduced its
charges significantly. Information is supplied on a free basis provided the
inquiry is answered within 30 minutes. And companies with fewer than 200
employees are eligible for a 50 per cent reduction in export consultancy
projects lasting up to three days. The full cost of this service is between
Pounds 1,500 and Pounds 2,000.
THE staff are also available for hire as consultants to inspect designs or
product samples and to advise on modifications, or to carry out in-depth
research in a particular country. The cost is Pounds 650 a day plus travel
expenses, although reduced-price 'packages' can be agreed.
The European Community's plans to introduce its own harmonised mark of
conformity - CE marking - will help remove many of THE's standards problems.
Any product bearing the marking will have met criteria laid down by the
relevant EC New Approach Directive and will be acceptable in any country
within the EC. Products so far affected include toys, gas appliances,
machinery and weighing instruments.
CE marking, introduced in 1990, indicates that goods meet certain general
parameters laid down in a directive, rather than conforming to a particular
type. Where national standards conflict with agreed European standards they
have to be withdrawn. But the majority of goods are not covered by EC
directives and therefore continue to be governed by national standards.
Mr Derek Francis, head of the electrical section at THE, says: 'The process
is still in its transitional stage, but although the CE marking will mean an
item has met the essential requirements of a directive, this does not mean
it will necessarily meet national preferences.'
Herein lies a potential 'time-bomb'. Many believe that even when European
trade is harmonised 'national rules' may be illegally applied to block bona
fide trade.
Mr Ian Campbell, director general of the Institute of Export, says: 'It's
fine for the directive to be introduced. The problem is one of compliance.
Some countries' authorities may try to block exports with the CE marking
saying they don't comply with their national health and safety regulations,
which came under the Factory Inspectorate, or with consumer protection
rulings, overseen by trading standards officers.
'So, in other words, although the CE marking demonstrates conformity, this
is only the first step because, thereafter, you are exposed to national
preferences. The level playing fields idea is excellent in theory but while
we may follow the rules, some of our competitors don't'
But any company which believes its products have been rejected by an
invidious application of 'national standards', or some other unfair ploy,
can appeal to the Department of Trade and Industry's Single Market
Compliance Unit (SMCU), set up to resolve difficulties caused by breaches of
EC rules. The unit is currently dealing with about 50 cases, 15 of which
concern standards.
According to the SMCU, single market rules on standards only apply to the
public sector, as private sector clients are free to set their own
requirements because they are not bound by EC public purchasing rules.
Public sector or monopoly buyers are subject to the rules and cannot impose
standards favouring nationals.
The SMCU deals with problems such as an exporter not being given a test date
for a product, or delays in receiving the test results. Or 'general
obfuscation directly or indirectly interfering with the free movement of
goods', the unit says.
The SMCU can take such matters up with a member state through Brussels,
ministers can contact their counterparts in the member state or ambassadors
can raise matters with the ministry concerned.
The DTI says: 'Everything we do for an exporter is treated confidentially.
The SMCU wants the company to be satisfied and so it looks for the best,
quickest result. We always have commercial reality in mind.'
Technical Help for Exporters: 0908 220022
Single Market Compliance Unit: 071 215 6730
The only other equivalent to Technical Help for Exporters elsewhere in
Europe is the French company, Norex, based in Paris, Tel: (331) 4291 5555.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

930629

