FT932-3424

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (12): Covers come off real history -
Memories of the Jewish past are being unveiled


   By FRANCIS GHILES


EIGHTEEN months after succeeding Mr Habib Bourguiba as Tunisia's second
president, Mr Zine el Abidine Ben Ali paid a state visit to France. All the
usual trappings of a state visit were in evidence, including a few hours
spent at the Saint Cyr Coetquidan military academy which the young officer
had attended 30 years earlier. More unusual was the restaurant at which Mr
Ben Ali chose to have dinner on his first night in Paris - Chez George de
Tunis, Rue Monmartre, is a typically Tunisian Jewish restaurant, of which
there are many in this arrondissement of Paris.
Last September, the chief rabbi of France, Mr Joseph Sitruk, was invited
back to the country where he was born. The rabbi was shown round the
presidential palace by the head of state in person and the news was featured
on prime time television.
This gesture marked a break in the arabisme of the past two decades. It
brought back memories of Mr Bourguiba's bold suggestion, made in Amman in
1965, that only when the Israelis and the Palestinians sat down together
would there be any hope for peace.
To mark the fifth anniversary of his accession to power last November, the
president attended a ceremony where Tunisian history was evoked with a
greater measure of truth than ever before. Never since 1956 had Tunisian
people been reminded that a majority of their countrymen were Christians
until just over 1,000 years ago. The vast majority of this Sunni Moslem
country had no idea that Shi'ite Islam had flourished under the Fatimid
dynasty which ruled in the ninth and 10th centuries. The menorah candlestick
was paraded, a reminder of the more than 2,000 years of Jewish presence in
the country.
Tunisia's personality is complex, its richness lies in its diversity. Legend
has it that the Ghriba synagogue of the southern island of Jerba was built
around a stone prised from the eastern wall of King Solomon's temple in
Jerusalem brought by a group of Jews after its destruction by Nebuchadnezzar
in 586BC. The synagogue, according to another account, takes its name from a
Jewish woman who reached Jerba, carrying a stone in her hand. She became
known on the island as al Ghriba,the stranger, who, after living an
exemplary life, died, leaving no trace.
The annual pilgrimage held in memory of Rabbi Meir Ba'al Haness and Rabbi
Shimon Bar Yochal takes place annually a few weeks after Passover. This year
it attracted 2,000 Jews, the largest number in decades.
Seven hundred of an estimated 2,000 Jews in Tunisia live on the island,
happily co-existing with the local inhabitants who belong to the Ibadite
rite of Islam which is the dominant rite in Oman and in the southern
Algerian town of Ghardaia. Ibadites in north Africa are traditionally
tolerant, learned and excellent traders. Indeed, hospitality as they
practise it is described by the great Arab poet Omar Khayyam as deeply
etched on to Jerba - 'the clay whispered to the potter who pounded it;
remember I was once as you are, do not handle me roughly.'
History recalls the presence of Jews in Tunisia, notably in Carthage nearly
2,000 years ago. A large necropolis was discovered in the 1970s, probably
the burial ground of those Jews descended from others who had taken refuge
in north Africa after the second destruction of the temple by the Roman
emperor Titus in 70AD.
Unlike the events in many Arab countries after the creation of Israel the
Tunisian Jews, who at the time of independence numbered around 50,000 and
had acquired French nationality, did not leave the country under duress.
Moving to France was natural as that country offered greater opportunities.
One Tunisian Jew who did stay and is now a successful businessman is Mr
Roger Bismuth, who still lives in the suburb of La Goulette, just outside
Tunis, an area which in colonial days was synonymous with Jewish and
Sicilian ways of life.
Following the French Great Rabbi's visit, the Tunisian authorities lifted
the freeze on funds belonging to Tunisian Jews. That money can now be spent
in Tunisia.
Official recognition of the diversity of Tunisian history is taking other
forms. The role of the former rulers of Tunisia, the 'beys', is now
officially recognised. Since the last bey, Lamine, was deposed in 1957, the
very memory of their existence had been erased. One of their palaces near
Tunis, at Ksar Said, has recently been restored.
All these gestures come at a time when Tunisian leaders are liberalising the
management of the country's economy. Foreign investment is being encouraged
and some Tunisian entrepreneurs are now investing abroad. No one expects
former Tunisian Jews to come back and settle in Tunisia but they could prove
useful relays in marketing Tunisian goods abroad or joining with Tunisians
in joint ventures in the land where they lived for so many centuries.
International marketing is one of the skills which still eludes many
Tunisian businessmen.
Former Tunisian Jews are well established, notably in Paris. Most of them
have fond memories of Tunisia - for centuries they shared many cultural
values not least music and many business interests. As the Tunisian film,
The Man of Ashes, so eloquently showed, the cultural symbiosis between the
two communities ran deep. A number of Tunisian families played an important
role in the struggle for independence.
During the Vichy and the Italian-German occupation, 1940 to 1943, many
Tunisian Jews found refuge and help with their Moslem rather than their
French brethren. Mr Ben Ali shares such memories of close relations with
Jews with many Tunisians. His childhood days were spent in Hamman Sousse
during the Second World War.
Closer links with the Jewish community, if they develop, could have other
beneficial consequences. They could encourage moves to liberalise the
economy further. They could force greater transparency in economic
operations. Such links could encourage foreign investment and trade, greater
freedom of expression.
Mr Ben Ali's welcoming hand in no way belies his support for the Palestinian
Liberal Organisation. The president has said he would be happy to host a
meeting between the PLO leader Mr Yasir Arafat and the Israeli prime
minister. The president's policy might simply help Tunisia recover its
memory and thus bring it closer to Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

930614

