FT934-8620

FT  15 NOV 93 / Nursery education for all ruled out


   By JOHN AUTHERS


THE GOVERNMENT yesterday ruled out introducing universal nursery education
ahead of a call for its introduction today by the independent National
Commission on Education.
Universal education from the age of three, and a 'graduate tax' which would
make students pay for the cost of their university education via higher tax
payments, are both expected to be included in the proposals.
The education department stressed yesterday, however, that nursery
education, now provided for 53 per cent of children, must be left to local
decision makers.
Ministers have also made clear that a graduate tax, mooted recently by
vice-chancellors, is not a government priority, partly because it would be
unpopular with Conservative voters. A decision by university heads not to
call for any specific form of graduate tax was described as 'a victory for
commonsense'.
The commission's plans appear to conflict with Mr Patten's re-stated
commitment last week to maintain A-level exams in their present form.
However, Mr Patten could not comment in detail on the plans, drawn up by an
independent commission headed by Sir Claus Moser, the warden of Wadham
College, Oxford, as they are yet to be published.
Other recommendations expected from the commission include greater funding
for primary schools; the abolition of GCSE exams, with A-levels converted
into a 'baccalaureate' system; and a new combined department for education
and training to avoid any overlap of responsibilities between education and
employment departments.
The commission's members include representatives of industry and finance,
such as Dr David Giachardi, director of research for Courtaulds; Mr
Christopher Johnson, former economic adviser to Lloyds Bank; and Mr Peter
Wickens, director of personnel for Nissan Motor Manufacturing (UK).
It has no statutory authority but its aims were broadly endorsed by the
government when it was founded, and its members were appointed by the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, an independent
educational body.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931115

