FT932-248

FT  30 JUN 93 / Feathers fly over shooting of wild birds


   By DAVID GARDNER


   LUXEMBOURG


'LOOK at the little starling, it's oh so cheerful' runs a popular children's
song in Denmark. So popular, it would seem, that it induced the Danish
delegation at this week's European Community environment council to try to
sabotage a Danish EC presidency compromise on rules for shooting wild birds.
The latest twist in the 15-year-long tale of the Community's efforts to
legislate for the birds has arisen because the Danes regard the starling
sturnum unicolor (as opposed to the sturnum vulgaris) as a prized songbird.
Spain and Portugal want to be allowed to shoot starlings as a pest, but the
Danes do not believe Spanish claims about their hunters' ability to
distinguish between the vulgar and the unicolour. Britain, usually in the
vanguard of birds' rights, reckons the starling actually kills other more
prized songbirds.
More feathers flew over whether hunters in southern Italy could shoot the
black-tailed and bar-tailed godwit, because they can be confused with
curlews - which, it was pointed out, the fastidious Danes are allowed to
kill.
The environment ministers were attempting to amend the 1979 birds directive,
to make it possible to shoot pest birds like crows, jays, magpies, jackdaws
and rooks (except in the mating season). But it was not immediately clear
how much of the discussion was intelligible to those conducting it.
As one EC official opined: 'Magpies are stuffed either way.' Another, from
the UK, held to loftier philosophical ground, underlining that 'the problem
on pest species would not be negotiated in this way now, in the light of
subsidiarity'. That is to say. . . . if the legal mess had not been made at
EC level in the first place by member states now clamouring for Brussels to
mind its own business.
Yet in its original proposal, the European Commission specifically said that
pest species could, and even should, be shot. But it was argued down by a
bird-lovers' coalition led by Britain. This opened the way to prolonged
court actions against nearly all member states, where they continued to be
shot anyway.
As the Danes retired yesterday to ponder the fate of the starling, one
French official grandly trumped their popular songs about starlings by
pointing out that the poet Charles Baudelaire had written a famous poem
about the albatross. That fabled bird, he asserted, was closely related to
the gulls, cormorants and white-fronted goose which Danes can take pot-shots
at, but to which the French are very attached.
'It is unthinkable for us to shoot seagulls,' he fulminated. But it looked
more an attempt to ruffle a few more feathers.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930630

