FT934-11461

FT  01 NOV 93 / Yeltsin decree will allow foreigners to buy land


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


PRESIDENT Yeltsin's decree permitting land to be freely bought and sold is
likely to unleash a revolution in the Russian countryside and lead to
substantial foreign investment.
However, ambiguities in the law and a rearguard action by officials hostile
to land privatisation could delay or even halt its intended effect, by
preserving the power of state and collective farms and preventing peasants
from selling their share of collective farms.
Mr Yuri Chernichenko, leader of the pro-market Peasants' Party, said the
decree would be meaningless unless the state pushed through collective farm
sales and supported the new individual farmers.
Earlier decrees have cut subsidies to state farms, stopped easy loans and
ordered an end to obligatory grain sales to the state - causing state farm
leaders to forecast a crisis unless they receive funding. The decree, by
allowing farm workers to sell and buy land, gives an incentive to create
private farms which could take over from the failing state enterprises.
The decree appears to allow foreigners to buy land through joint ventures.
Mr Mark Borghesani of US lawyers Baker MacKenzie, said: 'There is nothing in
the law to prevent a foreign company buying out its Russian partner after
the joint venture has acquired land. This could lead to transactions in
which the Russians would be nominal purchasers on behalf of the foreign
company.'
While the bulk of the decree was aimed at privatising land for agricultural
use, one section allows local authorities to change the use from
agricultural to commercial, Mr Borghesani said. 'There is now definitely a
growing demand for premises - including manufacturing bases on greenfield
sites. Leases are now being signed with the option to buy later - in
anticipation of the land law coming into force.'
However, the decree will also spark efforts to protect the present system.
The Agriculture Ministry, voice of the state farm sector, has criticised the
decree as ill-thought out and premature. Mr Valentin Denisov, a senior
ministry official, said: 'Without a precise mechanism to control the land
market and give permission to sell land, farm managers can do as they please
and that could breed chaos.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931101

