FT934-8413

FT  16 NOV 93 / Clarke warns on export prices: Chancellor expects steady
expansion


   By ROLAND RUDD and PAUL CHEESERIGHT


MR KENNETH Clarke, chancellor of the exchequer, yesterday warned that the
weakness of European markets was one of the biggest risks to Britain's
fragile economic recovery.
In a speech to the Confederation of British Industry conference in
Harrogate, North Yorkshire, he said: 'Britain is the only major country in
Europe where the economy is recovering. But that is a cause only for subdued
celebration since more than half our trade is with other EC countries.'
Mr Clarke voiced concern that in the past year exporters had raised their
prices by 10 per cent while inflation was less than 2 per cent and wage
increases at a historic low. The rise could not reflect cost pressures at
home.
He said: 'It provides a vivid reminder that British management, no doubt
under shareholder pressure, always tends to prefer return to volume when
competing in overseas markets.
'If our recovery is to be strong and sustained, we need to export as well as
consume. And if our recovery is to be a job-creating recovery, we must do
everything in our power to maintain our competitive advantage and to expand
our share of world trade.'
Mr Clarke said he doubted whether the recovery would lead to a sharp upturn
and a period of rapid growth. His view was that much of Europe was likely to
see an expansion that was steady, but slow. 'The challenge will be to
sustain it. The nineties will not be an easy decade in which to earn a
living.'
Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, told the conference
that companies that wanted to generate their own electricity would no longer
need a supply licence.
He said the decision was evidence of the government's determination to
deregulate.
'Like competitiveness, deregulation has no end date. There is always more to
do,' he said.
The electricity decision removes a requirement that companies generating
electricity for their own use need a licence if they consume less than 51
per cent of the output themselves.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931116

