FT934-8560

FT  15 NOV 93 / Arts: A Sondheim straitjacket


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Watching The Ten Commandments, a musical written by a committee and which
has just been performed at the Place, is as grim an experience as I have
undergone in a long age. But pity the poor folk involved] They had to write
and rehearse it. The fact that it is a bad show is not in itself important,
since trashy musicals are common phonomena. What is sad, indeed alarming,
about The Ten Commandments is that it is the product of an entire school of
aspiring songwriters who mean to advance the musical.
The name of this collective is the Mercury Workshop, which was formed in
April 1992 as a spin-off from Stephen Sondheim's masterclasses in Oxford. I
saw the workshop's first show, The Challenge, in July 1992; and, though that
show had some glimmerings of talent, I am now wholly persuaded that Oxford's
idea of getting Sondheim to teach those masterclasses was the worst thing
that could have happened to British musical theatre. These young-ish writers
now seem to have wholly subordinated themselves to Sondheim style; they have
learnt everything from Sondheim except his talent.
They have, in fact, learnt the Ten Commandments of Sondheim musical theatre.
Namely: 1. Thou shalt have no other gods before Saint Stephen. 2. Thou shalt
be clever. 3. Thou shalt be cynical. 4. Thou shalt not be original. 5. Thou
shalt give each line of verse as few syllables as possible. 6. Thou shalt
rhyme, rhyme, rhyme. 7. Thou shalt give equal stress to most syllables, then
undue stress to the last syllable of each line. 8. Thou shalt make music
less vital than words. 9. Thou shalt eschew jazz, swing, and rock from thy
music. 10. Thou shalt cultivate a truly wearisome mixture of patter,
vaudeville, and ballroom musical ingredients.
A possible Eleventh Commandment (though it is one that Saint Sondheim has
broken on occasion) is: Thou shalt choose as unlikely a subject for musical
as the brain of man might conceive. In The Challenge the Mercury Workshop
set itself the task of telling the tale of Daedalus, the Minotaur and
Icarus. For The Ten Commandments, each of the Biblical commandments is
assigned to a separate decade of the 20th century; and each commandment is
viewed as cynically as possible. Thus, 'Thou shalt not kill' is illustrated
in Africa in 1907, when a ritual self-sacrifice is stopped by Christian
teaching with unhappy effect; 'Thou Shalt not Commit Adultery' is seen in
the 1960s, with contraception and adultery adding up to lovelessness.
All is cynical, gloomy, clever; and the evening made me wish to heaven that
rhyme had never been invented. The 1960s number (lyrics by Stephen Clark)
finds so many lines to rhyme with 'bed', and seems so pleased with them,
that I was amazed when finally it moved on to use another rhyming word. In
the Ninth Commandment, Warren Wills's music showed some signs of
originality, and Adele Anderson's lyrics some refreshing independence from
rhymestering - though not for long.
What is most depressing is that these composers and lyricists seem to have
learnt nothing from the larger world of Gershwin, Rodgers and Hart, Berlin,
Porter - the true masters of the idiom in this century. None of the
composers seem to have thought about setting expansively lyrical music to
words that are cynical - as, for example, Rodgers does to Hart's 'Falling in
love with love' (or Sullivan to Gilbert's 'Hearts do not break'). These
people write songs as if the last thing they wanted was for an audience to
come out humming them; and their lyricists write words as if the last thing
an audience might need was a good time.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931115

