FT934-8606

FT  15 NOV 93 / Banks set to process cheques for each other


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


BRITISH banks are preparing to process cheques for each other, or pay
companies to do so on their behalf, for the first time since the clearing
system was founded in the 1770s.
Fears about growing costs have led to an agreement to change the rules of
the Cheque and Credit Clearing Board (CCCB) - which regulates the processing
and clearing of cheques and credit vouchers - to allow joint ventures and
new entrants.
Several of the big clearing banks are thought to be in the early stages of
talks over joint ventures, or the sub-contracting of paper processing, after
an analysis showed that unit costs could rise by 20 per cent by the year
2000.
The banks now carry out all their own processing. This means each has to
transport large volumes of cheques and other paper around the country before
they are sorted, and payments registered.
The Association for Payment Clearing Services predicts a 25 per cent fall
over the decade from the 4.1bn cheques and credits processed last year. This
and the rise in unit costs would mean the Pounds 1.5bn annual cost being
spread over fewer transactions.
Mr Gordon Younger, chairman of the CCCB, said that banks had no plans yet to
amalgamate processing centres, but growing costs meant there were likely to
be efforts to increase volumes at each centre.
He said: 'As volumes dwindle, some people are going to suffer and they are
going to have to bite the bullet in some way.' He said that detailed rules
for which outside parties might be admitted were still to be drawn up.
The banks participating in the Access credit card company have
sub-contracted processing to First Data Resources, and some bankers have
called for a similar joint approach to the separate networks of automated
teller machines.
The change in CCCB rules coincides with an estimate by SG Warburg Securities
that banks are only recouping about Pounds 2.5bn in revenues from the
clearing system, compared with the total cost of Pounds 4.5bn estimated in
an Apacs study.
Warburg Securities predicted last week that the costs would force banks to
introduce charges on personal current accounts in credit by the end of 1994.
It said that by 2000, cheques would account for only 20 per cent of total
payments.
The only current example of joint processing - which was allowed because of
a loophole - is that Co-operative Bank processes cheques and vouchers on
behalf of Girobank.
Mr Younger said that if outside processing companies were allowed to join
the CCCB, there would have to be safeguards to ensure that the banks for
which they carried out processing maintained the responsibility for cash
settlement.
Pressure for consolidation is likely to be increased by the entry of foreign
banks to the UK clearing system. Both Credit Lyonnais and Deutsche Bank have
been admitted to the Chaps electronic transfer system.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931115

