FT934-8608

FT  15 NOV 93 / Agents lose jobs ahead of EU laws


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY and STEWART DALBY


MANY British companies are sacking their commercial agents to avoid being
caught by new regulations which will implement European laws in the UK on
January 1.
The regulations will make agents much more difficult to sack in some
countries and guarantee high levels of compensation if they are. The
regulations will also give agents the right to inspect their principal's
books to check their commission and assess their future prospects.
Agents sell on commission for companies which appoint them to do so. They
are different from distributors, who take title to goods they sell and
assume responsibility for any ensuing bad debts.
The government estimates that the changes could cost companies between
Pounds 5,000 and Pounds 80,000 per agency agreement if they try to cancel
agreements after January 1.
Mr Ian Campbell, director-general of the Institute of Export, said:
'Companies are going to have to become urgently aware of the need for proper
agency agreements. They must become more professional in their dealings with
agents.'
The regulations will bring the UK into line with the rest of European Union,
where in most countries the law has been weighted in favour of agents over
the companies which employ them since 1986.
They will replace the informal common-law approach which governs agency
agreements in the UK and is based on cases and precedent.
The new regulations will apply equally to agents in any EU country. As this
includes Britain, many companies are urgently examining the implications for
agents they use in UK domestic markets and mainland Europe.
Mr Michael Thornton, a partner in Laytons, a law firm specialising in
foreign trade, said: 'Many agency agreements have been made by sales
managers with no knowledge of the legal implications. Many agreements have
been oral and concluded by handshake, or simply by exchanging letters.'
BICC, the cables company, has already terminated all its agency agreements
worldwide and drawn up new ones that take account of the changes.
Evidence that the implications of the new regulations have not sunk in for
many companies has come at a series of seven UK regional conferences on
exporting staged in the past few weeks by the Financial Times, NatWest Bank
and Institute of Export.
Several participants said afterwards they were going to sack their agents
immediately and start again.
Mr Andrew Mackintosh, managing director of Oxford Instruments, the
scientific instrument manufacturer which has a turnover of more than Pounds
5m and exports 90 per cent of this, said: 'I was vaguely aware that changes
were in the pipeline but I had not realised how sweeping they were.'
Mr Philip Dimmock, managing director of Sovereign International Freight,
said his company acted as both principal and agent in export and import
markets. He added: 'We will all have to be much more careful in our
contracts. This directive forces us into long-term relations with agents.
While, ideally, we would all like long-term relationships, if anything goes
wrong it could become expensive.'
Mr Neil Quinn, managing director of Apollo Fire Detectors, said: 'We
realised 18 months ago what this new directive could mean and started to
change our set-up. We have gone over to distributors in Europe. They are not
covered by the new rules.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931115

