FT934-8536

FT  15 NOV 93 / Economics Notebook: Picking holes in independent Bank
proposal


   By PETER NORMAN


Independence for the Bank of England is a subject that refuses to lie down.
The question has been the focus of an extensive inquiry by the cross-party
House of Commons Treasury and Civil Service Committee over the past six
months. On Thursday of this week, the Centre for Economic Policy Research, a
think-tank, will publish a report with proposals to change the mandate of
the Bank and its relationship with the Treasury and with parliament.
It is a foregone conclusion that the CEPR panel of experts, chaired by Lord
Roll of Ipsden, the president of SG Warburg, will put forward plans to make
the Bank independent and accountable. The commons committee is likely to go
the same way when its report on the Bank appears, probably before Christmas.
Over the past few weeks, a succession of establishment figures, including
Lord Lawson, the former chancellor, and Sir Peter Middleton, a former
permanent secretary at the Treasury, have appeared in the Palace of
Westminster's dusty committee rooms to disown the present arrangements,
which leave the Bank subservient in matters of monetary policy to the
Treasury.
Indeed, the cause of central bank independence has achieved such momentum in
Britain that even those sympathetic to such an idea must worry that it is
achieving the status of a panacea and that too many hopes are being invested
in it.
So it is a happy coincidence that the judges of this year's essay
competition organised by the Amex Bank Review have chosen to give one of the
top prizes to a paper that disputes some of the claims made for central bank
independence, and in particular the idea of a causal link between low
inflation and the freeing of a nation's central bank from short-term
political control.
Mr Adam Posen, the Amex silver award winner, asserts that close examination
of the post-war economic record of the advanced industrialised democracies
reveals no automatic link between an independent central bank and low
inflation. An extra ingredient must be found. Mr Posen, an economist who is
doctoral candidate at Harvard University, has concluded that a central bank
will take strong action against inflation only when there is a coalition of
interests in society capable of giving the bank political protection.
Other economists have expressed similar ideas, including Mr Andrew Crockett,
the Bank of England executive director appointed last week to take over as
general manager of the Bank for International Settlements. He asked recently
whether the independence of the Bundesbank was responsible for Germany's
generally good low inflation performance, or whether the desire of the
German people for low inflation was the reason the Bundesbank can operate as
it does.
An important part of Mr Posen's 'interests not institutions' approach to
central bank effectiveness is his belief that the financial sector plays the
key role in resisting inflation in industrialised democracies. In his view,
variations in the inflationary tendencies of societies can be ascribed
partly to structural differences in their financial systems.
These ideas lead him to suggest that:
financial sectors with universal banking systems have a stronger
anti-inflation bias than those without. This, he contends, is because
universal banks are more involved in lending than in securities operations
and so are more aware of the costs of inflation.
the system of bank regulation has an impact on the counter-inflationary zeal
of a country's financial sector. Mr Posen says that where central banks are
not involved in bank supervision, financial sector representatives will be
less inclined to lobby central banks for easier monetary policies to reduce
the regulatory burden on banks and financial companies.
political conditions also influence financial sector opposition to
inflation. Mr Posen claims that the financial sector is more likely to press
counter-inflationary ideals on a central bank in a federal system because
its representatives, who are normally well organised and share common
interests, can put forward a united front across regions.
It is perhaps no surprise to learn that Mr Posen was a guest economist at
the Bundesbank in late 1992 and at Germany's Deutsche Bank this spring. The
financial and political conditions he advances for a successful independent
central bank (universal banking, no central bank involvement in supervision
and a federal state) exist most obviously in Germany.
Conditions in the US - with its independent Federal Reserve system - lend
some support to his argument that the degree of political support for
counter-inflation policies, and in particular financial opposition to
inflation, is the key to a successful anti-inflationary central bank.
'It is not a coincidence,' Mr Posen writes, 'that the threats to Federal
Reserve independence mounted by Senator Paul Sabarnes and Representative
Henry Gonzales, among others, have noticeably increased in the last few
years along with the relative political weakness of the American financial
sector - irrespective of the contemporaneous extremely loose monetary
policy.'
At another point, he asserts that 'an independent Bank of England cannot
bring about noticeably lower inflation so long as the British financial
system is securities based, specialised, and central bank regulated and thus
not strongly anti-inflationary.'
His claim that independent central banks which supervise banking systems are
less effective in controlling inflation is sure to meet hefty opposition at
the Bank of England. The Bank has gone out of its way to reject suggestions
that its responsibility for bank supervision could lead to a conflict of
interest with the needs of monetary policy if it gains independence.
But UK policy makers, weighing independence for the Bank of England, would
be well advised to take note of his central idea: that there is no
institutional 'fix' which ensures that an independent central bank can
deliver low inflation.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931115

