FT933-5150

FT  04 SEP 93 / A very British ordeal: Summer Rites


   By NIGEL SPIVEY


IT IS better to marry than to burn, as St Paul says. But it is worse to
marry and roast at the same time. At my own wedding, of fairly recent
memory, temperatures outside the morning suits were spectacularly high.
Perspiration levels inside the morning suits were downright unsightly.
Those of us who had crafted long and witty speeches watched helpless as many
in the audience melted away and threw themselves into a nearby
swimming-pool. Later my wife, wringing out her sodden raw silk drapery,
assured me that all was as it should be. According to her, the ceremony had
to have something of the fiery ordeal about it: a test of body and spirit,
from which we should emerge stronger.
She is right. Marriage as an institution may be getting statistically
evanescent, but weddings are still taken seriously. And by choosing to pitch
the ceremony at the height of summer, couples are compounding the chances of
making it a serious test.
I have noted various strategies for building unpleasantness into the
structure of a wedding. The first and most obvious is to hire a professional
photographer. Usually a slovenly chap in shirt-sleeves, for no extra charge
he will load his pockets with keys and small change so that he makes a
substantial jangle as he bustles about at the altar, dictating proceedings
far more authoritatively than the Book of Prayer.
He will do everything possible to embody that truism which Susan Sontag so
neatly states in her essay, On Photography: 'Having an experience becomes
identical with taking a photograph of it.'
As the cameras click and click, the coronation chicken nestles patiently at
the reception. l am not sure for whose coronation this odious sauce of
curried mayonnaise was created, but l wish it had abdicated from the realm
of the British buffet. There must be an 80 per cent chance of having it at a
summer wedding - along with a glass of some frothy potation stinking of the
hedgerow. Drink it to the dregs. It is part of the test.
The most subtle contribution to a difficult rite of passage comes from the
church itself. Many couples fondly suppose that they can fix up a
picturesque ceremony in the same little village church - Saxon tower, yew
trees, a lych-gate embroidered with roses - where the bride's mother took
communion one Easter in the late 1950s.
They can, of course. But the local vicar knows transient custom when he sees
it, and knows that God is not mocked by the photo opportunities of a
florally enhanced lych-gate. So he exacts a sort of vengeance.
He may arrange for bells to peal during the vows. He may pause
over-significantly when he asks if anyone knows why these two may not be
legally joined together. He may lengthen his usual homily on the sanctity of
human relationships into a tirade against the prevailing rates of divorce
and fornication.
The finest clerical revenge I ever witnessed, however, came from a Jersey
priest. He had evidently decided that if he was going to surrender a
pleasant summer's Saturday, he would do it in a grand way. He turned up
staggeringly drunk, and so garbled the institution of marriage that most of
the congregation came away doubtful if the couple at the front were indeed
bound by wedlock.
A final note. Just in case anyone has managed to get through the ceremony
lightly, and is licking his lips at the prospect of champagne not made out
of elderflowers, there is a niggling hurdle to be raised. Make all the
guests queue up to shake hands with the bridal contingent. If prolonged,
this can generate a really effective, utterly unforgettable experience of
pain and peevishness.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930904

