FT933-10187

FT  05 AUG 93 / Index-linked market set to grow


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE STRENGTH of the UK's index-linked gilts market has prompted other
countries to consider issuing government bonds linked to their inflation
rate.
Officials from the Swedish National Debt Office have visited London to study
the workings of the index-linked market. Mr Jonas Lind, head of domestic
borrowing, said their main concern was whether there would be a sufficiently
large base of investors. 'There are only a limited number of natural
investors, consisting of insurance companies and national pension funds,' he
said.
Sweden's government bond market has grown by more than SKr130bn in the last
year to SKr420bn. The borrowing requirement for 1993 is around SKr200bn
(Pounds 16.6bn).
Meanwhile, the New Zealand Treasury 'has undertaken a project to examine the
UK, Australian and Canadian experiences', said Mr Phillip Anderson,
principal of New Zealand's debt management office in London.
Canada and Australia, the only other countries with similar markets, began
issuing index-linked debt in 1991 and 1985 respectively, and have recently
increased their activity.
Index-linked gilts account for about 10 per cent of the Pounds 172bn British
gilts market, according to the Bank of England, but the sector is considered
relatively illiquid.
The world-wide economic slowdown has squeezed revenues while inflating
public expenditure, pushing up government borrowing. Index-linked bonds are
an attractive way of funding this as they are tied to inflation, now at
historically low levels in many countries.
Index-linked bonds, particularly in Europe, may also prove attractive to
investors. Gilts traders report growing interest in the sector, including
the first signs of interest from overseas investors.
'Index-linked gilts represent a major opportunity to capitalise on a
forthcoming fall in real yields. Unlike conventional bonds they are
indifferent as to whether the fall comes through lower bond yields or higher
inflation,' said Mr Kieron Lynch, head of gilt sales at SG Warburg.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930805

