FT934-10001

FT  08 NOV 93 / Arts: Encouraging but not earth-shattering - Opera in San
Francisco


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


Plans are being made for the War Memorial Opera House in San Francisco to
close for repairs in a few years. The earthquake of 1989 left some
structural faults which, though not dangerous, need to be rectified for the
long-term health of the building.
On the artistic side, too, a pragmatic decision has been taken for the
company's future well-being. Although the San Francisco Opera has long been
regarded as one of the leading American companies, its reputation has
traditionally rested on the singing, rather than on overall musical
standards. On a visit to the city one could often find an impressive array
of international singers being accompanied from the pit rather than a strong
musical director setting his sights on a unified musical vision.
Now the company has acted to strengthen this weak link in its artistic
structure. Two experienced operatic conductors, both with British
connections, have been appointed, the Scot Donald Runnicles as music
director and Charles Mackerras as principal guest conductor, their
complementary musical interests making them a well chosen pair. This autumn
season is the first under San Francisco's 'Dream Team'. Between them they
are conducting no less than six of the nine productions - a splendid chance
of getting to grips with orchestral standards.
To provide a showcase for Runnicles' widely acknowledged mastery as a
Wagnerian, the dust was blown off an old production of Die Meistersinger von
Nurnberg. The performance was not extreme in any way (Goodall's famously
magisterial breadth and Jochum's rebellious wit both stamped their
personality on this opera more forcefully) but it was always alive and
attentive, fairly swift, and by the end quite elating. Without knowing, one
might imagine the conductor was a German at the top level. For Runnicles
manages to combine the seemingly opposing virtues of being central to the
venerated Wagnerian tradition and, at the same time, youthful and fresh.
Unfortunately everything on stage was correspondingly stale. The production
was dated 1971 and only a cosmetic attempt had been made to cover its
wrinkles. Perhaps audiences then still delighted in seeing the inhabitants
of Nuremberg as cute little medieval people in funny costumes who spent
their time plaiting flowers and skipping around.
Even the principals largely remained picturebook characters, but there were
vocal compensations. Ben Heppner was deservedly a prizewinning tenor as
Walther, strong, clear and beautiful; for once it was worth waiting five
hours to hear the Prize Song. For his woman, he had a ravishingly beautiful
Eva in Karita Mattila. Bernd Weikl has added humour to his down-to-earth
Sachs, but there is not the wisdom or depth to make us believe this
character capable of uttering eternal truths.
For Mackerras the season has brought Verdi, Puccini and - naturally -
Janacek. With the leading authority on Janacek's operas now on its roster,
the San Francisco Opera has the best possible excuse to embark on an
authoritative Janacek cycle for the US in the 1990s - as long as this
revival of The Makropulos Case does not set the tone.
There is no reason to complain that an existing staging was pressed into
service. Janacek never depends on lavish sets and the money was no doubt
more urgently needed elsewhere. What his operas do require is a searching
ability to probe, to show sympathy for the human condition which was nowhere
evident in Lotfi Mansouri's production.
The thinking seems to be, 'the audience may find this opera difficult, so
let's play to the gallery'. An able cast of singers had been assembled,
including Graham Clark as Gregor, Tom Fox as Prus and the esteemed Czech
bass Dalibor Jedlicka as Kolenaty, but all had been asked to put on an act.
As the ageless Amelia Marty, Stephanie Sundine brought physical and vocal
glamour into play. Much was made of the fact that Elisabeth Sodestrom,
herself a renowned exponent of the role, was listed as joint producer, but
gestures that with Sodestrom had taken us deep within the character's
complex psyche - the wringing of the hands, the haughty toss of the head -
remained ideas applied externally here.
Again it was the musical performance which was a haven for all that was true
to the opera's spirit. The size of the War Memorial Opera House militates
somewhat against Janacek's detailed, incisive style, but no conductor has
his finger on its pulse more tellingly than Mackerras. The nervous
agitation, the determination to keep going at all costs which drive the
opera's 300-year-old heroine on has rarely tingled with more expressive
intensity. As his Edinburgh concert with the Czech Philharmonic showed,
Mackerras's Janacek gets better and better.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931108

