FT933-12816

FT  22 JUL 93 / Leading Article: New leader for the EBRD


THE EUROPEAN Bank, as its departed president, Mr Jacques Attali, liked to
call the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, needs a new
start. It will soon get a new boss, but it also needs redefinition and
restructuring. Only then might it prove more than an expensive and
embarrassing failure.
Mr Attali's legacy is not all bad. The founding-president had two
achievements: the most important was to have been chief spokesman for the
needs of his clients; the second was to establish the institution. The next
president must build on both.
Ideally, that person would combine the qualities of two candidates, the
experience of the reforming ex-finance minister of Poland, Mr Leszek
Balcerowicz, and the knowledge of international financial institutions of
former International Monetary Fund managing director, Mr Jacques de
Larosiere. The winner could also use the development banking skills of the
World Bank's Ernest Stern and the political clout of former British prime
minister, Lady Thatcher. Such a paragon is unavailable. But the EBRD has to
get as close to that ideal as possible. Its new chief must at the least
possess knowledge of the economic task ahead, impeccable integrity and
political weight.
Selection of a man like Leszek Balcerowicz would have attractions. It would
symbolise the reunification of Europe; would put someone from eastern Europe
in an important pulpit; and would endow the EBRD with relevant experience at
its highest level. But there are questions. Does Mr Balcerowicz, for all his
achievements, have the political and managerial skills the job needs?
Equally, would anyone from a client state of the EBRD be able to command the
attention of western governments on contentious policy issues, such as
trade?
If it is to be someone from the donor countries, Mr de Larosiere looks the
most credible candidate yet to emerge. This is not because France has a
'moral claim' to a job that was won in an unsavoury horse trade with the
British and then filled by a man who has proved unsuitable. Nor is it
because there is a shortage of French officials in high places. With Michel
Camdessus at the IMF, Jacques Delors at the Commission of the European
Communities and Jean-Claude Paye at the OECD, France is more than adequately
represented. The case for Mr de Larosiere is that he has vast relevant
experience.
Choosing a new president will not be enough. The bank must itself be
restructured if it is to help restructure former communist countries. Since
Europe has no shortage of private merchant banks, the EBRD's existence
cannot be justified as a public sector one. More fundamentally, lending by
the EBRD directly to private projects is neither a necessary nor a
sufficient condition for development of healthy economies based on the
private sector. Existence of a public institution like the EBRD is justified
by its ability to contribute simultaneously to the formulation of policy,
development of institutions, financing of infrastructure and direct lending
to private projects. The bank should be organised not by types of projects,
but by countries, and possess a substantial permanent presence on the
ground.
The question facing the EBRD is not just who should lead it, but what it is
for. The new president should follow Mr Attali's example by speaking up for
the countries in transformation. But he (or she) must also lead an effective
development institution. The EBRD is not that now. Its new president must be
able to make it one.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930722

