FT932-7078

FT  26 MAY 93 / New line on Bosnia 'boosts Serb radicals'


   By LAURA SILBER and KERIN HOPE


   BELGRADE


WHILE Serb leaders celebrate what they believe is the international go-ahead
for the division of Bosnia, there is a fear in Belgrade that the Washington
agreement could undermine the stability of Serbia and Montenegro.
The agreement - between the US, Russia, France, Spain and Britain - seeks to
create 'safe areas', effectively freezing the military situation while a
political solution is sought.
However, by implying that the Bosnian Serbs and their Croat counterparts
will be allowed to hold on to their territorial gains, the agreement appears
to signal to the Serbs that aggression will be rewarded. 'It's the opposite
of containment and it's the opposite of a durable peace. It enhances the
position of violent extremists,' said a western diplomat.
There is a particular concern that the position of Serb extremists such as
Mr Vojislav Seselj, a parliamentary deputy who also commands a paramilitary
unit, will be bolstered.
Mr Seselj, a vociferous opponent of the Vance-Owen peace plan, praised the
Washington declaration as 'the first sober public statement by the west.'
Described by the US as a war criminal, Mr Seselj has called not only for the
expulsion of all non-Serbs from Serbia but also for the prosecution of
'politically suspect' Serbs, who have voiced opposition to the Bosnian war.
'The agreement cuts the rug out from under potential democratic forces. It
creates an unstable Serbia,' one diplomat said. If the trend towards
extremism was allowed to continue, Mr Seselj and his ultra-nationalist
allies, like General Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb commander, would start
to represent the political mainstream, he added.
The ultra-nationalists' hand has been strengthened in Serbia by their
defiance of western pressure, even under the threat of military action
against the Bosnian Serbs.
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has also won a degree of popular
support for his pledge not to yield to the west. He was quick to refuse the
deployment of UN monitors on Serbia's border with Bosnia on the grounds that
Serb and Yugoslav leaders could prevent the supply of weapons to Serb-held
Bosnian territories.
Nevertheless, in a bid to get stepped-up UN sanctions eased, Mr Milosevic
this month showed a more conciliatory attitude by exerting pressure on Mr
Karadzic to support the Vance-Owen peace plan. Yesterday he denied the
Washington agreement handed the Serbs victory.
Continued enforcement of sanctions will now become the west's most important
lever. Although sanctions have devastated the economy, they failed to slow
the Serbian onslaught in Bosnia. Worsening economic conditions may increase
the likelihood of unrest. But with scant popular support for the democratic
opposition, Mr Seselj and his supporters could benefit most.
Serb leaders have also rejected the proposed deployment of international
monitors in the southern province of Kosovo, where ethnic Albanians make up
90 per cent of the 2m population.
If the Serbs are correct in believing that the Washington declaration
condones the establishment through violence of national states, the restive
Albanian majority in Kovoso may be tempted to make a bid for independence.
'This agreement strengthens the nationalists and the extremists. Giving in
to those who divided up territory will encourage the Albanians. I'm afraid
it's a signal for the next flashpoint, Kosovo,' said Mrs Vesna Pesic, an
opposition leader.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930526

