FT934-11262

FT  02 NOV 93 / Legal right to interest on late debts is urged


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


INDUSTRIALISTS, business people, bankers and opposition politicians
yesterday joined a campaign for legislation to give suppliers the right to
receive interest on overdue trade debts.
Launching a 1,200-strong register of supporters, the Forum of Private
Business called for legislation to 'give businesses the money that is
theirs'.
Supporters of the Prompt Payment Register include Sir Richard Greenbury,
chairman of Marks and Spencer; Lord Alexander, chairman of NatWest Bank; and
Midland Bank as well as opposition MPs.
The Department of Trade and Industry said it had not ruled out legislation
to tackle the problem of late payment, but it was concerned that legislation
had not been shown conclusively to work. For example, measures in some
Continental countries had 'not improved things very much'.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, said the government had
spent 15 years studying the issue since the Law Commission first called for
legislation, and should now act.
Lord Ezra, Liberal Democrat spokesman and former chairman of the National
Coal Board, said the UK should enjoy the kind of legislation most
continental European countries already had in place.
Mr Stan Mendham, founder of the Forum of Private Business, said 89 per cent
of small and medium-sized companies in the UK were paid late. On average,
these businesses were paid 81 days after the invoice, or 51 days after the
average due date.
Dun and Bradstreet, the business information company which is also a
supporter of the register, says UK companies have to wait on average 20 days
longer after the due date than their counterparts in France, the next-worst
payers in Europe.
Writing in the Financial Times in September, Lord Alexander said more than
Pounds 15bn of trade debts to small and medium sized businesses were overdue
at any one time. 'Too many businesses consider it acceptable, and some even
consider it astute practice, not to pay their bills on time,' he wrote.
By setting up a national register, the Forum of Private Business hopes to
demonstrate that pressure for legislation has wide support from businesses
and their pressure groups.
The forum wants the government to focus on late payment, the main problem
facing small businesses, rather than the issue of non-payment or disputes.
Mr Mendham said a central element of legislation should be provision for
statutory rights to interest payments after the agreed due date. These
should be collected after the principal had been paid, and should be
collectable up to six years after the interest liability was first incurred.
Mr Steve Hill, insolvency partner of Coopers & Lybrand, the accountancy
firm, called late payment 'the Aids virus of the commercial community' and
'economic madness'.
Marks and Spencer said it had found that paying promptly led to better
service from its suppliers.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931102

