FT934-10126

FT  06 NOV 93 / Sport: Serving up young British winners - Tennis


   By JOHN BARRETT


IT WAS Stefan Edberg who prompted the thought. Edberg, Sweden's former world
No. 1, is a London resident, and is often to be seen hitting with the
leading British players. 'So many of them practise beautifully but they have
no idea how to win their matches' he told me between matches in Hong Kong.
Sweeping generalisations are dangerous, but Stefan has a point. Ever since I
have been associated with the game, British tennis players, men and women,
have been late developers. Fred Perry was 25 before he won the first of his
three Wimbledon titles in 1934. Angela Mortimer, was 29 when she became
Britain's first post-war winner in 1961; Ann Jones was 30 when she followed
Mortimer eight years later; Virginia Wade, Britain's last champion, was
almost 32 when she won in 1977.
The explanation? Well, part of the reason is the lack of intensive
competition in the early years. Winning is a habit. The only way to develop
it is to compete from an early age. That is what Edberg did.
'Before I was 12 I was playing a tournament every week. There were dozens of
kids from my home district in Vastervik, all as eager as I was to win.
Competition became a way of life. Only the best players went on to national
competitions. The right incentives were there.'
Jeremy Bates, the 31-year-old British No 1, who has been in Telford this
week defending his title at the Volkswagen National Championships, had no
such early training in the art of winning.
'As a junior I was three or four years behind kids from Europe. Living in
Solihull there was no-one to practise against. In the winter it was dark in
the evenings when I came out of school and there was only one indoor court -
at the Edgbaston Priory club - which was always booked. So I could only play
at weekends, weather permitting, and could only compete in a few junior
tournaments in the holidays. I can now see that all this was totally
inadequate. No wonder it took me years to learn to win matches.'
Chris Bailey, 25 years old and the British No 3, is another who had sparse
competition between the ages of 12 and 17, the years when habits are formed.
'I played everything else at school - football, cricket, badminton, rugby
and basketball. During term my tennis coaching had to be squeezed in with
visits to Brian Blincoe in Norwich. The only competition I had was at local
tournaments in the holidays and the occasional Saab tournament, when
invited. So, aged 16, I took myself off to Norway and Sweden for two of the
International Tennis Federation junior tournaments. I was very green - and
very lonely, too. It was hell even getting somewhere to practise. When I saw
how good the other players my age were, especially the Swedes, I realised
how much I had to learn about winning matches.'
When he was 17 the lanky Norfolk lad, inexperienced and physically immature
but possessing obvious potential, was selected for the Lawn Tennis
Association's Laing Squad. This was the chance Bailey had been waiting for.
His first official overseas trip was to Bangkok with team captain Nigel
Sears. 'Nigel put me through such a punishing regime of training I was
reduced to tears . . . it all was very painful . . . but at least I knew I
still wanted to make tennis my career.'
That career was almost ended in 1990 when Bailey snapped the anterior
cruciate ligament in his right knee, an injury that required surgery and
cost him two years. To his credit, Bailey simply redoubled his efforts and,
with the help of Sears and his wife, rebuilt his shattered leg. 'I feel all
the stronger as a result,' he says. 'But I still have to prove myself on the
court.'
Much as we all admired Bailey's heroic performance against Goran Ivanisevic
at Wimbledon this year (who but a madman would have attempted an ace on a
second serve at match point down?), the fact is Bailey lost a match he could
 -perhaps should - have won. He had still not learned the trick of turning a
winning chance into victory.
That is a quality sought by Britain's national training manager, Billy
Knight, himself a dogged competitor in the 1950s. 'Until they learn to
convert their wining chances they are not real competitors,' he says. 'The
only way you learn to do that is to play hundreds of matches. Ever since I
started this job in May 1991 I have been nagging and badgering the LTA to
create more tournaments. At last things are happening. Next year we will
have four Satellite circuits - that is 16 weeks of international competition
 -as well as the 21 weeks of domestic competition on the Reebok circuit.'
Knight is encouraged by (but certainly not complacent about) the minor
British successes that are now beginning to appear. 'Take our new junior
champion, James Fox. After an intensive match-playing schedule on the South
American junior circuit he played in his first Satellite circuit and
qualified for the Masters. That earned him three computer points. Now he has
just qualified in Bangkok and won his first round. Nothing to get excited
about but good positive progress.'
Certainly the atmosphere at Telford this week has been much more positive.
Matches on the new cushioned acrylic courts have been hard, competitive and
skilful.
'We are getting there slowly,' said Knight. 'Each year sees a slight
improvement. Players are altogether more professional in their approach to
life and are showing a greater belief in themselves. There is also a greater
togetherness. Instead of being jealous of the successes of others they now
see a good result from a rival as a challenge to themselves. That is a
healthy sign.'
Also healthy is the increase in activity among the tinies. Mark Cox, who
directs the nationwide Rover scheme, is quietly building an understanding
between coaches, parents and hand-picked pupils in the 10-12 age group to
provide them with facilities and the opportunity for regular coaching and
competition. If the experience of Edberg is anything to go by, this is the
most important area of all.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

931106

