FT932-6831

FT  26 MAY 93 / World Trade News: Mexican textiles bet on Nafta lifeline


   By DAMIAN FRASER


   MEXICO CITY


MEXICO'S once thriving textile and clothing sectors have been badly hit by
the country's free trade policy.
Cheap imports from South-East Asia and up-market goods from the US and
Europe have devastated the industry, forcing some 300 textile companies to
close since 1988, and putting about 20,000-25,000 workers out of a job.
Now, five years after the trade opening, the Mexican textile and clothes
industry is betting the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) will
reverse its ailing fortunes.
Industrialists are hoping a flood of joint ventures with US competitors,
cheap foreign capital and guaranteed access to the US market will raise
productivity and make the sector more competitive.
Under Nafta, the quota on Mexican textile exports to the US will be
scrapped, while current tariffs of 20 per cent or more will be phased out.
The so-called yarn forward agreement in Nafta means fibres have to be
converted into textiles in Mexico, the US, or Canada to be sold duty-free in
the region, giving Mexico a significant edge over Asian competitors.
Mr Peter Hutchinson, finance director of Alfa, the conglomerate with a joint
venture in fibres with Dupont, says: 'The downstream part of the chain in
textiles and garments is very labour-intensive and thus there is a strong
rationale to have production in Mexico given its comparative advantages
under Nafta.'
However, the transitition may involve a further shake-out in the Mexican
textile industry before it can reap the benefits of Nafta. For every well
capitalised, efficient Mexican textile company, there are still several
others with little money, antiquated machinery and small product lines.
Mr Javier de la Rosa, finance director of Grupo Synkro, Mexico's largest
tights maker, warns: 'The restructuring in the industry is going to
continue, because in general the textile sector has not invested in new
technology and in better fabrics. Obviously it has concentrated just on
survival.' He sees several more years of consolidation in the sector.
Joint ventures make sense because while US companies can offer cheap capital
and knowledge of the US market, the Mexican companies can offer wages a
fifth of the level in the US.
Closeness between Mexico and the US means Mexican factories can respond more
quickly to changes in the US consumer market than Asian competitors.
Cydsa, a petrochemicals to textiles conglomerate, is probably involved in
the largest joint venture to date. It is set to formalise an alliance with
the US textile company Jantzen in the production and commercialisation of 2m
sweaters a year, of which about 85 per cent will be exported.
Jantzen sells the sweaters throughout the US using its established
distribution network and is advising Cydsa on some technical aspects of the
manufacturing process.
Smaller companies are engaging in joint ventures. Mr Jorge Marin, the
37-year-old president of the Garment Business Chamber and head of the
Industrias Extro, is now building a factory in partnership with Hart-Marx, a
US textile maker, to produce 2,000 Oxford trousers a day for export and
domestic markets.

The Financial Times


International Page 5

930526

