FT934-11316

FT  02 NOV 93 / Italy moves nearer state steel sell-off


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


ITALY's state steel company Ilva has decided to split its activities into
three, marking an important step in the state's withdrawal from loss-making
steel production.
One operational company will be formed round flat products produced at
Taranto's integrated complex and at Novi Liguri, Genoa. A second will
concentrate on stainless steels at Terni in Umbria.
Iri, the state holding that controls Ilva, intends these two operational
companies to be privatised. A third company will include all those assets
and activities which it intends to liquidate.
Mr Romano Prodi, the head of Iri, first unveiled plans to split up Ilva in
July in an attempt to break the deadlock between Italy and the European
Commission over state subsidies to the industry and to remove the financial
burden of Ilva's L7,580bn (Pounds 3.15bn) debts. However, the idea came
later of forming a special company to liquidate unsaleable assets - and it
is assumed that that company will take on Ilva's losses which totalled
L1,700bn in 1992.
The company charged with liquidation will also handle 5,545 of the 11,500
redundancies envisaged over the next three years from Ilva's present
workforce of 34,000. The job losses risk provoking serious unrest, but the
government is to be asked to fund generous early retirements and back new
industrial projects in the worst affected areas.
It is thought likely that Mr Hayao Nakamura, the Japanese steel executive
brought in this year to run Ilva, will be asked to take over the management
of the flat products company. But much will depend on who decides to buy out
this operation based round Taranto, Europe's biggest steel complex, with a
capacity of 10m tonnes a year.
This week, Mr Nakamura, who formerly worked for Nippon Steel, is
accompanying Mr Prodi on a trip to Tokyo to discuss the privatisation of Iri
activities with Japanese investors.
Ilva was formed in 1988 from the collapse of the previous state-run group,
Finsider.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931102

