FT934-11627

FT  30 OCT 93 / Pounding sound of cash: Rave parties flourish in the UK at
the expense of other leisure industries


   By RACHEL JOHNSON


Clouds of smoke from dry ice parted to reveal Lisa, aged 16, on a concrete
breeze-block, clad in hot-pants and platform boots, jerking her body to the
beat that pumped from the sound system. Her eyes were shut and in one hand
she held a small bottle of Evian mineral water. It was 4am at the Ministry
of Sound, the south London night club, and the Friday night rave had only
just got going. A decade ago, Lisa might have been sipping lager at a
friend's house, or more probably at that hour tucked up in bed. But
increasing numbers of her generation are spending their time and money in a
new wave of clubs - of which the cavernous Ministry of Sound, run by James
Palumbo, son of property-developer Lord Palumbo, is a thriving example. The
club has a no-alcohol, no-drugs, no-weapons policy, enforced by hulking
bouncers. The attraction is the rave culture of all-night dancing in a
sweaty, intimate atmosphere induced by the stimulant Ecstasy which is taken
by many dancers before they arrive, or secretively when there. It is about
seven years since rave - which combines hedonistic Mediterranean discos and
the electronic dance music of 1970s New York and Detroit - seized the
imagination of Britain's 15 to 24-year-olds. But it is only this week that
its economic impact - in particular on the nation's pubs and off-licences -
has been quantified.
According to estimates from the Henley Centre, the research institute, young
people make 1m visits to raves each week. Each time, they spend as much as
Pounds 35 and stay up to 24 hours.
The annual spending at raves is estimated at between Pounds 1.5bn and Pounds
2bn - five times more than total UK spending on cinema admissions, and
equivalent to a quarter of spending on spirits. In addition, up to a third
of those at a rave will have taken drugs such as Ecstasy - at about Pounds
15 a tab - speed (amphetamine) or cocaine.
The biggest losers have been pubs, where visits by young people fell by 11
per cent between 1987 and 1991. They are forecast by the Henley Centre to
fall a further 20 per cent by 1997.
The trend will hardly thrill Britain's publicans. But there is reason for
them, and other traditional leisure venues, to relax a little. Rave has been
a fast-changing culture in its short life, and today's fads may look
outdated in a year.
Among the cognoscenti, the original concept of a rave is already
old-fashioned. Asif Noorani, a 21-year-old who writes about popular culture
for the Modern Review magazine, says young people are rejecting the large,
expensive raves that mushroomed in the late 1980s to seek a cheaper rave
experience in clubs.
' 'Rave' suggests hordes of 16-year-olds with bottles of Vick's VapoRub
(which is inhaled to clear the head before taking Ecstasy). The first ravers
were people who lived for Ecstasy, and didn't understand music,' he says.
Until about 1989, rave centred on events in open fields in the West
Midlands, for example, or on an 'orbital rave' around the M25. Organisers of
such raves had no licence to sell tickets; they took advantage of a legal
loophole and claimed the gatherings were parties - and passed around a
bucket for contributions.
'It was all about thousands of people taking as many drugs as possible,
listening to hardcore music. It was illegal and therefore a kick,' says
Matthew Butcher, 16, a pupil at Pimlico comprehensive.
But under pressure from the government and residents, the police cracked
down on raves organised without local council permission.
A number of entrepreneurs then tried to fill the gap in the market by
organising licensed, mass-attendance raves costing up to Pounds 25 a head.
These offered 'interactive' alcohol-free entertainment, combining
attractions such as laser shows, funfairs and trampolines with soft drinks
and powerful sound systems. A sell-out crowd could generate an income of
Pounds 400,000 a rave, excluding merchandise sales.
But the scene has changed again - partly because the profitability of
organised large-scale raves did not last. Fantazia, one of the few surviving
promotors, is organising a 'dance party' to raise money for the Terence
Higgins Aids charity in Glasgow next month. It is charging Pounds 25 a
ticket but needs a 12,000 crowd just to break even. It expects to spend more
than Pounds 300,000 on organising the event: security alone will cost Pounds
40,000.
Though the large-scale rave has probably peaked, experts agree with the
Henley Centre that the culture is more than a passing fad. In the eyes of
many young people, the new night clubs that offer a rave experience and that
are replacing the large-scale events, have more of a buzz than pubs. Matt
Paice, 21, a London student, enjoys a drink. But to him an average night out
means 'kids sitting at home having a puff on a joint and then going to a
club'.
Many young women, according to Lifeline, the Manchester drugs advisory
agency, go to dance parties because it is more fun burning off calories
there than at the gym. Women also find the atmosphere induced by Ecstasy -
the so-called 'hug drug', because it triggers empathetic emotions - less
threatening than the alcohol-induced aggression of pubs.
'Unlike punk or grunge, raves are not a cult but rather a new leisure
activity enjoyed by different types of young consumers,' the Henley Centre
concludes.
To combat the threat, pubs could offer themselves as rave venues. But the
attraction of clubs such as the Ministry of Sound is that they do not open
until midnight - and ravers want to escape the staid conventions of a night
at the local. It seems decibels and mineral water will be the scene for some
years to come.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931030

