FT934-11691

FT  29 OCT 93 / Making good on pledge by Bolsheviks: Yeltsin hopes to make
'peasants the masters'


   By JOHN LLOYD


THE daily Izvestiya yesterday heralded its announcement of President Boris
Yeltsin's decree giving Russian citizens the right to buy, sell, rent and
bequeath land by reprinting its own front page of exactly 76 years ago. That
contained the decree 'On Land' by the new Bolshevik government which
proclaimed that land would be returned to the peasants.
The decree, said Izvestiya, claimed to 'make the peasants the masters', but
remained a piece of propaganda, while the reality soon became one of state
ownership and dispossession of peasant proprietors in favour of
collectivisation.
The present decree eschews grand sounding phrases in favour of a definition
of rights and a description of the mechanisms under which citizens can buy
and sell land in order to create a class of farmer-proprietors with fully
guaranteed rights, for the first time in Russian history. The state will
guarantee and protect the right to buy, sell, rent, transfer and divide land
freely, reserving only the right to claim land for strategic state use after
paying the market price for it.
Foreigners and foreign companies can participate in the process of buying
and selling land, but apparently only (the decree is vague on the point) in
association with Russian companies. Land can be used for agricultural
purposes, or for development of any kind.
In a move analagous to the rights given to workers in state enterprises,
workers on state and collective farms will have the right to buy plots of
land at discounted prices. Land can be sold off in auctions or offered for
sale privately to competitive bids.
A new state body, with offices in all regions, the Russian Federation
Committee for Land Resources and Land Construction, will be the body charged
with ensuring that land sales go through. It will have offices in all
regions, and is clearly designed to override the inevitable objections and
barriers raised to land sales by local authorities and the leadership of
state and collective farms to a measure they have bitterly resisted for
years.
Resistance to the move to make land a commodity is not confined to former
communist leaders and bureaucrats in the regions, but is often strongly
expressed by the state and collective farm workers themselves - who see the
growth of a private farming sector as a threat to a life which, though poor,
is secure and undemanding. At the same time, those who have already embarked
on private farming have faced delays, hostility and sometimes intimidation -
as well as a lack of capital and equipment designed to the needs of small
farmers.
Russian land has only briefly been freely tradeable, in the decade before
the first world war following agrarian reform pushed through by Mr Pyotr
Stolypin, the prime minister. It succeeded in creating a class of
peasant-proprietors - who were dispossessed two decades later by ruthless
collectivisation which left only small plots in the hands of the peasants
throughout the Soviet Union.
Mr Viktor Khlystun, the agricultural MInister and as such the highest
representative of the agricultural lobby, has already sought to limit the
damage he sees the decree as doing - by saying that no foreigners can buy
land, that speculation in land should be avoided and that no small farmer
should be allowed to hire labour.
However, the decree gives a solid guarantee of the state's intention to
tackle what has been the largest inhibition to the dismantling of the
socialist system: it will, however, require a vigorous response from
would-be farmers if it is to herald the revolution in the countryside it
clearly hopes for.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

931029

