FT933-5323

FT  03 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Weather worries soya traders


   By LAURIE MORSE


   CHICAGO


WITH ONLY a few weeks to go until the start of the US soyabean harvest,
Chicago commodity futures traders are keeping open telephone lines to
private weather forecasters.
The weather men have the rapt attention of the market at the moment because
late-planted crops and surplus moisture have delayed soyabean plant
development. The lateness of the crop makes it vulnerable to early frost,
while prolonged periods of fine weather will increase yields and produce a
larger harvest.
A 'weather market' is characteristically volatile, and Chicago soyabean
prices this week have certainly been that.
Talk of an early frost abated on Monday when the National Weather Service
forecast normal temperatures in the maize and soyabean belt for the coming
week. The long-term 30-day forecast predicted normal to below normal
temperatures, but contained no indication of a late September frost.
Futures prices for soyabeans to be delivered in November, just after
harvest, dropped by more than 10 cents a bushel on Tuesday at the Chicago
Board of Trade in response to the forecast and by a similar amount on
Wednesday, ending at Dollars 6.54 3/4 a bushel.
Private forecasters, traders said, had confirmed the government's weather
predictions.
Yesterday morning, however, soyabean futures steadied as managed futures
funds bought back short positions taken out earlier in the week and the
November price bounced to Dollars 6.62 1/2 a bushel. In late trading the
price had settled back to Dollars 6.57 a bushel, up 2 1/4 cents on the day,
but that was still well below the summertime high of Dollars 7.57 1/2 a
bushel.
Mr Gerry Gidel, crop analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds in Chicago, says that
the only predictable feature in the soyabean market until harvest time will
be uncertainty.
'People are still trying to determine yields. We get weekly crop progress
numbers, and we can tell the crop is maturing.'
However, he said, it was difficult to determine how productive the plants
were.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930903

