FT934-10027

FT  08 NOV 93 / Economics: Markets focus on US inflation fears in wake of
share and bond price falls


   By PETER MARSH


AFTER the big fall in US share and bond prices at the end of last week, a
spate of data over the next few days should indicate to what degree
inflationary pressures in the US are rising.
Investors will be particularly interested in news of producer and consumer
prices tomorrow and Wednesday, while Friday's retail sales statistics will
shed light on demand in shopping malls around the country.
Inflation will also figure in the minds of investors looking at the UK
economy, with data out later today on the extent to which manufacturers are
pushing up prices of their finished goods.
Other figures will indicate the rise in prices being paid by manufacturers
for raw materials and energy, and how much extra credit is being taken on by
consumers.
Any fresh signs that inflation is weak may stimulate new speculation about
an early cut in bank base rates, held at 6 per cent since January. Last week
the Bank of England was cautiously optimistic about price pressures in the
medium term in its quarterly inflation report.
Friday's data on UK manufacturing output in September will provide one of
the last chances before the Budget, just over three weeks away, for an
assessment of the strength of the UK recovery. The City is expecting a 0.3
per cent increase on the month in output, which would help to dispel some of
the disappointment linked to August's fall in production.
Statistics in Japan are thin on the ground, while Spain and Finland are
likely to publish some gloomy unemployment numbers, underlining worries
about weak economic activity across Europe.
France's inflation figures on Friday are likely to show continuing weak
price pressures. They could spur a decision to cut interest rates to
stimulate demand.
The main economic statistics and other important events during the week
follow. Figures for median market expectations, provided by business
information company MMS International, are in brackets.
Today: UK, consumer credit business in September (rise of Pounds 225m),
prices of manufactured goods at factory gate in October (up 4 per cent year
on year, 0.2 per cent on month, up 3 per cent on year excluding food drink
and tobacco), input prices for manufactured goods (up 2.6 per cent year on
year, 0.2 per cent on month).
Canada, October housing starts (160,000), August labour income (up 2.4 per
cent on year).
Hong Kong, revised gross domestic product for second quarter.
Tomorrow: US, October producer price index (up 0.3 per cent), PPI excluding
food and energy (up 0.1 per cent), September wholesale trade.
Japan, September machinery orders excluding electrical power machinery and
ships (up 6.5 per cent on month, down 17.7 per cent on year).
UK, Confederation of British Industry distributive trades survey.
Canada, new vehicle sales for September (down 1.1 per cent on month).
Wednesday: US, consumer prices index for October (up 0.3 per cent), CPI
excluding food and energy (up 0.2 per cent), initial unemployment claims for
week ending November 6 (340,000), state benefits for week ending October 30.
Japan, Bank of Japan governor gives speech in Tokyo, October Bank of Japan
data.
Germany, Bundesbank repo rate details.
UK, CBI regional industrial trends survey, August worldwide visible trade
deficit (Pounds 1.5bn).
Canada, October department store sales (down 1.9 per cent year on year),
October leading economic indicator (up 0.4 per cent on month).
Norway, October consumer prices index (up 0.2 per cent on month, up 2.2 per
cent on year).
Thursday: Australia, October employment figures (down 2,500), unemployment
rate (10.9 per cent).
Sweden, October consumer prices index (up 0.2 per cent on month, up 4.2 per
cent on year).
Friday: US, October retail sales (up 1 per cent), sales ex-autos (up 0.4 per
cent). Monetary data for week ending November 1 and for October.
France, October preliminary consumer prices index (up 0.2 per cent on month,
2.2 per cent on year).
UK, September manufacturing output (up 0.3 per cent on month, 1.4 per cent
on year), industrial production (up 0.4 per cent on month)
Sunday: UK, CBI annual conference starts in Harrogate.
During the week: Japan, October trade surplus (Dollars 11.5bn), October
wholesale prices index (down 0.1 per cent on month, down 3.1 per cent on
year).
Germany, October final cost of living, September retail sales (down 1.5 per
cent on year).
Spain, October unemployment rate (16.9 per cent), growth in M4 monetary
indicator in October (14.5 per cent at annualised rate),
Finland, September unemployment rate (17.9 per cent).

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931108

