FT934-11754

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: France aiming for Renault
privatisation next year


   By JOHN RIDDING and CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   PARIS, STOCKHOLM


THE FRENCH government is aiming to privatise the merged Renault-Volvo
vehicle group in the second half of next year, according to Mr Gerard
Longuet, France's industry minister.
Mr Longuet's statement, in an interview in yesterday's Dagens Industri, a
Swedish financial daily, appeared to be aimed at reassuring Volvo
shareholders and union members who have voiced concerns about the merger and
the fact that there is no firm date for privatisation.
'The intention of the French government is not to 'nationalise' Volvo but to
privatise the new group as quickly as possible,' Mr Longuet said. 'If the
situation in the automobile industry stabilises then we have as our
objective privatisation in the second half of 1994.'
But he added that the merger between the French and Swedish car groups must
be implemented, as scheduled, from the beginning of next year for
privatisation to go ahead.
The merger agreement, concluded at the beginning of last month, has faced
strong opposition from small shareholders in Sweden, some union members and
much of the Swedish press. Their main criticisms are that the privatisation
schedule is too vague and that the valuations, which have given the
state-controlled French car group 65 per cent of the shares and Volvo 35 per
cent of the combined company, are unclear.
Earlier this week, 900 Volvo engineers called for the merger to be postponed
until the combined group is privatised. A committee representing 5,000
white-collar workers has also decided to vote against the deal at the
company's extraordinary general meeting on November 9.
Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish prime minister, has said there is an 'urgent
need' for the merged group to be privatised.
French industry ministry officials also clarified the terms of the 'golden
share' to be retained by the French government after privatisation.
The officials said that even in the event of a rupture in the shareholder
agreement between the two groups and the failure to privatise the group, the
French government could not use its golden share to force Volvo to reduce
its shareholding.
Volvo could, however, lose voting rights on shareholdings above 20 per cent
of the group.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931029

