FT932-199

FT  30 JUN 93 / Thorp delay costs 1,700 jobs at Sellafield


   By CHRIS TIGHE


SEVENTEEN HUNDRED contract workers at Sellafield are to lose their jobs in
the next few weeks because of the government's decision to hold more public
consultations on the need for the site's new Pounds 2.8bn Thorp reprocessing
plant, British Nuclear Fuels said yesterday.
BNF also announced that it is to make redundant 1,500 of its employees,
mostly white-collar engineering, design and administration staff at its
headquarters at Risley, Cheshire, over the next two years.
The company, which estimates that the delay in commissioning the Thermal
Oxide Reprocessing Plant is costing Pounds 2.4m a week, said the 1,500 job
cuts, amounting to 10 per cent of its employees, were necessary to make it
more competitive for the future.
The cost so far to BNF of the delay in live commissioning of Thorp, which
had been scheduled for January this year, is estimated at nearly Pounds 50m.
That is certain to rise by tens of millions of pounds following Monday's
Commons announcement of more public consultation, delaying a final decision
on Thorp's future until late autumn.
BNF has already forecast that its 1992-93 pre-tax profit, to be announced
next month, will be about Pounds 60m down on the Pounds 161m figure for
1991-92.
The company, which has a Pounds 9bn order book for Thorp, attacked the
Department of the Environment's decision yesterday. 'These further
bureaucratic delays by DoE and HMIP Policy Branch could have been avoided
with good management,' it said. The delay, it warned, would deter other
industrialists from investment in the UK, in case regulatory bodies later
forced closure of plant they deemed unnecessary.
Mr Howard Davies, CBI director-general, criticised the delay, saying it
could have worrying implications for other industrial development.
Speaking to the British Nuclear Forum in London last night, he said:
'Business needs greater certainty in planning and environmental policy.
Should this decision prove a precedent for the future, then the uncertainty
and constraints which it introduces could undermine investment and wealth
creation.'
The 1,700 to lose their jobs at Sellafield are mechanical and electrical
engineers and skilled manual workers. They, and 600 others who lost their
jobs earlier this year, would have worked on Thorp for its first year of
operation. One thousand of the 1,700 will go by the end of next week.
Mr David Bonser, director of BNF's Thorp decision, rejected a claim
yesterday by Mr Chris Smith, shadow environment secretary, that BNF was
'holding a gun to the government's head' by announcing the job cuts. The
company had made very clear this would be the consequence of further delay,
he said.
But he revealed that BNF is to press the department again to allow it to
start live commissioning of Thorp, during the public consultation period,
using low-radioactivity uranium nitrate instead of spent oxide fuel rods.
The department had rejected a previous request. Mr Bonser said that if BNF
were given immediate permission to carry out uranium commissioning, 500 jobs
would be saved.
The latest job losses are a further blow to west Cumbria, which is
struggling to diversify its economy and stem a tide of job losses. One in
three of the local workforce depends on the nuclear industry.
Local unemployment, now 10.2 per cent, is expected by Copeland borough
council to touch 20 per cent this year because of the rundown of Thorp's
construction and the start of job shedding at Sellafield.
Thorp would employ 1,500 BNF workers. BNF said the delay in commissioning
was also preventing the creation of 1,000 contract jobs on allied
construction projects. The council expects 25 per cent unemployment if Thorp
is not allowed to start operating.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930630

