FT931-4221

FT  11 MAR 93 / Survey of Software at Work, Spring 1993 (4): Control across
multiple projects - Application area / Financial Information Services


   By CLAIRE GOODING


AS ONE of the world's largest information services groups, CCN relies on
information technology (IT) systems at the centre of its business. But IT
projects are among the most difficult to manage, and it was to control a
dozen different project areas, and multiple projects within them, that CCN
first acquired Hoskyns' PMW tool, writes Claire Gooding.
CCN's main customers are banks, building societies, credit card, finance and
mail order companies, which rely on CCN information for credit management
and marketing decisions. The company is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Great
Universal Stores, with a turnover of Pounds 67m.
Of a staff of 1,500 worldwide, 350 work in IT, and some are full-time
project managers. Delivering to time and cost was a big concern, and needed
more than hand-drawn charts. In 1987, when Alec Dawson, director of systems
development, started looking for a project management system, there was a
need to manage several client projects simultaneously. He looked at five
different products, but found that there was very little available for
running on PCs at the time: most needed mainframe hosts.
One product was rejected for being too closely aligned with engineering and
construction. And another, Wings, although functionally rich, had an
uncertain future.
PMW is now used to control costs and track staff deployment across multiple
projects. With 27 licences, and as many as 45 individual users, CCN invested
in tailored training, provided by Hoskyns - 'PMW has been of big assistance
to us in bringing in our projects on time and within cost,' explains Alec
Dawson. 'Previously, we were finding it increasingly difficult to achieve
this with paper and pencil.' Another advantage is that the use of the
software has standardised communication between teams, and enabled a quicker
response to change - 'having the ability to change project plans quickly and
easily has allowed managers to identify and focus on key issues much faster
than when they used manual methods.'
To get the best out of PMW, CCN had first to put effort into organising its
own disciplines. Mr Dawson's advice is that standards have to be set,
in-house.
'You must have a set of standards for describing resources and tasks which
are present in all projects - for example, SP for a senior programmer, and
implementing it across the company,' he says.
'The training was very much tailored to teaching our specific standards, not
just PMW methodology.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930311

