FT932-7020

FT  26 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Reshuffle fever breaks out - Philip
Stephens tastes a tangible atmosphere of anticipation over early changes to
the cabinet


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


A TIDAL wave of reshuffle speculation swept through the bars and lobbies of
Westminster last night as ministers and MPs prepared for their Whitsun
break.
With Mr John Major insistent that the outside world would be given no
advance warning of any shake-up, senior ministers joined political
journalists in the latest game of rearranging the place mats around the
cabinet table.
A signal from Downing Street early in the day that ministers could depart
for a well-deserved Whitsun break without fear that their P45s would follow
in the post initially brought a collective sigh of relief.
Mr Norman Lamont, the beleaguered chancellor, was said to be heading for a
spot of rest and recuperation at his Dorneywood country house.
Mr Michael Portillo, the chief secretary to the Treasury, was taking time
off from the political storm over his public-spending review to plan
tonight's celebrations of his 40th birthday.
But politics is never that simple. As the night wore on - and the wine
bottles emptied - it dawned on Mr Major's loyal generals and lieutenants
that the message from Number 10 had not been entirely unequivocal.
For all the prime minister's insistence that he will not be bullied by the
media, it is common currency at Westminster that his closest political
advisers want him to move Mr Lamont from the Treasury. Nothing personal, you
understand, but the chancellor has been at the scene of too many accidents.
So relief at the prospect of a stress-free week soon gave way to suspicion
that Mr Major might have outsmarted everyone. He could plan the reshuffle
next week and spring his surprise when ministers and MPs return on June 7.
What better way to start the second half of the summer term. It might even
help him win the Christchurch by-election.
It must be a real possibility - though the few in the know will not yet
venture it as a probability.
The prime minister's thoughts on cabinet changes - will he, won't he - are
the closest thing in this post-cold-war era to a state secret. The chief
whip might know, possibly the party chairman. But their lips are sealed.
Late last night came the real panic. If the Mr Major was serious about
changes might he not startle us all by choosing his new team this week?
Well, suggested Downing Street, probably not. For one thing he will be
spending most of Friday with President Francois Mitterrand in Paris. On
Sunday he has a long-standing engagement with the Queen. Back to square one.
Not quite, perhaps. Good governance, as it was once called, demands that Mr
Major will soon have to put his ministers - and us journalists  - out of
their misery.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930526

