FT932-13537

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (10): Fuel oil freed to earn export revenues
 -As many domestic power plants as possible are switching to gas


   By MARK NICHOLSON


Egypt is busy with its own version of the dash for gas.
To free up more of its limited oil reserves for export, and make the most
economical use of unexpectedly good recent gas finds, Egypt is switching as
many of its domestic power plants as possible from fuel oil to gas.
About 60 per cent of Egypt's annual gas output of 1.2bn cu ft is presently
used to fuel the country's power stations. With output slated to rise to an
annual 1.4bn cu ft within three years, the government hopes to raise the
proportion of its power stations fuelled by local gas to 80 per cent from
the present 60 per cent by 1997.
Fuel oil freed in the process will be exported to eke the maximum revenue
from Egypt's crude sales. These last year earned just over Dollars 2bn - a
sum which, despite being 20 per cent down on 1991 as a result of softer
world crude prices, was nevertheless Egypt's second biggest source of hard
currency after tourism. Production last year averaged 870,000 barrels a day.
By the reckoning of many oil executives in Egypt, prospects for the oil
sector are limited.
Present reserves are 6.3bn barrels, and few local executives believe that
accelerated exploration in the Gulf of Suez, Western Desert, Mediterranean,
Red Sea and Nile Delta regions will yield much more than a further 1.5bn-3bn
in reserves.
In February the government approved exploration and production agreements
with seven foreign companies, and the state-owned Egyptian General Petroleum
Corporation is understood to be offering improved terms as an incentive to
attract back to Egypt many of the oil majors which left in the mid-1980s,
mainly as a result of uncompetitive government pricing policies.
The improved terms are likely to include raising to 40 per cent the amount
of oil companies can dedicate to cost recovery in the first years of
production, and lifting to 25-27 per cent from 18-20 per cent the companies'
share of profit oil in their joint ventures with the EGPC. Terms for all
production agreements are, however, made on a case-by-case basis.
Perhaps the most substantial incentive, however, has been provided by a
precedent-setting agreement won by Shell to improve the terms on which gas
prices are set.
The government earlier this year agreed to abandon a formula setting gas
prices at 85 per cent of the price of fuel oil, replacing it with pricing at
85 per cent of the price of Suez Blend, a sweeter and thus higher-value oil.
This, combined with the fact that the government no longer insists on taking
the full share of associated gas from any discoveries, is likely further to
boost Egypt's already promising gas reserves.
Present known reserves of gas have doubled since the mid-1980s to 12
trillion (million million) cubic feet, and many in the industry believe
these could rise further to 27t cu ft, or more.
Shell alone, for instance, is developing a field at Obaiyed in the Western
Desert, which Mr Tarek Heggy, the Shell chairman, says could hold 3.1t cu ft
in its first layer, and possibly a total of up to 9t cu ft in two further
depths.
For the time being, Egypt's present intention is simply to use the gas for
its power system. If further good finds take the country's reserves above
20t cu ft, however, several executives believe that Egypt could start
exporting gas, either by landline to Israel or by pipeline to Italy or North
Africa.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930422

