FT934-11785

FT  29 OCT 93 / Fisher pictures Kodak at heart of media revolution


   By MARTIN DICKSON


MR GEORGE Fisher, who surprised Wall Street on Wednesday by moving from the
chairmanship of Motorola to head Eastman Kodak, said yesterday he had
accepted the job because of the important role Kodak could play in the
information revolution.
His appointment as chairman and chief executive of Kodak sent the company's
stock soaring yesterday, and it closed up Dollars 4 7/8 at Dollars 63 5/8 in
New York.
Mr Fisher is one of the most highly regarded managers in the US, and
analysts saw his combination of technological expertise and team-building
skills as positive for Kodak, which has been suffering from lacklustre
financial results and a bureaucratic, self-absorbed culture.
Shares in Motorola, the semi-conductor and mobile communications equipment
maker, dipped Dollars 1 3/8 to close at Dollars 104 1/4 .
The company, which was taken by surprise by Mr Fisher's move, appointed Mr
Gary Tooker, its president, as interim chief executive.
Mr Fisher said he was attracted to Kodak because of the role it could play
in the 'content', or imaging side of the information revolution, which is
bringing together the computer, media and communications sectors in one
large industry.
Kodak, he said, had a 'a franchise and a market position second to none in
the world on the content side of the information revolution'. He said
profitability and return on assets had to improve, while the company also
needed to cut its large debt burden.
He envisaged the company's photographic imaging and healthcare businesses as
'dual pillars of future growth'. He did not intend to sell the healthcare
business, but said there were 'pockets' of business across the group which
might be divested.
Mr Fisher declined to give details of his pay package, but acknowledged it
was 'generous'. Last year Motorola gave him Dollars 1.5m (Pounds 990,000) in
pay and bonuses, relatively modest for such a successful US company.
Mr Roberto Goizueta, the chairman of Coca-Cola and the non-executive
director of Kodak who led the search for a new chairman, said Mr Fisher had
been top of the list of candidates drawn up by Heidrick & Struggles, the
executive search firm.
Kodak began the hunt in August when the board forced the resignation of Mr
Kay Whitmore, chairman since 1990, for not moving decisively enough to
improve its performance.
Sharper focus, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931029

