FT932-7062

FT  26 MAY 93 / Iranians raid guerrilla bases in Iraq: Aircraft retaliate
for sabotage against oil pipelines as election nears


   By PARICHEHRE MOSTESHAR


IRANIAN aircraft yesterday raided guerrilla bases in Iraq in retaliation for
a series of attacks which have left an already war battered oil network in
even greater disarray.
Mr Ali Akbar Nateq-Nouri, the Majlis (parliament) speaker, confirmed early
morning raids against bases of the Mujahideen Khalq north-east of Baghdad.
He said the raids, the first since April 1992, were launched in response to
recent acts of sabotage by the mujahideen ahead of presidential elections
set for June 11.
Tehran said last week that infiltrators from Iraq had blown up oil pipelines
in oil-producing Khuzestan province in south-west Iran and clashed with
government forces elsewhere.
The mujahideen claim to have killed scores of government soldiers in a
series of ambushes in the past month.
The organisation runs several camps in Iraq, and sided with the Iraqis
during the eight-year war with Iran.
Ordinary Iranians were yesterday unaware that their government had once
again taken arms against what remains the only thorn in the side of the
Rafsanjani government. However, popular support for the mujahideen is
minimal and yesterday's events are likely to have more significance in
Washington than in Tehran.
The mujahideen were instrumental in bringing about the Islamic republic, but
their 'Marxist' leanings later proved unpalatable to the mullahs.
The leadership fled to Iraq, where its backing of the enemy in the Iran-Iraq
war lost it what popular support it might have had.
A government spokesman in Tehran yesterday played down the significance of
the attacks. The mujahideen 'want to stir things up as people pay Iran
attention coming up to the elections, to make themselves look as an
alternative. These events are to attract the attention and financial backing
of Clinton,' he said.
'It is very unimportant and ordinary. In the affairs of this country it is
not very important, in the same way as the British government is not in
danger when the IRA plant bombs in London.'
In August last year a series of bomb attacks in Tehran and several other
Iranian cities were laid at the door of 'Iraqi agents'. The mujahideen
claimed responsibility for the attacks, but the Iranians arrested 'an Iraqi'
who 'confessed' that he was an agent of Saddam Hussein.
Following last year's attacks on mujahideen bases in Iraq, the organisation
claimed responsibility for a number of riots in the Iranian cities of
Shiraz, Arak and Mahshad. President Rafsanjani dismissed the events as 'mere
gatherings'.
It is more probable that the riots were the work of the so-called
fundamentalists who had just lost political power in the Majlis elections
last May.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930526

