FT934-11568

FT  30 OCT 93 / Catalogue of mistakes at Queens Moat: Debt-ridden hotel
group suffers losses of Pounds 1bn


   By MAGGIE URRY and PEGGY HOLLINGER


A CORPORATE horror story unfolded yesterday when Queens Moat Houses
published a 34-page catalogue of mistakes and mismanagement with its results
for 1992.
The once high-flying hotel group formerly run by Mr John Bairstow, a
typically aggressive 1980s entrepreneur, has been brought almost to its
knees by nearly Pounds 1.2bn of debt.
Though some investors had become concerned by the company's rapid expansion,
funded by high levels of debt and a number of rights issues, few were
prepared for yesterday's revelations. One shareholder said yesterday 'there
was no way you could have discovered what was going on from previous sets of
accounts'.
The revelations included alleged breaches of company law, including the
unlawful payment of more than Pounds 20m in dividends; the earlier
overstatement of profits; losses of more than Pounds 1bn and a Pounds 803.9m
property write-down, and an apparent lack of financial controls. There were
minimal reporting systems, a scarcity of management information and no
monthly consolidated accounts. There was no clearly defined treasury
function.
These revelations could lead to an investigation by the department of trade
and industry, although the company has not requested one.
Legal action against the group's former advisers and directors is under
consideration by the new management team - probably over the question of the
dividend payments.
The former advisers included Bird Luckin, the auditors, Charterhouse Bank,
the merchant bank, and Beeson Gregory and De Zoete & Bevan, the joint
stockbrokers. All either failed to return calls or refused to comment.
Mr Bairstow admitted the group had got out of control but defended himself
yesterday blaming the spirit of the times. 'The sheer size of the growth in
the 1980s was such that it would take care of any mistakes,' he said.
He said he was 'perplexed' by the Pounds 1.1bn difference between a property
valuation by Weatherall Green and Smith at the end of 1991 and that by Jones
Lang Wootton at the end of 1992.
'With so much at stake and with such a vast difference in the valuations the
issue should go to arbitration,' he said.
Mr Andrew Coppel, QMH's new chief executive, said he could not comment on
the differences, but said the JLW valuation had been subjected to lengthy
and detailed examination before being adopted.
He said financial controls in the group had been severely lacking. The new
management team appointed in July had been unable to locate the working
papers from which 1992 interim profits were constructed. An outsider close
to the group said of the financial controls, 'it was a complete and bloody
shambles'.
A number of the group's hotels were run by managers paid under an incentive
scheme. Mr Andrew Le Poidevin, the new finance director, said 'in the past
there was very little financial information from these hotels'.
In its rush to expand into continental Europe, QMH had acquired hotels in
France which were subject to leasing deals making it 'unlikely that these
hotels can ever be profitable', Mr Coppel said. In Austria hotels had been
acquired with excessive debts making them 'heavily loss-making'.
The group first announced it was in difficulties in March, when its shares
were suspended at 47 1/2 p.
QMH has been surviving with the support of its banks. These are now entering
discussions with the company over a financial restructuring. This is
expected to give the banks control and substantially dilute the interests of
existing shareholders.
A banker said that when the details of QMH's losses and property revaluation
were given to a meeting of the company's banks on Thursday there was a
'shocked silence'. One banker said he had 'no idea how a company could build
such a complicated banking structure with such inadequate security'.
With nearly 200 subsidiaries, loans from 65 banks in a number of different
syndicates with varying levels of security, and operating in many countries,
the restructuring will be extremely complicated.
The plan is to concentrate on a core of 50 UK hotels which will be renamed
and form a base for eventual expansion. The other 53 hotels in the UK and
the 86 hotels elsewhere in Europe will be managed to maximise returns for
shareholders and creditors.
Although the business plan assumes some recovery in hotel values, one banker
said the assumptions were sensible and if lenders 'sit tight' they could
eventually get all their money back.
Reports and background, Page 8
Lex, Page 22
London stocks, Page 13
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
CRISIS UNFOLDS
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
 -DTI and Stock Exchange told of more than pounds 20m in unlawful
  dividends paid in 1991, 1992 and 1993
 -1992 pre-tax loss of pounds 1.04bn. Exceptional losses of pounds 939m
  including pounds 803.9m write down
 -1991 profit pounds 90.4m pre-tax restated as pounds 56.3m loss
 -1993 interim loss pounds 48.4m before tax
 -Balance sheet July 4 1993 - net debt of pounds 1.18bn, negative net
  assets pounds 435.5m
 -Restructuring to be finalised by January 31 1994 at a cost of pounds
  32m
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931030

