FT931-3973

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (7): Political scandal casts a
shadow - There has been no sign yet of foreign investors even testing the
waters, in spite of a widespread view that the lira is now undervalued /
Italy


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


CAPITAL values and rental prices have continued to slide in the
recession-hit Italian market as companies economise on their use of space
and new tenants remain few and far between.
Yet the sharp fall from the boom days of late 1990 has not so far teased out
new investors looking for property bargains, in spite of the fact that
yields are now drifting back into line with European averages. Moreover,
Italy's mushrooming political corruption scandal, which has struck down
cohorts of local and now national politicians, has cast a shadow over the
entire property scene, contributing to the lack of funds in the sale market.
Rental prices in central Milan have fallen by between 15 per cent and 20 per
cent from their peaks, reckons Mr Roberto Trella, managing director of
Richard Ellis in Italy. That translates to a top price today of L650,000 a
square metre in prestigious locations, compared with up to L800,000 at the
top of the market just over two years ago.
Even the current maximum price would only apply to the highest quality
space, with full services - something hard to find even in Milan. 'Even the
best-located offices don't always offer the quality international tenants
would expect', he says. 'Today, most deals are taking place between L500,000
and L600,000 per square metre.
'That means yields have now risen from about 5 per cent to between 6 per
cent and 6 1/2 per cent', says Mr Trella. 'They're likely to reach 7 per
cent by year-end, bringing them back to levels comparable to other European
centres'.
The situation in Milan also applies to Rome, the other big commercial
market, although prices tend to be a shade lower there. The recession has
also hit the Roman market slightly later than the big cities of the north.
The fact that the capital is sustained by the government's own heavy
property needs and the necessity for many companies and associations to be
present there has propped up demand somewhat, compared with Milan. But
although rentals in Rome are not expected to fall by as much as the northern
city, property specialists point out that they never rose as high as in
Milan in the first place.
It is a tougher tale in more peripheral locations in both cities, with
rentals having slumped. Some poorly-conceived, badly-planned modern
buildings in fringe locations, suffering from inadequate public transport
and poor local infrastructure, are struggling to find tenants. Rentals in
peripheral locations in Milan have dropped from a peak of L320,000 a square
metre to L220,000-L250,000 today, reckons Mr Trella.
However, the market is not moribund. Mr Carlo Puri, the managing director of
Milano Centrale Immobiliare, the Pirelli-owned property group which last
year signed a co-operation agreement with the UK's Knight Frank & Rutley,
says there are still tenants for the right kind of space.
He has just signed up Siemens for 42,000 sq m in the ambitious Bicocca
development covering part of a former Pirelli plant to the north of Milan's
city centre in a deal worth about L200bn. Mr Puri expects to sign another
single tenant for a further 52,000 sq m shortly.
Such one-off transactions have not, however, lifted sentiment in an
otherwise gloomy market. 'Essentially, we are in a situation where there is
very little demand', says Mr Trella. 'And that demand which does exist is
very selective in terms of quality and location'.
As with some other forms of investment in Italy, last year's slide in the
value of the lira could offer a glimmer of hope in the property world.
Although foreign investors have traditionally treated the Italian market
with great caution, the currency's fall, combined with the decline in local
prices, could present attractive opportunities for non-Italian investors.
'When the political situation becomes more stable, we could become very
interesting for foreigners', says Mr Puri. So far, however, there has been
no sign of foreigners even testing the waters, in spite of a widespread view
that the lira is now undervalued.
Italian institutions are also extremely cautious. Insurance companies, which
own very large property portfolios, have been selling, but the disposals
have been largely restricted to the residential side, with the proceeds
reinvested in the core insurance business to help cover heavy underwriting
losses. Even bulk sales of residential property have been taking longer to
conclude owing to the noticeably less liquid market.
There is little to brighten the picture at present. Mr Puri draws some
comfort from the current political scandals, often linked to building
projects, which have helped to 'remove' - at least temporarily - some
players from the market. The elimination of such operators, who concentrated
on renting to public-sector bodies, could create new opportunities for
smaller companies, he reckons. However, in the depressed Italian market,
even such schadenfreude offers scant comfort.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930312

