FT934-10048

FT  08 NOV 93 / Gateway to cut prices of 150 lines


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES and DANIEL GREEN


GATEWAY TURNS up the heat on the big three supermarket groups today with
steep price cuts on a range of luxury items in the run-up to Christmas. The
retail chain has slashed its turkey prices to 42p a lb - almost half the
price of the birds at J. Sainsbury and Safeway, and cut some other products
by up to a third.
The move is the latest in a fierce price war between supermarket chains that
intensified last week when Sainsbury, Britain's biggest supermarket chain,
cut the price of 300 of its most popular own-label products.
Mr David Simmons, chief executive of Gateway, said the store's Christmas
promotion had been planned before Sainsbury launched its price cuts. But
Gateway has reduced its prices on other items - around 150 products - so
that they either match or are lower than those of Sainsbury.
Other retailers yesterday signalled their determination not to be beaten on
price. Asda, the food and consumer goods superstore chain, said yesterday it
would do everything to maintain prices which it froze 10 days ago. 'We
intend to remain the lowest-priced superstore and have not the slightest
intention of losing the high ground,' an official said.
Tesco said it would continue to compete vigorously in the market, but would
not be specific about any price-cutting promotions it planned before
Christmas.
The share prices of the sector have fallen in response to the price war.
Sainsbury fell 34p last week to 366p. Argyll fell 32p to 260p, Asda fell
more than 4p to 49 1/2 p and Tesco fell 10 1/2 p to 195p.
Mr Simmons said that Gateway's effort so far to trim prices, which began in
May, had more than paid for itself in additional sales. 'The extra customer
traffic has more than compensated for any margin cuts.' The chain has seen
an additional 1m customers a week on top of its usual 6m to 7m weekly
shoppers, Mr Simmons added.
A strong challenge is being mounted on margins by the rise of discount
chains such as Germany's Aldi and the UK's Kwik Save.
Chains such as Asda have been laying stress on permanently low prices and Mr
Simmons said he believed cut-price deals are here to stay. 'Once the
customer has a taste for value, it's hard to shake that,' he said.
Gateway's deep-discount promotional items include Christmas puddings,
Bulgarian red wine, Coca-cola, frozen peas and some biscuits, all of which
have been cut by more than 25 per cent.
The current round of price cuts in retailing and telephone services will not
be the last, says a report from Midland Bank published yesterday. 'Price
restraint is becoming a permanent feature of the retail scene and is
spreading to the non-retail sector,' says the bank.
It argues that price cutting has been shown to work for retailers: the
recovery in retail sales volumes has been almost twice as fast as growth in
gross domestic product.
Higher volumes have more than made up for the price restraint and it is
'very likely' that profits have increased.
The bank cites four reasons for the effectiveness of price restraint: a
change in consumer psychology as a result of the recession, low inflation
meaning that consumers are more familiar with what items cost, falling real
incomes constraining what consumers can spend, and finally that 'unlike the
1980s, there will be no personal borrowing boom over the next few years to
help consumers circumvent hefty price increases'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931108

