FT932-6663

FT  27 MAY 93 / Leading Article: An attempt to see the future


BRITAIN'S FIRST thorough review of science policy for 20 years will come as
an anticlimax both to those who advocated a radical shake-up and to
traditionalists who think the only thing wrong with the present system is a
severe shortage of funds.
There is no commitment to increase UK spending on research and development,
which has slipped in comparison with other industrialised counties. Nor is
there fundamental change in the 'dual support system', by which funding for
science is channelled primarily through the research councils and
underpinned by general funds for universities.
More disappointingly, the white paper hardly touches the R&D activities of
other government departments. A short and complacent chapter on the Ministry
of Defence, which still accounts for almost half of public spending on R&D,
offers no ideas on switching resources to the civil sector as military
research runs down.
Yet the review gets some things right. Splitting up the over-extended
Science and Engineering Research Council should give new focus to its
activities. The Advisory Board for the Research Councils - a confusing and
secretive mix of in-house policy-making and outside advice - deserves to be
abolished. The new director-general of research councils, advised by
independent experts but located firmly within the Office of Science and
Technology, has a much clearer function. Another welcome change is the
replacement of the Advisory Council on Science and Technology - which has
often seemed to do little more than produce worthy reports that everyone
ignores - with a more high-powered Council on Science and Technology chaired
by Mr William Waldegrave, the minister responsible for science.
But the white paper's most significant proposal is 'technology foresight', a
process already followed in a number of countries for achieving a better
match between publicly funded research and the needs of industry. The aim
should not be to pick winners in the form of specific projects but to
identify technologies or areas of research that satisfy three criteria: real
scientific promise; availability of strong research groups to do the work;
and companies willing and able to exploit the outcome of the research. There
is no point, for example, in the government spending Pounds 10m on a laser
research programme, however exciting, if the UK has no opto-electronics
industry to make lasers.
However, the foresight exercise can work only if experts from science,
industry, finance, consumer research and government work together. Companies
will have to show more commitment to relations with government R&D managers.
And then they must be ready to pick up the results of priority research
programmes. In the end, the attitude of industry will determine whether this
white paper succeeds in harnessing Britain's scientific excellence to wealth
creation.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930527

