FT932-238

FT  30 JUN 93 / Bosnian presidency ends divisions


   By LAURA SILBER


BOSNIA'S collective presidency agreed yesterday to work together on a new
proposal for the future of the divided republic.
A statement issued after a two-hour meeting of the multi-ethnic presidency
said three of its nine members - a Moslem, a Serb and a Croat - would draw
up a new document on constitutional arrangements for the republic.
'It has been decided that the presidency is going to work on a collective
basis and with all members present,' the statement added.
Yesterday's meeting in Sarajevo was the first time that some of the seven
members of the collective presidency had visited the besieged Bosnian
capital since the war erupted 15 months ago.
Mr Fikret Abdic, a challenger to President Alija Izetbegovic, and who is
from the isolated north-western Moslem heartland, attended the Sarajevo
meeting despite an earlier statements that he feared assassination. Mr Abdic
last week broke ranks with the other Moslem representatives to the
presidency, saying he would consider any agreement which would end the
bloodshed in Bosnia. Mr Izetbegovic and Mr Ejup Ganic, the vice-president,
have boycotted the Geneva talks on the republic's partition, saying such a
move would be tantamount to collective suicide for the Moslems.
They fear the carve-up, backed by Serb and Croat nationalists, would leave
the Moslems without a state. Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader,
has repeatedly threatened that if the Moslems refuse to support partition,
they will be forced to accept a two-way division between the Serbs and the
Croats.
The other presidency members appear divided over whether to accept the
partition of Bosnia into three ethnic mini-states or continue to fight to
preserve the war-torn republic as a unified state.
Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, the international mediator, yesterday arrived in
Zagreb, the Croatian capital, to meet UN officials and wait for the return
of some of the presidency members. Western diplomats say international
mediators are frustrated by Mr Izetbegovic's intransigence and his apparent
hope that the international community will finally turn around and rearm
Bosnia's Moslems.
Lord Owen, the other mediator, has vowed to work for a viable Moslem state
if all three parties agree to partition. But the pattern of recent fighting
makes it clear that both Serb and Croat troops intend to leave the Moslems
in scattered, unconnected ethnic enclaves. This strengthens the view of many
Moslems that it will be impossible to draw a border through the middle of
Bosnia without confining them to landlocked ghettoes.
In apparent confirmation of Moslem fears, Sarajevo radio yesterday reported
that 25,000 tonnes of emergency food aid has been stuck in UN warehouses at
Croatia's Dalmatian coast. The further blockade and continued fighting along
key supply routes appears likely to spur the mainly Moslem army to fight for
control of the roads leading out of central Bosnia.
The Sarajevo meeting was held as Serb and Croat forces closed in on the
Moslem stronghold of Maglaj in northern Bosnia.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930630

