FT934-11474

FT  01 NOV 93 / Queens Moat chief blames management style for losses


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


MR ANDREW COPPEL, chief executive of Queens Moat Houses, yesterday laid the
blame for a Pounds 1.04bn pre-tax loss last year at the hotel group firmly
on the management style, which may have left its board seriously short of
information it needed to monitor the group's health.
Mr Coppel refused to exonerate the non-executive directors, who have been
criticised for failing to see the unfolding crisis that led to the year's
largest corporate failure.
He emphasised that source of the company's problems was the management's
style.
He said: 'Whatever is the view of the non-executive directors, the fact is
that there were serious shortcomings in the executive management of the
business, and this is the source of the company's problems.'
Mr Coppel said Queens Moat would have had to refinance its debts even
without the Pounds 803.9m write-down on the value of the hotel group's
properties, the main factor behind the loss. The real handicap was that the
company made no trading profits in 1992 with which to pay a Pounds 100m
interest bill.
Mr Coppel's remarks will reinforce a view emerging among City observers that
Queens Moat's advisers and non-executives for some time may have been
seriously short of detailed information they needed to check on the health
of the business.
In the past decade, the business expanded rapidly, financed by high levels
of debt and several rights issues. Senior executives brought in over the
summer believe the company lacked basic financial controls.
The hotel group built up by Mr John Bairstow, an aggressive 1980s
entrepreneur, may be investigated by the Department of Trade and Industry.
The company's new management is considering legal action against its former
advisers and directors, possibly over allegedly unlawful payments of
dividends.
Mr Coppel said the entire board had offered to resign when he became chief
executive in July. He asked Mr David Howell, the former cabinet minister, to
stay on as a non-executive to smooth the transition to a new board and to
help organise the refinancing of the company's Pounds 1.2bn of debt.
He said Mr Howell had been 'very useful and approved the reference of
certain matters to the Department of Trade and Industry'.
Nevertheless, investors in Queens Moat are likely this week to question the
property valuations that are the main reason for the loss. A valuation
concluded by Jones Lang Wootton in August for the new board valued Queens
Moat's properties at Pounds 861m on December 1992.
Only five months earlier, the group's former valuers, Weatherall, Green and
Smith, had produced a draft valuation of Pounds 1.35bn for the same assets.
WGS had valued the group's properties at Pounds 2bn in early 1992.
Both valuations followed guidelines laid down by the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931101

