FT931-3971

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (9): Bust will not follow
building boom - Since 1985, Belgian office rents have grown strongly and,
compared with other European cities, Brussels still has room for growth /
Belgium


   By ANDREW HILL


THE Brussels building boom is almost over. But true to its reputation as one
of Europe's most stable property markets, Belgian boom will not be followed
by Belgian bust.
The vacancy rate in the Brussels office market - which accounts for about
three-quarters of office space in Belgium - is rising. As recently as 18
months ago, availability was as low as 2.5 per cent, but according to
January figures, 6.4 per cent of Brussels' 7.45m sq m of office space is now
available for rent.
'In 1993 and the beginning of 1994 I think we are going to see an increase
in availability to 7 or 7.5 per cent,' says Mr Jean-Claude Vandecauter,
general manager of the Brussels office of Knight Frank & Rutley. But unlike
developers in the City of London, Belgian developers had anticipated such a
situation as early as 1991. In the words of one Belgian property analyst,
there has been no speculative 'feeding frenzy' among Brussels property
speculators, and the total figure for offices available and sites under
construction is already dropping.
After a speculative surge fuelled by Scandinavian investors two to three
years ago, traditional investors - Belgian, Dutch and French insurance
companies and pension funds - also started to return to the Brussels office
investment market towards the end of last year, boosting a slack year with
investments of some BFr10bn in November and December.
But although such windfalls are welcome, Belgian property professionals are
also rather proud of the stability of Belgian real estate. 'You could say
it's rather boring, but I think it's quite healthy,' says Mr John Travers,
senior partner with Healey & Baker in Belgium. 'You won't see rental
doubling in Belgium, but you will see good rental growth.'
Mr Travers has reason to feel optimistic, despite the likely hiatus in
office building over the next two to three years and the fact that the
Belgian economy is slowing down.
Since 1985, Belgian office rents have grown strongly, well ahead of
inflation, and by comparison with other European cities, Brussels still has
room to grow further. Healey & Baker's 1992-3 survey of office rental gives
the dearest Brussels rent as Dollars 26.18 per square foot, compared with
the most expensive London West End property at Dollars 64.39.
One reason is that the Brussels market is supported by the presence of
international institutions, notably the EC and Nato.
Last December's Edinburgh summit confirmed what most people have always
assumed - that Brussels was the permanent seat of the Commission, the
biggest EC institution - and thus underscored the decision of myriad lobby
groups, legal firms, international companies and others to establish offices
in Brussels.
The average take-up of office space in Brussels is about 250,000 sq m a
year, but the institutional appetite for space means it is a market which
will always benefit from unexpected increases in demand. In 1991, for
example, the total take-up was 370,000 sq m, as the European Commission
searched for places to put 'fonctionnaires' displaced from its Berlaymont
headquarters by renovation work.
Last year, the European Parliament alone rented well over 200,000 sq m in
the glittering new Espace Leopold, complete with debating chambers and
conference halls. The addition of new members to the Community over the next
decade should maintain the momentum.
Mr Travers is keen to emphasise, however, that international institutions
are not the dominant players in the Brussels letting market. In fact, they
account for only 16 per cent of office occupation. The Belgian state (30 per
cent), international private sector (24 per cent) and Belgian private sector
(23 per cent) all have a bigger presence.
Last month, in one of Europe's largest deals, Pleiad Real Estate sold its
newly-built Tours Pleiad complex in Brussels to Belgacom, the telecoms
company, for Pounds 280m.
Rents will also continue to be underpinned by the strict urban planning
policy of Mr Charles Picque, minister-president of the Brussels-Capital
region, who is trying to limit the spread of purely commercial districts.
Professionals criticise him as a utopian, but simultaneously admit that such
a policy, while bad for developers, will always be good for investment and
rental values.
Outside Brussels, the main interest is in the retailing sector. Highlight of
this year's retail market is likely to be the opening on March 11 of
Belgium's biggest out-of-town shopping centre at Wijnegem, near Antwerp.
The importance of the development is not so much its size - 170 shops spread
over 37,000 sq m, plus an existing 14,000 sq m hypermarket - but the fact
that it has been allowed at all.
Special legislation dating back to 1975 and aimed at protecting independent
shopkeepers has allowed cities to veto such schemes. Partly as a result of
this policy, the growth of the chain store - motor of the in-town and
out-of-town retail market - has been limited in Belgium. With the opening of
Wijnegem, property professionals believe there is a chance that other
Belgian towns will be tempted to approve such developments, fuelling what is
already healthy rental growth in the retail sector.

The Financial Times


London Page X

930312

