FT932-6730

FT  27 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Councils shake-up comes under fire


   By JOHN AUTHERS


THE Association of District Councils yesterday launched a scathing attack on
the approach the Local Government Commission has taken to the reorganisation
of local government.
The commission has already announced changes to introduce unitary
authorities in the Isle of Wight, Cleveland, Durham and Derbyshire. It has
given cost savings as the basis for its proposals.
But the association said that the commission's emphasis on cost was
misleading and that its methodology for reaching its conclusions had been
hidden.
Mr Malcolm Fletcher, chief executive of Erewash Borough Council, which is to
be abolished under the commission's proposals, attacked the commission's
claim that a large unitary authority for Derbyshire excluding the city of
Derby will save Pounds 34 in council tax.
He said that this finding, produced by consultants Ernst & Young, conflicted
with the council's own advice from consultants, and that the methodology for
the costings had not been published. He said: 'The experience we have had in
Derbyshire so far ranges from disillusioned to disappointed and perhaps an
awful lot of us are disgusted.'
Lady Elizabeth Anson, chairman of the association, also attacked the
commission's figures. She said: 'People speaking in favour of this on the
expectation of a personal reduction in their council tax will be
disappointed. By the time the government has altered its means of
calculating central grant and has altered the grant itself, no such benefit
is likely to be seen by any Derbyshire council tax payer.'
The association also announced its expectations for the next stage of the
commission's review. It believes that Somerset will become one large unitary
authority, but Avon will be split into three authorities, including an
autonomous Bristol council.
North Yorkshire, in a move the association would strongly contest, is to be
split into three large districts. Proposals for all these councils will be
announced by Sir John Banham, chairman of the Commission, next month.
Humberside, which like Cleveland and Avon was first created in the review of
local government under the premiership of Sir Edward Heath, will be split
into five unitary authorities, the association says. Gloucestershire will be
split into three authorities.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930527

