FT932-6889

FT  26 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: North Sea herring's nose dive -
Dutch concerned over depleting stocks of a staple


   By RONALD VAN DER KROL


With the Netherlands about to celebrate the traditional opening of the 'new
herring' season, Dutch biologists are expressing concern that the number of
the fish in the North Sea is starting to decline again after steady growth
throughout the 1980s.
The North Sea's herring population is currently estimated at roughly 1.2m
tonnes, an important gain compared with the late 1970s when stocks were
practically wiped out, though down slightly from the most recent peak of
1.5m tonnes in 1989.
Overall, however, the total still falls well short of the previous target of
2.2m tonnes set by stock managers. It remains far below the 3m-4m tonnes of
the species that swam in the North Sea just after the second world war.
Herring, which can be eaten all year around after freezing but which tends
to be consumed most often in the summer months, is a mainstay of Dutch
fishmongers, accounting for 33 per cent of the average fish shop's annual
turnover.
This year's season opens in the Netherlands today with a traditional charity
auction of the first catch in Scheveningen, the seaside district of The
Hague.
Like the public relations surrounding 'beaujolais nouveau' in the wine
world, the festivities attached to the 'new herring' are designed to bolster
the delicacy status of the country's favourite fish.
The Dutch explanation for the reduced numbers is as regularly recurring as
the marketing extravaganza that accompanies the start each year of the
herring season: Danish trawlers systematically overfish young herring in the
waters of Skagerrak and Kattegat to supply their fishmeal industry,
weakening the ability of the population to reproduce in the North Sea, the
Dutch say.
'The problem remains acute, and Brussels has yet to take sufficient action
against the Danes,' Mr Ad Corten, a biologist and herring specialist at the
Dutch national fisheries research institute RIVO, says.
Still, numbers have improved considerably since all herring fishing was
banned in the North Sea from 1977 to 1981 to give dwindling stocks a chance
to recover. Mr Corten says the recovery of shoals since then shows that
stock management can be successful.
Nevertheless, biologists are concerned about a new policy by the Dutch
government aimed at preserving a 'biological' minimum of fish for population
replacement rather than a minimum number of fish needed to foster stable and
commercially-viable catches. According to Mr Corten, this could lead to
strong fluctuations in the number of herring in the future.
The appellation 'new herring' is a slight misnomer. The fish are generally
three years old and are considered to be at their tastiest in the months of
May and June, when they rapidly put on fat to prepare for the autumn and
winter.
The Dutch fishing industry is hoping for a repeat of the 1991 season, when
the herring were of the right size and the right fat content to make that
year's 'vintage' top quality. In 1992, the herring were smaller and
contained less fat.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930526

