FT933-12579

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (5): After the
dust clears, recovery can start - Italy: The award of public contracts has
been paralysed by a political scandal


   By PETER COOPER


THIS IS an exceptionally difficult year for the Pounds 80bn Italian
construction market. A sharp downturn in the business cycle has coincided
with a major scandal over public sector contract awards.
The market forecaster Cresme predicts a 5 per cent fall in total
construction output in 1993. But even that could prove optimistic. There was
a 17 per cent fall in cement consumption in the first quarter of the year
which points to a much bigger decline in construction output.
At the moment the award of public sector contracts is virtually paralysed by
the Mani Pulite (clean hands) inquiry. Ten of the top 15 Italian contractors
are under investigation for the alleged illegal funding of political
parties. The biggest name in the industry, Pounds 750m-a-year
Cogefar-Impresit, heads the list; other companies include Pounds 230m-a-year
Grassetto and Pounds 360m-a-year Lodigiani.
More and more contractors, politicians and government officials have been
implicated in the scandal surrounding the alleged payment of party political
contributions to secure public sector contracts. So far this year, the
number of such contract awards has slumped by more than two-thirds.
The Pounds 16bn-a-year public sector construction market is in disarray.
Large civil engineering contracts are the hardest hit by the crisis. But the
Pounds 2bn-a-year public sector building sub-sector is largely unscathed. A
five-year modernisation of barracks for the Carbinieri and a prison
rebuilding programme are unaffected.
The crisis is also damaging private sector work. Planning permission is at
present almost impossible to obtain in the big Italian cities because
everyone is afraid to take a decision that might attract the magistrates'
eagle eye.
'The wave of scandals has not only blocked public sector contracts worth
Pounds 12bn a year, but has also shut down Pounds 42bn worth of private
sector projects,' says Mr Riccardo Pisa, president of the National Building
Association. 'There is no longer anyone who has the courage to approve any
type of scheme.'
Market commentators think things will get worse before they get better. 'The
government will have to cancel projects like the high speed train to reduce
its budget deficit,' says Professor Aldo Norso of Milan University. 'Public
spending on construction will fall.'
Recovery hopes are pinned on the private sector which, contractors believe,
will become more involved in infrastructure development. There are reasons
for optimism. Italian motorways are tolled, and their development could be
financed privately. Italians are also the biggest savers in Europe, and
might be persuaded to invest directly in infrastructure schemes.
Of more immediate interest to contractors are the proposed giant commercial
building projects, such as the plan to build a Canary Wharf-style financial
district near the Garibaldi station in Milan. These developments are stalled
by the political crisis. Nonetheless, property agents report a shortage of
high quality office space in Italy as well as inadequate hotel accommodation
and retail space. A commercial building boom is in prospect in the near
future.
Mr Paul Bacon, of Milan-based commercial property agent Healey & Bacon, says
there is a shortage of quality office accommodation in Milan, with less than
two years' supply. He points to many opportunities for retail chains.
'Out-of-town shopping is very underdeveloped in Italy and many of the big
international names are absent from the high streets,' he says.
However, commentators do not see the commercial building market improving
greatly until a new government is elected in the autumn and confidence is
restored in the Italian economy.
Mr George Soros, the well-known Wall Street investor, currently rates Italy
as having the best investment potential of any country in Europe. Italian
contractors hope others will heed his advice, and look for investment
opportunities at the bottom of a very deep business cycle.
WT Partnership, the British quantity surveyor, has established a 12-strong
office in Milan in anticipation of a private sector boom. It hopes to advise
developers on new projects.
'We see the current political crisis clearing in the next 12 months,' says
Mr Roy Merritt, a WT partner. 'Electoral reform should provide the catalyst
for economic stability. The situation is already improving in Milan with the
election of a new mayor and council. Italy is going through a quiet
revolution, and those looking to take part in the recovery should be making
a move now, not next year.'
This year the private sector has benefited from a fall in long-term interest
rates from 15 to 11 per cent. The devaluation of the lire last September has
also helped to keep the private sector competitive internationally. All the
same, Cresme still sees a 6 per cent decline in commercial and industrial
construction output in 1993, before a 1 per cent upturn next year.
Consumer confidence has taken a tumble during the political upheaval.
Forecasters say the impact of the crisis on both private purchaser
confidence and public housebuilding activity will depress housing starts
from 278,000 last year to 265,000, despite a sharp fall in mortgage rates
from their 18 per cent peak last December.
But most market analysts think a new government will succeed in cleaning up
the system. It would have a revolt on the streets if it failed to do so.
Feelings are running very high among contractors and materials producers who
are seeing their businesses ruined.
So it is more than likely that the Italian construction industry will
somersault from seemingly intractable public paralysis to private
prosperity. The industry is at a major turning point. It is shifting its
focus from the public sector to private-led development with international
participation.
Yet this is a horribly painful process for those trying to earn a living
this year: 1993 will be a difficult period for Italian contractors and
material producers. Even the infamous Italian 'Black Economy' is in for a
rough ride, with Cresme forecasting a 4 per cent fall in activity to Pounds
11bn this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930723

