FT934-10194

FT  06 NOV 93 / London Stock Exchange: FT-SE 100 index plunges 2 per cent


   By STEVE THOMPSON


THE warning signals emanating from all of the world's major stock markets on
Thursday gathered momentum yesterday and triggered the biggest single-day
fall in UK share prices for more than a year.
Big international institutions moved to sell as they fretted over the
possibility of a rise in US interest rates. Such a scenario could lead to a
substantial repatriation of US funds, according to dealers. Cash from the US
is widely acknowledged as having been the driving force behind most European
markets this year.
After falling almost 37 Dow Jones points on Thursday, as the US bond market
tumbled afresh, the US equity market came under renewed selling pressure at
the opening yesterday before staging a strong rally and moving close to
positive territory as London closed.
The FT-SE 100 share index ended a frantic trading session a net 63.4 lower
at 3,085.6 - the heaviest fall in a single trading session since October 5
last year, when the London market was still affected by the UK's withdrawal
from the exchange rate mechanism. Over the week the FT-SE 100 has fallen
85.4. The market has come under increasing pressure all week, with
yesterday's 2 per cent fall leaving the 100-index a net 2.6 per cent lower.
The speed of the market's decline caught out many market dealers, with the
second-liners lagging the leaders and the FT-SE Mid 250 index, down 40.3
yesterday, down 68 points, or 1.9 per cent on the week.
Gilt edged stocks ran into sustained bouts of selling and posted losses in
excess of a point, before edging off the bottom.
Turnover in equities, still running at high levels during the week despite
the general uncertainty surrounding the market, increased yesterday to
773.3m with the FT-SE 100 stocks accounting for turnover of almost 360m
shares, well above the usual split between FT-SE 100 and other stocks and
indicating a high level of inter-marketmaker activity. The value of customer
business in the market on Thursday reached a heavy Pounds 1.73bn.
The view of senior dealers around London trading desks was that the market
had undergone an entirely justified correction, which reflected a similar
move on Wall Street and was replicated by moves on French and German
markets.
Most emphasised, however, that the level of selling pressure in UK equities
by UK institutions had been small.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931106

