FT932-6806

FT  27 MAY 93 / Balladur staves off rift in coalition


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


FRENCH Prime Minister Edouard Balladur appeared yesterday to have
forestalled, with his latest job-boosting plan, the first serious rift in
his ruling coalition.
The prime minister, an RPR Gaullist, had come under criticism from Mr Valery
Giscard d'Estaing, president of the UDF centre-right party, for introducing
too much austerity in his May 10 budget.
In particular, the former French president, who is not in the RPR-UDF
coalition government but who is a contender for the presidency in 1995,
tried to swing the UDF against Mr Balladur's proposal to increase the
controversial CSG tax, a supplementary income tax hitting unearned as well
as earned income, on July 1. Mr Giscard d'Estaing said the tax increase
should be delayed until next year.
But Mr Balladur's announcement on Tuesday of a FFr40bn (Pounds 4.73bn) state
loan, most of which will be spent on preserving jobs and accelerating
housing and infrastructure, appeared yesterday to have silenced Mr Giscard
d'Estaing. Mr Bernard Bosson, the UDF transport minister, disowned his party
leader's criticism, expressing regret that most of the blows against the
government should have come from within.
Yet, with presidential elections less than two years away, the prime
minister runs a growing risk of being sniped at the two most likely
presidential contenders - Mr Giscard d'Estaing and Mr Jacques Chirac.
Criticism from the Socialists of Mr Balladur's change of emphasis towards
measures to create jobs has been muted by the fact that the prime minister
is now vigorously pursuing some of their policies. Not only is he providing
funding for 200,000 more places in Socialist-created work schemes, but his
labour minister, Mr Michel Giraud, said yesterday that he would implement a
law on redundancy procedures, passed by the Socialist government last
December and criticised then by conservatives.
Commenting on Mr Balladur's proposal for a wage subsidy, Les Echos newspaper
yesterday said that the government would have been critical if it had been
applied by its predecessor. In cases where employees have agreed to take a
wage cut in order to ward off the threat of layoffs, Mr Balladur has said
the state will step in 'temporarily' to make up the shortfall in wages.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930527

