FT934-10318

FT  05 NOV 93 / London Stock Exchange: FT-SE 100 Index driven below 3,150


   By STEVE THOMPSON


A WORLDWIDE decline in equity markets engulfed a UK stock market regarded by
many observers as overvalued and drove share prices sharply lower yesterday.
However, a rally, prompted mainly by a relatively steady opening on Wall
Street, left the London market well above its lowest levels by the close of
trading. Dealers said London had been upset by fears that a move to
repatriate US funds could follow a shift to tighter monetary policy in the
US.
Helping the market kick against big losses throughout Continental bourses
was an excellent set of third quarter figures from British Petroleum,
triggering an all round good performance from the rest of the all-important
oil sector.
The FT-SE 100-share Index ended a volatile session a net 13.3 lower at
3,149.0, while the FT-SE Mid 250 index moved in tandem, closing 16.9 off at
3,500.4.
Big falls in the world's most important stock markets overnight and early
yesterday set the tone for what was always going to be a difficult trading
session in London. Wall Street retreated sharply from its record high level,
troubled by another sizeable decline in US bonds which in turn triggered a
flurry of selling pressure in US equities.
Far eastern markets took their cue from the US with Tokyo sliding 430 points
on the Nikkei index and Hong Kong's Hang Seng - a weak market in recent
sessions - losing 147 points.
The FT-SE 100 index began the session almost twenty points lower and staged
a minor rally during the first hour of trading, picking up to show a 5 point
decline before coming under another bout of downside pressure. This drove
the 100 index down to the day's low point of 3,133.9 in mid-morning.
Wall Street's better-than-expected opened helped UK prices stabilise towards
the close, although dealers noted signs of more selling pressure building up
during the last 30 minutes of trading when one of the leading UK
marketmaking firms was thought to have executed a substantial sell
programme, including big blocks of telecom and financial stocks.
Turnover yesterday reached a heavy 784.1m shares, well above the levels seen
earlier this week. The value of customer business transacted on Wednesday
was Pounds 1.29bn.
Senior traders in London agreed that London had performed exceptionally well
yesterday in face of the big falls across the world's markets. All of them,
however, voiced caution about Wall Street's vulnerability. 'If Wall Street
holds or closes up on the session we should be OK; but if it wobbles and
goes down then we will test the downside levels,' was the view of one head
of marketmaking although he said he still felt confortable with the market.
A welter of important trading statements from some of the UK market's
leading companies plus a number of big moves around the sectors kept dealers
busy. BP, the oil group, unloved and shunned by UK domestic institutions
just over a year ago when it cut its quarterly dividend payment, extended
its recent oustanding performance after releasing third quarter numbers well
in excess of market forecasts, pulliing other oil stocks with it.
On the other hand, BT upset the big income funds by putting a question mark
over future dividend growth and its shares dipped accordingly.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

931105

