FT933-12574

FT  23 JUL 93 / Management: Alive and kicking in the US


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


Total quality management is alive and kicking within large US companies, in
spite of the problems some of them have had with it in the past few years.
Almost all those which have initiated TQM are continuing or intensifying it.
They expect it still to be one of their top initiatives by 2000.
These are some of the conclusions which emerge from a study* of member
companies of the Business Roundtable, an association of more than 200 large
corporations. The study, which drew responses from 106 companies (90 chief
executives and 92 'quality officers'), was carried out by Delta Consulting
Group, a New York firm.
Delta has a strong professional interest in rehabilitating the image of TQM
at a time when many large companies have been seduced by the more
dramatic-seeming promise of business process re-engineering. But that does
not make its findings any less striking.
Delta's president, David Nadler, has argued - in common with some
re-engineering consultants - that TQM and re-engineering are complementary
and companies would find it counter-productive to drop one in favour of the
other.
TQM, if handled properly, delivers gradual but continuous improvements in
many aspects of business performance, while re-engineering attempts to
create a more dramatic impact on business processes over shorter periods of
time. It employs some of the same tools and techniques as TQM.
In the Delta study - Ten Years After: Learning about Total Quality
Management - chief executives reported two particular problems with TQM: it
took longer than expected to take effect; and some senior managers were
still not sufficiently skilled in it.
Quality officers generally saw more problems than the chief executives did.
They were more negative on: senior management knowledge and skill;
conflicting values among key senior managers; the lack of perceived need for
change; and strong resistance to change.
The 'top TQM company' most admired by the respondents was Motorola, followed
by Xerox, Milliken, AT&T, Ford, Corning, Federal Express, GE, 3M and IBM.
* Available from Delta, 521 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10175.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930723

