FT934-10051

FT  08 NOV 93 / Yorks TV chief set to quit today


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR WARD THOMAS will take over as acting chairman of Yorkshire-TyneTees
television following the resignation, expected today, of Mr Clive Leach, the
chairman and chief executive of the ITV company.
Mr Leach declined to comment last night but an announcement is expected from
Yorkshire today.
It is believed that Mr Thomas and a non-executive director of the company
met Mr Leach on Saturday and told him that the board required his
resignation.
The move follows last week's warning that Yorkshire-TyneTees was likely to
make a pre-tax loss in its 1992/93 financial year instead of an expected
profit.
The problem arises from two factors - attempts to pull forward revenue into
the 1992/93 period by offering heavy discounts on advertising rates and
'overtrading', doing deals from an inflated station average price.
This meant that Yorkshire was in debt to advertisers either in advertising
time or cash.
As a former sales director Mr Leach - one of the more flamboyant executives
in ITV - has been held responsible for the serious financial position at the
company.
The decision that Mr Leach should go was taken at a meeting of non-executive
directors in London on Friday. It is believed that major shareholders such
as Pearson, owners of the Financial Times, would have pushed the issue to an
extraordinary general meeting if Mr Leach had not agreed to resign.
Until a new group chief executive is appointed the two managing directors,
Mr John Fairlie of Yorkshire and Mr John Calvert of TyneTees, will run the
day-to-day affairs of the company.
Pearson is in the final round of bidding to take over Macmillan, the US
publishing company and the largest remaining part of the former empire of
Robert Maxwell to be sold.
Sealed bids for the company have to be submitted by 5pm tomorrow. Apart from
Pearson, the other bidders are expected to include Paramount Communications,
the entertainment group, and Harcourt Brace Jovanovic and K-III, the US
magazine publishers.
Pearson is also interested in adding to its electronic publishing activities
by buying Extel, the information services group which is being sold by
United Newspapers.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931108

