FT932-3200

FT  15 JUN 93 / Survey of Retail Chain Management (7): Market shows signs of
stabilising - Vanessa Houlder examines how some sections of the property
sectors are bucking the downward trend


   By VANESSA HOULDER


RETAIL property remains a tenant's market. The lengthy recession, together
with the surge in development in the late 1980s, has created a glut of empty
premises and a steep decline in rental values.
Nonetheless, there are tentative signs that the market is stabilising.
Moreover, some segments of the market such as food stores and retail
warehouses have bucked the downward trend.
Tenants are forcing up rents and facing fierce competition to obtain
suitable sites and planning consents.
Variations between different parts of the retail property market are
striking. Over the two years to February 1993, rental values of town centre
shop units and out-of-town shopping centres fell by 8 per cent and 1 per
cent respectively, according to research group the Investment Property
Databank.
By contrast, the rental value of retail warehouses rose by more than 6 per
cent over the same period. Indeed, the buoyancy of the retail warehouse
sector has been one of the most notable features of the property recession.
This has been due partly to a limited supply of space since retail warehouse
units are rarely built without a letting agreement from a tenant. At the
same time, growing requests from retailers to take space away from the town
centres on sites that are visible, accessible and have ample car-parking
space has boosted demand.
This trend, which gathered momentum during the 1980s, was led by the
supermarket groups, along with stores selling do-it-yourself equipment,
furniture, and home furnishings. In fact the trend has continued with
traditional high street retailers, including Comet, Currys and Halfords,
opening out-of-town units.
Demand from tenants may soon begin to stimulate development of some of the
16m sq ft of retail warehouse parks that now have planning consent.
According to Hillier Parker, chartered surveyors, there are 'clear signs of
interest' in retail park development beginning to re-emerge.
The same cannot be said for any significant renewal in development of
shopping centres, a market that is currently in the doldrums. Just over 2m
sq ft of shopping centre floorspace was under construction in December 1992,
down from more than 7m the previous year, according to Hillier Parker. And
more than 1m sq ft of shopping centre floorspace originally scheduled for
completion during 1991 and 1992 failed to open.
Indeed shopping centre development is likely to remain subdued. Hillier
Parker expects it 'to take at least two or three years' for the shopping
centres opened since the onset of recession to be filled up.
The future of out-of-town shopping centres does not simply depend on a
revival of demand from retailers. It also depends on the outcome of a debate
between those who believe out-of-town centres are complementary to the needs
of town centres and those who believe they are highly damaging.
The government's policy on out-of-town shopping centres was updated last
October, when the Department of the Environment issued a new planning policy
guidance note, known as PPG6. The guidance note emphasised the need to
revitalise town centres, rather than promote large out-of-town stores.
It said that regional out-of-town shopping centres 'would not normally be
appropriate' if they seriously jeopardised investment in nearby town
centres, or unless there was likely to be a significant growth in population
or retail spending.
The difficulty in assessing these factors was recently highlighted by the
government's decision in March to approve the development of the Trafford
Shopping centre, the first regional shopping centre in the north-west of
England.
The decision was strongly criticised by local councillors, town centre
retailers and property owners who claimed that 1m sq ft of new shops on the
outskirts of Manchester would further damage business in the city.
But the Trafford Centre may turn out to be the last regional shopping centre
to be granted planning consent - most of the country is now within reach of
a regional centre, with the exception of the south-west of England.
The arguments on regional centres also apply to other types of out-of-town
stores. For instance, 'club warehouses' and factory outlets  - the US-style
discount stores which are beginning to take root in the UK - are seen as a
potential threat to town centres by many retailers.
Supermarket groups are also at the centre of the debate about out-of-town
shopping, since they are continuing with ambitious programmes to open
out-of-town superstores.
Similar criticisms to regional shopping centres apply - the growth of
out-of-town food stores is hastening the demise of local shops. The number
of grocery shops has fallen in the last three decades from more than 100,000
to 40,000.
Such criticisms may increase as the large supermarket groups target smaller
towns. Chesterton, the chartered surveyors, says that the proportion of
large new food stores located in small towns has increased from less than 10
per cent in 1990 to about 25 per cent today.
Finding suitable sites is a growing constraint on the supermarket groups'
expansion. Moreover, the difficulty in securing suitable sites is a severe
obstacle for newcomers to the market, such as Aldi and Netto, discount food
retailers, attempting to gain ground in the UK.
'It is clear that the newcomers have encountered greater-than-foreseen
difficulites in obtaining suitable sites and planning consents in a highly
competitive property market,' says research companyCorporate Intelligence
Group.
Indeed for the retail sector as whole, intense competition for premises is
now the exception rather than the rule.
But UBS, the brokers, believes it unlikely that retailers in general will be
looking to take additional space in preparation for an upturn in consumer
confidence. 'Whereas the late 1980s saw a 'race for space', the emphasis now
is one rationalisation and the restoration of profit margins', it says.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

930615

