FT931-3896

FT  13 MAR 93 / Accord cuts use of aid as sweetener for trade deals


   By DAVID DODWELL, World Trade Editor


WESTERN countries' use of aid as a 'sweetener' to help companies win
contracts overseas has fallen sharply in the past year, according to aid
donors meeting in Paris this week.
The value of tied aid, and other credits seen as trade boosting, fell from
Dollars 10bn in 1991 to Dollars 4bn last year, according to the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development.
The improvement follows the controversial introduction in February last year
of the so-called Helsinki accord, which banned the use of tied aid for
projects that are 'commercially viable', or in better-off developing
countries. It called for close monitoring of contracts where there is
suspicion that aid is being mixed with commercial financing to help
companies win tenders.
More than 300 such projects were notified during 1992, but only 30 needed
detailed examination. Of these, fewer than half were found to break the new
rules, an OECD official said.
'There has been a tremendous shift towards credits that are less suspect of
being trade motivated,' the official said, noting at the same time that the
slump between 1991 and 1992 may have been exaggerated by governments pushing
sensitive loans through in 1991, ahead of the Helsinki accord deadline.
Aid donors, in particular the US, fought hard throughout 1991 for the
reforms, which are intended to ensure aid funds are used for proper aid
purposes, rather than as covert subsidies for exporters.
Controversy erupted just two weeks before the ban came into force, when
Spain launched large export credit lines to Venezuela and Mexico - neither
of which are eligible for tied-aid funding under the Helsinki rules. Spain
was not forced to withdraw the credits, with a compromise agreed under
special transitional rules.
There was uncertainty throughout last year over whether governments would
change practices, not least because of difficulties in defining whether a
project was 'commercially viable'.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930313

