FT933-10127

FT  05 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Mossgas gets severe evaluation
in auditor's report


   By PHILIP GAWITH


   JOHANNESBURG


MOSSGAS, South Africa's controversial R12bn (Pounds 1.77bn) synthetic fuel
project, is unlikely to produce any real returns and an estimate of its gas
reserves gives it a lifespan of only 10 to 14 years, according to a Deloitte
and Touche report, commissioned by Mr Henry Kluever, the auditor general.
Less than two years ago the project's lifespan was put at 25 years.
Mossgas has been a bone of contention since the cabinet gave the provisional
go-ahead for its construction, near Mossel Bay on the southern Cape coast,
in February 1987. It was a strategic decision that sought to enhance South
Africa's liquid fuel self-sufficiency in the face of an oil embargo against
the country.
Taxpayers have long resented the costs of a project that has a spectacularly
inefficient cost/output ratio compared with industry norms. This latest
report is likely to prompt renewed calls for it to be abandoned.
Mr Kluever said he considered the R11bn historical cost of the project,
before capitalised interest, to be a sunk cost. The investigation then
focused on projected cashflows from 1993.
On a best scenario basis, the project is expected to be cash positive from
1994 until further capital expenditure is required around the turn of the
century.
The estimate assumes the project will receive its revenue on an import
parity basis, not the export parity basis it is currently receiving.
The import parity price, received by Sasol, the other synthetic fuel
producer in South Africa, is the base price at which fuel in the country is
sold.
The export parity price, which is about 8-10 cents a litre less, is the
price the local oil industry receives for its exported product.
Mossgas had always assumed its product would be priced on the same basis as
Sasol's, but this is being resisted by local oil companies, who wish to
renegotiate the terms on which they take products from the synthetic
producers.
The report concluded that if the sunk costs were excluded from an analysis,
Mossgas had a future on an import parity basis. It added that the project
was sensitive to relatively small external changes, such as the price
received for its product determining overall revenue.
Mr Kluever said that Mossgas's potential had in fact deteriorated since last
being discussed by the parliamentary joint committee on public accounts in
December 1991.
Based on the best estimate scenario 'it is unlikely that Mossgas will be
able to fully service and repay the Central Energy Fund's foreign commercial
commitments relating to Mossgas'.
In spite of the report's damning conclusions, Mr Kluever said economic
viability of the project should continue given other social and economic
benefits that attached to its operation.
These included savings of foreign exchange, job creation and general
stimulation of economic activity.
The public accounts committee was to discuss Mossgas's position later this
week.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930805

