FT932-7118

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (6): Support grows for 'steady
Eddie' - President Fidel Ramos is winning new allies


   By VICTOR MALLET


LIVING UP to his nickname of 'Steady Eddie,' President Fidel Ramos has
advanced gradually but firmly on two fronts in an attempt to bring political
stability to a notoriously unstable country and to consolidate his own
authority following his election victory in May last year.
In September, he established the National Unification Commission, an
advisory body with the task of mediating between the government and various
rebel groups - including communists, right-wing military rebels and Moslem
separatists - and with devising an effective peace process.
Mr Ramos has also won enough allies in Congress to ensure that the
legislature does not block him at every turn in the day-to-day running of
the Philippines. He has thus avoided so far the governmental paralysis which
afflicted his predecessor, Mrs Corazon Aquino.
The president made an inspired choice in naming Ms Haydee Yorac to chair the
NUC. A lawyer with liberal credentials, she won respect as an incorruptible
election supervisor for Comelec, the election commission, and is acceptable
both to the establishment and to left-wing guerrillas, some of whom were her
clients.
Both Ms Yorac and the government regard the military rebels as the most
immediate threat to the security and stability of the Philippines.
The rebels did, after all, stage seven coup attempts against Mrs Aquino; Mr
Ramos, as her armed forces chief, was obliged to protect her.
Negotiations between the government and the rebels have already begun, and
Colonel Gregorio 'Gringo' Honasan, the charismatic officer regarded as the
most influential of their leaders, is seen regularly in Metro Manila, either
in restaurants or attending peace talks.
The assumption is that the rebels will be granted an amnesty and will in
exchange disband their forces and give up their weapons - 'I'm pretty
confident that maybe within the year we will have a settlement,' says Ms
Yorac.
MEANWHILE, the communist threat has been sharply reduced by its
international decline as a popular ideology. According to official estimates
the number of partisans under arms in the Philippines has fallen from a peak
of about 25,000 in the mid-1980s to a third of that number - 'in terms of
being able to overthrow the government, it's not forthcoming in the next 100
years,' says Ms Yorac.
The communist party is racked by internal strife and is heavily infiltrated
by military intelligence agents. Divisions have been deepened by Mr Ramos's
decision to rescind a ban on membership of the party; communists are being
urged to abandon the armed struggle and to campaign legally in Philippine
elections.
In spite of the weakness of the communists, the government is anxious to
conclude a formal peace agreement because officials are finding it
increasingly difficult to distinguish between political rebels and armed
gangs; a deal would leave the bandits out in the cold and allow the
government to tackle them as common criminals.
The Red Scorpion crime and kidnapping gang, for example, is led by former
communist rebels, according to the government. In March, Vice-president
Joseph Estrada, the ex-film star who heads the Presidential Anti-Crime
Commission, was in a group of officials attacked with guns and grenades
south of Manila as they investigated the death of a tax officer thought to
have been murdered by the Red Scorpions.
No-one was killed, but Mr Estrada blamed supporters of Leopoldo Mabilangan,
a former communist commander known as 'Comrade Hector,' for the attack. Mr
Estrada has accused Mr Mabilangan, who recently surrendered, of taking part
in kidnapping jobs for the Red Scorpions.
The government and the leadership of the communist party have been haggling
about the venue for a proposed second round of talks, and a meeting in Hong
Kong is being considered. The atmosphere has not been improved by a
statement from Mr Jose Maria Sison, party chairman, who accused the NUC of
being 'a propaganda instrument of the US-Ramos regime'.
Organising negotiations with rebels of the Philippines' Moslem minority is
likely to be equally difficult. Again, it is hard to distinguish between
political activity and crime in the lawless southern provinces where the
Moslems are strongest, and again the Moslem movement is divided.
The Moro National Liberation Front, whose leader, Mr Nur Misuari, is based
in Tripoli, Libya, does not want to negotiate with the government at the
same time as the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the more
religiously-inclined faction which broke away from the MNLF 17 years ago.
Behind the various rebellions in the Philippines lies a widespread
perception that the political system - even after the 1986 downfall of the
late dictator Ferdinand Marcos - is unjust and favours the wealthy,
influential families which have long dominated both business and politics.
The NUC is also trying to tackle this problem and has hosted 'public
consultations' in most of the country's 76 provinces.
Ms Yorac says she is urging disaffected Filipinos to air their grievances
constitutionally rather than militarily. She reminds people that there are
legal ways for the public to sack corrupt or incompetent officials, and that
they can press for reforms suggested by the post-Marcos 1987 constitution;
this, for instance, directs Congress to legislate against political
dynasties, something it has so far failed to do.
It would be over-ambitious, however, to expect the political patronage
system in the Philippines to transform itself overnight into a model
democracy.
Mr Ramos, who was competing against seven rivals, won a mere 23 per cent of
the vote in the presidential poll and his Lakas party fared poorly in
congressional and local elections. He has therefore not flinched from making
alliances with power-brokers to consolidate his position.
He co-opted (or, say the cynics, was co-opted by) Mr Jose de Venecia, a
political organiser for Marcos who is now speaker of the House of
Representatives. The result was a 'rainbow coalition' of support for Mr
Ramos, a euphemism meaning that many congressmen defected from the once
dominant Laban party and from Mr Eduardo Cojuangco's party and gravitated
towards the presidency and its powers: the whole House comes up for
re-election in 1995, three years before Mr Ramos's term expires.
The Senate meanwhile replaced Mr Neptali Gonzales as its president with the
more amenable Mr Edgardo Angara. Mr Ramos's amicable relations with Congress
allowed him in March to win emergency powers to deal with electricity
shortages - 'you have to credit Ramos with the political ability to get the
legislature behind him,' says one leading foreign businessman.
President Ramos also felt obliged to seek popular legitimacy after his
narrow election victory by touring the country to attend numerous rallies, a
tactic some describe as a 'post-election election campaign'.
If the opinion polls are anything to go by, the president is doing fine. Not
only do they suggest that 60 per cent of Filipinos approve of his
performance, they also show that 46 per cent claim to have voted for him in
the election - double the actual figure.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930525

