FT934-10251

FT  06 NOV 93 / Rabbit runs out of subscribers and time: Alan Cane charts
the short and difficult history of Hutchison Whampoa's mobile phone service


   By ALAN CANE


IT WON accolades from Which? magazine for friendliness and economy but it
failed to attract the masses. So there was little surprise yesterday when
Hutchison Whampoa announced it was killing off Rabbit, its telepoint mobile
phone service, after attracting only 9,000 subscribers.
It was strange that the company had persevered with the service in the first
place. In October 1991, a consortium comprising British Telecommunications,
France Telecom, Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, Nynex of the US and Northern
Telecom of Canada, essentially wrote the obituary for telepoint in the UK
when it announced it was withdrawing its Phonepoint operation.
The operation was one of four consortia licensed by the government in 1988
to provide mobile phone services based on a technology - known as CT2 -
developed by Ferranti, the Manchester-based electronics concern.
CT2 can be used to develop a mobile phone service that is cheaper, lighter
and more reliable than conventional cellular phones. It depends on a network
of base stations established in public places. Users have to be within 100m
of a base station and can only make, not receive, calls. The handsets,
however, are, at about Pounds 99, significantly cheaper than conventional
cellular telephones. Transmissions use digital - computer-based - signals
rather than analogue, bringing improved quality and accuracy.
By the time the consortium withdrew, declaring the service suspended because
of adverse market conditions, it was clear that CT2 technology had little
mass-market appeal. It had established only 3,300 base stations and had
about 800 customers.
Mercury Callpoint, a consortium comprising Mercury, Motorola of the US and
Shaye Communication of the UK, had given up the previous July; Ferranti had
sold off its Zonephone business. Byps, however, owned by Barclays Bank,
Philips and Shell, was sold to Hutchison Whampoa which set about developing
a system for launch in the UK.
Hutchison launched Rabbit in June last year. It has done rather better than
Phonepoint, with 9,000 subscribers and 12,000 base stations across the
country, but it has little prospect of attracting an economically viable
volume of subscribers in a reasonable time.
By contrast in Hong Kong, Hutchison, Chevalier Telepoint and Pacific
Telelink, which is backed by Vodafone, the UK cellular telephone operator,
have all launched successful services. Hutchison alone has more than 70,000
subscribers. The Hong Kong market is stronger because it has a large
population concentrated in a small area.
Mr Hans Snook, managing director for Hutchison Telecommunications in the UK,
said Rabbit had been hampered by unsatisfactory equipment - the only
available handsets performed well but were too big - and the need,
single-handedly, to educate the market.
To some extent, Hutchison's decision must also be seen as a way of clearing
the decks for its own excursion into the next generation of portable
telephony - PCN or personal communication networks - based on a combination
of cellular radio and digital signalling. This is the new battleground in
portable communications and the most important.
Hutchison says the launch and roll-out of its PCN network, which will cover
at least 70 per cent of the UK population in the first year of operations,
will require further investment of about Pounds 345m over the next three or
four years.
In the UK, Hutchison's chief competition in the field is Mercury One-2-One,
a joint venture between Cable & Wireless and US West.
But if PCN is the mobile communications of tomorrow, does CT2 have any role?
Mr Snook believes it will be developed as the digital cordless telephone for
the home, combining low weight with accuracy.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931106

