FT933-12797

FT  22 JUL 93 / Sage shares plummet after profits warning on US


   By PAUL TAYLOR


SAGE Group's share price fell by 119p to 385p yesterday after the
Newcastle-based business software company issued a 'short-term' profits
warning related to two subsidiaries operating in the fiercely competitive US
market.
The company said that Remote Control International, acquired recently, had
incurred restructuring costs. It had also brought forward development
spending on a new version of its Telemagic software for organising business
contacts, a product designed to work under Microsoft's Windows.
DacEasy, the group's US accounting software subsidiary, had been adversely
affected by the introduction of competitors' Windows products ahead of its
own, due out this autumn. Costs had been reduced and the products
repositioned in less price-sensitive market segments.
The rapid growth of Windows-based software in the US has caught several
software companies by surprise. Products designed to run under Windows now
account for about 60 per cent of the US software market.
Sage is the second UK-based high growth stock this week to be marked sharply
lower following a profits warning. On Monday Medeva's shares lost almost
half their value after the fast-growing drugs company said profits would
fail to meet expectations.
Sage said its pre-tax profits and earnings per share for the year to
September 30 'will be lower than general market expectations', but ahead of
those reported for last year.
Last year it made Pounds 8.85m pre-tax on turnover of Pounds 27.3m.
Following a 24 per cent increase in interim profits, most industry analysts
had been expecting a full-year figure of Pounds 10.8m-Pounds 11.1m. After
the announcement, forecasts for the current year were downgraded to around
Pounds 9.5m, with earnings of about 32p per share.
Most analysts, however, left pre-tax forecasts for next year little changed
at about Pounds 12m.
Mr David Goldman, Sage's chairman, said the company had decided to issue the
statement 'to lay some ghosts'. He emphasised that the measures at RCI would
enhance its prospects and the company remained 'absolutely confident' about
next year's outlook.
'It is a minor blip,' said Mr Goldman.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930722

