FT932-132

FT  30 JUN 93 / The world on his shoulders: John Gummer must choose among
urgent priorities at the environment department


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


Mr John Gummer has inherited a long list of tough choices as UK environment
secretary as well as unresolved battles with other government departments.
After a month in the job, there are questions about whether he has the clout
in the cabinet to meet the challenge.
The government's announcement this week that it is holding a further public
consultation on the future of Thorp, the Pounds 2.8bn nuclear reprocessing
plant at Sellafield, has delayed a final decision on that thorny question
until autumn. Mr Gummer is responsible for the eventual decision, however,
and the awarding of a licence to the plant, as seems likely, will earn him
the opposition of environmental groups.
A year after the Rio Earth Summit, he must also find a credible way for the
UK to meet its targets on global warming, which Mr John Major, the prime
minister, has said is a national environmental priority This week found Mr
Gummer at odds with his European counterparts, whom he accused of trying to
ambush the UK over a proposed energy tax to curb emissions of so-called
greenhouse gases.
The most complex question Mr Gummer must address is whether the UK - and
other industrial countries which have signed international 'green' treaties
 -can afford the ambitious environmental policies they have designed over
the past two decades. As recession has increased awareness of the costs of
going green, the environment has slipped on the UK political agenda.
Mr Gummer built up some green credentials as agriculture minister, mainly
for his opposition to commercial whaling. But pressure groups remain wary of
his appointment, feeling he kept silent on controversial issues, such as
agricultural contamination of rivers.
They are concerned, too, that his appointment signals a downgrading of
environmental issues in the cabinet. To many environmentalists, Mr Gummer is
a lightweight against his predecessors - Mr Chris Patten, Mr Michael
Heseltine and Mr Michael Howard, now home secretary.
Concern about Mr Gummer's priorities is warranted because he takes over at a
critical point in the development of the UK's environment policy, when it is
widely accused - by other governments, environmentalists and industrialists
 -of being patchy and incoherent.
It is barely five years since the UK began seriously to develop an
environment policy. The turning point was Mrs Thatcher's apparently
overnight conversion to green issues when she told a startled Royal Society
that scientists should worry more about global warming. The government's
belief that there was political capital in the environment was strengthened
the next year when the Green party grabbed 15 per cent of the vote in the
1989 European elections.
The white paper drawn up by Mr Chris Patten in 1990, This Common
Inheritance, is one of the government's most ambitious attempts to design a
policy. It declared an 'intense hope that we can pass on what we value most
about our heritage to our children'. Its guiding principles were the use of
scientific research, the need to take 'precautionary' action when scientific
evidence was equivocal, and a desire to ensure 'the polluter pays'.
UK policy is now built on the 1990 Environmental Protection Act which
coincided with the white paper, plus the 1989 Water Act, some 200 EC
directives, a handful of international pollution treaties, and last year's
Rio conventions on biodiversity and global warming. A range of issues are
covered - from air, water and land pollution, to local planning and
promotion of worldwide 'sustainable development'.
But some expectations raised by Mr Patten and sustained by Mr Heseltine have
been dashed. Mr Howard's report last autumn on the second anniversary of the
white paper reveals an uneven record. Water pollution and some industrial
emissions have improved; traffic pollution and inner-city air quality are
getting worse.
Central parts of the 1990 act have also been dropped or delayed:
A proposed register of contaminated land has been scrapped as it threatened
to cause property blight across much of the country;
Tighter rules on landfill operators - managers of rubbish dumps - have been
postponed until clashes with EC rules are ironed out.
Last year's election pledge to create an environment agency to centralise
all pollution regulation has also given way to more politically pressing
issues.
Environmentalists blame Mr Howard, a former barrister, for this
retrenchment. But DoE officials argue that whoever had inherited the job of
implementing the 1990 act would be forced to acknowledge that parts were
ill-thought out.
The better-aimed criticism of Mr Howard is that he failed to address some of
the deeper conflicts in the government's environment policy, which Mr Gummer
now confronts.
First, many industries are forthright in warning him that greener does not
always mean richer. The European Chemical Industry Council has argued that
bulk chemical manufacture is being driven outside the EC by the costs of
complying with environmental regulation. UK manufacturers complain their
costs will soar if the government backs recycling as a waste disposal method
rather than landfill. Recycling has become a moral crusade for many parts of
the environmental movement, but generally is the most expensive method of
all.
Second, Mr Gummer must grapple with the problem of how to meet Britain's Rio
commitments to cut emissions of carbon dioxide, one of the gases implicated
in global warming. The targets, which would bring such emissions back to
1990 levels by 2000, a cut of 6 per cent on projected levels, seem certain
to put Mr Gummer at odds with current energy and transport policies.
The government claims that it has put in place measures to take it
two-thirds of the way to meeting Rio's targets. But economists, such as
Oxford Economic Research Associates, have attacked a central plank of its
stategy - the March Budget's new taxes on motor fuel and home heating. They
say these will have little effect because demand for transport and for
domestic heating is relatively insensitive to price.
Environmentalists fear that beyond 2000 the outlook is even gloomier -
transport pollution looks particularly intractable given current plans for
more roads. However, the government appears nervous about upsetting its
supporters by higher road or energy taxes.
This autumn's review of nuclear power will be a test of the real importance
accorded by the government to the Rio principles. If the review scales down
nuclear power's long-term role in energy supply in favour of gas and other
fossil fuels it will make cutting carbon emissions even harder.
Third, Mr Gummer must address the tensions in the UK's approach to
international environment policy, which reflect the country's ambivalence
about its role. His resistance this week to the imposition of an EC-wide
energy tax indicates that he shares the government's caution over Brussels'
influence. However, the UK is unlikely to want to be labelled a permanent
dissenter, despite its concern over rising EC water standards, for instance.
Symptomatic of all the considerations about cost, energy policy and
international co-ordination is the looming decision on the Thorp plant.
Mr Gummer, who holds pro-nuclear views, needs to show the government has
addressed the wider political and economic questions raised by Thorp -
including nuclear weapons proliferation - if he is to claim the UK is
developing a coherent and far-sighted environment policy.
The choices facing Mr Gummer are not easy. They reflect underlying dilemmas
over much of government policy, notably its uneasiness about its role in
Europe, and over the fragility of its political support. The result of these
conflicts is likely to be an untidy, pragmatic environment policy. Without a
resurgence in public attention to green issues during economic recovery,
however, departure from the spirit of the 1990 white paper is unlikely to
give the government much political trouble.
The government cannot hope to satisfy all demands of the environmentalists.
The danger is that, in turning away from its 1980s green evangelism, it will
fail to act on the handful of issues that deserve to be at the centre of
environmental policy. It may saddle businesses and households with
unnecessarily high charges while failing to make enough polluters pay. It
may fail to devise an energy policy, including a role for nuclear power,
that gives it a real chance of meeting global warming targets. It may
tolerate rising transport levels despite worsening inner-city air pollution.
It may also fail to take a constructive part in the complex international
debate about how to protect the environment. These are the priorities which
stare Mr Gummer in the face. They demand a clear response.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930630

