FT932-3132

FT  16 JUN 93 / Russian constitutional talks given new deadline


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin's constitutional convention will adjourn today for a
10-day break during which experts are likely to try to come up with either a
compromise draft constitution or temporary rules for new elections.
President Yeltsin had earlier set the convention a June 16 deadline to
finalise a draft constitution.
However, Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, first deputy prime minister, announcing
yesterday that the convention would resume on June 26, said that the top
priority of the presidential camp was early parliamentary elections.
For this purpose, an electoral bloc was being formed with the aim of uniting
all the country's pro-reformist forces to win as many seats as possible in a
new parliament. Founders of the bloc include Mr Yeltsin's closest colleagues
and leaders of the radical democrat movement, and will be led by the Russian
president himself.
The president is also expected soon to order the creation of a conciliatory
commission to work on the presidential and parliamentary drafts for a new
constitution between now and next week.
Meanwhile, a number of influential delegates at the convention yesterday
began circulating a plan for a new constitution to be adopted by a
newly-elected parliament, instead of the existing Congress of People's
Deputies.
The plan includes rules for early parliamentary elections and a temporary
division of powers between president and parliament.
This temporary move would be until a new parliament adopts a new
constitution setting out all these provisions. 'An election campaign is
already under way in Russia,' Mr Gennady Burbulis, a close ally of Mr
Yeltsin, told reporters yesterday.
While recognising that the existing parliament is unlikely to adopt a new
constitution, the plan for new elections would also have to be approved by
the Congress of People's Deputies in order to be constitutional.
The Congress is unlikely to agree to its own dissolution, however, leaving
the president with the choice of violating the existing constitution unless
he can get deputies to change their mind.
A group of 315 deputies is already trying to gain signatures of another 30
deputies so it can threaten to resign and deprive Congress of a quorum
unless it agrees to vote itself out of office.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930616

