FT934-10090

FT  08 NOV 93 / Fisons drugs probe may lead to sackings: Salesmen alleged to
have offered inducements to GPs


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


FISONS, the troubled British pharmaceuticals and scientific group, yesterday
warned that heads could roll among its sales force after allegations that it
used illegal techniques to market its drugs in the UK.
Mr Cedric Scroggs, Fisons chief executive, and Mr Mike Redmond, its
pharmaceuticals division managing director, were yesterday in the West
Midlands interviewing members of the group's 100-strong UK sales force.
The managing director of UK pharmaceuticals operations is Mr Brian Higginson
and the UK director of sales and marketing is Mr Alan Morgan. Mr Scroggs
said: 'I categorically deny board members were aware of such practices. If
the allegations are true, there will be strong and quick disciplinary
action. Heads will roll. The practices suggest there is a rogue element in
the sales force, whether among individual sales representatives or
management.'
He continued: 'The buck will stop as high up as there was knowledge,
collusion or turning a blind eye to these practices. I am not bothered at
what level that might be.'
The allegations, made in yesterday's Sunday Times, are that Fisons breached
the drugs industry code of practice through free foreign trips, lavish
receptions and other incentives for doctors who prescribed its products.
The code forbids inducements to doctors and limits the value of hospitality
to the amount doctors would themselves spend.
The revelations cap a series of mishaps for Fisons in recent months. It has
now had difficulties in the three most important areas of pharmaceuticals
operations: development, manufacture and marketing of new drugs. Poor
standards at its plants forced the group to withdraw two products from the
US in 1989 and 1990 after regulators intervened. Last April, the company
stopped developing Tipredane, an asthma treatment and one of only two
medicines it had in late development, because of lack of efficacy.
The most serious of the allegations are that:
Fisons launched a scheme about five months ago which involved
representatives offering general practitioners Pounds 10 for each new
patient prescribed Tilade, the group's asthma product.
The company provided money for representatives to supply doctors with gifts
including luxury goods, theatre and ballet tickets and golfing trips.
Such practices would break the code of practice set by the Prescription
Medicines Code of Practice Authority, part of the Association of the British
Pharma-ceutical Industry. Serious breaches have led to expulsion from the
association, as happened to Bayer in the 1980s. Fisons could also be
prosecuted by the Department of Health's Medicines Control Agency under the
Medicines Act.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931108

