FT933-12727

FT  22 JUL 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Opec faces worst crisis since
1986 says Iran


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


THE Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries is facing its worst crisis
since 1986, when oil prices collapsed almost overnight, Mr Gholamreza
Aqazadeh, the Iranian oil minister, said in Tehran.
Mr Aqazadeh was referring to the Dollars 3 a barrel fall in oil prices since
May because of over-production by member countries and the threat of an
Iraqi return to the oil market.
In 1986 prices fell from Dollars 30 a barrel to about Dollars 15 within a
few days because of over-production.
Opec has called an emergency meeting for next Wednesday to try to calm the
market.
Baghdad has been discussing with the United Nations a possible one-off oil
sale worth Dollars 1.6bn (Pounds 1.1bn).
But traders think progress with Iraq on weapons monitoring issues could see
a wider lifting of sanctions and a partial return to the export market.
Mr Aqazadeh, speaking on Tehran radio, said Opec must accommodate Iraq
within the existing production ceiling and that Kuwait should be persuaded
to sign the conference resolution.
Opec's last meeting broke up when Kuwait refused to sign the producers' club
accord to restrain output and said it would prime its own taps to produce as
much oil as it could.
Mr Jean Ping, Gabon's oil minister and current Opec president, held talks in
London yesterday with his Kuwaiti counterpart, Mr Ali Ahmed al-Baghli, in an
effort to persuade him to delay the emirate's production increase.
Oil prices edged up by 25 cents to close at Dollars 16.85 a barrel in London
trading in response to Kuwait's apparent willingness to re-enter Opec's
fold.
Mr al-Baghli said he might put off his demand for a quota increase to 2.16m
barrels a day (b/d) until October if other members curbed their own
production.
Kuwait is currently producing about 1.7m to 1.8m b/d and had been planning
to boost output by about 100,000 b/d up to the end of September.
Other members are also ignoring their quotas and the organisation as a whole
is producing between 24.3m and 24.5m b/d compared with a ceiling of 23.6m
b/d set at the last meeting.
Mr Ping must try to reinforce production discipline or at least to build a
consensus for action to be taken at the next meeting.
Mr Ping's next stop on his present tour of the Middle East is Saudi Arabia
where he will hold talks with Mr Hisham Nazer, oil minster of Opec's largest
producer, whose support will be vital to any deal.
In the meantime, the oil market remains nervous but fairly quiet while
traders consider Opec's possible next move.
Prices are likely to be volatile in response to any headline news that
emerges from the organisation.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930722

