FT933-9902

FT  06 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee futures rise higher as
options cover increases


   By RICHARD MOONEY


COFFEE FUTURES prices on the London Commodity Exchange surged still higher
yesterday in a continuation of what some analysts were coming to regard as a
self-perpetuating rally.
The December robustas position touched Dollars 1,180 a tonne at one stage,
before closing at Dollars 1,157 a tonne, up Dollars 32 on the day, Dollars
119 on the week so far and Dollars 338 from the low reached just four months
ago.
In the absence of fresh fundamental news coffee analysts pointed to options
covering in a thin market as the most likely explanation for the latest
gains.
Increased confidence in Latin American producers' ability to make their
export retention scheme work - and perhaps to persuade African producing
countries to join in this market support effort - has given the market a
firmer base in recent weeks. This week's initial jump to 2 1/2 -year highs
was prompted by reports of a cold front threatening frost damage to crops in
the south of Brazil, the world's biggest coffee producer.
Those factors were still providing underlying support, said Mr Lawrence
Eagles, analyst at GNI, the London trading house. But there was 'one main
reason' for the continuing uptrend, and that was options covering, he said.
He explained that increasing numbers of call (buying) options had been put
'in the money' by the recent rise and the options' granters were being
forced to cover potential losses by buying futures contracts at an
accelerating rate.
In view of the low level of trading volume at present these covering
purchases were having an exaggerated effect on prices, pushing more options
into the money and forcing more covering by the granters, he added.
Mr Eagles noted that there were large open positions for call options at
Dollars 1,100 and Dollars 1,200 a tonne.
He suggested that there was also an element of catching up with the US
market in this week's sharp rise.
Coffee prices at New Yorks' Cocoa, Sugar and Coffee Exchange - where Latin
American-style arabica coffee is trade, rather than the mainly African
robustas traded in London - had been quicker to react to the possibility of
frost in Brazil and nearby positions rose by about 5.5 per cent last week,
compared with 4.5 per cent for London contracts.
In the first three days of this week, however, the 9.9 per cent rise for the
LCE's September position outdistanced the 2 per cent advance in CSCE's
corresponding contract.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930806

