FT933-5231

FT  04 SEP 93 / Letters to the Editor: Corruption now high on the ethical
agenda


   From Mr LAURENCE COCKCROFT


Sir, Samuel Brittan's article, 'How economics is linked to ethics'
(September 2), strangely omitted to deal with corruption in this context.
Strange, because this year has seen at least four major or significant
governments (Japan, Italy, Brazil and Kenya) shaken to their foundations or
overturned on the issue of corruption at the interface of business and
government. Elsewhere, corruption at this interface gnaws ever more deeply
into the social fabric, an effect which is at least partly an (unintended)
by-product of large-scale privatisation.
The issue is now clearly a major one on the global agenda. Its effects are
particularly disastrous where they lead to the chronic misallocation of
resources in the developing world, and so directly foster impoverishment.
The ethical questions are also complex: at first sight the securing of an
award for a major power plant in a country of the south may sustain several
hundred jobs in the UK for a period of months. That is unquestionably good
news. It is less good if the contract has been awarded because a bribe has
been paid and a more cost-efficient, environmentally friendly power plant
should have been installed. The UK or EC taxpayer may have helped sustain
employment through schemes such as the Trade and Aid facility, but have
contributed to a negative effect in the south.
There are many involved in the exporting world who are concerned about this
dilemma. In the US an exporting company can pay fines of up to Dollars 2m
and a responsible director or company official can go to jail for up to five
years for transgressing the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
Yet most EC countries and the UK allow bribes paid in pursuit of overseas
business as a tax deductible expense if appropriately 'buried' in the
accounts.
Laurence Cockcroft,
Transparency International,
PO Box 3378,
London N5 2TP

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930904

