FT934-8607

FT  15 NOV 93 / The lights are out in Dudley: The plight of town-centre
shops has been highlighted by the government. Paul Cheeseright visits a
blackspot


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT


NO CHRISTMAS lights will twinkle in Dudley this year. The borough council
has run out of money to put them up and local traders seem unable to find
the Pounds 28,000 it would cost to colour the gloom of the Black Country
dusk.
If this signals a lack of festive cheer, it is because the town centre is in
straitened circumstances - although slightly more relaxed than in 1991 or
last year.
Of all the town centres in the West Midlands conurbation, Dudley has been
hardest hit by the growth a couple of miles away of the Merry Hill shopping
centre, a consumer behemoth of 1.39m sq ft, one of the largest retail
concentrations in Europe.
The town's plight is a factor behind the assertion last week by Mr Tony
Baldry, environment minister, that government policy is to encourage retail
investment in town centres, not in out-of-town areas such as Merry Hill.
A government report prepared by consultants Roger Tym & Partners said that
Dudley has been particularly adversely affected and Stourbridge had also
suffered 'a very significant impact'.
Merry Hill inevitably posed a competitive threat to all the traditional
shopping areas of the conurbation once it had reached its present size. It
offered a multitude of new shops to an area where both population and
individual spending were declining. The threat to Dudley was acute because
it is the nearest shopping area of any size.
Shopkeepers are nostalgic for life before Merry Hill. Mrs Linda Nicholls,
who has been trading in Dudley for nine years under the banner Lin's
Perfumery, said: 'Four years ago the town was thriving. It's not true Dudley
was going down. It was a goldmine. I can remember coming to town on the bus
and there was an army of people in the High Street.'
Marks and Spencer did not see the town in quite such rosy light. Even before
it shut its town-centre store to move to Merry Hill it had closed 40 per
cent of its available space. Dudley was the target of government initiatives
to stimulate the local economy from the late 1970s.
By the late 1980s Dudley was losing its comparison shopping - items such as
footwear, which are not bulky. Of the department stores, Debenhams and the
Co-op had closed and Next moved downmarket to Next to Nothing. The quality
of the shops had started to fall.
After Merry Hill was complete Dudley's retail decline quickened. The Tym
report calculates that since 1989 Dudley has lost 70 per cent of its market
share - far higher than Stourbridge at 43 per cent, West Bromwich at 20 per
cent or Birmingham and Wolverhampton at more than 10 per cent. Borough
council figures show that more than 15 per cent of Dudley's shopping
floorspace is vacant.
There is little empty space around the central pedestrianised area with its
cluster of market stalls. But as the high street climbs up to the deserted
FW Cook department store there are six empty premises among 32 postal
addresses on one side of the road.
On the other side of the road downmarket clothing stores abound. 'Faze, the
New Look - stock clearance, every item under Pounds 10' is one, 'Changes,
for all seasons, now open, mid-season sale' is another.
Beatties, Boots and Woolworths remain in the town centre. But there has been
a mass exodus of other multiples. Littlewoods is now Poundworld, all items
less than Pounds 1. C&A's property has been taken by Kwik Save, the
supermarket. There is one indoor market where once was BHS and a second
where J. Sainsbury traded.
The shuffling of shopkeepers led Tym to say that 'the retail composition of
the town centre has deteriorated in quality due to the proliferation of
discount/low-order retail operations. This is a stage in the cycle of
re-adjustment in response to the Merry Hill centre.'
Dudley's difficulty has been that the coming-of-age of Merry Hill coincided
with the start of the recession and it is not clear which has been the most
damaging to the town centre.
The catchment area for Dudley shopping has fallen, and, according to Mr John
Mainwaring, the council's assistant chief planner, is now largely made up of
people in the lower C and D income groups.
To take the town centre back upmarket is difficult. Theoretically more
expensive shops would attract richer shoppers. Mr Mainwaring said: 'The
Catch-22 is that you can't attract back quality because the customers are
not there to spend the money.'
But investment is drifting back, not least in the Pounds 10m purchase and
refurbishment by London & Cambridge Properties of the windswept Churchill
shopping centre.
Mr Stephen Schwartz, the Trueform shoe shop manager and chairman of Dudley
Retail Business Watch, said the town had seen the worst effects of Merry
Hill two years ago. 'We can never compete at the end of the day, but as long
as we can keep filling up shells with better-class shops, that has to be a
plus,' he said.
In any event, trade may be improving. J. Hollins, the old-established
jeweller, reported a 15 per cent increase in turnover this year. Mr John
Griffiths, the manager, scoffed at Dudley shopkeepers wringing their hands
in despair. He said: 'A lot of them have got the death wish. Nothing
succeeds like a will to fail.'
Merry Hill Impact Study; HMSO, PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT. Pounds 15.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931115

