FT931-4078

FT  12 MAR 93 / Yeltsin faces further challenge: Russian parliament to
debate fresh measures to erode president's powers


   By JOHN LLOYD


PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin's rivals in the conservative-dominated parliament
will today debate further moves to strip him of much of his power as
Russia's power struggle moves to a climax.
Politicians in Moscow were split last night on whether Mr Yeltsin would
accept yet another compromise which erodes his powers. Mr Vassily Lipitsky,
a leader of the centrist Civic Union bloc, said: 'The president has to agree
 -he has no other legal choice. With this congress in this mood, this is the
best he will get.'
The alternative course for Mr Yeltsin is to take the 'decisive measures' at
which he has hinted, to break the constraints stifling economic and
constitutional reform.
In Washington, President Clinton, offering another endorsement of Mr
Yeltsin's attempts at democratic reform, said he could not predict whether
Mr Yeltsin would survive his battle with conservatives.
He spoke as officials of the Group of Seven industrial nations prepared to
discuss urgent aid for Russia at a weekend meeting in Hong Kong.
In the Congress of People's Deputies yesterday, Mr Yeltsin, in a stumbling
speech interrupted by dissenting cries but received largely in silence,
insisted on the primacy of his office and on the urgency of constitutional
and economic change.
He was backed by Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, but both men
were fiercely criticised by Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary
speaker, who accused the first of tyrannous intent and the other of not
being master of his own cabinet.
Mr Yeltsin sat glumly through proceedings as a deputy demanded his
dismissal, walking out of the chamber shortly afterwards.
The Congress voted in principle for a resolution which gives the government
some of the control over central bank and budget which Mr Yeltsin and Mr
Chernomyrdin had demanded.
But it deprives the president of the right to hold a referendum, reinstates
frozen constitutional changes which could see him dismissed by congress for
'acting unconstitutionally', and permits further legislative sorties into
his diminished powers.
A compromise reached on the basis of the resolution would be seen as a
victory for the anti-presidential forces.
Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov, the president's press secretary, said that some key
points of the resolution - on the referendum and on the constitutional
changes in particular - 'destroyed all of the rest' of the proposed
agreement.
Mr Boris Fyodorov, the deputy premier for finance and the economy, said:
'This is a question of life and death - a matter of whether order will be
restored in this country or if we will slide further into the abyss. No one
can say how the events in the congress will go - the government has no plans
for specific action depending on different outcomes.'
Gulf widens at the top in Moscow, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930312

