FT934-10128

FT  06 NOV 93 / Property: Greece opens its doors - Foreigners, especially EC
citizens, now find it much easier to buy houses there


   By AUDREY POWELL


MEMBERSHIP of the European Community has been making a real impact at last
on residential property in Greece. In the past two or three years, the
country has removed most of its restrictions on buying by foreigners -
something which has been of major benefit for EC citizens, especially.
One knock-on effect has been the growth in the number of agents in Britain
offering Greek property. And, for someone in the UK seeking a holiday home
in Greece, there is a colourful choice and a broad price range.
It is very much a tiered market, though. At one end is the small, renovated
old stone property or the possibility oF having an equally small new home
built, either way under Pounds 50,000 and probably on Crete, largest of the
Greek islands.
At the other end is something more glamorous, on its own and close to the
water on some lesser-known island - with a price tag probably over Pounds
250,000.
There are many islands to consider, along with their various transport
links. The Secretariat-General for Information in Athens said in a recent
official booklet that 'this small, mountainous country' had 9,841 islands -
provoking the question: who had time to count? But the tourist office in
London suggests a more manageable figure of 1,500 that are inhabited.
The most popular is Crete, 160 miles long with mountains and spectacular
gorges. And Hellenic Heritage Homes in Britain concentrates on this island,
where it has a team operating. 'We have an active building programme
restoring traditional Cretan houses,' says Hellenic spokesman Stefan
Nicholls.
The company is involved in a number of property-related activities. It has
plots available and can design and build new homes. It also has businesses
for sale.
But it also has good advice for anyone viewing a property independently: do
not show your interest but, instead, act like a curious tourist. 'If you
show your delight in a property, the price will increase in proportion to
your smile,' Hellenic warns.
Typically, it has a stone-built property awaiting renovation at Mourne. This
would make a two-bedroom home with an archway leading to an enclosed garden.
It has water and electricity is ready for connection. The property is Pounds
15,000 and restoration would cost another Pounds 17,000.
Alternatively, a small plot at Kissos, on the edge of the village and with
views across a broad valley, would be Pounds 10,500. Utilities are nearby
and a two-bedroom house could be built there for Pounds 30,000. A total of
Pounds 42,000 would cover the land, property, professional fees and taxes,
says Nicholls.
If you prefer a holiday home on one of the other islands, the John Goodwin
Greek Property Consultancy might help. A well-presented, 38-page brochure
gives clear information about buying procedures and illustrates many island
choices.
Examples include a renovated house overlooking the yachting harbour of
Patitiri, on Alonislios in the Sporades and close to mainland Greece. It has
three bedrooms, a balcony and terraces plus an unrestored stone cottage.
There are olive, lemon and cherry trees in the garden. Price: Pounds
105,000.
On Skiathos, in the northern Sporades, there are furnished, split-level
one-bedroom apartments with views to the outer islands and the Aegean sea.
They are priced at Pounds 46,000. On Zakynthos, the southernmost of the
Ionian islands, a picturesque, rambling, three-storey villa with four
bedrooms and a separate studio/flat, in an acre plot, is Pounds 170,000.
It might be possible to recoup some of this outlay with summer rentals, for
which there is a big demand.
Goodwin also offers property in Crete. He points out that, before 1990,
non-Greeks were not permitted to buy freehold property there as it was
designated a border area. Only enough properties were built to satisfy Greek
requirements.
When the restrictions were relaxed, demand by foreigners created a shortage
on the island, with increased prices. He recommends buying a plot and
building because the savings could be 'substantial.'
While the Greek islands are sought-after more than the mainland, villas are
more expensive to build on them. Corfu, the best-known of the Ionian chain,
once was a British protectorate.
Today, with 4m olive trees (the groves were planted by the Venetians during
their long occupation) and its international airport, it represents the old
and new worlds. It is also in the process of sprucing itself up.
Greece will take over the EC presidency from January and a summit meeting is
to be held on the island. Unfortunately, its new 200-berth marina, being
built with EC money, will not be open until 1995.
Sotheby's International Real ty has a variety of properties on Corfu, with
prices from Pounds 250,000 to Pounds 1.3m. One is a four-year-old holiday
house on a sunny ridge, between the mountains and the sea.
It has four bedrooms, and its two wings are joined by a central living room
and dining area. There are several terraces, a guest studio and a large
swimming pool in the middle of the lawn. Price: Pounds 650,000.
On Hydra, where no motor vehicles are allowed and life centres on the
harbour town, Sotheby's is offering a converted windmill on a hilltop
overlooking the harbour. Accommodation includes two circular bedrooms with
bathrooms, a salon with kitchen, and a terrace with wide-ranging views. The
American owner is seeking Pounds 325,000.
Hellenic Heritage Homes (tel. 051-630 2621); John Goodwin Greek Property
Consultancy (0703-864 660); Sotheby's International Realty (071-408 5196).

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

931106

