FT932-7112

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (8): A controlled and
careful fightback - Profile: Westinghouse Electric


   By ANDREW BAXTER


The Westinghouse Electric name is one of the most famous in the power
equipment industry but is currently more likely to be associated with the
company's troubles in financial services or the seven-year legal wrangle
with the Philippines over the Bataan Peninsula nuclear plant.
Not for the first time, some of Westinghouse's competitors in the power
generating equipment industry have been trying to exploit the recent adverse
publicity by suggesting the US company's long-term commitment to the power
industry is in doubt.
That rankles with Mr Frank Bakos, vice-president and general manager of the
Westinghouse power generation business unit. 'Enough is enough,' he says.
'We are doing fine.'
Power generation is the biggest part of Westinghouse's power systems
business, which also includes the nuclear and process control businesses.
Overall, power systems has grown about 44 per cent in the past three years,
contributing 35 per cent or Dollars 2.9bn to Westinghouse's revenues last
year.
This achievement is a measure, in particular, of the transformation in the
fortunes of the power generation business, which had reached a low point by
1988, says Mr Bakos.
Over the previous three years, the business had been through considerable
management upheaval, and two wrenching closures of 'dinosaur' factories in
East Pittsburgh and Lester, Pennsylvania - each of them a massive 4m sq feet
in size. Crucially, though, Westinghouse had also withdrawn in 1986 from the
production of combustion turbines in the US.
However, as the combustion (ie gas) turbine market - for open cycle or
combined cycle application - pulled the industry out of its doldrums,
Westinghouse found itself 'in the right church, but the wrong pew,' as Mr
Bakos puts it.
What has happened in the past three years is a careful, controlled
fightback. At the core of the strategy has been the three-way alliance in
combustion turbines with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries of Japan and FiatAvio
of Italy. Westinghouse, fortunately, had remained committed to designing gas
turbines throughout the period of non-production in the US.
The network allows the three companies to build turbines to the same design
in three locations, sharing development work and building on each other's
strengths and capabilities. This was one way in which Westinghouse was able
to produce its first US gas turbine again in 1991, only 17 months after
taking the important decision in 1989 to restart production.
Another crucial element, however, has been the manufacturing strategy. The
concept of a 'Great North American Factory,' where several plants work
together on a product by concentrating on their core competences, has come
into its own over the past three years.
Factories from Hamilton, Ontario to Charlotte, North Carolina and Pensacola,
Florida are involved in the production of combustion turbines, with no new
bricks or mortar required.
Building a new factory would have cost Dollars 120m-Dollars 150m, says Mr
Bakos, considerably more than has been spent on upgrading facilities.
Although Westinghouse cannot produce as many gas turbines as arch-rival
General Electric, it is cost-competitive even when producing only 24 a year,
he says.
The move southwards, away from the unionised plants of the north-east, to
plants such as Charlotte and Pensacola has clearly been a big benefit for
Westinghouse (as it has been, at GE). A flexible, non-union workforce has
been a big element in the all-important reduction of cycle times.
At the project level, too, the company is attempting to reduce lead times
from order to operation. Mr Randy Zwirn, general manager of the power
generation projects division, says the goal is 20 months for a combined
cycle plant - achieved by reducing the level of 'first time engineering' to
about 25 per cent of the project and raising the level of repeatability.
'That helps you drive the cost down,' he says.
Sales in the Orlando-based power generation business unit have grown from
Dollars 700m to Dollars 1.7bn in five years, and the business is becoming
increasingly international - 60 per cent of new plant orders last year were
non-US. In the world combustion turbine generator market, the three-way
alliance has moved from the number five position in 1987 to claim number two
spot last year with a 20 per cent share.
One of the biggest recent power contracts won by Westinghouse - in
consortium with Mitsubishi - was for Enron's 1725MW Teesside plant, the
largest combined cycle plant in Europe. Performance to date is 1,840MW, says
Westinghouse.
But smaller orders also bode well for the future. An example was a brace of
contracts announced in November and worth Dollars 80m in total, to supply
generating equipment to companies in Peru and Venezuela.
The turnround in the power generation business has changed the profile of
Westinghouse's power systems business. Power generation took over from the
nuclear business in 1991 as the biggest single element of power systems, but
the nuclear and process control segments, grouped together as energy
systems, has also had some notable successes recently.
The new plants side of the nuclear business is relatively quiet, but the
great advantage for Westinghouse is its unrivalled installed base of nuclear
plants which need regular servicing and support - 173 of the 400 plants
worldwide were either supplied by Westinghouse or based on its technology.
Along with its successful nuclear fuel business, this means that the nuclear
side can run profitably even without new orders, says Mr Nat Woodson,
vice-president and general manager of the energy systems business unit.
The process control division has also distinguished itself by building the
instrumentation and control system for the Sizewell B nuclear plant at
Suffolk - at short notice after a French supplier's contract was cancelled
in 1991.
Mrs Ann Pauley, general manager of the process control division, is
targetting Poland and Czechoslovakia as the likeliest east European
countries to be able to buy Westinghouse's sophisticated control systems -
for nuclear or conventional power plants. Already the business is doing
Dollars 5m-Dollars 10m a year of business in Poland.
In spite of these successes, however, the power generation business unit
seems likely to become an increasingly important part of Westinghouse power
systems. In this it will be helped by last year's multifaceted agreement
with Rolls-Royce. The UK company's aero-engine technology will be applied to
Westinghouse's next generation of large gas turbines, helping it maintain
its much improved position in increasingly competitive and global markets.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930525

