FT934-8886

FT  13 NOV 93 / US retail sales surge confirms speed-up in growth


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


A SURGE in retail sales in October provided further confirmation that US
economic growth is accelerating.
The Commerce Department said yesterday that retail sales rose by 1.5 per
cent last month and by 6.2 per cent in the year to October. That was the
seventh consecutive monthly rise in sales and the biggest increase since
April. Analysts had expected a gain of only about 1 per cent.
The figures helped lift the Dow Jones Industrial Average, which closed up
22.08 points at 3,684.51. Bond prices initially fell because of the figures
but they later recovered on technical buying.
Mr Ron Brown, commerce secretary, called the figures a 'clear signal that
our economy is improving'. He said: 'Real growth is accelerating as
inflation continues to decline.'
The sales increase was led by a 3.6 per cent rise in car sales between
September and October. Sales of furniture and building materials rose 3.9
per cent and 3.5 per cent respectively, reflecting robust homes sales.
Department stores and restaurants registered increases of 1.1 per cent and
0.8 per cent.
The figures follow buoyant statistics indicating that growth is accelerating
in most sectors after a disappointing first half.
Most analysts are projecting economic growth at an annual rate of 3.5 per
cent to 4 per cent this quarter, after growth of 2.8 per cent in the third
quarter when output was depressed by flooding in the Midwest. Annual growth
was only 1.3 per cent in the first half.
Signs of accelerating growth have been causing jitters in bond markets,
where yields have moved back above 6 per cent, because investors fear such
growth will put upward pressure on inflation and prompt a tightening of
monetary policy.
But many economists say growth will slow down next year because consumer
spending is outstripping personal incomes.
Currencies, Page 13
US stocks and bonds, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931113

