FT932-13310

FT  23 APR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Australia's BHP set to join
mineral sands big league


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


BROKEN HILL Proprietary, Australia's biggest company, seems to have found a
way to join the relatively few groups that control the world's mineral sands
industry. It may play the major role in developing a project in Mozambique.
It has signed a deal with Kenmare Resources, a small Irish exploration
company, which could lead to BHP spending an estimated USDollars 24.11m to
earn a 75 per cent share inthe Congolone project, near Angoche on the
northern coast of Mozambique.
BHP already owns 100 per cent of the Beenup mineral sands project in Western
Australia but has made it clear in the past that it was planning to get
bigger in the mineral sands business or get out. Some observers calculate
that a combination of Congolone and Beenup would give BHP more than 20 per
cent of the market for titanium dioxide, produced from ilmenite and a key
ingredient in the production of pigments for paint, paper and plastics.
Mr Michael Carvill, Kenmare's managing director, said BHP had already spent
a year and a quarter working on the project but there was a long way to go
before the Australian group could decide to take the project into
production.
A scheme to process ilmenite to produce 500,000 tonnes a year of titanium
slag in Mozambique, using the ample and cheap power from that country's
Cabora Bassa dam, was being considered, but it would require more tax
incentives than the Mozambique government was offering at present, given
that similar projects elsewhere had cost Dollars 300m.
The very earliest a development decision could be made was 1997, said Mr
Carvill, and it would then take another two years for output to begin.
BHP and Elkem, the Norwegian group, have finalised their strategic alliance
in the manganese business - manganese is essential in the production of some
steels.
BHP, the world's third-largest producer of manganese ore, will secure a
long-term market for production from its Groote Eylandt mine in the Northern
Territory, and fluctuations in Elkem's manganese operations - it is the
world's largest independent producer of manganese alloys - will be evened
out.
Groote Eylandt Manganese Sales, a company 51 per cent owned by BHP and the
rest by Elkem, will supply ore from the mine at production cost to two
manganese alloy production plants in Norway, previously owned by Elkem but
now also put into a joint company, Elkem Mangan, 51 per cent owned by Elkem
and 49 per cent by BHP.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930423

