FT934-10199

FT  06 NOV 93 / Money Markets: Italian shorts steady


   By PETER JOHN


ITALIAN short-term interest rate futures steadied yesterday as some
economists began to argue that they offered good value after a sharp fall
earlier in the week, writes Peter John.
The Eurolira contract for December had fallen on worries that corruption in
Italy might stretch as far as the presidency. A surprise broadcast on
Wednesday by President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, denying any involvement in
illegal activity, actually increased the uncertainty.
But at around 91.30, December futures are discounting three-month lending
rates of about 8.6 per cent compared with a discount rate of 8 per cent.
Mr Julian Jessop, Midland Global Market's specialist on Italy, argues that
approval of the Italian budget in the weeks ahead should clear the way for
at least a further half point off the discount rate and so increase investor
interest in Eurolire.
In the UK, the Bank of England provided Pounds 950m of assistance to the
clearing banks at the earliest opportunity.
The figure cleared most of the forecast liquidity shortage of Pounds 1.15bn,
later revised to Pounds 1.25bn. Consequently, overnight lending rates
remained low at around 5 per cent and the effect of four consecutive days of
comfortable interbank conditions saw three-month rates edge lower to around
5 19/32 per cent.
Among the main factors affecting the position were the take-up of Treasury
Bills and paper maturing in official hands, which drained Pounds 187m from
the system. Exchequer transactions removed Pounds 135m while a rise in note
circulation - generally high on Fridays as banks stock up cash machines for
the weekend - took up Pounds 820m. Bankers' balances drained another Pounds
25m.
Dealers said the Bank of England was not providing any signal on the
direction of base rates but the market remained convinced that a half-point
reduction to 5.5 per cent was likely to take place at or shortly after the
Budget at the end of the month.
The short sterling futures contract, which expires in mid-December, has
consequently remained within a narrow range and it closed at 94.48, slightly
easier on the day.
Hopes for an early cut in French lending rates sent the French futures
contract up eight basis points to 93.64.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931106

