FT932-146

FT  30 JUN 93 / Arts: More than 'bonbons stuffed with snow' - Bergen
Festival


The Bergen International Festival always ends with the Grieg piano concerto.
Listening to it in the fiery performance of the brilliant young Leif Ove
Andsnes with the Bergen Philharmonic, on the 150th anniversary of the
composer's birth, one realised that this work, more than any other, gave
Norway its musical voice.
To say that Norway is proud of this son is an understatement. Since the
beginning of the year the country has been turned upside down. There have
been drop-in concerts, jazz sessions, folk-song recitals, all connected in
some way with the composer. The Lofoten Islands have celebrated his visit.
In one town there was even a Grieg marathon.
As the composer's native city, Bergen is at the centre of all this. He was
born there on June 15 1843, and he died there. This year's festival moved
from its normal date in May to coincide with the anniversary. King Harald
and Queen Sonja attended the memorial concert, at which a specially
commissioned work, Hommage a Grieg by Alfred Schnittke, was performed: it
turned out to be a charming, wistful piece saved from pastiche by subtle
dissonances and a soaring violin solo.
The man who gave rise to all this comes across strongly from an exhibition
called 'Your Grieg' at the local Museum of Applied Art in the very building
where the composer's body lay in 1907. He was mercurial, humorous, often
outspoken, always totally honest. Extracts from his 20,000 lively letters
(strange how many composers could also handle the pen) provide the sole
commentary for an excellent video.
One is struck by how tiny he was: but in spite of constant ill health which
sent him round the spas of Europe, he was a mighty atom. He was fearless in
expressing his views, political or other, refusing for instance to give
concerts in France after Dreyfus was sentenced in 1899.
He seems not to have been very interested in his Scottish ancestry: all
Norwegian Griegs are descended from Alexander Greig - the composer's
great-grandfather, who moved to Bergen in 1770 from a small town north of
Aberdeen and set up a successful business exporting dried fish and lobster
to Britain. His only other real connexion with things British was his
friendship with the young Percy Grainger who, he declared, understood him
better than anyone else.
In Bergen today you will look in vain for the house he was born in: it was
burned down in 1945. The centre of the Grieg cult there is the lakeside home
he built himself six miles south of the city at Troldhaugen - Trolls' Hill -
together with the wooden hut in the garden in which he did his composing.
The house is a Grieg museum, and recitals are given both in it and in a hall
built in a little ravine beside it.
The city - a charming place set among mountains, fjords and pine-clad
islands - is well provided with venues for music. The big Grieg Hall is an
ugly piece of concrete but has a fine acoustic, as does the smaller
Haakonshalle, built by an early Norwegian king in the 13th century.
There is also the National Theatre, which dates from the turn of the century
and is much devoted to Ibsen. This year it presented a new production of
Peer Gynt with the Grieg incidental music, contrasting with the brilliant
Ingmar Bergman production of the same play in which Grieg features not at
all. Another new work is the ballet on the composer's life, Grieg A Jour,
with choreography by Solvi Edvardsen and music by Frank T. Nordensen.
You come away from all these events with a corrected impression of an
otherwise hackneyed composer. Grieg's music is much more than those 'bonbons
stuffed with snow' of the Debussy gibe. The small cubicles at the exhibition
where they play samples from his compositions bear that out; in the best of
the songs and chamber music, in folk song arrangements that look forward to
Bartok, a much stronger musical personality is revealed.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930630

