FT932-6814

FT  27 MAY 93 / Threat to cabinet unity as row over Lamont intensifies:
Momentum builds for early government reshuffle


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and ALISON SMITH


A BEHIND-the-scenes battle over Mr Norman Lamont's hold on the Treasury last
night threatened a serious rift in Mr John Major's government.
As political momentum built up for an early cabinet reshuffle, Mr Lamont was
said to be fighting hard to resist the mounting pressure on his position.
Cabinet colleagues said the chancellor was insisting he should not be made
the 'scapegoat' for the government's political difficulties. The implication
was that he would leave the cabinet rather than accept another department.
Mr Lamont, who intends to spend the next few days preparing for the summer
public spending round, was said by friends to have won support on the
Conservative back benches.
But 10 Downing Street declined to quash the wave of speculation at
Westminster that the prime minister was preparing to shake up his
ministerial team. His aides stuck firmly to a 'no com-ment' formula designed
to keep open Mr Major's options.
Senior party figures were said to be making little secret of their
determination that Mr Norman Lamont should be replaced at the Treasury as
soon as possible.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, home secretary, Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary,
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, and Mr John MacGregor, transport
secretary, were being promoted as replacements for Mr Lamont.
The rift between the chancellor and some of the prime minister's close
associates left Mr Major facing demands from all wings of the party to end
the uncertainty.
Some MPs suggested that a reshuffle could come as early as today but the
consensus among senior ministers was that Mr Major would consider his
options during the Whitsun recess after parliament breaks up today.
Mr Major made it clear this week that he would not be pushed into a
reshuffle by media speculation or by attempts to 'assassinate' cabinet
members. But he is now being warned that the speculation - rife in
ministerial ranks - is destabilising the government.
Sir Norman Fowler, Tory party chairman, last night sought to damp the
speculation with a public though equivocal statement. He told journalists:
'Everyone should just calm down a bit and just allow things to take place.'
The impression of disarray was reinforced when Mr Lamont and Mr MacGregor
offered markedly different assessments of the ultimate goal of the
government's proposals for road pricing. Mr MacGregor was dismayed at the
chancellor's suggestion that motorway charges would lead eventually to
privatisation of sections of the road network.
The appearance of disunity was underlined by an unrelated row between Mr
MacGregor and Mr William Waldegrave, the public services and science
minister.
Mr Waldegrave was furious that a white paper unveiling the first overhaul in
decades of the government's science policy had been overshadowed by Mr
MacGregor's green paper on motorway tolls.
In an interview with the Guardian, Mr Lamont said it was the lot of a
chancellor to be disliked and to 'seem responsible for sinking the Titanic.'
He said he met finance ministers from all over the world, and they were
'deeply unpopular people.' But he said he acted as a useful lightning
conductor for the unpopularity of his party.
Political Notebook, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930527

