FT933-5332

FT  03 SEP 93 / International Company News: Browning-Ferris in Dollars 520m
takeover


   By KAREN ZAGOR


   NEW YORK


BROWNING-Ferris Industries, one of the biggest US waste management
companies, is to acquire Western Waste Industries in a share-swap deal
valued at about Dollars 520m. The deal includes the acquisition of about
Dollars 90m of Western's debt.
Browning-Ferris said the merger would expand its core waste services
business signifi- cantly, especially in southern California.
The combined companies will have revenues of more than Dollars 3.6bn, of
which about Dollars 230,000 will be from Western's operations.
On Wall Street, shares in Western soared Dollars 3 to Dollars 20, while
Browning-Ferris fell Dollars 1 1/4 to Dollars 23 5/8 .
Under the terms of the letter of intent, each share of Western common stock
would be exchanged for 1.02 shares in Browning-Ferris. The deal is subject
to renegotiation if Browning-Ferris' common share price rises above Dollars
30 or falls below Dollars 20. Browning does not expect the acquisition to
dilute earnings.
Western has agreed not to invite bids or inquiries from other parties while
the transaction is pending.
The merger is expected to be a tax-free reorganisation which would be
accounted for as pooling of interests.
Although analysts expect Browning-Ferris to benefit from the move into
southern California, some were concerned that it had paid too much for
Western.
Western's shares have closed no higher than Dollars 17 in the past 52 weeks,
and the stock's all-time high is Dollars 23 1/2 .
Mr Vishnu Swarup, an analyst at Prudential Securities, said there was 'a lot
of room for cost reductions and synergies. I think it's a good fit. It will
double BFI's market share in Los Angeles and increase its presence in
Houston, New Orleans and other markets.'
In recent years, Browning- Ferris has been plagued by permit problems at its
largest landfills, in addition to the pricing pressures felt throughout the
entire industry.
The company's earnings fell steadily in the early 1990s before starting to
improve this year. Net income for the nine months ended June was Dollars
144.4m, including a pre-tax reorganisation charge of Dollars 27m, compared
with net income of Dollars 125.4m a year earlier.
It said most of its third-quarter revenue growth came from acquisitions. It
completed 33 acquisitions in North America during the quarter, with
annualised revenues of about Dollars 41m.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930903

