FT934-8676

FT  13 NOV 93 / I'm back - has anything happened?: Dominic Lawson puts his
new book aside and returns to the 'real' world


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


TO ALL those who have written to me while I have been away, begging me to
return, I would like to say: thank you, both of you. My advice to all other
readers is to turn over to the next page.
That, at least, is what I have been doing over the past two months: reading
nothing. No newspapers, no magazines; nothing. Disraeli said that if he
wanted to read a good book, he would write one. In my own more modest way, I
have followed the same approach. I have read nothing except for the words of
my own book, as they have emerged on the computer screen. My television has
remained in its cupboard, not even to be wheeled out at the news witching
hours.
I have become, in a word, ignorant. Ignorant, at least, about all the things
which are supposed to be important. What is the latest word on Kenneth
Clarke's Budget plans? Is John Major getting more or (even) less popular?
Are house prices turning up? I don't know, and frankly, my dears, I don't
give a damn.
To the extent that the viscous fluid of political life percolated through to
my study at all, the most eminently indigestible was the domestic scene. It
suddenly did seem all immensely boring and unimportant. But even matters of
international significance left me unengaged. Did I care desperately about
the resolution of the Palestinian issue? No. Did I mind whether Boris
Yeltsin succeeded in storming the White House? No. Was I kept awake at night
worrying about nuclear proliferation in North Korea? No, I was not.
You might think this perfectly normal behaviour. You too might consider
these matters to be crashingly boring, although I suspect that, as an FT
reader, you are unlikely to be so parochial. But the thing is, I am an
editor. I am supposed to be greatly fascinated by the domestic and
international political scene. I am supposed to care about who is up, and
who is down, what is in, and what is out. Not only that: I am supposed to
have views on such matters.
While I was writing my book, I turned down every invitation I received to
cocktail and dinner parties. Ostensibly the reason was that I was far too
busy scribbling to find the time or the energy to socialise, let alone eat
and converse simultaneously. And there was some truth in that. But it occurs
to me that there was another reason for my apparent ascetism. I was simply
embarrassed that I would be asked my opinion on the latest topics of
political importance and thereby my vast range of ignorance would be exposed
to the sort of people it is my job to impress. Sing for my supper? I
couldn't even have croaked.
My book is about the psychology of sporting and intellectual conflict, as
seen through the medium of world championship chess. This, it seems to me,
is a topic of fascinating interest. But there are limits to the extent to
which a cocktail or dinner party conversation can revolve around such
matters. Small talk, it is not.
When I finally returned to my office, having delivered my baby to the
publishers, I received a number of friendly letters and telephone calls.
Virtually all of them said something along the lines of 'Welcome back to the
real world.'
What these kind people meant was that the world of current affairs
journalism was real, and the world of Grandmaster chess was not. In a way, I
understood this. Chess is, for most people, just a game. But for those who
play it for a living, it is real enough. They are engaging in pure,
creative, mental conflict, and pushing real chess pieces around a chess
board. There is no hypocrisy at the chess board. Something either works, or
it does not. In this sense, chess has similar properties to the worlds of
engineers or physicists.
But what do political journalists do? And what, for that matter, is it that
politicians do? They talk a lot. They have lunch a lot. Usually with each
other. From time to time they make things up. On some occasions they do
something useful. Because some of the things they do are useful, they
consider them 'real', and, therefore, important.
But now I miss the pure, useless, value-free world of the chess
Grandmasters. And I am sorry, in a way, to return to the 'real' world where
people try so desperately hard to govern and influence the behaviour of
their fellow men.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

931113

