FT932-6839

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(17): Testing limits of silicon chips - Multimedia: One more milestone


   By GEORGE BLACK


MULTIMEDIA looks set to move from being a niche market to becoming a part of
the mainstream computer industry, writes George Black.
This could give the industry the new lease of life it needs after a
recession. Leading personal computer makers and software package suppliers
are keenly supporting the development of multimedia because they see it as
the best hope of sustaining their growth.
Many users look forward to new applications that combine media such as
word-processed text, CD-ROM (Compact Disk Read Only Memory), graphics,
video, photography and audio.
Banks would like computer files on their customers that include photographs,
signatures and perhaps recorded interviews. Architects, estate agents,
engineers and planners would all like to be able to show their offerings on
a screen, or even to give a guided tour in 'virtual reality' headsets.
There are masses of prospective users in other sectors such as aerospace,
retailing, security, education, the police and television.
The accusation that multimedia is a technology looking for applications
could not be more wrong. But to become universal, multimedia has to come
down in price and bring together several emerging technologies. Although the
principles of the individual technologies have been mastered, getting them
to work together effectively calls for a lot more effort.
The biggest drawback for prospective users in the present economic climate
has been the cost, but the sharp fall in the price of personal computers is
helping. The market may soon reach the point where falling prices and
growing sales create a virtuous circle. The rapid spread of
videoconferencing as a cheaper alternative to air travel is evidence that
where multimedia is cost-effective there are plenty of customers.
The progress of multimedia depends on more processing power. Video and sound
are harder for computers to handle than text and graphics, but users now
expect instant response. The increase in power will come on the desktop
through new chips such as Intel's Pentium, as well as through faster
CD-ROMs, and in larger systems through what is known as 'massively parallel'
hardware.
But hardware makers are struggling to keep up with the demand for power. Mr
Trevor Wing, marketing director for VideoLogic, multimedia products
supplier, says processing video and sound will test the limits of the
silicon chip. Today's advanced workstations labour to process video, he
says. System builders will need to add new hardware to standard chips to
cope with the volume of information in multimedia applications.
The rapidly falling cost of storage is making multimedia applications
commercially feasible, but the capacity of storage devices can barely meet
demand. While PCs have standard hard disks of 80-120 megabytes and standard
CD-ROMs give 500 megabytes, processing the image of a newspaper could use
100 megabytes every day.
Multimedia will also stretch very large database technology. According to Mr
Robert McCord, European development director for database vendor Ingres, the
total volume of data held in databases worldwide could multiply 10 times by
the turn of the century. Whereas data up to now has been measurable in
gigabytes and terabytes, multimedia could need some new unit of volume not
yet in use.
Formidable problems of indexing and retrieval will need to be faced.
Multimedia vendors will be looking for bright ideas from developers of
relational and object-oriented database management systems and hypertext
searching software.
The recent move by Microsoft and Apple to modify their standard operating
systems software so that video, sound and graphics can be incorporated into
programs is seen by the industry as a big step towards creating a mass
market for multimedia.
Before, it was too difficult and expensive for software houses to change the
operating systems to connect them to multimedia applications. Now the
software houses are hard at work to build on the adapted operating systems.
In the next year or two a new generation of software packages should include
presentation systems using sound, video and graphics, aimed mainly at
marketing departments and sales people.
Video quality has to improve; at present postage stamp-sized video windows
give an acceptable image but anything larger tends to lose in smoothness.
The cost is such that there is usually a trade-off between the size and the
quality of the video. Add-in boards for video can be bought for Pounds 300,
which should help the market to grow and make good quality cheaper.
Users will want also higher resolution displays. The PC now delivers 256
colours as an industry standard, which is good enough for many applications,
but others will require even higher, television quality images.
By far the most popular application for multimedia is still training. The
reason for this, says Mr Peter Copeland, chairman of the Sussex-based
training company Futuremedia, is that it is both effective and cheap. Unlike
class instruction, it can be tailored to the individual's needs. A 10-hour
training course might cost Pounds 10,000, but the investment could be
recouped in less than a year, he says.
Standardisation is one of the main needs of the business in the next couple
of years. Microsoft has forged ahead with its own standards, but these may
soon merge with the official standards being developed by the International
Standards Organisation and the Consultative Committee on International
Telephony and Telegraphy.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930526

