FT934-11225

FT  02 NOV 93 / Business and the Law: Burst of competitive energy - The
European Commission's intervention in plans for a Portuguese power plant


   By MICHAEL SMITH


The European Commission has demonstrated through its intervention at a
Portuguese power plant that it will pursue its ambitions to liberalise the
European electricity market in spite of strong opposition.
Using European competition law, it has restricted to 15 years the period in
which Electricidade de Portugal, the state-owned monopoly, will have
exclusive rights to the electricity that will be produced from a power plant
at Pego which is due to be completed in 1995.
The consortium building the plant, including the UK's National Power, had
expected to have 28 years of exclusivity. It says it will not be hurt by the
change, owing to a compromise deal with the Commission. But the EC
intervention has set a precedent that, say EDP's lawyers, could affect the
funding of future power stations in Europe.
The Pego case comes at a time when the Commission is fighting hard to gain
acceptance for its 'third-party access' plans, which are aimed at
liberalising the European gas and electricity markets. It argues that a free
market in all goods throughout the Community can be achieved only if energy
is traded without restrictions imposed by monopolies. Competition would
force a reduction in electricity prices, it believes.
Most of Europe's electricity companies, and in many cases the states that
own them, have put forward arguments against the Commission's proposals.
Unbridled cross-border competition along the lines proposed by the
Commission, they say, would endanger security of supply. It would also
reduce incentives for companies to invest in transmission systems.
Large sections of the European Parliament agree. MEPs have tabled 324
amendments to the 30 articles in the third-party access directive. If the
directive is adopted, it is likely to be in a much diluted form.
However, the Commission has made it clear that it will use existing law to
ensure that monopolies cannot exert what it considers to be too much
influence over markets. Its chief tool is competition law, including article
85 of the Treaty of Rome prohibiting restrictive agreements which distort
trade between states. The Commission's interpretation is that an exclusive
supply obligation of more than 15 years is restrictive.
Ironically, the Portuguese electricity system is making considerable
progress in introducing competition in energy generation and supply along
the lines the Commission hopes to achieve through its third-party access
directive.
The Pego plant, which may eventually supply about 10 per cent of the
country's electricity, is being built by a consortium that includes National
Power, Electricite de France and Endesa - the UK, French and Spanish
utilities - as well as EDP. Most European countries would baulk at providing
such an inroad for foreign companies.
The Commission therefore apparently tried to avoid damaging Portugal's
progress. It agreed that, after a 15-year exclusive agreement, Tejo Energia,
the company set up by the consortium to operate Pego, will be able to sell
surplus capacity to third parties providing EDP does not need it.
That harms none of the deal's participants, since EDP will be provided with
all the electricity it needs from the plant, and the consortium is likely to
find ready buyers in other countries, including Spain, for any excess.
But such a compromise may not be so easily achieved elsewhere. Countries
without the capital to build the power capacity they need - especially in
southern Europe - may find it more difficult to gain funding from the
private sector. 'Banks want the certainty of a strong revenue stream over a
long period if they are to provide funds. The danger is that the
Commission's approach will restrict the way that finance is raised,' says Mr
David Marks, a partner with McKenna & Co, a law firm that advises on big
power projects including Pego.
The Pego decision and others that follow are likely to prove fertile ground
for merchant banks and the lawyers.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931102

