FT932-139

FT  30 JUN 93 / Letter: UK productivity growth and the trade deficit


   From Mr TERRY BARKER and Mr RICHARD LEWNEY


Sir, Samuel Brittan is right to emphasise the substantial changes in the
structure of UK trade and the increased importance of services ('That
manufacturing fallacy again', June 28). Our long-term projections, based on
a detailed analysis of trade performance by manufacturing and service
industries, forecast a sustained reduction in the huge deficit on the
balance of payments as the European recovery gets under way and the effects
of the sterling devaluation come through, even with a recovery in UK
domestic demand.
However, these forecasts are predicated on continued improvements in
competitiveness, and in particular strong productivity growth in both
manufacturing and traded services. The issue for policy is whether
government has a useful role to play in sustaining these improvements, for
example through re-entry to the exchange rate mechanism at a competitive
rate, raising standards of education and training, or measures to stimulate
innovation. The technical question of whether the market will restore a
sustainable current account position misses the point. There will, of
course, exist various combinations of the terms of trade and domestic demand
consistent with external balance. A competitive economy will enjoy higher
terms of trade and no external constraint on domestic demand growth.
On interpreting the recent data showing strong import growth, we doubt that
there is any significant lag between domestic spending and imports, and
believe that the answer lies rather in sterling's overvaluation and the
composition of domestic spending (eg investment demand for goods in which
the UK is not specialised). The higher share of manufactures (as opposed to
raw materials) in imports means that imports are more responsive to relative
price changes than ever, and we expect a relatively strong response to
sterling's decline. Incidentally, we also expect the large increases in
import prices to begin to be reflected in retail prices shortly.
Terry Barker,
Richard Lewney,
Cambridge Econometrics,
Covent Garden,
Cambridge CB1 2HS

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930630

