FT932-13440

FT  23 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Newbury challengers press Tories
over policy on VAT


   By ALISON SMITH


THE TORIES came under renewed pressure yesterday in the Newbury by-election
campaign over their plans to extend value added tax.
The issue is threatening to become the single greatest force behind a
protest vote against the Conservatives.
Despite a press conference in the barn of a racing stables - intended to
highlight the Budget's resolution of the problems of VAT on bloodstock - Mr
Julian Davidson, the Tory candidate, was again thrown on to the defensive
about the VAT extension to domestic fuel from next April.
Sir John Cope, a Treasury minister, insisted that the government did not
intend to widen the VAT base beyond what it had announced, and denied that
the fate of the Conservatives' election promises on tax meant that
assurances now about future intensions could not be believed.
The issue is likely to dominate today also, as Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, joins the campaign. Mr Davidson said he was delighted that 'the
man who's guiding Britain's recovery' was coming to Newbury, but the other
parties sounded similarly pleased.
Even before the incentive of Mr Lamont's appearance, both Labour and the
Liberal Democrats have been intensifying their campaign on VAT.
Mr David Rendel, the Liberal Democrat candidate and the main challenger to
the Tory majority, said that more than 1,000 people had so far given their
support to his petition against the tax change. He talked of 'very real
anger' in the constituency, saying that it was not confined to people who
feared they might not be able to afford higher bills.
Mr Steve Billcliffe, the Labour candidate, challenged Mr Davidson to say
whether he would vote in the Commons against the change if he were elected;
and whether he would vote against any proposal to extend VAT to food.
MPs will have a full day's debate in the Commons on imposing VAT on domestic
fuel soon after the by-election on May 6, as part of their discussion of the
finance bill.
A record number of 19 candidates are standing in the by-election. One of the
late entrants to the race was Mr John Browne, the former Tory MP for
Winchester, who was de-selected by his local party and stood unsuccessfully
at the general election as an independent Conservative.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930423

