FT933-12566

FT  23 JUL 93 / Technology: Software finds a fashionable friend


   By DELLA BRADSHAW


First there was Ascot, then Henley. But the British summer season can only
truly be declared open when high street clothes shops display their end of
season 'sale' notices.
As fashion retailers rush to slash the figures on their garment price tags
they are increasingly having to ensure that those prices correspond to the
ones held on their computers. For the UK retail outlets of Paul Smith, the
men's fashion designer, the job has been simplified by work it has been
doing with its supplier Prologic, which specialises in software for the
fashion industry.
'We've been working with Prologic for four to five years,' reports Cuan
Hanley, co-ordinator at R. Newbold, Paul Smith's forthcoming retail venture.
'We've been moving in tandem.'
Initially when it came to sale time, employees at Paul Smith's head office
in Nottingham had to change the price for each item separately - every item
had a code denoting style, colour and size. Paul Smith's Covent Garden
stores stock eveything from toothbrushes to Pounds 600 suits - some 2,500
items in all.
The Cims (clothing industry management system) software was altered, says
Hanley, to ensure that the prices could be changed by product group. And if
one particular product group in one particular store was selling badly the
price of that group alone could be reduced. 'We can change all the prices
now in half a day,' reports Hanley.
Such speed of reaction is particularly important in the fast-moving fashion
industry where retailers have a rapid stock turnover - unlike a food chain,
for example, where the same brand of baked beans can be sold year in, year
out.
The reports produced by the Prologic software, points out Ian Bergin, at
Paul Smith's Covent Garden stores, can look at the stock levels throughout
the organisation or can track down a single garment. The software can
produce reports of bestsellers or 'worstsellers'.
'You can say 'I'm going to run out of this on this day and so I need to
order more now',' elaborates Bergin. 'You can see problems before they
occur.' The biggest problem would be if the stores ran out of the most
expensive items - suits.
If shortages occur, the individual shops can look up the stock held at the
warehouse and order items from the terminal which also acts as a till. Or
they can order from head office in Nottingham.
If they suspect shortages might ensue, each retail outlet can check to see
whether there is a similar style or fabric that could be stocked instead but
which they had hitherto overlooked - a shirt, for example, that was only
stocked in one of Paul Smith's Japanese shops.
The Prologic system, which is based round an Oracle database held at head
office, uses the data collected every time a sale is completed in the shop
to compile accounts and other management reports. The same data are used to
verify stock control levels. For the shop managers it means that there is no
need to back up the data every evening which is collected on disc, a
drawback which had become evident with the previous system in the Paul Smith
stores.
The system also helps eliminate errors. Because the code number for each
item has to be entered before a sale can be made, it can only be sold for
the correct list price. Barcode readers can be incorporated to help with
manual stock controls. And Cims lets retailers build in specialist services
 -such as automatic discounts for clients lucky enough to hold discount
cards.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930723

