FT932-6853

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (9): They're breathing down
London's neck - Changes may be imminent in the major-centres league table


   By PETER MARSH


LONDON MAY find the going harder over the next few years, as it seeks to
consolidate its position as the leading centre in the world's foreign
exchange market.
Last year's crisis in the European exchange rate mechanism helped London's
position. Traders in the UK capital had a ringside seat at the drama, and
more influence on what was going on than their counterparts in New York and
Tokyo.
However, London's role could slip if, as expected, the European Community
nations choose somewhere outside the UK as the site of the mooted European
Central Bank.
Also, New York appears to be flexing its muscles as a centre for foreign
exchange dealing, with more US fund managers choosing to shift in and out of
non-US currencies as a way of maximising their investments.
At present Tokyo is a poor third in the league table of the centres for
foreign exchange. The nearest rivals to London in the rest of the European
Community - Frankfurt and Paris - are some way down the field and look in no
great shape to make much headway catching up.
According to the latest surveys of currency market dealing, in April 1992
London accounted for currency trading worth about Dollars 300bn a day, or
almost one third of the world total of some Dollars 1,000bn. New York was
next with Dollars 192bn, then Tokyo with Dollars 128bn.
Further down the league table, in fourth place, is Singapore with a daily
turnover of Dollars 74bn, Zurich with Dollars 68bn, Hong Kong (Dollars
61bn), Frankfurt (Dollars 57bn) and Paris (Dollars 35bn).
In recent years London has increased its lead, its annual daily turnover
having risen by 60 per cent between 1989 and 1992. New York, in contrast,
saw a 49 per cent increase in turnover during this period, while the
increase for Tokyo was a meagre 11 per cent.
All these centres have seen their foreign currency business rise in line
with increased liberalisation of financial markets worldwide, in which
cross-border money flows have become much more important. Total gross
cross-border equity holdings in the US, Europe and Japan increased by more
than 50 per cent from 1986 ot 1991, from Dollars 800bn to Dollars 1,300bn,
according to estimates at the International Monetary Fund.
Institutional investors have played a big part in this increase in
international monetary flows. European funds typically invest around one
fifth of their assets in other countries, as opposed to the equivalent
proportions of less than 10 per cent in the case of US and Japanese funds.
As a result, the shifts have had a proportionately greater effect on pushing
up currency trading in Europe than in the other industrial regions. London
has been a major beneficiary of this trend, partly because of the lightly
regulated nature of capital markets in the UK.
However, according to Mr Geoffrey Dennis, head of research at the New York
office of stockbrokers James Capel, this picture may be changing. He says US
investors are becoming more interested in switching money into other
currencies as they begin to weigh up the attractions of cross-border
investments.
In the past few years, this trend has been underscored by the rise in
importance of the mainly New York-based 'hedge funds' - relatively small
funds, which do business by taking speculative positions in currencies.
According to Mr Lawrence Veit, an economist at the Brown Brothers Harriman
investment bank in New York, US investors' 'global spread' puts New York
just ahead of London as a place from which he would advocate that a
portfolio of investment be handled.
Even though there may be grounds for thinking New York will catch up
somewhat on London in the currency trading league table, London will retain
the huge advantage of being in a favourable time zone for international
foreign exchange dealing.
A possible threat is the prospect that at least a sizeable part of Europe
will move on schedule to a single currency around the end of the century.
That development would automatically greatly reduce the opportunity for
trading in European currencies, and might damage London's role.
Another possible damper for London is that, assuming some form of monetary
union comes about, the planned European Central Bank is likely to be sited
somewhere other than London, with the main contenders being Bonn and
Amsterdam. Some people think that London's role as a centre of currency
trading would be diminished if it were some way from the centre of the
action in terms of monetary policy decisions.
However, according to another school of thought, the location of the central
bank will make very little difference to currency markets in specific
countries. A fully paid up member of this school is Mr Eddie George, who
takes over as governor of the Bank of England on July 1, from his current
job of deputy governor, and who is relatively unconcerned about the
implications for London financial markets of a central bank being located on
mainland Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930526

