FT933-10208

FT  05 AUG 93 / Soft shoe shuffle: John Ridding on the politics of moves at
the top of French industry


   By JOHN RIDDING


Mr Loik Le Floch-Prigent, chairman of Elf Aquitaine, yesterday cleared his
desk at the top of Elf tower in western Paris. Removed from his post by the
government, he will leave the state-controlled group, which is also France's
largest industrial concern, to take over as head of Gaz de France, the state
utility.
On the other side of the River Seine, Mr Philippe Jaffre, chairman of Credit
Agricole, the country's largest bank, was similarly occupied. Chosen by the
government as the next head of Elf, he will exchange overdrafts for oil
exploration and loan policies for petrochemicals projects.
The musical chairs at the top levels of corporate France demonstrates the
extent to which the lines between the country's business and politics remain
blurred. 'There is no clear separation of powers as in the US and the UK,'
said a French banker. 'The hand of the government is still in evidence.'
For foreign investors, unused to the French practice of parachuting new
chairmen into public companies, this may provoke concerns - especially as
the government prepares to launch its programme to privatise 21 state-owned
companies. In particular, investors are faced with the questions of whether
Mr Le Floch-Prigent's departure heralds broader changes at the top of
state-controlled industry, and what effects such reshuffles have on the
companies involved.
In the case of Elf itself, named last month as one of the first four
companies to be privatised, there might appear to be cause for concern. Mr
Jaffre has a formidable financial background, having spent 10 years at the
treasury and having run Credit Agricole since 1988. But he has no experience
of running an industrial company. Moreover, he takes the helm at a time when
the oil group is confronting difficult markets.
Mr Le Floch-Prigent, credited with strengthening Elf in international
markets, has warned that depressed demand in the petrochemicals and basic
chemicals sectors will mean that operating profits for the first half of
1993 will show a fall of about 25 per cent compared with the same period
last year. 'I don't see much improvement in these areas this year,' Mr Le
Floch-Prigent, said at the end of last month.
But investors and oil industry observers appear relaxed about the change.
'Mr Le Floch-Prigent did a good job, but Mr Jaffre appears to be a very able
manager,' said one international fund manager whose company holds shares in
the oil group.
French industry officials argue that Mr Jaffre will inherit a strong team of
senior executives and that his experience of privatisation - while working
in the treasury during the earlier privatisation programme of 1986-1988 -
will be a big advantage in the forthcoming sale of the state's 50.7 per cent
stake in Elf.
If the selection of Mr Jaffre has met largely with approval, however,
international investors are wary that the move signals the government's
intention to retain a grip on the running of the oil group, particularly
since it has said it intends to keep a 'golden share' in the company.
Investors also hope that Mr Floch-Prigent's departure will not be the start
of broader changes at the top of French public companies.
'A certain amount of reshuffling comes with the territory in France,' said
one fund manager. 'But if it is widespread then of course it is unsettling
for investors and may mean that political motives are at work.'
There is little doubt that political motives were a factor in the changes at
Elf. A socialist himself, Mr Le Floch-Prigent was appointed to head the
group in 1989 by the socialist President Francois Mitterrand. The fact that
in 1981 and 1982 he advised Mr Pierre Dreyfus, then industry minister in the
socialist government, on the nationalisation programme, has damaged his
credentials in the eyes of the current centre-right government of Mr Edouard
Balladur.
But the message from Mr Le Floch-Prigent's exit is more that the Balladur
government is following a pragmatic rather than a political approach to its
relations with state-owned groups. 'It might have appeared unusual for
someone with Mr Le Floch-Prigent's background to spearhead the government's
privatisation campaign,' said Mr David Harrington, head of research at James
Capel in Paris.
Pragmatic as opposed to political motives are also suggested by the fact
that Mr Jaffre is regarded as politically neutral. During his spell at the
treasury he worked under both socialist and conservative governments.
The Balladur government has also limited its intervention in state-owned
industries. It has refrained from implementing a 'witch-hunt' of top public
sector executives as happened, for example, when the socialists took office
in 1981 and when the conservative government of Mr Jacques Chirac came to
power in 1986. Under the current government, the only other change at the
top of a state-owned company was the appointment in May of Mr Michel
Pebereau as chairman of Banque Nationale de Paris in place of Mr Rene
Thomas.
'The hand of the state is still at work,' said one oil industry observer in
Paris. 'But under Balladur it seems to be wearing a velvet glove.'
The test of the 'velvet glove' is likely to come as the government moves
down the list of companies to be privatised and the temptation arises to put
their own people in place before the controls of the state are loosened.
Most of the current chairmen seem relatively secure, although merchant
bankers in Paris say that question marks remain over Mr Jean-Yves Haberer,
chairman of the Credit Lyonnais banking group and possibly Mr Alain Gomez,
head of Thomson, the electronics company.
Both chairmen have links with the Socialist party. Mr Gomez was appointed by
a socialist government 11 years ago, while Mr Haberer had close ties with Mr
Pierre Beregevoy, the late Socialist prime minister. Both companies have
also been suffering losses, although they say they expect recovery this
year.
But with neither Thomson nor Credit Lyonnais facing imminent privatisation,
and with Mr Balladur's cautious approach, their chairmen seem safe behind
their desks for the time being at least.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930805

