FT933-5388

FT  03 SEP 93 / Drug stocks surge as Clinton rules out mandatory price curbs


   By MICHAEL PROWSE and PATRICK HARVERSON


   WASHINGTON, NEW YORK


SHARES in drug and medical services companies rose sharply on Wall Street
and in Europe yesterday after reports, later confirmed, that President Bill
Clinton would not impose mandatory price controls on the health industry as
part of his healthcare system reforms.
Some analysts had feared that the Clinton administration would impose
short-term price controls to prevent drug companies profiteering during the
phasing in of the reforms, a process that is not expected to be completed
until 1998. The reforms are due to be unveiled later this month.
Later yesterday, Mr Clinton confirmed that he would not seek even temporary
price controls and would instead urge drug companies to restrain price
increases voluntarily. 'I've never embraced them,' he said. 'I've never been
particularly hot on price controls.'
Merck closed in New York up Dollars 1 5/8 at Dollars 33 1/8 ,
Schering-Plough up Dollars 2 1/2 at Dollars 63 and US Healthcare up Dollars
2 7/8 at Dollars 47 1/8 . In London, Glaxo, Zeneca, Wellcome and SmithKline
Beecham all advanced in London, a pattern repeated in Zurich pharmaceutical
stocks.
The White House also confirmed that it intended to move rapidly to extend
health insurance to the whole population. It said the reformed healthcare
system would be operating in some states by 1995. There would be a firm
deadline of December 1997 for other states to join the new system. At
present, about 37m Americans lack health insurance.
Officials also confirmed that the extension of health insurance would be
financed mainly by limiting the rate of growth of existing federal
healthcare programmes. There would be an increase in 'sin' taxes, for
example on cigarettes, but no significant increase in the overall tax
burden. This reflects opposition to higher income taxes in the budget signed
last month.
Mr Clinton is also expected to propose a limit on the annual rate of
increase of private health insurance premiums. This would indirectly limit
the ability of drug companies, hospitals and physicians to raise prices
because purchasers of care would be subject to tighter budget constraints.
The main innovation is a shift to a form of 'managed competition'. The White
House will propose that most people buy health insurance through large
purchasing co-operatives known as 'regional health alliances'.
US stocks, Page 33
London stocks, Page 36

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930903

