FT934-10250

FT  06 NOV 93 / Hurd lauds Ulster peace seekers


   By DAVID OWEN


MR DOUGLAS HURD, the foreign secretary, last night used his first visit to
Northern Ireland in eight years to appeal to the province's political
parties to build on their recent efforts to secure a lasting peace.
With Mr John Major, the prime minister, preparing to meet unionist leaders
at Downing Street next week, Mr Hurd also offered an assurance that the
troubles were at the top of the government's agenda.
Mr Hurd was speaking after Mr James Molyneaux, the Ulster Unionist party
leader, had given a surprisingly upbeat assessment of the prospects for
success of the Major-Reynolds peace initiative.
In an implicit rebuke to the Rev Ian Paisley, the hardline Democratic
Unionist party, leader, Mr Hurd praised Mr Molyneaux and Mr John Hume,
leader of the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour party, for taking
some risks for peace.
'They and others will need to take more,' he said.
It emerged earlier this week that ministers were prepared to press ahead
with the peace process without DUP participation if necessary. Mr Major and
Mr Paisley are expected to meet on Monday or Tuesday. In remarks delivered
less than 24 hours after Mr Hume claimed there would be 'peace within a
week' if his initiative with Sinn Fein president Mr Gerry Adams was
embraced, Mr Hurd - a former Northern Ireland secretary - said he did not
agree that a political settlement could do nothing to stop terrorism.
He praised the six-point plan recently put forward by Mr Dick Spring, the
Irish foreign minister, as 'constructive'. Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish
prime minister, is expected to discuss the peace process further during his
speech to the Fianna Fail party conference this weekend.
Unionist MPs yesterday rejected Mr Hume's 'peace within a week' claim as
'preposterous'. Mr Ken Maginnis, UUP security spokesman, said Mr Hume's
contention was 'just about as arrogant as it is ludicrous'.
Mr Molyneaux claimed he had seen an early draft of the peace plan, and said:
'It is a fiendish plan which would suppress the wishes of the greater number
of people in Northern Ireland. They represent a total surrender to all of
the demands made by the IRA.'
Mr Paisley yesterday urged Mr Hume to 'stop this dialogue-of-death process
with the republican movement'.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931106

