FT932-47

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (3): An experiment in voting / A look at the
sweeping electoral reforms


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


AT THE next election, Italians will be experimenting with a new system based
on the principle of majority voting but balanced by proportional
representation.
The historic change came earlier this month when the chamber of deputies
began debating proposals for electoral reform. Ironically, the Italians have
decided to reject their system of proportional representation, introduced
with the post-war constitution, at a time when other European countries are
beginning to have doubts about the merits of majority voting.
The Italian argument for electoral change, however, is powerful. Politicians
from across the political spectrum have reluctantly come to recognise that
the existing system of proportional representation provides too great a
guarantee to small parties and encourages fragmentation. In consequence the
system has fostered unstable coalitions (the Ciampi government is the 52nd
since 1945) yet failed to offer a genuine change of government in elections.
The Christian Democrats have thus ruled throughout the post-war era and
relied on four alternating or contemporaneous allies - the Socialists,
Social Democrats, Liberals and Republicans. All the latter have enjoyed a
degree of power and influence over the institutions of state out of all
proportion to their share of the vote.
The pressure for reform has not come from within parliament, as the bulk of
the politicians have profited from the existing system. Instead it has come
from a small group of reformist politicians using the instrument of a
referendum. The first step was the June 1991 referendum endorsing an end to
the practice of multi-preference voting - a practice heavily abused to stack
the odds in favour of machine-backed politicians.
The fragmentation of the political scene in the wake of the April 4, 1992
general elections brought home the fact that the old system had reached the
limits of viability. No fewer than 16 parties were represented in parliament
and half had less than six per cent each of the vote, and only one more than
20 per cent. Pushed by President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, a 60-person joint
parliamentary commission was formed in October 1992 to draw up proposals on
constitutional reform, with specific reference to new electoral laws.
The existence of this committee, no matter how slowly it moved initially,
signalled that parliament was serious after years of indifference. Even so,
the pace and agenda of the commission was dictated by the cross-party
referendum movement headed by Mr Mario Segni, the then Christian Democrat
reformist politician who left the party in March this year.
Once in January the courts gave the go-ahead for a total of 10 referendums
to be held in April, a clock was ticking. The commission had to act either
to anticipate the referendum or to adhere to the results. One of the
referendum proposals was for introducing majority voting in the Senate for
238 of the 315 seats with the remainder retaining proportional
representation. Another proposal concerned the abolition of the existing
laws regarding the municipal and regional elections.
The commission, deeply divided on the nature of electoral reform, opted to
await the outcome of the April 19-20 referendum on reform of the senate.
But in the case of municipal election laws agreement was reached in March on
proposals similar to those contained in the referendum. The referendum was
thus unnecessary on this issue. The municipal reforms introduced majority
voting in all towns with populations over 15,000 and direct elections for
mayor, with a second round run-off between the two most voted candidates
where none obtained an absolute majority the first time. Voting was also to
be held on one day instead of the traditional leisurely two-day schedule for
local and national elections.
This system was tested on June 6, with a run-off on June 20, covering a
broad cross-section of Italian towns and cities with nearly a quarter of the
electorate involved. The reformer's two broad objectives were clearly
achieved. The first aim was to shift the voter's attention away from the
traditional blind party loyalty and instead chose a specific candidate.
The second was to provide a system that ensured stable local administrations
over a four-year period of office - during the course of the past year the
administrations in the big four cities of Milan, Naples, Rome and Turin have
collapsed because the governing coalitions have disintegrated.
To this end, the winning mayoral candidate has the right to chose 60 per
cent of the seats in the municipal council, the remainder being apportioned
on the basis of the party's share of the vote. For Italians it was a wholly
new experience to see the 145 new mayors declared winners and then promptly
have assured stability for their administrations. Normally elections have
been pursued by several months of uncertain and unseemly politicking. The
impact of the clean-cut results in the new municipal system could well
affect the course of electoral reform now being debated in parliament.
Since the reform of the senate referendum triumphed in April, parliament has
been obliged to respect the voters' sentiment by producing similar rules for
the 630-seat chamber of deputies. Agreement has been reached on a
first-past-the-post system for 75 per cent of the seats, with 25 per cent
reserved for proportional representation to guarantee minority parties.
An ample majority rejected the idea of a second round run-off in those
constituencies where there was no outright winner. They argued the second
round risked encouraging a series of local alliances which could not easily
be translated into a cohesive parliamentary alliance. The main proponent of
copying the French-style run-off was the former communist Party of the
Democratic Left (PDS) which calculated it could benefit precisely from such
a system. But with all parties so manifestly weak, save the populist Lombard
League in the north, the principle of a second round could yet be adopted.
The parties will also have to make up their minds how voters are going to
approach the 25 per cent proportional element. If the electorate is
encouraged to place one vote for a candidate and a second for a party, this
could produce what one commentator called 'a vote from both the head and the
heart'.
The proposals in any event should be ready before the summer recess. The
next stage will be the preparation of new laws redefining constituencies - a
complex process that could take four months. Nevertheless it is hard to see
fresh elections taking place without changes to the constituency
legislation. Beyond this, the constitutional reform committee should, if
parliament remains in session, address such key issues as whether or not the
president, or indeed the prime minister, should be directly elected.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

930630

