FT932-257

FT  29 JUN 93 / International Company News: Nissan starts to make it happen
in the US - North American prospects are brightening for the Japanese car
manufacturer


   By MARTIN DICKSON


GANBARO] proclaims a large, hand-painted sign alongside an assembly line in
the Nissan automobile company's US plant in rural Tennessee.
The exhortation means 'make it happen' and, after a rocky, roller-coaster 10
years of manufacturing in America, the Japanese car company may at last be
doing just that.
Nissan's US car sales - excluding the group's Infiniti luxury brand - were
up 17 per cent in the first five months of this year, and its market share
rose from 4.1 per cent to 4.7 per cent.
Yet, over the same period, compatriots Honda and Toyota saw their market
share (excluding luxury marques) drop substantially. Toyota dipped from 8.3
per cent to 7.7 per cent, while Honda fell from 7.3 per cent to 6.4 per
cent, due to stronger competition from US rivals and price rises forced on
the Japanese companies by the strong yen.
Nissan's market share improvement in the US - when its Japanese parent is
losing money - is due mainly to the success of its new and keenly-priced
Altima family sedan, which has been selling much more strongly than the car
it replaced last autumn, the ageing Stanza.
Nissan desperately needs the Altima to be a winner. For, in contrast to the
success of Toyota and Honda, it has had a lacklustre record since it began
manufacturing in the US in 1983 - a history which demonstrates Japanese
motor companies are far from infallible.
Nissan led the Japanese import charge into the US market in the 1970s. But
in the 1980s, Japan's number two manufacturer (after Toyota), shot itself in
the foot with a series of strategic errors. US consumers did not warm to its
dull, boxy cars and lacklustre dealer network. They were confused by the
change of its brand name from Datsun to Nissan and later shifts in marketing
and advertising.
It also suffered from a lack of strong products in the more profitable
family sedan and mini-van sectors, while its Infiniti luxury cars,
introduced in 1989, languished in the shadow of Toyota's more
successfully-marketed Lexus range.
As a result, Nissan's US car market share has never been higher than the
5.89 per cent peak reached in 1982, even though Japan's share of the US
market has jumped from around 20 per cent to 30 per cent over the past
decade. Its unit sales of cars and trucks peaked at 831,000 in the US in
1985 and totalled only 585,000 in 1992.
Now, however, the company is improving on several fronts. The
boldly-modelled Altima, which originated from Nissan's Californian design
studios, shows the company has become much more attuned to US tastes.
The vehicle, manufactured at Nissan's plant in Smyrna, Tennessee, which also
makes pick-up trucks and the small Sentra car, has got good marks for
quality in independent tests.
The Sentra also scores well in these tests, though it has not always done
so: a 1991 study found almost twice as many problems with vehicles made in
Smyrna as the same cars made in Japan.
Mr Jerry Benefield, who heads manufacturing operations at Smyrna, rejects
suggestions that the plant's quality might have been sometimes less than
excellent. But he says the Altima has brought improvements: 'We learned to
do a better job in design and development, our suppliers are improving, our
assembly is improving and the technology to put it together is improving.'
For example, some of the Dollars 490m invested at Smyrna to produce the
Altima was spent on a new 'smart' system for assembling vehicle bodies. This
is a box-like steel structure which uses lasers to ensure greater accuracy
in welding a body shell together.
However, the Altima's success is also due to its low price. Mr Christopher
Cedergren, of the California-based AutoPacific consultancy, notes that while
the Altima is a very good product, it is priced Dollars 1,000 to Dollars
2,500 lower than rivals such as the Honda Accord and Toyota Camry.
And that has led analysts to question whether Nissan is using the Altima as
a loss-leader to gain market share - and if so, how long it can afford to
maintain this strategy, given that its Japanese parent company is also
losing money at home.
Still, Nissan's US improvement extends beyond the Altima. The company is
doing well with the new Quest mini-van, also designed by Nissan in
California but which is being assembled by Ford.
Infiniti is starting to show signs of better market share, helped by a new
model and a new advertising campaign. And next year Nissan could get a
fillip in the full-sized car market when it introduces a new, keenly-priced
Maxima.
The US operations also have a new chief executive - Mr Robert Thomas, 48,
who has been with the company 11 years and replaced Mr Thomas Mignanelli. He
resigned in April amid rumours that Nissan's headquarters, which needs an
improved foreign financial contribution to offset its problems at home, was
unhappy at the subsidiary's performance, despite the improving market share.
One of Mr Thomas's first acts was to consolidate Nissan and Infiniti's
marketing operations as part of a worldwide Nissan programme to cut costs by
10 per cent.
Mr Thomas says he is not planning further big changes, though he makes clear
he wants to improve relations with Nissan's dealer network: 'I'm going to
spend a lot of time travelling and listening to what dealers have to say.'
His predecessor, while sometimes accused by dealers of aloofness, had moved
a considerable way in this direction, through a reorganisation which gave
more power to regional managers to solve dealers' problems.
However, Nissan's retailers are unlikely to be happy until they have a much
more competitive group of vehicles across the product range, including a
replacement for the boxy, entry-level car, the Sentra. Mr Cedergren reckons
that will not happen until the 1996 model year, when he expects the company
to introduce a small car similar to the Altima.
Nissan is now vying with Honda to be the second-biggest Japanese supplier of
cars and light trucks to the US market and Mr Thomas's ambition is to
'retain and solidify the number two position.'
But while the company seems better placed to do so than at any time in the
past decade, it also has a long history of false American dawns.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930629

