FT934-8880

FT  13 NOV 93 / DTI orders inspection of Queens Moat group after losses


   By MAGGIE URRY


MR Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, has appointed inspectors
to investigate Queens Moat Houses. The hotel group announced a loss of
Pounds 1.04bn two weeks ago and is talking to banks about refinancing its
Pounds 1.18bn of debt.
The company welcomed the investigation and said it was in the best interests
of shareholders. Mr John Bairstow, former chairman, said he would co-operate
fully with the inspectors.
Under Section 432(2) of the Companies Act 1985, inspectors can be appointed
if circumstances suggest fraud, misfeasance or misconduct, or if
shareholders have not been given information they might reasonably expect.
Since QMH's difficulties became public in March and its shares were
suspended, all those who were directors at the time have resigned. The
Department of Trade and Industry asked the inspectors 'to look at various
matters drawn to the department's attention in respect of transactions and
accounting issues' highlighted in the 1992 results announcement.
The announcement referred to suspected breaches of company law - notably
involving the payment of Pounds 33.3m of dividends over the past three years
 -and sale and leaseback transactions involving directors that should under
stock exchange rules have been declared to shareholders.
It also said new directors had been unable to find the working papers used
to produce the 1992 interim results. It is likely that the inspectors will
question former directors on the issue.
Mr Bairstow said: 'I can't tell them anything. David Hersey was finance
director. He is a very precise and pernickety chap.' Mr Bairstow said he was
sure Mr Hersey - who was suspended from the company in April - kept a master
set of the papers in his filing cabinet. 'I very rarely went into his
office,' Mr Bairstow said,
Although the DTI gives inspectors a remit when appointed, it is up to them
to decide how far their investigation will go. They are not given a time
limit, since investigations can be complex.
The inspectors are Mr Adrian Burn, the London region managing partner of
accountants BDO Binder Hamlyn, who has been involved in previous DTI
investigations, and Mr Patrick Phillips QC, a barrister with experience in
accountancy and finance.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931113

