FT932-13276

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (20): A portfolio
for his final curtain - In his work, John Nickson courts wealthy donors to
obtain finance for operatic productions. Meanwhile, his own investments,
entrusted to a fee-charging financial adviser, pursue capital growth for his
retirement / Serious riches


   By JOHN AUTHERS


OPERA-GOERS awaiting the overture to Verdi's Rigoletto at the London
Coliseum last August had an unscheduled surprise.
Before the orchestra launched into the opera, a man appeared on the stage,
illuminated by the beam of one spotlight, and spent two minutes asking the
audience to contribute towards the sponsorship of a new production of a
little-known Janacek opera, The Adventures of Mr Broucek. Forms for
donations had been placed on every seat.
That sponsorship appeal raised Pounds 102,000, all in small donations of up
to Pounds 400 from individual members of the public, making it the most
successful such venture yet attempted in London. John Nickson, the English
National Opera's head of corporate affairs, was the figure on the stage.
Most of his work, which involves raising finance for the company's
productions, requires him to deal with people who are able to make much
greater donations. Very wealthy, and equally discreet, donors, convinced
both of ENO's artistic merit and of its ability to spend money efficiently,
have been the key to the company's survival. One even donated Pounds 1m
anonymously.
Mr Nickson's own finances are not in the same stratosphere. However, based
on an inheritance, he is currently using a broad range of investments to
ensure a comfortable retirement, after a career which has been characterised
by much artistic buccaneering and a refusal to let finance get in the way.
That means an eclectic selection of investments. One of the most apparently
outlandish is in a privately managed and held Business Expansion Scheme,
which owns a large house in Bromley, Kent. Mr Nickson has never set eyes on
it, and points out ruefully that he and the other investors bought at the
top of the market.
However, the advantages of a 'do-it-yourself' BES are clear. There are no
sponsors to pay, no hidden costs or dubious managerial 'incentives', and all
the investors can easily see what their investment is worth. It also, of
course, brought in a hefty dose of top-rate tax relief.
On Murray Noble's advice, he also invested a large chunk of his portfolio in
zero-dividend preference shares of investment trusts. These allowed for
secure capital growth, which would be taxed as capital gain rather than
income.
However, the falling interest-rate climate of the past two years has put a
strain on investment for growth, as well as investment for income. After
sterling had left the European exchange rate mechanism, Murray Noble became
nervous that the level of cover for the projected maturity pay-outs on each
zero had been eroded, and sold all but one of them.
The money has been moved from there into two European bond funds, managed by
Global Asset Management and Clerical Medical International.
Mr Nickson admits that he did need to hold on tight before effectively
investing in Deutsche Marks, but at the moment things look promising.
European bond prices should rise in response to lower German interest rates,
allowing a quick capital gain.
Mr Nickson's current preoccupation with retirement and capital growth
follows a youth (he is now 46) during which, he admits, his philosophy was
to 'live for today'.
He went from the public school of Giggleswick, in Yorkshire, where he was
taught drama by Russell Harty, to University College, London. On coming of
age he received a small legacy, much of which he spent on a five-bedroom
house just off Clapham Common, in South London. His income at this point
came from letting to his friends ('not the most sensible thing in the
world'), plus his brief 'deeply unsuccessful' career as an actor.
While working at Shanklin Rep, on the Isle of Wight, 'I discovered that I
was one of the worst actors on the British stage, and wisely decided to
retire from the stage and become a manager.'
However, there was no direct road from Shanklin to the Coliseum. After three
years in a stage-management partnership, he sold the house in Clapham (for a
healthy profit), bought a flat in Holland Park, and left Britain on the
hippy trail, spending five months in Bali. 'I came back pretty broke with no
pension, just living for the day.'
He then found work in the box office of the Cambridge Theatre, in London,
and then as a fund raiser for the London branch of the Samaritans. Within
five months, he was busy organising a ball at which the then relatively
obscure Dame Edna Everage was to star.
Then he had a heart attack. He was 29. After five weeks in hospital he made
an unsuccessful attempt to return to work, but had to abandon it. His
capital was now being eaten away, and he needed to look around for work.
He found it in the relative calm of the British Council. Here, in the early
1980s, he set up the council's first press office, and had an experience
which was to repeat itself at ENO: 'We had to change our policy from bashing
the government and go out and find some alternative money instead.'
He stayed at the British Council for 12 years, accumulating an enviable
Civil Service pension, and moving to a large house in London's Little
Venice. He also spent the years prior to 1987 piling into investment bonds
managed by Scottish Equitable, on the advice of Robert Noble-Warren.
'We had quite a dizzy time in the run-up to Black Monday. We didn't do too
badly, because we'd switched out of the worst sectors in time, so it wasn't
the disaster it could have been.'
In 1989, came the opportunity to move to the ENO. A longstanding
opera-lover, Mr Nickson had already been involved in raising substantial
corporate sponsorship for an ENO tour of the then Soviet Union backed by the
British Council.
He had no intention of turning the job down. But the move was dreadful for
his retirement prospects. He will still get a pension from the British
Council, but ENO has no pension scheme at all.
Since making the move, he has been putting the maximum allowable into
personal pensions.
These were first put into with-profits versions from Standard Life and
Scottish Equitable, and are now going into a Scottish Equitable unit-linked
pension run by Murray Noble, reflecting the company's concern with the state
of the with-profits market.
Now, all that remains is to put his all into the job.
His office, in a cramped house just around the corner from the entrance to
the Coliseum, is surrounded by practice rooms, and the voices of visiting
mezzo sopranos and contraltos reverberate through the walls. This is not
like most businesses.
'It's like a business to the extent that we have to be sensitive to the
market. But we have a subsidy to fulfil certain non-commercial objectives,
which are principally to make opera accessible to the widest possible
public.'
ENO has not been immune from the recession, with attendances down 15 per
cent from the peak in 1988-89, and increases in the government grant lower
than inflation.
But corporate sponsorship, usually tied to the hospitality facilities which
lurk in the Coliseum's winding corridors, is holding up. Sixteen of the last
19 ENO productions have been sponsored, by such companies as National Power,
United Airlines, Guinness, TSB and KPMG Management Consultants.
But, as the emotive on-stage appeal on behalf of Mr Broucek suggested - 'If
I don't appear to believe in what I'm representing, then why should people
support it?' - Mr Nickson has put the emphasis on raising more money from
opera-loving individuals. Donations from this source have risen from Pounds
190,000 three years ago to Pounds 550,000, despite the recession.
And what of the heart attack which nearly claimed his life before he was 30?
'It isn't something I think about at all. If you are lucky enough not to
have too much damage, you have got to turn your back on it and race for
life.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

930423

