FT933-12530

FT  23 JUL 93 / Old loyalties tested by price war: Philip Morris's efforts
to lure US smokers back to Marlboro country


   By MARTIN DICKSON and NIKKI TAIT


Phrases such as 'Black Monday' or 'White Wednesday' are normally reserved
for cataclysmic events in the financial markets. But Philip Morris's
decision to slash the price of its top-selling Marlboro cigarette brand by
almost 20 per cent has been accorded similar status.
April 2, the day on which the price was cut was announced, has entered the
history books as 'Marlboro Friday'.
There is good reason for this. For years Marlboro has been one of the
world's top brands, commanding more than a fifth of the Dollars 46bn (Pounds
31bn) US cigarette market. The price cut both created mayhem in the highly
profitable US cigarette market and jolted the whole consumer products
sector, where all brands suddenly seemed vulnerable to cheaper own-label or
generic alternatives.
After all, if penny-pinching consumers were willing to substitute 'discount'
smokes for a well marketed brand such as Marlboro, triggering widespread
price cutting, would they not do likewise with less renowned names?
Three months on, the dust from Marlboro Friday shows little sign of
settling. Philip Morris announced this week that the Marlboro price cut  -
previously presented as a temporary, market-testing move - was being made
permanent and extended to the rest of its premium brands, including Virginia
Slims and Benson & Hedges. Other manufacturers of premium brand cigarettes
will have to follow.
It also announced price changes in discount cigarettes, a market which was
virtually non-existent 10 years ago but now commands around 40 per cent of
total US cigarette sales.
Ironically, Philip Morris, a late entrant to the discount market, is now one
of the segment's leaders, with an estimated 33 per cent market share,
roughly the same as arch rival RJ Reynolds.
Philip Morris said it would be increasing the price of its cheapest brands
(so-called 'deep discounts') by around 6 cents a pack, and would formally
move its mid-range brands, which are already deeply discounted through trade
promotions, down to that level.
The result will be a two-tier price structure rather than a three-tier one
which, if it sticks, will be simpler for the consumer to understand and
cheaper for the company to administer.
The discount price increases are the latest in a series Philip Morris and RJ
Reynolds have pushed through since April, with the aim of narrowing the gap
between premium and cheap cigarettes to the point where consumer purchases
are guided more by perceptions of quality than by price. Marlboro, Philip
Morris reasons, will then regain ground, and its increased sales should help
offset the loss of profits from lower prices.
After the changes, the average retail price of a pack of discounted Philip
Morris cigarettes will be around Dollars 1.31 - roughly 45 cents lower than
a pack of Marlboro, selling for Dollars 1.70 to Dollars 1.80. Before April,
discount cigarettes could be a Dollars 1 or more cheaper than Marlboro's
Dollars 2.20 pack.
The new price structure is certainly helping Marlboro regain some lost
market share. Philip Morris produced figures this week from the independent
market research group Nielsen showing that an eight-month decline in the
brand's share of US cigarette sales, to 21.5 per cent in March, had been
sharply reversed. Its share rose to 22.6 per cent in May.
The company thinks that Marlboro's share may be up to around 24 per cent in
July - roughly what it was in May of last year - and that the price cuts are
adding 2 to 4 percentage points.
However, this does not mean all is hunky dory.
First, it seems that much of Marlboro's gain so far has come from other
premium brands, including Philip Morris's own. Mr Gary Black, an analyst at
Sanford C Bernstein, the US brokerage, reckons only about half of the
increase has come from discount brands, a figure which Philip Morris's
preliminary data seems broadly to support.
The corollary, says Mr Black, is that Marlboro is likely to lose around half
of its total market share gain since April, because consumers will revert to
other premium cigarettes as their prices are cut.
Second, it is far from certain that the 45 cents a pack price differential
between premium brands and discounts, which Philip Morris wants to impose on
the market, will stick.
Analysts suspect that smaller manufacturers of discount brands may cut
prices to maintain their share, creating a new, ultra-low price third tier.
At the very least, it is thought they will not follow Philip Morris's price
increases.
Little more than a month after Marlboro Friday, Liggett Group - a competitor
weakened by falling market shares and declining profits - launched a brand
called Eagle. This combines fairly attractive packaging and reasonable
quality with one of the lowest 'discount' prices.
Whatever the outcome, there can be little doubt that the profits of the US
industry will be depressed for the foreseeable future. With the US tobacco
market declining at a rate of around 2.5 per cent a year, the cuts seem
unlikely to push up demand.
Philip Morris reckons operating profits from its US tobacco business will be
about Dollars 3bn this year, a fall of more than 40 per cent. Second quarter
profits, announced this week, fell 53 per cent to Dollars 684m.
Mr Black forecasts that Philip Morris's US tobacco profits will dip by
Dollars 500m more next year to about Dollars 2.45bn, and that the US
industry as a whole could see 1994 profits down by Dollars 1bn.
This is before the uncertain effects of any decision by the Clinton
administration to raise federal excise taxes on tobacco products to pay for
its healthcare reform package, due out in the autumn.
The only consolation for Philip Morris is that its international tobacco
business is growing strongly - operating income was up 15 per cent to
Dollars 577m in the second quarter - as consumers in Third World countries
take up smoking.
Ironically, Marlboro remains a symbol of American affluence in developing
countries, just when financially strained US consumers have sent its owner
the message: 'We remain fairly loyal to your brand, but only if you keep
prices in line with the discount sector.' And that could still prove a
downward moving target.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930723

