FT934-10179

FT  06 NOV 93 / The Long View: Mutual admiration


   By BARRY RILEY


ARE YOU sure you really want to deposit so much money with us? my bank
somewhat surprisingly asked me this week. Or, to quote more precisely: 'If
you have more money in your account than you need, you could be paying a
high price for accessibility.'
The advice, needless to say, was not entirely disinterested but was the
lead-in to an offer of some kind of guaranteed stock market bond. Such
mailshots reflect the growing anxieties of deposit-taking institutions at a
time when their so-called high interest accounts are becoming vulnerable to
actions under the Trade Descriptions Act, and the money markets are
discounting at least a further half-point cut in sterling short-term
interest rates.
The flipside of this anxiety is the optimism of some of the longer-term
savings institutions, which I certainly noticed at the annual dinner of
Autif, the unit trust trade association, on Wednesday. British unit trusts
have booked net sales of Pounds 6.9bn in the first nine months of 1993,
already beating the previous 1987 annual record of Pounds 6.3bn (although
the 1993 total will have to reach almost Pounds 9bn to exceed the 1987
figure in real terms).
In any case you can argue that this is all rather small beer, and certainly
British unit trust companies are gazing with wonder across the Atlantic at
the extraordinary growth of their US equivalents, mutual funds. These have
set an example of vastly greater penetration of the savings market. One US
group alone, Fidelity, has close to Dollars 200bn in its stock and bond
funds, making it comfortably bigger on its own than the entire British unit
trust industry.
Over the past few years the shifts in the US savings market have been
enormous. In 1980 bank deposits and certificates of deposit accounted for 48
per cent of household financial assets, but that has now dropped to about 35
per cent, according to Jeffrey Schaefer of the Securities Industry
Association. There has been a switch into mutual funds, which are up from 2
to 13 per cent over the period, and also into tax-efficient municipal bonds.
The interesting thing is that although there is a strong tradition of direct
ownership of equities in the US (about 45 per cent of US equities are still
held by private individuals) the recent shift has been towards mutual funds.
Clearly these have been successfully marketed as providing an easy way of
holding stocks and bonds, and a natural alternative to deposit-based savings
as interest rates have tumbled. In fact the banks themselves are now selling
nearly 20 per cent of US mutual funds.
For a couple of years the flood of money into mutual funds was mopped up by
huge domestic new issue volumes but this year large amounts have been
spilling into international markets. For some fund groups, half the net
inflow is now into their specialist foreign funds.
Overall, American investors (of all kinds) bought Dollars 21.7bn of foreign
equities during the first half of the year, including almost Dollars 4bn
into so-called emerging markets, many of which not surprisingly have been
going crazy, with indices in Brazil, the Philippines and Indonesia all up by
two-thirds or more so far in 1993 in dollar terms. The impact of the mutual
funds has been reinforced by an urge by US pension funds for geographical
diversification.
In the UK the pressures on the savings market are less intense than in the
US, because interest rates are not yet so low, but building society savings
deposits have been growing only slowly this year. The role of unit trusts is
still comparatively small: Autif gives the value of funds under management
as Pounds 84bn, but official statistics suggest that only about half are
owned directly by individuals (the rest being in pension funds and life
assurance portfolios). For comparison, savers have Pounds 250bn in
interest-bearing deposit accounts. Still, the unit trust figure is growing
quite fast, and the latest statistics suggest that the personal sector has
also slowed down (and perhaps reversed) its regular net selling of
directly-owned equities, which are worth about Pounds 160bn.
The really big opportunity for savings institutions in the UK, however, may
not be in equity-based products but in income funds based upon bonds. This
change in emphasis has already happened in the US mutual funds industry,
where bond funds at Dollars 725bn are bigger in total than equity funds at
Dollars 620bn. In the UK bond and mixed funds account for only about 5 per
cent of the unit trust aggregate, a figure that should rise substantially as
investors progressively switch out of deposit accounts (although the banks
and building societies, as I found in my junk mail this week, are devising
defensive strategies).
Quite possibly the prospect of the disruption of the retail deposit base of
banks and building societies is one reason why the Bank of England is so
cautious about further falls in sterling interest rates. The problem about
the expansion of mutual funds as a savings medium is that they can be so
volatile (in 1988, flows into US equity mutual funds were negative).
Moreover, small investors can easily panic in a crisis, and mutual funds
promise them almost instant liquidity. What happens if the punters in Boise
and Baltimore want their money out of Indonesia straightaway? There can be
panic withdrawals from deposit-taking institutions too, but the regulators
believe they know how to handle those. After this week's stock market upsets
the nerves of mutual fund investors, and perhaps those of regulators too,
are being tested.
In the long run, securities-based investments, like unit trusts, offer a
higher return than deposits, but savers need a different approach. It is
better to accept a low interest rate than suffer a capital loss. Although
various kinds of guaranteed products exist, they usually involve locking
your money away for a period such as five years. Accessibility may be
increasingly costly, but when the Footsie Index can dive 60 points in a day
it can be a price worth paying.

The Financial Times


London Page I

931106

