FT932-59

FT  30 JUN 93 / International Bonds: World Bank Y225bn global issue offers
broad appeal


   By SARA WEBB


THE WORLD BANK turned heads with the launch of its giant Y225bn global bond
deal yesterday. The seven-year bond issue has been much talked about in the
market and is expected to appeal to a broad range of international investors
 -who want to enjoy the benefit of further currency appreciation - as well
as Japanese investors hoping that a further interest rate cut will trigger a
rally in Japanese government bonds and other yen-denominated issues.
Daiwa Europe, Goldman Sachs, and IBJ International, the three joint
lead-managers, yesterday boasted that their 60 per cent allocation of the
deal was already 'placed and substantially oversold'. Other houses generally
praised the indicated pricing for the deal but said that, given the sheer
size, it might take a while to place all of the paper.
Yesterday's offering is the World Bank's fourth global yen deal. It already
has a five-year issue and two 10-year deals behind it but was keen to tap
the seven-year area given the shortage of paper in this maturity. Dealers
predict the issue will become an important seven-year benchmark.
The yen has been appreciating steadily against the US dollar in recent
months, moving from Y126 to the dollar at the beginning of the year to
Y105.32 on June 14. Since then, it has moved back to around Y111 - Y112 on
political jitters, but subsequently strengthened again to reach Y107 to the
dollar yesterday.
Several houses predict that the yen has further to appreciate, and some are
pointing to a trading range of Y90 to Y110. 'There is a belief that the yen
could go to 100 to the dollar, so international investors are looking for
currency appreciation,' said Mr Denis Kelleher of Daiwa Europe.
Meanwhile, Japanese investors are expected to be drawn by the prospect of a
cut in the official discount rate, possibly after the election if the
economy shows no sign of picking up, dealers said.
'There are some very large tickets in Tokyo: they are looking for a
reasonably liquid asset, which is tradeable around-the-clock, with some
pick-up over the JGB,' said one dealer.
The bonds will be priced today with an indicated yield spread of 11 - 13
basis points over the JGB No 129. In the secondary market, the World Bank's
five-year bond deal is trading at a yield spread of around 26 basis points
over the JGB No 105 while the 10-year issue is about 18 basis points over
the JGB No 145.
Aside from the World Bank's deal, the international bond market saw a couple
of smallish Euroyen deals - from Osaka Gas and Korea Development Bank - and
a handful of Eurodollar issues, including a Dollars 350m, five-year deal
from Tokyo Gas Co.
Japanese utilities have been flocking to the market, lured by the relatively
attractive pricing and the longer maturities available.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

930630

