FT932-250

FT  30 JUN 93 / Vigilante tactics forced on shops, says Dixons chief


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


BRITISH shopkeepers have been forced to adopt vigilante tactics to stem a
rising tide of property crime, according to Mr Stanley Kalms, chairman of
the Dixons Group, the UK's largest electrical retailing chain.
Mr Kalms told a conference held yesterday by the Social Market Foundation,
an independent think-tank, that Dixons had turned its stores into 'heavily
built fortresses' and employed a private security army to fend off thefts,
hijackings and ram-raider attacks which had cost the group Pounds 20m last
year.
He said Dixons had taken action to deal with squatters who moved into empty
stores and used them to sell stolen goods. Since the law appeared to have no
answer to shop squatting: 'We send the heavies in early in the morning and
turf them out,' he said.
The group's losses would have been much higher but for preventive measures
taken which blocked eight out of nine attempted break-ins. Yet Dixons alone
recorded more than 10,000 incidents of theft, violence and fraud last year.
On the day after the government published a white paper on reorganising
Britain's police, Mr Kalms said the police had increasingly become 'only a
data-collecting agency'. Although police resources had risen, the increase
did not match the explosion in crime. 'The police are no longer a force for
detection and prosecution of crime against property,' he said.
With all the high street stores building their own security forces, it was
inevitable that they would group together. Although it would be opposed by
the police, they should be given 'some sort of semi-official status', Mr
Kalms said. 'To avoid emotive discussion, we need to legitimise the meaning
of vigilantism.'
Mr Kalms said the lawmakers had not reacted quickly to new types of crime
such as ram-raiding and the use of car-boot sales to dispose of stolen
property.
Squatter shops had moved into empty high street property to sell stolen
goods without paying rent, rates or value added tax. Free of overheads,
trading regulations and health and safety standards, they undercut
legitimate stores such as Dixons.
Mr Kalms called for an independent commission to focus on crime 'with rights
to monitor, investigate and instigate' law changes using a 'fast track'
procedure. He also wanted more safety zones in shopping centres, which would
be closed to traffic at night and have bollards to stop ram-raiding.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930630

