FT932-13322

FT  23 APR 93 / International Company News: Carrier's crucial timetable for
recovery - James Whittington reports on Middle East Airlines' struggle to
return to profitability


   By JAMES WHITTINGTON


LEBANON'S Middle East Airlines (MEA), once a successful carrier, has during
the past 15 years been associated only with hijackings and terrorism.
Severely affected by the protracted fighting and repeated closures of Beirut
International Airport during Lebanon's civil war, the privately-owned
carrier was frequently victim of hijacking militias seeking international
exposure.
Now hostilities are over and the government led by Saudi-Lebanese prime
minister Mr Rafik Al Hariri is determined to rebuild the country. As a
consequence, MEA is looking to regain some of its former status.
Mr Abdel Hamid Fakhoury, appointed the airline's chairman in June last year
and reportedly close to Lebanese President Elias Hrawi, says: 'We are in a
period of transition. During the war, our main policy was that of survival.
We had to continue. Having survived, we can now look at building on what we
have.'
With a low level of debt of about Dollars 50m, Mr Fakhoury says that the
airline's 'conservative policy' during the war has paid off. Its fleet
remains substantially the same as that in 1975, with three Boeing 747s and
eleven Boeing 707s. In 1992, it leased two Airbus A310-200s from KLM Royal
Dutch Airlines. This contract runs for three years and grants MEA the option
to buy the aircraft.
Despite a 28 per cent reduction in the number of employees in 1981, MEA is
still the biggest private employer in the country, with 3,873 staff.
The carrier's ownership is split between the majority state-owned Intra
Investment Company, which has a 62 per cent stake, and Air France which owns
28 per cent. The remaining 10 per cent is half owned by employees and half
by Lebanese investors. Shareholders in Intra include Lebanon's central bank,
the National Bank of Kuwait, and the governments of Qatar and Kuwait.
MEA services 37 destinations in Europe, Africa and the Middle East. Last
year, it carried 701,805 passengers, which compares with more than 1.1m in
1975 when Lebanon attracted peak numbers of tourists. Unprofitable flights
to Ankara and Dacca have recently been stopped and the airline's overall net
losses last year were cut to Dollars 5.2m, from Dollars 10m in 1991.
Having suffered accumulated losses of more than Dollars 200m since 1976, Mr
Fakhoury is confident that the airline's lossmaking days are over. 'We hope
to break even this year for the first time since 1975,' he says.
His confidence is reflected by a high level of business optimism in Beirut.
Mr Al Hariri, who is himself a dollar billionaire, seems to have instilled
faith among the Lebanese business community and with foreign aid now
starting to flow into Beirut's reconstruction programme, the city is
beginning to shake off its image as one of the most dangerous places in the
world.
As an indication of this, the Arab Aircraft Carrier Organisation (AACO)
decided to return its headquarters to Beirut at its annual conference
earlier this month.
Mr Fakhoury explains that MEA's policy is firstly to serve the large number
of Lebanese expatriates scattered around the world, and secondly to
recapture the booming tourist trade of the 1960s and early 1970s.
A central objective of the airline's comeback strategy is to regain its
routes to the US. These were stopped in June 1985 after a TWA airliner on an
Athens-Rome flight was hijacked by members of Hizbollah, the Islamic
fundamentalist group, and ordered to fly to Beirut.
Mr Fakhoury says: 'There is continual dialogue between our government and
the US, but so far the response has been, 'give it more time'.' MEA hopes
that when the US rescinds the ban, other important routes will be granted,
such as one to Canada and Australia.
'One of the basic characteristics of this country is that we have a large
number of Lebanese spread all over the world. MEA could make profits on this
market alone, if we are given access to them,' he says.
In anticipation of increased passenger traffic, the government plans to
expand the state-owned Beirut International Airport. Modernisation of the
airport's facilities is already under way. Having been frozen for most of
the past 18 years by the civil war, much of the airport's aviation
technology is out of date.
Plans for expansion include a terminal capable of handling a flow of 6m
passengers a year and a third 3,500-metre runway. In 1992, 21 foreign
airlines used the airport, including Air France, KLM and Alitalia, and the
airport handled about 1m passengers. Tourist traffic today, however,
according to Mr Fakhoury, is negligible.
Funds required to rehabilitate and develop the airport will be allocated by
Lebanon's Council of Development and Reconstruction (CDR), charged by the
government to oversee the reconstruction of the country.
The CDR is seeking Dollars 5bn in foreign aid and private investment for the
reconstruction of Beirut city, including the airport. 'If finance is
forthcoming, development should take no more than two years,' says Mr
Fakhoury.
MEA's future hinges on whether this timescale can be met and this depends on
Mr Hariri's ability to deliver. The government faces a Herculean challenge
in its plans for reconstruction and stabilising an economy awash with
corruption, unemployment, poverty and mismanagement.
The country's politics remain volatile, and regional stability is far from
guaranteed. While MEA attempts to improve its tarnished image abroad, many
potential passengers are likely to wait and see before booking a flight.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930423

