FT932-3227

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Company News: Caisse de Depot buys further 22%
of Univa


   By ROBERT GIBBENS


   MONTREAL


CAISSE de Depot, which manages Quebec's public pension funds, is buying 22.5
per cent of Univa, Canada's second biggest food distributor.
It is buying the shares from Mr Bertin Nadeau, a Montreal entrepreneur, for
CDollars 171m (USDollars 134m). The deal increases Caisse's shareholding in
Univa to 36 per cent, including shares it already owns. However, it is
looking for an investor group to buy part of this.
Caisse is paying CDollars 8.50 a share, or slightly more than the recent
stock market level. It is not required to make a follow-up offer. Mr Nadeau,
through his Unigesco holding company, owned 26 per cent of Univa. He was the
biggest single shareholder and was chairman of the Univa board.
Including 2.2m Univa shares that Unigesco is transferring to the Ontario
Teachers Pension Board to satisfy a CDollars 25m debenture exchange option,
Mr Nadeau is effectively receiving CDollars 196m. He will use the proceeds
to meet Unigesco debt payments due over the next year.
In February New York investment bankers Blackstone Group offered CDollars 11
each for all Univa's shares in a takeover worth around CDollars 1bn. This
was withdrawn following opposition from the Caisse.
E. M. Warburg Pincus, another New York investment group, also bid CDollars
8.85 a share for Mr Nadeau's 26 per cent, but withdrew at the last moment.
Laurentian, the financial services group, has negotiated a CDollars 130m
five-year line of credit with National Bank of Canada, National Westminster
Canada, and Credit Lyonnais Canada to be used partly to repay a CDollars 70m
preferred issue.
BCE, Canada's biggest telecommunications group, is selling BABN, an
international lottery ticket manufacturer, to one of Canada's
fastest-growing commercial printers for CDollars 47m. The disposal completes
nearly all BCE's divestment of non-telecom activities.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930615

