FT933-5321

FT  03 SEP 93 / Money Markets: Belgian futures crash


   By JAMES BLITZ


BELGIAN interest rate futures contracts crashed yesterday after the
country's central bank surprised dealers by raising all of its major
short-term interest rates to defend its currency, writes James Blitz.
The Belgian authorities yesterday lifted their emergency rate from 13 per
cent to 14 per cent and their discount rate from 6 per cent to 7 per cent.
Although dealers had anticipated a slow policy of rate cutting, few had
expected an immediate rise in the country's interest rates.
The impact was felt sharply in the September Belgian franc contract, which
dropped 156 basis points to finish at 87.80 as dealers revised their
expectations.
The December contract was down 80 basis points at a closing 91.70. However,
over-night rates in the cash market responded more modestly, peaking at 15
per cent.
The Belgian interest rate futures market is small, but yesterday's events
rebounded on France, where dealers wondered whether the author-ities would
also adopt a very tight policy on rates.
The Bank of France left its intervention rate unchanged at its regular
Thursday inter-vention. But with the French franc coming under pressure
against the D-Mark on currency markets, dealers wondered whether the
authorities had missed the chance to ease policy. The September contract was
down 10 basis points at 92.74.
In the sterling cash market, there was deep dismay among some dealers about
the volatility in the overnight rate in recent days.
Yesterday, a shortage of Pounds 1.95bn was mostly removed in the early round
of trading, with banks selling a repo worth Pounds 1.7bn. The overnight rate
therefore tumbled from 7 per cent to 2 per cent in the morning. Three-month
cash eased to 5 7/8 per cent.
This was an extraordinary contrast with Wednesday's events, when most of a
Pounds 1.7bn shortage was not removed and the overnight rate touched 8 per
cent.
Two bank dealers regarded this as one of the most stark examples yet of how
sterling cash markets are dominated by one or two clearing banks for the
purposes of their own liquidity management. 'All the discount houses
together could not remove a shortage like today's,' said one discount house
dealer. 'It makes a mockery of London as a financial centre.'

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930903

