FT934-10107

FT  06 NOV 93 / Arts: Pletnyev plays Tchaikovsky


   By MAX LOPPERT


MIKHAIL Pletnyev's contribution to the Wigmore Hall's current Tchaikovsky
Centenary Festival was a recital of the highest quality, a sustained feat of
exquisitely finished pianistic display and musicianly sympathy. Anniversary
celebrations are only ever truly valuable when they shed new light on their
principal subject. This was certainly the case with Thursday's performance
of The Seasons, Tchaikovsky's 12-movement 'calendar' of pianistic
miniatures: no-one hearing Pletnyev's traversal of the suite will ever be
tempted to dismiss it as mere salon-music.
Up to now received opinion has rated The Seasons exactly thus - a chore
discharged by the composer during the supposedly barren year of 1876.
Pletnyev seemed to take it as his mission to demonstrate how much of
echt-Tchaikovskyan inspiration can be discovered in the simple forms,
melodies and rhythmic patterns of these small scenes pittoresques.
He did this not by any act of special pleading - the Schumann-esque
intimacies of 'January (At the Fireside)' and 'May (May Nights)' were
uttered with the utmost reserve, the folk-musical images of 'July (Song of
the Reaper)' and 'September (The Hunt)' recorded with strict technical
brilliance - but by conveying complete imaginative grasp of purpose and
direction in the placing of every note.
This was truly aristocratic interpretation, with the confidence to step back
from both the music itself and the fine detail of its execution. It can only
ever come about when absolute technical authority is married to artistic
maturity; and Pletnyev, winner of the 1978 Tchaikovsky Competition, has
plainly achieved that marriage. From the first his playing was remarkable
for its control, polish and 'school'; but now grace and fantasy have been
added to those qualities, and his place in the constellation of Russian
pianists has never seemed more assured.
A first half of Mozart (which would have delighted Tchaikovsky, that most
passionate of 19th-century Mozartians) was full of hushed savourings of
melody, inspired bendings of rhythm: an altogether 'personal' approach
triumphantly justified by the sheen and limpidity of every phrase.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931106

