FT932-6647

FT  27 MAY 93 / Daimler-Benz sales decline by 20% in first four months


   By DAVID WALLER


   STUTTGART


SALES at Daimler-Benz, Germany's biggest industrial company, fell by nearly
20 per cent in the first four months of the year to DM26bn (Pounds 10.3bn)
the group's chief executive told shareholders at yesterday's annual general
meeting.
Earlier this month Daimler reported first-quarter net profits of just DM20m,
down from DM480m in the same period last year. For the first three months
sales were down 19 per cent to DM18.4bn.
Yesterday's figure shows that business conditions for the group have
deteriorated further during May but Mr Edzard Reuter, chairman, voiced a
degree of confidence about the outcome for the full year.
Without repeating the forecast that net profits would reach DM1bn - after
DM1.45bn last year - Mr Reuter said the group would strive to maintain a
dividend payout of DM13 for 1993 as well as 1992, even if it meant dipping
into reserves in order to be able to do so.
The main source of the downturn in sales in the first third of the year were
developments at the the Mercedes-Benz luxury car subsidiary.
But although sales in the group's most important subsidiary fell 24 per cent
in the first three months, Mr Reuter predicted that for the year as whole
they would be at around the same level as 1992 when they reached DM66.5bn.
The impetus to sales was likely to come from the introduction of the C-class
Mercedes scheduled for June this year.
Commenting on the circumstances leading up to Daimler's decision to abandon
Mercedes Holding (MAH), the holding company set up in 1975 to prevent the
Shah of Iran from taking a large stake in the group, Mr Reuter acknowledged
that Daimler had been rushed into making an announcement of its plans on
April 2. The plan had been to break the news at the annual meeting. He said
disbanding the holding structure would show Daimler no longer 'needs a
shield against hostile takeover'.
Mr Franz Steinkuhler, who resigned as head of the powerful IG Metall union
on Tuesday this week after the disclosure of his dealings in MAH shares
ahead of the announcement, came in for heavy criticism at the meeting.
Shareholders condemn Steinkuhler, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930527

