FT934-8850

FT  13 NOV 93 / Taiwan in a quandary on hijackings


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


IT WAS the third hijacking in a week, and the seventh this year of a Chinese
airliner to Taiwan.
When an MD-82 Northern China Airlines jet was hijacked to Taipei yesterday
with 82 passengers on board it underlined yet again problems of lax security
and safety standards on Chinese aircraft.
The epidemic of hijackings is not only causing huge embarrassment to the
Chinese aviation authorities, it is also threatening fragile co-operation on
a range of issues across the Taiwan strait.
Mr Jason Hu, the Taiwan government spokesman, expressed the hope after an
aircraft was hijacked on November 5, that 'Beijing will take effective steps
to prevent a recurrence of such incidents.' Seven days and two hijackings
later, Mr Hu's remarks appear like so much crying in an aircraft's
slipstream. Chinese official undertakings to combat air piracy have come to
little.
This latest rash of hijackings coincided with talks on the island of Xiamen
between Chinese and Taiwanese representatives on ways to deal with air
piracy and other criminal activities.
Among the most contentious issues is Beijing's demand that Taiwan return the
hijackers to stand trial. Taipei is insisting on prosecuting the air pirates
itself until an accord can be worked out with China to facilitate their
return.
In recent cases tried in Taiwan, hijackers received sentences of 10 years,
much less severe than those likely on the mainland where hijacking is
punishable by death.
And so the pattern continues. An aircraft is hijacked to Taiwan; the
offenders surrender without fuss on arrival in Taiwan.
The hijackers, on their arrest, exhibit little remorse at the prospect of
cooling their heels in a Taiwan jail.
'For us ordinary folk living on the mainland who want to come to Taiwan, we
can't think of any methods other than hijacking,' said Wang Jihua, a factory
worker who hijacked an aeroplane to Taiwan earlier this week.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931113

