FT934-8914

FT  12 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: A spanner in the cocoa cycle -
Indonesia is at odds with older producers


   By WILLIAM KEELING


THERE IS no doubting the enthusiasm of cocoa experts for their industry.
During a half-hour 'cocoa break' at last month's International Conference on
Cocoa Economy in Bali an excited delegate was seen grasping a waitress. 'Is
this made from fermented or non-fermented Sulawesi beans?' he asked,
pointing to his hot drink.
Such eagerness may finally be rewarded with the industry climbing away from
a 10-year crisis of declining prices and over-production. Marking an
important shift, world consumption of 2.44m tonnes in 1992-93 outstripped
production and the past few months have seen a 25 per cent rise in world
prices to nearly Pounds 1,000 a tonne. With the cycle turning, prices are
likely to go higher and Mr S. Wateridge, economist at ED & F. Man, the UK
commodity trading house, forecasts that cocoa prices will reach Pounds 1,400
a tonne within the next 18 months.
Softening the effect of the world production shortfall has been the recent
decision of the International Cocoa Organisation (ICCO) to sell down its
230,000 tonne buffer stock over five years. Mr Wateridge believes, however,
that the industry has 'effectively moved from a period of structural surplus
to structural deficit, (which) can only be eliminated by higher prices'.
Such talk has excited the interest of speculators who can see that today's
cocoa prices in real terms are less than a fifth of their 1978-79 peak. They
have been encouraged by forecasts of a continuing rise in world consumption
set against a projected decline in output from the Ivory Coast and Brazil,
two leading producers.
Cocoa's history of volatile prices may not be repeated, however. Almost
certain to spoil the speculators' party is Indonesia, where surging
production will balance declines elsewhere. The likely result is a low
ceiling on the current up-turn in world prices.
While the production of most cocoa nations has stagnated, Indonesia's has
risen from 7,000 tonnes in 1980 to 180,000 tonnes last year. Analysts say
the country will add 40,000 tonnes each year until the year 2000. Such
forecasts, however, are based on poor information, particularly regarding
the planted area of cocoa in Indonesia likely to enter production within
five years.
A weak statistical base has made a mockery of the ICCO's recent forecasts.
In January, the organisation said Malaysia and Indonesia would each lift
production by 50 per cent between 1991 and 1997 to 315,000 tonnes and
320,000 tonnes respectively. Ten months later, it has put Malaysia's 1997-98
production at 258,000 tonnes and Indonesia's at 463,000 tonnes. 'These huge
differences . . . clearly highlight the need to improve statistical
transparency on tree-stocks,' suggests Mr Henri Jason, senior ICCO
economist. Greater transparency, however, is unlikely.  Indonesia and
Malaysia are not members of the ICCO and have been conspicuously slow to
endorse the organisation's proposal to limit production to raise prices.
The conference highlighted a sharp divide between traditional producers in
Latin America and Africa, and relative newcomers in south-east Asia. Whereas
the low world price may be exacerbating the problems of the already poor
farmers in countries such as the Ivory Coast and Nigeria, in Indonesia cocoa
is seen as a means of alleviating rural poverty.
Behind the divide are varying levels of productivity in each country. The
Food and Agricultural Organisation estimates that in 1989-1991, the average
yield per hectare in African countries was 380 kg, compared with 779 kg in
Malaysia and 1,177 kg in Indonesia. As a result, cocoa is remunerative for
most farmers in south-east Asia but not in Africa. The answer would be for
African and Latin American countries to raise productivity, but there are
factors militating against this. Their plantations are older and less
productive, and their governments are removing subsidies from inputs such as
fertiliser as part of World Bank programmes.
While less productive countries would like higher prices, this depends
largely on Indonesia agreeing to limit its output. An agreement excluding
Indonesia would most probably only worsen the plight of African and Latin
American cocoa producers. As Mr Mario Amin, a Brazilian cocoa economist,
pointed out: 'In order to improve market prices, some short-term actions
have to be taken by the whole group (of cocoa producers) and not just in an
individualistic manner'.
Few of the conference delegates, however, expected Indonesia to act against
its interests. As Mr Wateridge explained, 'the other producers are their
(the Indonesians') rivals, not their partners', and if Indonesia is content
with current prices, there is little other producers can do.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

931112

