FT932-3393

FT  15 JUN 93 / Long wait in prospect for German SEC


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


THE long-awaited federal regulatory body for the German securities industry
is unlikely to be fully operational before 1995 or even 1996, the government
minister responsible for policing Germany's largest stock market warned
yesterday.
Mr Ernst Welteke, economics minister for the state of Hesse, said in
Frankfurt yesterday that he expected the legislation to create the German
equivalent of the US Securities and Exchange Commission, and to make insider
dealing illegal, would be on the statute book in the first quarter of next
year.
But, he cautioned, it could take up to two years after that for the new body
to recruit its full complement of up to 100 staff and be in a position to
undertake its tasks, including the monitoring of insider dealing.
Mr Welteke's observations highlight the slow pace of change in the
regulatory environment in Germany - a slowness which is all the more marked
because of German financiers' growing recognition that it is in the
interests of Finanzplatz Deutschland, the promotion of Germany as a
financial centre, to bring regulations up to international standards as
quickly as possible.
This feeling has intensified in recent weeks following the downfall of Mr
Franz Steinkuhler, the former head of IG Metall, the powerful engineering
union. He was forced to resign from the union after it emerged that he had
dealt in the shares of a Daimler-Benz holding company ahead of a price
sensitive announcement while serving as a member of the Daimler-Benz
supervisory board.
Mr Steinkuhler's dealings in the shares of Mercedes Holding are being
investigated by the insider dealing unit of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. He
has denied insider dealing but his case has brought popular attention to the
lack of insider laws in Germany.
'The current sanctions against insider dealing are minimal,' Mr Welteke
said. 'They are not at all enough. At the moment it is just a matter of
commonsense that you don't do it - or at least you don't let yourself get
caught.'
Mr Welteke, whose ministry is responsible for overseeing the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange, which conducts 70 per cent of securities business in Germany,
called yesterday's briefing to explain measures which the state of Hesse has
taken to strengthen its regulatory activities ahead of the introduction of
the new laws.
The German government had intended to criminalise insider dealing and to
create the German SEC by the end of 1992. But disputes between federal and
state governments have led to serious delays in the implementation of
reforms first proposed by Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, in January
last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930615

