FT932-6795

FT  27 MAY 93 / World Trade News: Companies make offers to settle US steel
trade cases


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


TEN governments and steel companies have submitted proposals to the US
Commerce Department to settle 34 'unfair' trade cases in the hope of
escaping punitive American tariffs on their flat-rolled steel exports.
This is the first sign that the cases could be settled with 'voluntary'
limits on steel trade like those agreed with the US during the 1980s. The
previous Bush administration vowed not to resort to what are essentially
steel quotas.
Instead, Mr Bush said he would stand back from the 'quasi-judicial' process
under which tariffs can be levied on products judged to be subsidised by
their governments or dumped at 'less than fair market value'. The Clinton
administration has indicated no change in steel policy.
The Commerce Department now has until midnight on June 21 to negotiate these
proposed 'suspension agreements' and to rule on 52 other dumping and
countervailing duty cases filed last year by the US steel industry. Trade
officials have indicated that suspension agreements would only be
satisfactory to the US producers if they included guaranteed price floors.
Countries whose governments or steel producers submitted proposed suspension
deals are: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Finland, Germany, Mexico,
Sweden, Poland and New Zealand.
Missing from the list are some of the biggest suppliers in Japan, Canada,
the UK, France, and Italy.
A Commerce official said the US would not consider settlement of the 34
cases unless the 'unfair trade practice' or its impact on US producers was
eliminated. No deal will be acceptable unless it is 'as advantageous as the
completion of the government's subsidy and dumping investigations'.
After June 21, the remaining cases must go to the US International Trade
Commission which determines if there has been injury. If cases drop out of
the process - through settlement or a rare finding that subsidies and
dumping have not taken place - the ITC commissioners could find it more
difficult to return an injury finding.
With three Democrats and three Republicans on the commission, the ITC is now
believed to be more inclined to rule for domestic producers.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930527

