FT932-13492

FT  23 APR 93 / Republicans' lesson in respect trips up Clinton: The
president is struggling to hit his stride


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton declared himself disappointed but not disheartened at
his first big legislative defeat, after being forced to abandon all but a
fragment of the Dollars 16bn (Pounds 10.3bn) spending package he had called
for to stimulate the economy.
The setback is unlikely to prove devastating for Mr Clinton's presidency;
indeed, it is in some ways more of a rebuke to Senator Robert Byrd's
management of the bill, which showed more parliamentary virtuosity than
tact.
The point made by the Republican minority in the Senate, which prevented the
stimulus bill from coming to a vote through what amounted to a filibuster,
was about street credibility rather than economic policy. They wanted some
respect, and their success does not necessarily mean they will be able, or
willing, to block the rest of Mr Clinton's economic programme.
But the setback comes at a time when Mr Clinton appears to have lost much of
his early momentum and to be struggling to hit his stride.
He has not yet taken full control of the machinery of government - at least
partly because of his slowness in making appointments - and now has been
unable to shake off the largely unfair charge that he has been impotent or
ineffectual in the face of quandaries as different as the siege in Waco and
the civil war in Bosnia.
The president faces a testing time over the next few months when Congress
wrestles first with the details of his five-year economic package, and then
with the reform of the healthcare system now being prepared.
While Congress has already passed a budget resolution fixing the totals for
spending and taxation, the door is opening ever wider for changes to the
detailed measures Mr Clinton has proposed.
Congressman Dan Rostenkowski, who as chairman of the House ways and means
committee presides over all tax legislation, this week advised Mr Clinton to
drop a proposed investment tax credit, which many members of Congress have
criticised as merely bringing forward investments that were going to take
place in any case.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, Treasury secretary, has admitted he has a 'hunch' that
Congress will alter the new energy tax, which is one of the pillars of the
administration's revenue-raising proposals.
Many Democrats in the House of Representatives had at first been willing to
take Mr Clinton at his word and pass his proposals as a whole, swallowing
their concern over particular components.
That willingness is fast evaporating as members observe that the Senate is
not showing the same discipline.
Mr Clinton first gave in to western senators and backed away from increases
in fees for grazing and mining on federal land. Now he has been forced to
abandon most of his stimulus bill.
'I don't see how the president at this point can say no to compromise when
he is doing that over on the Senate side in the stimulus package,' Mr
Rostenkowski said.
Some of this reflects Congress's tradition of swiftly abandoning any ship
that shows the slightest signs of taking on water. But it also shows that
some members are learning a lesson cited by some of Mr Clinton's critics in
his home state of Arkansas: if you want something from Mr Clinton, you can
get more by opposing him than by working with him.
Certainly the White House's attempts to punish Democratic Senator Richard
Shelby of Alabama for breaking party ranks over the budget and the stimulus
bill have been pitiful and wholly unsuccessful.
Another home-state criticism was that Mr Clinton was better at campaigning
than at governing; that remains to be seen, but the president has some
catching up to do if he wants to prove his fellow Arkansans wrong.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930423

