FT934-10099

FT  06 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Business Expansion Scheme


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


PEOPLE investing in the BES and enterprise zone trusts are being warned to
choose carefully, writes Scheherazade Daneshkhu. The BES is being abolished
at the end of December while EZTs are coming to the end of their 10-year
span. David Major, personal tax partner with accountant Touche Ross, says:
'We are seeing an avalanche of schemes being marketed on the basis that
people should rush to take advantage of them while stocks last. Some look
very doubtful.'
The warning comes after Matrix Securities failed to get tax clearance for
South Quay, its Pounds 95m London Docklands EZT, after a High Court hearing
two weeks ago. It also lost in the Court of Appeal this week but will appeal
to the House of Lords on November 15. Major says: 'Be very careful before
committing yourself to any scheme, the attractiveness of which lies in
clever tax planning rather than its investment potential.'
The choice for BES investors remains wide. Nationwide building society is
seeking to offload some of its repossessed properties with the launch of
Nationwide Premier, sponsored jointly with Merrill Lynch, the investment
bank. The scheme aims to raise Pounds 30m and investors can choose a fixed
return of 121p after five years for every 100p invested, equating to a
compound annual return of 14.3 per cent for a higher-rate taxpayer.
Alternatively, they can opt for a return after five years of 60p for every
100p invested, plus 1.2p for every 1 per cent rise in the FT-SE 100.
The difference with other schemes linked to the FT-SE is that the return
will be calculated from the level on the start date to the highest closing
level during the five years, thereby locking-in the highest point. The index
would have to rise by 51 per cent in order to beat the fixed return. Minimum
investment is Pounds 2,000.
An industry analyst, the Allenbridge group*, recommends the fixed return as
'a first-class cash backed deal' with 'excellent security and a highly
competitive return.' It terms the FT-SE linked option 'good security' but
says the gearing level is less than can be obtained on some other deals.
BESSA Lincoln College, sponsored by Close Brothers, has a cash-backed,
arranged exit price of 120p, or a return of 80p plus an extra figure which
rises in line with interest rates.
Sponsor Neill Clerk has launched four cash-backed university issues. The
exit price on Second Glamorgan and Third Oxford Isis Residences is 122p. The
latter also has a Footsie-linked option of 60p, plus 2.5p for every 1 per
cent rise in the index (up to a maximum of 160p), with a lock-in after a
rise of 25 per cent.
St Anne's Residences and Derby Student Halls both offer a fixed exit price
of 120p, or 2.5p for every 1 per cent rise in the FT-SE 100 with the same
lock-in and cap.
The fixed exit price on the Fourteenth Johnson Fry Super Growth scheme is
120p. Johnson Fry's N&P Loan Back Plus scheme has a minimum exit price of
117p, provided through a non-status and non-recourse loan from N&P, but
carries the potential for more depending on how the property market
performs.
New trading issues include the chance to invest in Ealing Studios, the
film-maker; Cafe Poppy, a London brasserie chain; and Smiles Traditional
Inns (its first issue was over-subscribed in July).
Further details are obtainable from Allenbridge; for a free copy of its
guide to the BES call 071-409 1111.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

931106

