FT934-11637

FT  30 OCT 93 / Warehouses disturb the retail club: The effect of US-style
shopping on supermarkets


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


BRITAIN'S retailers are bracing themselves for the arrival of warehouse
clubs after a High Court ruling on Wednesday gave the go-ahead to the UK's
first such development in Thurrock, Essex.
The UK's three biggest supermarket chains, J Sainsbury, Safeway and Tesco,
asked the court to quash planning permission granted to Costco, the US
warehouse club operator. They argued that the project should have been
assessed as a retail rather than a wholesale operation, and so have been
subjected to tougher planning controls.
Mr Justice Schiemann rejected the supermarkets' application, clearing the
way for Costco to open the club on November 30. Costco has two other
projects under way, while Nurdin & Peacock, the UK cash-and-carry operator,
is building two warehouse outlets and Littlewoods, the department store
chain, has a joint venture with Price Club of Canada to open a warehouse
club in Liverpool.
But while warehouse clubs are expected to expand quickly in the UK they seem
unlikely to 'revolutionise' UK retailing. It has also become apparent that
Wednesday's ruling has not ended the debate about whether warehouse clubs
should be treated as retailers or wholesalers. The supermarket chains are
still considering further legal action.
Warehouse clubs have been the fastest-growing form of selling in the US for
the past 10 years, achieving sales of Dollars 34bn (Pounds 22.5bn) last
year.
The clubs are huge out-of-town warehouses selling a selection of goods at
prices 25 per cent or more below the high street. But they sell in bulk,
only to fee-paying members.
Warehouse clubs undoubtedly offer big savings, but there are several factors
which suggest their impact in the UK may be limited. One is that there is no
evidence that UK shoppers will be as willing as US counterparts to drive
long distances to shop, or buy in bulk, even though it has become
commonplace for retailers to talk of a growing price-sensitivity among
British consumers.
Many bargain-hunters may find their desire for lower prices satisfied by
fast-expanding high-street discounters such as Kwik Save and Shoprite,
without the need to travel to warehouse clubs.
While clubs' ranges stretch from mincemeat to motor lawnmowers they offer
only 3,500 product lines, compared with about 16,000 in a typical
grocery-only superstore.
The clubs are not open to everyone - and that was the basis for the court
ruling. Mr Justice Schiemann said that if there was a restriction on who
could shop at a warehouse club it was not open to 'visiting members of the
public' and so was not a retailer.
Members will have to be businesses, or belong to groups such as charities or
churches.
Finally, analysts' estimates of the potential size of the market for
warehouse clubs range from about Pounds 1bn sales a year to Pounds 3.25bn a
year, from between 30 and 50 outlets.
But even Pounds 3.25bn would represent only 2 per cent of UK retail sales,
and compares with the more than Pounds 10bn turnover achieved by Sainsbury
alone last year. As only about half of the clubs' turnover is expected to be
accounted for by food, they are unlikely to take large sales from
supermarkets.
Mr Paul Morris, analyst at Goldman Sachs, the investment bank, said:
'Evidence in the US is that the clubs cream off a little bit of business
across a range of sectors.'
But their most important effect may be to set a new low price 'floor',
leading to increased competition on price among retailers accustomed to
large profit margins.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

931030

