FT934-10105

FT  06 NOV 93 / Hawks & Handsaws: Black holes that swallow good ideas


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


IN ITS three years' existence Hawks & Handsaws has attracted a surprisingly
large mail, overwhelmingly from people sympathetic to its views. There have
been a few letters from psychos - usually from those on the far right-wing
of the pro-hunting lobby, or from those on the far right-wing of the
Conservative party (which may, or may not, be one and the same thing).
Generally, though, the letters have been friendly.
A good recent letter was the one from Colin Hill of The Rainforest Trust, in
response to H&H's suggestion, two weeks ago, that the biggest thing wrong
with this sad and weary planet was our inability to cut through the flimflam
and recognise that many complex-sounding problems might be solved by simple
measures.
The example given was the suggestion by Gregory Benford, of the University
of California, that one way to respond to the extinction of species might be
to collect them systematically and freeze them in liquid nitrogen for
long-term storage. Just post them to the future.
Hill says this idea may be a good one, though he has a few apprehensions.
For instance, popping endangered species into the freezer, out of harm's
way, would probably be used to justify an even faster rate of pillage of the
natural world.
It would be difficult, therefore, to imagine a time when species could be
returned to their natural habitats - particularly as man himself would have
contrived to populate every available nook and cranny on the planet.
'However,' says Hill, 'I think Benford's concept is most likely to fall foul
of a general rule of human activity and behaviour, which holds that the
chances of an idea being taken up are in inverse proportion to its intrinsic
good sense.
'That this is so may be connected with our inability, as a species, to learn
the lessons of experience; or an unwillingness to face the truth, if this
appears unpalatable; or an antipathy towards working together, in pursuit of
a great or even a common cause. Or maybe it just boils down to greed,
selfishness and stupidity.'
Yet if, says Hill, we could suspend the general rule quoted above, we might
be able to mull a few more ideas to conserve the planet's bio-diversity -
ones which could be adopted with minimal pain and without providing an
excuse for junketing:
'With immediate effect, an eco-label on every piece of timber that has been
produced by environmentally sensitive means.
'An official health warning - preferably skull and crossbones - on every
piece of timber produced by the traditional smash-and-grab technique.
'From 1995, a total ban on imports of timber produced on an unsustainable
basis, in whatever form - ie, logs, sawn timber, plywood and charcoal.
'International agreement that whenever a mature tree is felled, a sapling is
planted.
'A global fund to compensate timber-producing countries for the resulting
loss of revenue.
'At least part of the proceeds of the new UK national lottery to be
dedicated to bio-diversity conservation initiatives.
'A single and comprehensive trust fund to enable the public to 'invest' in
buying and protecting a large chunk of the Amazon and other forests . . .
Trustees would include representatives of indigenous peoples.'
Of course, says Hill, such measures are too straightforward to be adopted.
They are far more likely to be condemned as 'unworkable' or 'naive.'
Good and simple ideas are generated in their millions, covering all sorts of
problems. Where do they all go? Last weekend, John le Carre, in The Times,
put forward what he called a few Utopian notions for patrolling the global
village now the cold war is over.
One of them: 'A well-equipped, well-trained, flexible volunteer army to be
raised by America and its close allies, and placed under unified command for
worldwide peace-keeping operations. It will be expensive, but not half as
expensive as the wars it will prevent.'
This does not strike me as Utopian; merely as common-sense. If you ask me,
all these good ideas disappear down black holes. At the other end they
re-emerge from white holes and are adopted by the race of intelligent beings
which lives in that far-away place. The laugh they enjoy when doing so is a
laugh at our expense.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

931106

