FT934-8493

FT  15 NOV 93 / Lion and dragon showdown:  stalled talks over Hong Kong's
future


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


Only an optimist would believe that the resumption of talks on Friday
between Britain and China on Hong Kong's political future will lead to a
comprehensive agreement.
For the negotiations to be fruitful, the parties would have to undergo a
Pauline conversion on the road to Daoyutai - the location for the talks in
Beijing.
This would mean either - or both - of them reluctantly conceding
strongly-held principles on the colony's 1995 elections. After more than 150
hours of negotiations, such an outcome is unlikely.
At best, the two days of talks might result in a partial accord on Governor
Chris Patten's plans for more democracy in Hong Kong. This may allow extra
time to address the more controversial aspects of his package, such as
broadening the franchise for Hong Kong's voters. It would not amount to
complete agreement, but at least it would be some progress.
At worst, the two parties will not even achieve a partial accord. If
negotiations do founder, Mr Patten's original bill for greater democracy in
the colony is likely be presented, in defiance of Beijing, to the
Legislative Council (LegCo), Hong Kong's 60-strong law-making body, by early
next month.
Until recently Mr Patten - the target of some unpleasant abuse by the
communist-controlled Hong Kong press - has given an Oscar-winning
performance as a conviction politician who will not compromise his core
beliefs.
China has with obdurate determination played, by turns, the role of victim
of English perfidy and uncompromising guardian of the 'sacred texts' (past
Anglo-Chinese agreements).
But before, and after, last week's meeting of the British cabinet committee
which decides Hong Kong policy, both sides slipped ever so slightly out of
character. Could it be that the dragon and the lion can sit down and cut a
deal; that the storm and fury of the past year was just that?
China led the way in the days preceding the British cabinet meeting with a
sotto voce offer to accept the less contentious aspects of Mr Patten's
plans. Britain's cabinet responded by offering more time to talk if such a
deal could be stitched together at this week's talks. Hong Kong reacted
predictably.
Those who want more than the soupcon of democracy Mr Patten is offering
smelled a rat. The United Democrats, which won most of the popularly
contested LegCo seats in the 1991 elections, cried 'sell-out' - and with
some justification. They have seen tough talk of deadlines give way to
'talks about talks'. The United Democrats fear that the UK is slipping into
past habits: posturing and ultimately giving way.
Investors in Hong Kong's stock market also spotted the apparent change of
position but drew a different conclusion.
In the aftermath of Wednesday's cabinet meeting the colony's stock market
rose sharply, ending the week at a record high.
The business community, like its supporters in LegCo, wants a deal with
China on almost any terms believing, like Micawber, that all will turn out
for the best.
Yet as the week drew to a close, it became apparent that there might be less
to the Chinese offer of a deal than first thought.
For the UK, settling the easy part of Governor Patten's package would entail
agreements on aspects of the 1994 municipal poll and the more important and
broader 1995 election. An acceptable interim deal, in London's eyes, would
include reducing to 18 the age of voting in Hong Kong, (as is the case in
China); replacing appointed members with elected representatives in urban
and municipal councils in the 1994 poll; and allowing a 'fair' vote for 20
of LegCo's 60 seats in the 1995 elections.
But as of last Friday it seemed all Beijing had in mind was agreeing to the
reduction in the voting age and accepting the 1994 polls, while leaving the
more important 1995 elections unresolved - the tactical offer it first made
to Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, in September but which was
rejected.
Beijing, having made no concessions in talks that have stretched back some
seven months, needed to show the people of Hong Kong that it was prepared to
be flexible. The British cabinet had no option but to take it at face value
and offer something in return.
Viewed in this perspective, the twists and turns of the past week perhaps
amount to no more than deft diplomatic manoeuvring before the two parties
take to the negotiating table in Daoyutai. London and Beijing could simply
be positioning themselves for the battle for Hong Kong's hearts and minds
which will inevitably commence if the negotiations collapse.
In spite of all the speculation about partial deals, the realities
underlining the dispute have not changed. The world is justifiably agog at
China's headlong rush to modernise its economy. China may no longer be a
communist state; but it would be wrong to conclude that China's government
has also thrown off its Leninist mantle.
Beijing's primary aim in its protracted negotiations with London is to
secure political control in - as well as of - Hong Kong.
This is most apparent in its reluctance to concede Britain's demand to
broaden the franchise for 30 LegCo members in the so-called 'functional
constituencies' (industry-based votes), and allow democratic selection of a
committee which would elect 10 LegCo members.
This issue is the single most important obstacle to final agreement. It
seems unlikely that Beijing would agree terms for an election whose outcome
was unpredictable.
The British government, however, if it stands by Mr Patten's fine words, can
do no less.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

931115

