FT932-7019

FT  26 MAY 93 / Jobs: Pen-pushing largely written off - Readers vote
overwhelmingly in favour of encouraging students to work on word-processors


   By MICHAEL DIXON


WOULD readers who were not in the congregation four weeks ago, kindly pardon
the Jobs column while it says something to one Shirley Anderson then
present? Thank you. O K then, here goes:
What? Me? Rude? Rubbish]
Which said, I owe the innocent majority of you an explanation of what
provoked the outburst.
Ms Anderson is one of several dozen who responded to my sermon on the day
concerned, which was about getting the evil eye from a conference audience
at Nottingham University. My offence was to question whether higher
educational institutions are right to deter the use of word-processors by
their students, pressing them to write their essays and such in long-hand.
That strikes me as mistaken. No doubt schools let alone universities should
ensure their charges are good enough at handwriting to use it in framing the
short communications for which it remains a necessary skill. But it is a
different matter to require students already at degree level to churn out
thousands of words by hand. Pen-pushing at such length is now an obsolescent
ability, and students would be better occupied strumming the keyboards they
will increasingly have to use in earning a living.
Shirley Anderson dissents. In particular, she suggests that I earned the
evil eye by behaving rudely: 'You effectively told your audience that their
point of view was so old-fashioned it wasn't worth discussing.'
That is hard to accept. While I might have been controversial, I find it no
easier to see myself as being rude than academics would to view themselves
as clinging to convenient customs regardless of their students' best
interests.
But if it so happened that I seemed rude, then it is a mercy that the
conference audience isn't here to see the bulk of readers' replies on the
issue. For of the 74 responses, 69 agree that the use of word-processors
should be positively encouraged by higher educational institutions, often
accusing same of unworthy motives in resisting the change.
True, upwards of 30 of you think the switch should not be immediate. The
reason given is typically that, since protracted pen-pushing requires
practice, students should be obliged to keep their fists in by handwriting
essays until such time as word-processors can be used in taking university
exams.
Even so, approaching 20 others see no reason why examinations can't be done
on word-processors right now. 'Admittedly it's a development that would cost
money,' says one. 'But even if it couldn't be found by disposing of
un-productive staff, at least heads of universities could get off their
bottoms and trek round computer companies. I'll bet they could be levered
into offering good deals.'
To my eyes, that proposal looks well worth a try. After all, there would be
no need for universities to supply hardware to all of their students - only
to those who, not having their own, still wished to use one in preference to
a pen.
Nor do I see sense in the claim made by two of the dissenters that making it
optional to use a word-processor in examinations would be unconscionable,
because it would discriminate unfairly against students from families too
poor to have one in the home.
I remember seeing a research report some time ago (though I sadly cannot lay
my hands on it now) indicating that one of the factors most strongly linked
with success in exams is clarity of handwriting . . . which helps to explain
why some pukka schools train pupils to write a readable fist. Hence there's
surely good reason for allowing those who've lost out on the pen to gain on
a word-processor.
NOW to the table below, which looks to contain a worrying message for motor
companies. As on previous occasions, it gives indicators of prevailing pay
levels in City of London banks as revealed by Day Associates' latest survey
based on data from 121 employers, and including 293 jobs from general
manager to tea lady.
Since I have room for only 17 of them, anyone wanting more information will
need to obtain the full report from Joe Clark of Day at Suite 2.31, 75
Whitechapel Rd, London E1 1DU; tel (0)71-375 1397, fax (0)71-375 1723. The
price is Pounds 141 to concerns taking part in the survey, and Pounds 220 to
others.
The table's first four columns of figures cover basic salaries. The lower
quartile refers to the person a quarter way up from the foot of a ranking of
all in the same type of job, the median to the person mid-way, and the upper
quartile to the one a quarter down from the top. Then comes the average
salary, followed by the percentage of it typically received as an added
bonus.
Lastly come the percentages with a car, and its average price thereof -
which suggest that in the City at least, cars are fast being withdrawn and
replaced by allowances. Mr Clark reckons the typical allowance, at about a
third of the price of the vehicle given up, is less than the benefit of
keeping it. 'But people I've talked to don't seem to mind,' he says,
'despite being bankers.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930526

