FT933-5289

FT  04 SEP 93 / Ukraine set to surrender its nuclear arsenal: Russia offers
debt deal on fleet and warheads


   By JOHN LLOYD and DAVID WHITE


   MOSCOW, LONDON


UKRAINE appeared ready yesterday to surrender its status as a nuclear power
when it agreed in principle to transfer all its nuclear warheads to Russia
for dismantling.
It is also to sell the Ukrainian share of the jointly-controlled Black Sea
fleet to Russia, which will rent the port of Sevastopol, the main Black Sea
base.
In return, Moscow will write off a substantial amount of Ukrainian debt to
Russia and supply uranium for its power stations.
The surprise agreement came at talks in the Crimea between Russian President
Boris Yeltsin and Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk. It must still be
ratified by the two countries' parliaments, where it will face opposition
from nationalist deputies, especially in Ukraine.
If implemented, the agreement will come as a relief to the US and its
allies, which have become increasingly concerned about the potential
emergence of Ukraine as a nuclear-weapon state.
Anxiety over the future of the weapons stationed in Ukraine was increased by
recent reports that the Ukrainians were trying to gain operational control
over the missiles.
The strategic arsenal on Ukrainian territory consists of 176
intercontinental ballistic missiles with a total of 1,240 warheads, and at
least 30 bombers and their nuclear armaments. It has been feared that
Ukraine might seek to retain at least the more modern of the missiles, 46
SS-24s, each carrying 10 warheads.
Ukraine's delay in ratifying the 1991 US-Soviet Start 1 arms agreement and
joining the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty has held up implementation of
both Start 1 and the follow-up Start 2, which the US signed with Russia in
January this year.
The deal, if ratified, also removes the largest sources of enmity between
the two states - and appears to cede to Russia the senior role in a future
relationship.
The 300-ship fleet, which the two presidents had agreed to split at a summit
meeting last year, has remained a political football, as the mainly Russian
officer corps protested against the division.
Both agreements appear to have been dictated by the rapidly worsening
economic position of Ukraine, where inflation has risen to around 40 per
cent a month and all attempts at reforms have stalled.
Russia will set its payment for the Ukrainian half of the fleet - to be
worked out by a joint commission in the coming months - against an estimated
Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds 1.65bn) Ukrainian debt to Russia, mainly for oil and
gas. 'If the balance is in Ukraine's favour, then Russia will pay,' Mr
Yeltsin said after the three-hour talks.
Mr Kravchuk, speaking after the talks which were described by members of his
delegation as 'tense', said that the previously adopted decision on
splitting the fleet 'no longer corresponded to the real situation'.
If confirmed, the deal could pave the way for closer economic union between
the two states - a strategy to which Mr Kravchuk was once resolutely
hostile, but which he now appears to support under pressure from his own
industrial lobby.
Rutskoi backed by parliament, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930904

