FT932-49

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (1): A move into the fast lane - Italy has
been undergoing profound changes which strike at the very heart of the
political and economic system. Robert Graham discusses the reforms taking
place, as the country embarks on rapid modernisation in an attempt to keep
up with its European partners


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


EVENTS in Italy seem to possess a never-ending capacity to surprise.
A car bomb explodes at the Uffizi Gallery in Florence; seven times premier
Giulio Andreotti is accused of consorting with the Mafia and plotting to
kill a journalist; the Ferruzzi family surrenders control of the second
biggest private industrial group amid a mountain of debt; Carlo Azeglio
Ciampi, the former governor of the Bank of Italy, becomes the first
non-politician this century to be prime minister.
Things are happening with such bewildering speed, there is a risk of
analytical indigestion.
Within the space of the past 12 months, Italy has had two prime ministers.
There have been no fewer than five different people holding the finance
ministry and three foreign ministers. The leaders of five parties have
stepped down, and the Socialist leadership has changed twice.
These changes are some of the many symptoms of the profound process of
political and economic transformation overtaking Italy. Amid considerable
confusion, the nation is casting off a corrupt political system and
reshaping the dominant role of the state in the economy through
liberalisation and privatisations. In a great hurry, and in forced
circumstances, Italy is attempting to modernise itself and carry out reforms
to avoid being left in the slow lane of Europe, isolated on the other side
of the Alps.
Historians will have to decide whether Italy has embarked on a revolution.
At this stage it looks more akin to a movement restoring a democracy which
was hijacked by a corrupt establishment. The present phase is clearly
transitional, leaving behind the First Republic with its constitutional laws
that encouraged a series of mutually balancing (and neutralising)
institutions, shaped by the trauma of fascism and the needs of what was
still a poor country.
In this phase anomalies are bound to exist. The composition of parliament
for instance, no longer represents the mood of the electorate. In the light
of this month's partial municipal elections the four-party coalition, which
is notionally the basis for the Ciampi government's parliamentary majority,
represents only 20 per cent of the vote.
The parties themselves are in mutation seeking new alliances, fresh
identities and credible policies. The long-ruling Christian Democrats and
Socialists are disintegrating, while the populist Lombard League of Umberto
Bossi has taken over the rich industrial north, planting its flag in the
municipality of Milan. The former communist party, Party of the Democratic
Left (PDS), retains old allegiances in the centre. The country's political
geography is being redefined with a strong pull towards less central control
and more recognition of regional initiative and identity. The spectre of a
northern secession spearheaded by the League is still a mixture of bluff and
astute tactics by a north impatient with Rome's reluctant reformism.
With so many vested interests at stake, there has been considerable
behind-the-scenes resistance - especially over lessening political control
in the state companies. Such rearguard action is one reason why the pace of
privatisation has been so disappointingly slow. A more sinister reaction has
been last month's car bombs in Rome and Florence. Although the precise
authorship of these outrages remains unclear (the authorities have blamed
the Mafia), the message is unmistakeable: there are still people willing to
create a climate of tension. But this is not the Seventies and society is in
no mood to put up with such blackmail.
External pressure for change has played, and will continue to play, an
important role. The financial markets and Italy's EC partners have obliged
the government and parliament to reduce the huge public sector deficit and
lower the mountain of debt to meet Maastricht Treaty criteria. This has
meant cutting state hand-outs, reassessing the funding of the welfare state
and ending feather-bedding in the public sector. Any lingering doubts on
this score were brought home by the September currency crisis and the lira's
enforced exit from the European Monetary System.
Internally, the magistrates and electorate (through the elections and
referendums) take near equal credit. The old guard of politicians has been
discredited and swept aside by the nationwide efforts of magistrates
investigating corruption. No modern democracy has witnessed such devastating
action by the judiciary - one in six members of the chamber of deputies is
under investigation for corruption.
Through a deliberate policy of leaking information to the press, the
magistrates have laid bare the incestuous structure of power that evolved in
the post-war years under the guise of defending Italy against communism. The
parties in government enriched themselves by demanding fat bribes from
businessmen in return for contracts and political protection; business in
most cases appeared more than happy to oblige, and certainly never
complained in public.
Some of the most important company names and their managers have been caught
and damaged by the scandals which touch every area of activity from
kick-backs on fixing pharmaceutical prices to percentages on power stations
contracts.
In this climate, the long taboo subject of political links with the Mafia is
being touched. The political protection given to organised crime is one of
the explanations why the Mafia has survived and prospered so long in the
south. Investigation of these links may help elicit the truth behind the
countless unsolved mysteries of the past which rest on the nation's
conscience - such as the kidnap and murder of former premier Aldo Moro.
The Mafia's power is beginning to crack - another important element in the
process of change. The Amato and now the Ciampi governments can claim credit
for putting in place more effective measures to fight organised crime. But
public pressure for action could scarcely be ignored in the wake of the
killings of the two leading anti-Mafia magistrates, Giovanni Falcone and
Paolo Borsellino.
Public pressure has also been vital in pressing electoral reform as the
prerequisite for political renewal. It is an eloquent commentary on the
outgoing political class that parliament has been obliged to accept
electoral reform rather than anticipate it. As a result of the April
referendum, majority voting is being introduced for 75 per cent of the
seats, the remainder retaining the old system of proportional
representation.
However, to be fair, the previous government of Professor Giuliano Amato
never had the parliamentary backing to press political reform. Prof Amato
made a valuable contribution to the transition, and even accelerated it by
attacking public spending, initiating reforms of the civil service and
regional administration and removing political appointees from state
companies. However, he fell in May in good measure because his four-party
coalition lacked the moral authority to impose new electoral laws.
Mr Ciampi was a choice of last resort by President Oscar Luigi Saclfaro.
No-one else could command sufficient prestige and be above the party fray;
and he stepped in out of a sense of duty even though he was ready to retire
from the Bank of Italy.
He has stated his task is twofold - oversee electoral reform and draw up
another austerity budget for 1994, with the clear aim of calling elections
as soon as possible.
Legislation for electoral reform should be in place by the summer recess;
but this will have to be complemented by new laws redrawing the
constituencies, which could take up to four months to approve. In other
words, even if a majority of parliament wishes to hold elections in the
autumn, this might be impractical.
At the moment the majority of parliament wants to see the legislature last
at least until next spring. This would give the parties time to reorganise,
and permit Mr Ciampi sufficient elbow room to get privatisation on course
and ensure the public sector deficit is being tackled in earnest. But the
Lombard League and PDS are adamant in demanding autumn elections, and Mr
Ciampi cannot easily survive for another year in the present unpredictable
circumstances.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

930630

