FT934-11385

FT  01 NOV 93 / A unified Budget is worth the bother


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


The British Treasury is once more making threatening noises about tax
increases of up to Pounds 5bn per annum. But it is not clear how far these
are a response to a threatened overshoot of agreed spending limits for the
next financial year and how far they represent an independent wish to
tighten the fiscal stance. Only the first would be justified during a
fragile and modest recovery - and then as a holding operation until the
prime minister summons up the courage to confront his spending colleagues.
In any case, politicians and officials should resist the temptation to blame
all their troubles on the decision of the last chancellor, Norman Lamont, to
present a unified Budget covering both expenditure and taxation. Amazing
though it is to retell, British Budgets have up to now covered only the tax
side. The first unified Budget is due on November 30 and not before time.
The last chancellor's decision to introduce it was widely commended, but is
now the target of a hostile whispering campaign by grumblers who say that it
is not working and that it will not last.
Something is indeed wrong. But the mistake is that the change has not gone
far enough. For as Andrew Dilnot of the Institute for Fiscal Studies pointed
out at an early stage, the Budget is now unified only in name. Public
expenditure discussions are still taken in outline in July and in detail in
autumn, a process which is now giving the cabinet so much trouble. Tax
decisions are still made by the chancellor and the prime minister, after
just a prudential consultation with colleagues. The main difference is that
they have now to be made in a rush before the Christmas season, instead of
in March.
The way forward should surely be to make the Budget genuinely unified: that
is for the cabinet to discuss both spending and tax together at the same
time. This does not mean subscribing to the primitive notion of an exactly
balanced Budget or even a fixed borrowing requirement. The true housekeeping
point is that, whatever level of borrowing is prudent in a given economic
situation, extra spending on X still means less spending on Y or higher
taxes; and the more that the noses of people like Malcolm Rifkind, the
British Defence Secretary, can be rubbed into this logic the better.
The grumbles about a unified Budget are fourfold. First there is said to be
an undue strain on the Treasury in a short period in the autumn. The second
is that the gap between a late November Budget and the beginning of the
financial year in April is said to provide a heaven-sent opportunity for
parliamentary mischief-makers to try to overturn the chancellor's decisions.
The third is that a November Budget has to be decided on the basis of a
premature, and therefore unnecessarily bad, guess about economic and revenue
prospects, compared with an assessment made in March. There is apparently a
fourth objection: that the Conservatives are depriving themselves of the
opportunity of a spring election a few weeks after a tax-cutting March
Budget. This is not even good politics, overlooking as it does Abraham
Lincoln's saying about not being able to fool all of the people all the
time.
The answer to the first point about the overload on the Treasury is 'hard
luck'. The seasonal pressures are a hazard of the job, as similar pressures
are for farmers and fishermen. The second objection would amount to contempt
of parliament if it had more substance. Where quick implementation is
possible, as in the case of VAT and drink and tobacco duties, new rates can
come into effect the day after Budget Day, irrespective of when that day is.
The gap in implementing say, income tax decisions, is administrative and has
little to do with the financial year. Indeed, November announcements should
enable new income tax rates to come into force at the beginning of the
financial year in April instead of in high summer.
Thus we are left with the third difficulty, of guessing the fiscal outlook a
few months before the start of the financial year. On the Treasury's own
doctrines this should be a minor problem. For the official view - not mine -
is that tax rates should be set to bring the Budget back towards balance
over several years, accepting that progress will be slow in years of
recession or modest recovery and relatively fast when growth is more rapid.
If that is so, the chancellor should not be panicked into raising taxes
because recovery is slower than foreseen; nor should he become more relaxed
if economic prospects improve. In either case a departure from the target
balance would be a helpful stabiliser - and even economists who are
sceptical of such considerations are keen on stable tax rates, based on an
assessment covering a whole business cycle, for supply side reasons.
It seems that, whatever politicians and officials think they believe, the
ghost of Philip Snowden, the ultra-conservative Labour chancellor who tried
to balance the Budget in the 1931 depression and destroyed his party in the
process, still stalks the corridors. My own proposal, made in Economic
Viewpoint on October 21, is for announcing slow-motion revenue increasing
reforms, desirable in themselves, like phasing out mortgage interest relief,
but coupling them with offsetting tax-cutting proposals to be introduced if
the economic and fiscal position allows. This is hardly throwing caution to
the winds.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

931101

