FT932-6553

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (1): Pressing ahead on the long road of
reform - Amid continuing radical changes, many of Russia's business and
political leaders fear takeover and expropriation by foreign interests and
capital. But the stolid patience of the populace has remained extraordinary


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


HOW one reads the progress of Russian reform in the past year is a matter of
the half full or half empty glass.
For those who prefer to point out that the glass is half empty, there is a
rich selection of horrors before which to shiver. Russia has not succeeded
in laying democratic foundations: it has neither a constitution commensurate
with the demands of a new state, nor strong political parties - and it has a
bitter, unresolved tension between the presidency and the parliament.
The lack of a constitution and the weakness of the central government means
that the republics and the regions within the federation are anarchically
claiming and taking power. The political stasis has enforced economic
timidity, as the cabinet - itself divided between conservatives, moderates
and radicals - stands transfixed in front of the massive tasks of
restructuring which it must undertake.
Foreign investment is negli-
gible and foreign confidence dropping because of a largely bad experience
with joint ventures and with direct investment. As the world's two most
populous states - China and India - move strongly towards more open
economies and attract mobile capital, Russia stands as a lonely outpost of
statism, immured in opaque struggles, unable to chart a consistent course,
the despair of the coalition of rich capitalist states which is trying to
help it, and with it the other former Soviet States.
It remains a nuclear arsenal, and has not yet ratified the Start II treaty
nor begun a wide-scale demobilisation of its vast army. It has a host of
tensions on its borders with the former Soviet republics - especially
nuclear-armed Ukraine, which has not even signed Start 1 and is increasingly
inclined to retain its warheads.
This is a bare selection: the nightmare can easily be rendered more lurid
with the addition of ecological disasters waiting to happen, increasing
impoverishment of vulnerable sections of the population and the rise of
fascist - and neo-communist - sentiment. But it requires the balance of the
half full perspective.
In this view, a blink-of-an-eye 18 months have passed since reforming
government started to construct a Russian state. In that time, the process
of state-building has been almost entirely peaceful: not only has there been
little violence, there have been few demonstrations (and these ill attended
in the main). A parliament functions, as does a presidency, in public view:
their arguments are fierce, but open - a rare experience for this country.
The press is free, often raucously so. Organisations defending and
furthering civil rights spring up constantly: the restrictions on domestic
and foreign travellers, for citizens and non-citizens alike, have largely
gone.
THE reforms instituted last year by a reform cabinet under Mr Yagor Gaidar
have meant that money and price now matter again, and that property is
beginning to acquire a meaning. Managers are being constrained to think
about making a profit - and consumers are beginning to feel able to demand
availability and quality. Neither now look only to the state to feed them.
The privatisation campaign, which picked up speed in the second half of last
year, has now seen half of the small businesses privatised.
Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy premier in charge of privatisation, predicts
that all will be off the state books by the end of this year, together with
5,000 medium and large-sized companies. The vouchers issued to all Russian
citizens, with which they can take part in privatisation through auctions,
have at least given them a stake and given the government a pro-market
constituency.
Finally, reform is still on the agenda. It is a rough road, but President
Boris Yeltsin is still on it, and he still protects a cabinet struggling to
further the market and to underpin democracy.
Mr Yeltsin is a deeply ambiguous figure: by turns courageous and
backsliding, clear and muddled, uncompromising and hesitant. Yet his gut
instinct for a more liberally inclined Russia has not deserted him and his
shaky popularity remains higher than that of any contender, including
populists like his vice president, General Alexander Rutskoi.
The change in Russia remains obvious in foreign policy - a change which
predates the disintegration of the Soviet Union but which has stood the test
of severe internal criticism from conservatives and nationalists.
ALTHOUGH it has been unable to solve its long-running territorial dispute
with Japan over the Kurile Islands, Russia has proved a strong supporter of
the UN majority line in the former Yugoslavia; it has generally retained
sanctions on Iraq and Libya; and it no longer provides aid and succour to
historic allies like Cuba.
This does not make the international crises less critical - there is an
argument it has made them more so by removing the element of bi-polar
stability - but it has given a greater scope for democratic development in
countries frozen in cold-war attitudes and alliances.
The key consideration is the likely durability of peaceful reform. Mr
Yeltsin passed the end of last year and the beginning of this in
increasingly impossible compromises with a parliament whose majority became
more and more opposed to the president and government - and who were able to
force Yegor Gaidar out of the leadership of the cabinet in December. Despite
this, he insisted on the holding of a referendum a month ago and won votes
of confidence in himself and his reform programme.
Since then, he has sought - not wholly convincingly yet - to capitalise on
these results, by giving a boost to the privatisation programme, sacking
some of the more conservative senior officials and getting agreement on a
reform plan between the Central Bank and the government ready for the
approval of the International Monetary Fund.
As this survey is written, the combat between him and his government and
other allies on the one side and the parliament and its allies on the other
is still in the wings: both have rallied round different versions of a
constitution which, broadly, would seek to mould the country into a
presidential or a parliamentary system.
Mr Yeltsin, with the backing of the security and defence ministries and with
wider powers of patronage, has retained the upper hand: the parliament is
again pressing for a compromise, while Mr Yeltsin's allies fear that such a
siren call may again enmesh the president in fruitless debate without an
outcome.
These fears are real, and their resolution is presently the highest task
facing Russia's leadership. Russia has not lost the reform road, and the
stolid patience of its people has been extraordinary. But nor has Russia
properly found the reform road: it is being surpassed by other states; and
its hold over the attention and purse strings of the developed world must
have limits.
Above all, it needs to construct normal, open and transparent relations with
the world from which it attempted to cut itself off during the Communist
period. Many of its business and political leader fear takeover and
expropriation by foreign interests and capital: these fears need to be both
calmed and faced, and the nature of international capital and division of
labour grasped and internalised to suit Russian conditions.
It has the advantage not just of a patient but of an educated and often
cultured people: a mineral-rich earth; an industrial culture; and,
presently, international goodwill. It could squander these before as it has
squandered them in the past: but for the first time in Russian and Soviet
history, the people appear strong enough not to allow it to happen.
ON OTHER PAGES
Foreign policy: western political and financial support remains vital,
reports Andrew Gowers, Page 6
Russian and the Commonwealth of Independent States: the struggle to unbundle
the monolith, Page 7
Energy: the big slide in oil production, Page 8
Banking scene: Russia has over 1,600 banks in all shapes and sizes, reports
Leyla Boulton, Page 9
Ambitions of Russia's new entrepreneurs.
More delays in mining deals; problems exploiting vast natural resources,
Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page I

930527

