FT933-10247

FT  05 AUG 93 / Sell-off requires the right kind of leasing: Richard Tomkins
on how ministers aim to ensure a supply of new trains for a privatised
British Rail


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


WHAT SORT OF trains will passengers will be riding if the government's plans
for railway privatisation are fulfilled?
Optimists look forward to the day when private-sector franchisees, free of
the restraints on British Rail's capital spending, replace out-of-date
rolling stock with modern trains that passengers will like and use.
A gloomier view is that operators will simply take over existing trains from
BR and run them into the ground, grabbing as much profit as they can before
their franchises - and the trains - expire.
In theory it will make sense for private-sector train operators to invest in
new trains, for much the same reason as airlines invest in new aircraft or
shipping companies invest in new ships: to get their hands on the most
attractive and efficient machinery available, and make money.
But the difficulty with railway privatisation is the risk introduced by the
franchising process. Since most franchises are likely to last only about
seven years, private-sector operators will have little incentive to invest
in new trains because of the risk that the investment will be wasted if the
franchise is lost.
In the airline or shipping business, the loss of a franchise would not
matter as much because operators could recover the residual value of their
investment by selling their aircraft or ships on the second-hand market.
Trains tend to be custom-built for the lines they serve and are rarely much
use elsewhere, so no similar second-hand market exists.
The government hopes it can overcome this difficulty by creating a leasing
market for passenger rolling stock. That way, private-sector operators would
be able to lease trains for the duration of their franchises without the
fear of being stuck with them.
The first step would be to take all existing passenger trains (11,000
vehicles worth Pounds 2bn) and split them between three newly formed
rolling-stock companies - initially BR-owned, but later to be privatised.
Private-sector operators would lease trains from these three competing
companies for the duration of their franchises. If they lost a franchise at
renewal, the trains would revert to the rolling-stock company, which should
have a deep enough spread of risk and market share to absorb and redeploy
them.
More importantly, the government hopes that as privatisation progressed,
franchisees would become bolder and start ordering new rolling stock direct
from the manufacturers. Again, ministers are making the assumption that
franchisees would lease trains rather than buy them outright.
The problem is that lessors - typically the leasing arms of the big banks -
could prove reluctant to enter this market because they would fear being
lumbered with unwanted trains if lessees go bust or lose their franchises.
Acknowledging this potential pitfall, the Department of Transport has
published leasing proposals aimed at assuaging lessors' fears.
First, it promised that if a franchisee went bust, the franchising director
would keep up the payments on any rolling stock leases until a replacement
franchisee was found. Second, it said the franchising director would have
powers to order that new rolling stock be used on a given route from one
franchise period to the next, even if the franchise changed hands.
Mr Roger Freeman, public transport minister, hopes that with these measures
in place, lessors will be more enthusiastic about getting involved in the
rolling stock market. After all, he points out, trains typically have a
useful life of between 30 and 40 years, so if lessors recoup the value of
their assets over the course of two franchise periods (say, 14 years), they
could be showing a very good profit by the time the assets expire.
The lessors are far from convinced. Mr Roy Fullelove, chief manager at
Lloyds Leasing (part of Lloyds Bank), says the leasing industry is extremely
apprehensive about the risks involved.
'The franchising director might say the rolling stock has to be carried over
from one franchise period to the next, but who is to say the franchise will
still exist in seven years' time?' he asks. 'What if the government does a
Beeching on it and closes it down? You could be left with a lot of rolling
stock.'
Mr Freeman says the worries are overdone. Modern trains are much cheaper to
operate and maintain than older ones, so owners will always find a market
for them - all the more so if they order trains that can be used on a wide
variety of routes instead of the traditional custom-built rolling stock.
Even so, the uncertainties created by privatisation will inevitably create a
hiatus in orders for rolling stock: and if that means discomfort for
passengers, it could mean agony for the UK's beleaguered rolling stock
manufacturers.
The industry has the capacity to produce 2,200 vehicles annually, but even
during the record investment cycle of the past five years it has been
turning out only 500 a year.
So whatever the outcome of privatisation, the industry has capacity far in
excess of what is likely to be required. The closures and job losses that
have characterised the UK train-making industry in recent years may only
have been the beginning.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930805

