FT932-9

FT  30 JUN 93 / Coke fails the kosher cola test say rabbis


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


IN ISRAEL things don't always go better with Coke.
The country's 360,000-strong ultra-orthodox Jewish community is intensifying
pressure on a leading rabbi to remove his kashrut - the kosher certificate
stamped on every product - from the soft drink.
Coca-Cola is the latest victim of a rising tide of fundamentalist Jewish
consumer boycotts. Among Coca-Cola's 'sins' are sponsorship of the music
cable television channel MTV, 'immodest advertising', and desecration of the
sabbath by advertising on Saturday - including sponsoring the Jerusalem
International Film Festival which will show films on the sabbath.
The focus of the pressure is Rabbi Moshe Landa, chief rabbi of the Bnei Brak
rabinical court, who granted the kosher certificate to Coca-Cola.
Rabbi Landa last month successfully pressed for the withdrawal of the kosher
certificate from Pepsi because of its sponsorship of Michael Jackson
concerts and its 'immodest' advertising which was 'poisoning the souls' of
Israeli youth.
The attack against Coca-Cola comes a week after leading rabbis signed a
religious decree calling for the removal of kashrut certificates from food
companies which use advertising agencies that produce 'immodest' billboards.
'The holy land is filled with abomination. We cannot walk in our streets,'
said Rabbi Eliezer Schach, one of the sponsors of the decree.
In Haredi (ultra-orthodox) neighbourhoods billboards have been put up
attacking the rabbi. One says: 'Coca-Cola continues to enjoy all worlds:
they enjoy the Rabbi Landa certificate and give platforms to idol singers of
the most lowly and abominable kind.'
The PR departments of Coca-Cola and Pepsi are trying to play down the
problem but are refusing to alter their advertising. Among the objections of
the orthodox community are Pepsi's use of the slogan 'The new generation'
and billboards showing a young woman in jeans showing her bare arms and a
hint of stomach.
'You have to understand that the Haredi feel that they are not just fighting
a soft drink but a culture,' said Professor Menachem Friedman, a sociology
lecturer at the Bar Ilan university. 'Like the Moslem fundamentalists they
feel Pepsi and Coca-Cola are selling a type of western secular permissive
culture which identifies with movie stars and rock bands. They find
themselves increasingly threatened and in a war with that culture.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930630

