FT932-3302

FT  15 JUN 93 / People: At 40 to Forte


The rejuvenation of Forte, Britain's largest hotel and restaurants group,
continues with the hiring of United Distillers' Keith Hamill as chief
financial officer and finance director designate.
Last month, Lord Forte handed the helm to his son, Rocco Forte, and a
handful of other directors, with over 200 years of service to the company
between them, also stood down from the board. At the same time, the company
has also been actively recruiting at just below board level over the last
year or so. 'It is a much more forward-looking group than it was a year or
eighteen months ago,' comments Peter Hilliar, an analyst at BZW.
Forte has arranged for a considerable handover period, as the current
finance director, Donald Main, who has been in the job since 1981, does not
retire until the end of 1994 when he turns 60. Main says he expects Hamill,
40, to move onto the board as finance director at the beginning of next
year, leaving him with time to devote to other areas, notably disposals.
Meanwhile, colleagues at United Distillers express no surprise that Hamill
is off after Philip Yea, the 37-year-old director of Guinness Brewing
Worldwide, was appointed Guinness group finance director designate in a
reorganisation initiated as Tony Greener took over as Guinness' chairman at
the turn of the year.
Hamill was previously a partner of Price Waterhouse, engaged on the Guinness
audit at the time of the scandal, joining the company full-time eighteen
months after Ernest Saunders resigned. Analysts agreed that in addition
accountancy skills, he had already demonstrated considerable commercial
savvy of importance for his new role at Forte.
Of his workaholic reputation among Distillers colleagues Hamill says: 'Now I
have turned 40, I have set myself objectives of being less of a workaholic.'
He points out that he is keen to keep a variety of outside interests - he is
chairman of the CBI financial reporting panel, a member of the urgent issues
task force of the Accounting Standards Board (where Main is a member of the
board), and is very active for his almer mater, Nottingham University.
Main also sits on the board of the Savoy, the luxury hotel group with which
Forte has clashed frequently in its takeover attempts but of which it owns
42 per cent. But he was non-committal as to whether he would be stepping
down from that job in favour of Hamill. 'It's so far away I can't really
say' was Main's comment yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930615

