FT932-3087

FT  16 JUN 93 / Timex strikers isolated from reality: How the workforce
continued Dundee's tradition of militancy


   By JAMES BUXTON and DAVID GOODHART


THE Timex dispute, which came to such a devastating climax yesterday, will
do nothing for the reputation either of Timex or of the city of Dundee. But
it is likely that Dundee will have to live with the consequences for longer.
Timex may be branded as a ruthless and ham-fisted employer. But Dundee will
regain a reputation for poor industrial relations which it has had some
success in shaking off, and loses an employer which has been in the city
since 1946.
The dispute flared when Timex demanded the temporary layoff of part of its
workforce to cope with a downturn in orders.
That provoked a strike and when the workers rejected a peace plan under
which the management also hoped to end long-standing restrictive practices,
Timex fired its workforce.
It hired a substitute workforce which had to be bussed in past angry
pickets. National officials of the AEEU engineering union eventually coaxed
an offer out of Timex, under which the workforce would be reinstated with a
27 per cent cut in pay and fringe benefits. Two weeks ago it was
contemptuously rejected. It was rejected again yesterday.
Timex had been trying with little success since 1990 to win the full-hearted
cooperation of its workforce, providing bonuses, profit-sharing and giving
employees 10 per cent of the Dundee subsidiary's equity.
The sacked workforce blamed the troubles at the plant, which has lost Pounds
10m in the past six years, on the arrival of Mr Peter Hall as plant manager
in 1991. Mr Hall blamed the deterioration in labour relations on the
election of an unaccommodating union convener and deputy convener at the end
of last year. They misjudged his determination in the confrontation and led
the workforce into making fatal mistakes.
It is no secret that the national leadership of the AEEU found local
officials and plant representatives intractable and unrealistic. But AEEU
national officials believe Mr Hall should have sought their co-operation
earlier, explaining the plant's financial problems and his difficulties with
plant union leaders.
The officials point to the case of the Hoover plant at Cambuslang, Glasgow,
which was saved by a union-agreed cut in pay and conditions.
Local union officials, led by Mr John Kydd, father of the union convener at
Timex, are heir to a long tradition of union militancy in Dundee. In the
1970s and early 1980s the city became a byword for poor industrial
relations, with Timex, which then employed 7,000, one of the worst affected.
Since the mid-1980s things have improved considerably. The council has, with
the help of the former Scottish Development Agency, developed the city's
waterfront and improved its appearance. Unemployment has gradually fallen
and is now about ten per cent.
But poor industrial relations persisted. For example, Davy Corporation chose
Dundee to convert an oil rig into a production platform in 1989 but
eventually towed the rig to the Cromarty Firth after failing to win union
agreement for round-the-clock working.
As the Timex dispute continued, the sacked workforce was buoyed up by
considerable public sympathy in Scotland and support from other parts of
Britain, some from left-wing groups such as Militant. The workforce
apparently failed to appreciate the weakness of its position: it had been
replaced by other workers and was dealing with a company that held most of
the cards.
The Scottish media helped isolate the strikers from reality by their
frequently one-sided presentation of the dispute.
The image of angry pickets clashing with police outside the plant surprised
many people who thought such scenes had been banished by 10 years of
Conservative trade union legislation.
Yet, while the dispute was conducted in a highly legalistic framework,
almost all of the law pre-dates the Thatcher revolution.
Recent legislation did affect the conduct of the dispute - for example, it
forced the national union to repudiate many of the actions of its members -
but it did not significantly alter the balance of power.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930616

