FT933-5112

FT  04 SEP 93 / As they say in Europe: Red wine equals red-blooded rugby


   By JAMES MORGAN


READING newspapers on holiday is often a disappointing experience. La
Montagne, in the Auvergne, made one look hard for the Paris papers to find
something that did not read like a freesheet, yet cost almost as much as the
FT. Luckily, south of the Loire, there is that great consolation, Midi
Olympique.
This is not the first time I have been entranced by MO, the greatest
sporting weekly in the world. Its sole concern is rugby union and so,
naturally, it is published in Toulouse. Its appearance is unusual: a large
broadsheet of hugely unattractive yellow paper. The masthead is unchanged
from the day of its foundation in 1919. It represents an aspect of popular
French (and, therefore, European) civilisation that has been ignored for too
long.
My first holiday edition of MO splashed the headline: 'Un Week-end tres
muscle.' The story revelled in the sendings-off, injuries and spectacular
examples of dirty play that had characterised the first round of friendly
matches that precede the official opening of the French season this weekend.
Midi Olympique adopts a vigorous, macho approach that makes John Wayne seem
like Woody Allen. To followers of the game in other nations, the fascination
of French rugby is its beauty-and-the-beast quality. Brilliant ball skills
are, somehow, allied to devil-may-care brutality.
The only other nation to have produced a similar combination is South
Africa, which might help to explain why the resumption of sporting contacts
between the cockerel and the springbok has had such a devastating effect on
relations between the two countries.
The edition of MO which prompted such musings answered other questions rugby
fans have pondered for years. How, for example, did the game come to
flourish in southern France, between the Alps and the Atlantic, particularly
in the deep south-west? Why is its social infrastructure so different from
the country from which it was imported?
Midi Olympique published extracts from a survey of the 'political geography
of rugby' in which one authority observed: 'Often aristocratic, but almost
always bourgeois or university-led in Scotland, England and Ireland, working
class in Wales, rugby in France remains essentially local and the worthy
offspring.'
Geographically, French rugby coincides with strongholds of the left, with
the Langue d'Oc, as opposed to the offical French of the north. It is
republican and often peasant. The great player of years ago, Amedee
Domenech, proclaimed: 'Rugby votes left.' Hence the gulf between French and
English players and fans, bridged only when the occasional Englishman goes
off to run a bar in the shadow of the Pyrenees.
In its urban manifestations, French rugby coincides with one-industry towns
where the club becomes another centre of local cohesion. The report quoted
in MO said the backbone of any team is found in 'teachers, farmers,
municipal officials and barmen, where intellectuals, like the bourgeois,
have only a modest role (as distinct from the Anglo-Saxon countries.) If the
British monarchy formed its officers with the help of the strict education
provided by rugby, the republic filled its strongholds of the south-west
with the great grandsons of the Third Estate of 1789 and the studious pupils
of the 'black hussars of the Republic'.' In other words, republican
teachers.
Anybody who finds this hard to grasp has only to turn to a column of local
news: 'Marriage at Narbonne-Corbieres club.' The story runs: 'On Saturday
August 4 at 4pm, there were joined together at the church of Marcorignan the
scrum-half Michel Barbaste (the new Narbonne manager) and Nathalie Belzons,
daughter of the former Narbonne player Andre Belzons who runs, with his wife
Nadine, the Narbonne clubhouse and bar at the Cassayet ground. The bride's
brother is the present Narbonne number eight, Gilles Belzons, who follows in
his father's footsteps.' Even a Welsh newspaper might have offered a
sympathetic gesture to the bride.
The last edition of MO to appear during my holiday revealed more evidence of
the roots of French rugby. An official had drawn up a regional league table
which showed where the best rugby was played. At the top was Midi-Pyrenees,
at the bottom Brittany and Normandy.
A thought which must have struck others suddenly struck me: the league table
reflected the relative importance of red and white wine. The less red, the
lower the quality of the rugby. No wine means no rugby, except in Paris.
English rugby runs on beer, of course. And everyone knows the grape and the
grain do not mix.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

930904

