FT933-10008

FT  06 AUG 93 / Management: A shock to the system - German shareholders are
starting to reject their boards'  traditional lack of accountability


   By DAVID WALLER


The depth of the German recession is prompting unprecedented questioning of
the country's system of corporate governance.
It is the equivalent of more formalised debates in the US and the UK that
were touched off after a series of corporate failures and scandals
highlighted weaknesses in the 'Anglo-Saxon', stock market-centred form of
capitalism.
In the UK the soul-searching led to the publication of a code of good
practice, which was issued last December by the Cadbury committee on
corporate governance. In the US a number of financial institutions have
taken the initiative to change the management of companies that they believe
have been performing poorly.
The effects of the debate in Germany have been varied.
There has been increased shareholder activism, notably by Professor Ekkehard
Wenger, of the University of Wurzburg, who was recently ejected from the
annual meeting of Daimler-Benz after he made a vehement attack on the
company's management.
Calpers, the large US investment fund, intervened at the annual shareholders
meeting of RWE, the German utilities-based conglomerate. The fund's
spokesman condemned the navete of the German company for expecting to be
able to raise cash in international capital markets at the same time as
having an anachronistic capital structure restricting shareholders' voting
influence.
A further symptom of the corporate governance debate is the willingness of
managers to think the unthinkable. For example, board members of Deutsche
Bank and Daimler-Benz have hinted that the bank should reduce its 28 per
cent stake in the industrial group. The two deny any concrete plans for such
a move, but the fact that the issue is being talked about in public casts
doubt about one of the most stable relationships in German capitalism.
Deutsche has owned the stake since 1926.
Meanwhile, German managers pepper their press conferences with buzzwords
such as 'investor relations' and 'shareholder value', which imply that the
interests of long-suffering shareholders are beginning to be taken more
seriously. And a highly critical book about German management entitled
Nieten in Nadelstreifen, or Nitwits in Pin-stripe Suits*, has been at the
top of bestseller lists for months, its note of self-doubt capturing the
mood of the times.
Critics of the system are united in believing that senior managers are
shielded from the pressure to perform - at least as measured by reported
profits and other financial criteria such as dividend growth.
With the exception of Krupp's purchase of rival steel group Hoesch last
year, or Pirelli's ultimately unsuccessful attempt to acquire control of
Continental tyre company, hostile takeovers are rare.
Managers sit behind legal barricades, which guarantee that they cannot be
dislodged from office. For example, devices restrict shareholder voting
rights (Stimmrechtbeshrankung), and special types of non-voting shares, such
as the 'vinculated' shares common in the insurance sector, allow management
the right to choose which shareholders acquire votes on their holdings.
Critics are unhappy with two other characteristically German features:
The two-tier board structure. Joint-stock companies are by law required to
appoint a supervisory board (Aufsichtsrat) and a management board
(Vorstand). The management board is responsible for the day-to-day
management of the company, while the supervisory board, comprising
representatives of both shareholders and employees, oversees management
performance according to its own criteria. It also appoints senior
management and, in some circumstances, has the right to veto important
commercial decisions.
Strong relationships between Germany's bigger banks and large German
companies. Those relationships are expressed via direct industrial holdings
and via influential positions occupied by bankers on industrial companies'
supervisory boards. For example, besides Daimler-Benz, Deutsche is reputed
to have stakes of at least 10 per cent in more than 80 large German
companies. And the chief executive of Deutsche is traditionally chairman of
the Daimler supervisory board. Such relationships lead to a flow of
information between banks and companies from which ordinary shareholders are
excluded.
'It is the most Japanese system outside Japan,' says Roland Berger, head of
the leading German managing consultancy that bears his name. 'The German
corporate governance system is part of the country's consensus society. It
is a system of controlled behaviour where people don't do unconventional
things.
'It ensures that radical and short-term-oriented decisions and moves cannot
be expected from German management and supervisory boards. Companies are
much more long-term.'
But has the stock market's lack of pressure on management deepened the
impact of Germany's recession? Critics such as Prof Wenger argue that the
security and cosiness of the German system blinded companies to signs of
impending recession last autumn, with the result that wage rises were too
high.
While not so extreme as Wenger, Berger concedes that the German system
'means that the factor capital is not employed in the most rational way. . .
managers are not under enough pressure to make their assets sweat. The
interests of shareholders have a lower priority than issues such as the
development of long-term technology, labour relations, consumer
responsibility and so forth'.
Others strongly disagree, citing the long-termism that the system encourages
as a central reason for the success of the German economy in the decades
since the end of the second world war.
Walter Seipp, chairman of the supervisory board of Commerzbank, believes
German managers' freedom from the threat of takeovers is a strength.
'It has been argued that takeovers have helped strengthen corporate US,' he
says. 'On the contrary. There are many companies which have been decisively
weakened by successive leveraged takeovers and by the need to fight off
unwelcome bids. I am very happy that we have not had this wave of takeovers
in Germany.'
Seipp accepts that many German companies are in need of a degree of
'cultural revolution'. But he rejects suggestions that the absence of a
'market for corporate control' has weakened boardrooms. 'I don't know any
other European country which is so open in terms of chances to get to the
top of management. Neither family nor school nor university have any
influence on this. Getting into the corporate elite is based on performance
and nothing else.
'I fear that those who talk about shareholder value are those who simply
want to make a fast buck.'
Whether that remark is justified or not, there is certainly reason to doubt
whether the current corporate governance debate poses a serious threat to
the system.
There is little chance that a wave of takeovers will force German companies
to restructure. Research from two UK academics shows that 86 per cent of all
listed German companies have a single shareholder of 25 per cent or more,
providing an effective block to takeovers**.
Moreover, recent economic evidence suggests the worst of the German
recession may be past. The stock market has reached new highs amid optimism
that companies and unions have agreed on the cost-cutting measures to
restore the competitiveness of German industry, without the threat of
takeovers. If the economy does restore its former economic might the
questioning about the efficacy of the German system will fade away.
*Nieten in Nadelstreifen by Gunter Ogger, reviewed in the FT on May 20.
**German capital markets: corporate control and the obstacles to hostile
takeovers: lessons from three case studies. By Julian Franks and Colin Mayer
of the London Business School and the University of Warwick.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930806

