FT934-11371

FT  01 NOV 93 / Business help sought in urban revival plan


   By JOHN WILLMAN and TIM BURT


BUSINESS executives in London, Birmingham and Manchester are to be asked to
help draw up plans for the regeneration of their cities as part of
government reforms on urban policy to be announced this week.
The initiative - City Pride - will bring together business, government,
local authorities and the voluntary sector in a new partnership for
restoring English cities. They will be asked to visualise the future for
their cities and set regeneration priorities for the allocation of the
government's Pounds 1.7bn urban budget.
Mr John Gummer, the environment secretary, will also set out plans to bring
together the government's inner-city regeneration programmes into a single
budget. The City Pride teams will be encouraged to bid for a share of the
funds, using the model developed for City Challenge.
The unified urban budget - promised in the Conservative election manifesto
to allow greater local autonomy in setting priorities - will not be
restricted to run-down inner-city areas. City Pride teams will consider all
aspects of regeneration, including work needed to develop the economies of
cities and regions.
The funds for the new unified urban budget will come from existing
programmes run mainly by the Environment Department and the Department of
Trade and Industry. Existing commitments to urban development corporations
and some 30 City Challenge schemes will be honoured. The funds promised to
the new Urban Regeneration Agency, to be chaired by Lord Walker, will also
be 'ring-fenced' within the overall budget.
London First, the private-sector body formed last year to promote strategic
thinking in the capital, is likely to play a leading role in drawing up City
Pride plans for London. It has already opened its doors to local authorities
after accusations that it was unrepresentative.
The announcement, expected on Thursday, will include details of the new
regional offices, also promised in the election manifesto, to co-ordinate
the work of Whitehall departments in the regions. The offices will give
businesses, local authorities and voluntary bodies a single point of access
to the Environment Department, the Department of Trade and Industry and the
Home Office. A senior civil servant will head each office as regional
director.
The creation of the regional offices has already been condemned by the
opposition as 'a further sinister act of centralisation'. Mr Jack Straw,
Labour's environment spokesman, described the regional directors as
'Whitehall commissars'.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

931101

