FT931-3978

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (2): Reforms provoke a sluggish
reaction - The single market has changed the behaviour of investors in ways
that will inevitably affect property / Removal of trade barriers


   By VANESSA HOULDER


THE arrival of a truly European property market is probably decades, if not
centuries, away.
Few large industries have been less affected by the removal of trade
barriers at the beginning of this year than property. The diversity of legal
regimes, tax systems and market practices across Europe, together with the
simple fact that property cannot be moved across borders, rules out most
attempts at standardisation.
Nonetheless, the lifting of trade barriers has changed the behaviour of
investors and occupiers in ways that inevitably affect property.
The impact of the single market initiative has been felt most directly in
the field of distribution property. Networks of European-wide distribution
parks are planned by groups such as Pan European Logistics, a UK-based
distribution specialist, and IDI Group Europe, a consortium of Gazeley
Properties of the UK, GA of France, Starke Deikstra of the Netherlands and
Travaux of Belgium.
The pattern of office demand could also change as companies take advantage
of a unified Europe. 'As national boundaries erode, cities will be competing
with each other to attract footloose investors and occupiers. The rules of
the game will change,' says Mr Nigel Roberts, a partner of Jones Lang
Wootton. This competition is illustrated by the rivalry between cities such
as London, Frankfurt, Paris and Brussels to attract the European Central
Bank.
Increasing attention has been focused on the relative merits of Europe's
large cities. 'In the context of Greater Europe, the credibility of the
notion of the continuing viability of 12 or more national capitals becomes
strained,' says JLW.
The largest capitals, in particular London and Paris, have a head start. A
recent survey of 530 senior executives in Europe for Healey & Baker,
chartered surveyors, found that London, Paris, Frankfurt and, to a lesser
extent, Brussels and Amsterdam, scored better than other European cities as
the best locations for business.
But Europe's smaller capitals may grow faster than those which are already
established.
Taken together, London and Paris have accounted for a diminishing share of
Europe's office take-up: 54 per cent in 1986, 60 per cent in 1987, but only
43 per cent in 1991 and 1992.
The debate about the single market's influence on office demand is complex.
It has prompted fewer companies to develop grand strategic plans to
centralise their operations than expected a few years ago by many experts.
Indeed, in the view of some agents, the expectations of increased office
demand as a result of the single market initiative was misplaced. It has
prompted acquisitions and mergers rather than the establishment of many new
offices throughout Europe. Moreover, if it increases efficiency and reduces
bureaucracy it should, if anything, reduce the demand for offices.
As well as the shifting prominence of different capitals, the investment
markets have also undergone significant changes as a result of requirements
that governments relax investment restrictions on investing outside the home
market.
The relaxation of investment controls across much of Europe in the late
1980s prompted a wave of ill-fated diversification, particularly in the case
of Swedish investors. Their place has, to a small extent, been taken by
German investors, most of whom were restricted in their ability to invest
abroad before Spring 1991. They have invested heavily in London where they
have spent some Pounds 700m over the past 18 months.
German investors' enthusiasm for investing in London underlines how far off
Europe is from having a unified market. Many German funds find that
investing in the UK offers considerable tax advantages over, say, France and
Spain.
In addition, there are the attractions of the UK's idiosyncratic lease
structure, which has no equivalent in the rest of Europe.
Apart from German investment in London, pan-European property investment is
at a low ebb. Dutch funds and companies - which have long been enthusiastic
international investors - are considering further investments, particular in
Germany and Paris. However they are delaying investment until they consider
that those markets have hit the bottom.
The general slowdown in pan-European investment is largely due to the
problems that institutions have experienced in their existing investments.
In addition, potential investors are focusing on opportunities in their home
markets. 'The opportunities to pick up bargains in your own back yard is so
great that people are asking why take on the increased complexity and risk
from going overseas,' says a banker advising on international purchases.
While 1993 may be a year of enormous changes to Europe's businesses,
widespread recession has muted the impact of those changes on the property
market.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930312

