FT933-12462

FT  23 JUL 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Norway takes first, wary steps
towards EC - Sentiment is still tilted in favour of the anti-accession
faction


   By KAREN FOSSLI


EARLIER THIS month Norway submitted two of its three most crucial position
papers - fisheries and agriculture - to Brussels, kicking off an arduous
process of negotiations to accede to membership in the European Community.
Norway's economy is healthy and it possesses a base of natural resources -
fish, oil and natural gas - which would allow the community to become more
self-sufficient and diversified in these areas.
So-called exploratory talks on fisheries have been held between Oslo and
Brussels but negotiations on that sensitive issue and another, agriculture,
will not begin in earnest until after Norway's general elections on
September 13 are out of the way.
'The outcome of negotiations in this area (fisheries) will play a decisive
role in determining public attitude on Norwegian accession to the
community,' says Mr Jan Henry T. Olsen, the fisheries minister.
Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, the prime minister, has given a virtual veto on
the EC issue to Mr Olsen, who has a strong anti-EC record. The minister says
he can only recommend membership to the electorate if Norway's demands on
fish are met.
The third most important issue in the negotiations is energy. Norway,
western Europe's biggest oil producer and the third biggest supplier of
natural gas to the community, has not yet spelled out energy demands in a
position paper. It has expressed strong disapproval of the community's plans
to introduce an oil and gas licensing directive when Norway is struggling to
convince a resistant electorate of the benefits of EC membership.
Mrs Brundtland said recently that the Oslo government did not view the
proposal as a very positive move. 'The situation reminds us of 1972 when the
EC adopted a fisheries policy shortly before Norway was going to make the
decision on whether or not to become a member of the community. That move in
itself had a considerable impact on the Norwegian referendum.'
More than 80 per cent of Norway's petroleum exports and all of its natural
gas make their way to the community, accounting for 15 per cent of the EC's
total supply of oil and gas.
After twice having membership applications rebuffed in 1961 and 1967,
Norwegian voters rejected entry in 1972. Sentiment on accession is still
tilted in favour of a robust anti-EC faction.
In Norway's two position papers, it has demanded special arrangements for
fisheries and agriculture to help ensure its policy of strategic
distribution of population is maintained. Any changes in community policy on
issues that would affect Norway should be postponed until the country makes
up its mind on membership, Norway says.
On fisheries, Norway believes it is important that it be allowed to continue
its management regime, which ensures adequate control and sustainable
management of all marine resources and aquaculture activities, minke whales
notwithstanding.
Repeatedly Mr Olsen has warned Brussels that Norway has no fish to give
away. But under the European Economic Area trade pact between the EC and the
European Free Trade Association, of which Norway is a member, Norway has
agreed to a gradual escalation of fishing quotas to the community for cod,
which will reach 11,000 tonnes by 1997, under the regime.
Brussels officials say there were no surprises in Norway's position paper on
fisheries, but there is a view that it may be 'preachifying' on the issue.
The present annual volume of exchanges of fish quotas between Norway and the
EC are up to 300,000 tonnes each way. In Norway's view, the principle of
relative stability constitutes an essential means of ensuring a satisfactory
quota system. It also wants the 12-mile coastal zone to be maintained at
least until 2002.
Norway wants arrangements to ensure that fishing entitlements remain at the
disposal of the member states to which they have been allocated. It is also
demanding free access to EC markets for all its fish and fish products from
the date of membership, planned from January 1, 1995.
The country has some 27,000 fishermen and exports about NKr16bn (Pounds
1.45bn) worth of fish a year. Officials estimate that free access to the EC
market could save Norway's fishing industry about NKr300m a year. Mr Olsen
has expressed concern over EC fishermen seeking to gain access to Norway's
fish by buying up the country's fishing fleets. He points out deficiencies
in the the EC's resource management regime and urges Brussels to improve
measures on monitoring and control.
'Given the extent and importance of her fishing industry, Norway will have
to play a major role in the development of the (community's) common
fisheries policy,' he says.
On agriculture, Mrs Gunhild Oeyangen, Norway's agriculture minister, says
that Norway is not seeking derogations from the community's rules, but
special arrangements will be required to ensure that the EC's common
agricultural policy is adopted effectively by Norway. Last February Norway's
parliament approved new guidelines for agricultural policy to promote a more
market-orientated sector through cost-efficient use of capital and resources
while pursuing a balance between supply and demand.
Norway's main problem in this area is that its producer prices are twice as
high as those in the community, partly because it insists on maintaining an
agricultural structure capable of ensuring the viability of rural
communities in all parts of the country.
Mrs Oeyangen says that adjustment to the present EC price and acreage
support level would involve a considerable drop in income by grain
producers. 'If farmers in these areas turn to livestock production, this
would have serious negative consequences for farmers already engaged in
livestock production in other areas,' she warns.
Because of this Norway is demanding 'special solutions' to keep areas from
lying fallow. 'An adjustment to the EC price level will require transitional
arrangements,' Mrs Oeyangen says. Community officials view Norway's position
on agriculture as not comprising an insurmountable obstacle and have
suggested that the common agricultural policy will have to be examined
thoroughly to see how it could benefit Norway.
'We need to identify what gap would be left in funds to Norway when it
complies to the CAP.' they say. 'Will new measures be required; will the use
of other EC funds be possible; will aspects of the competition policy be
able to benefit Norway?'
However, on energy Norway is stalling on signing the European Energy Charter
for co-operation with central and eastern European countries until it is
given assurances by the community that it can retain its sovereign right to
ownership its oil resources.
'There should be room for such a policy in an all-European, broad-based
multilateral arrangement. If so, Norway for its part would be able to
conclude the European Energy Treaty negotiations,' Mrs Brundtland said
recently.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930723

