FT934-8305

FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Slimmer Wang gets back on line /
A look at how the US computer group has re-emerged


   By ALAN CAIN


It was once America's fastest growing computer company. But when Wang
Laboratories slipped into bankruptcy 15 months ago, there were fears it had
entered a black hole from which there could be no return.
The position seemed desperate. It was one of the first victims of the
profound changes now racking the global computer industry. Its technology
was obsolete, its revenues were declining rapidly, and its debt, despite the
Herculean efforts of former chairman Mr Richard Miller - who had managed to
pay off Dollars 575m - stood at a over half a billion dollars.
Today, Wang will report its first quarterly figures since emerging from the
protection of Chapter 11 of the US bankruptcy code three weeks ago. The
price paid for survival includes loss of control by the family of Dr An
Wang, the brilliant Chinese-born inventor whose death from cancer in 1990
exacerbated the crisis, and a significant change of identity.
The old Wang with Dollars 3bn in sales was a manufacturer of proprietary
minicomputers tuned to run Wang's own, well-regarded office software.
Today's Wang is a slimmer computing services company with just under Dollars
1bn worth of sales, marketing a range of white-collar productivity software
and prepared to work with industry standard hardware and other suppliers to
meets customers' needs.
The chief link with the old Wang remains the commitment to computer systems
for the office and for workgroups.
Mr Miller resigned at the beginning of the year. Wang has a new chairman and
chief executive in Mr Joseph Tucci, promoted last month. Mr Tucci joined
Wang as vice-president, operations, in 1990. He was recruited by Mr Miller,
who reasoned that Mr Tucci's previous experience with Unisys, another US
manufacturer hard-hit by the changes in the industry, could help Wang
through the crisis.
Crucial to the company's survival has been the manoeuvres to eliminate the
debt burden and rejuvenate the balance sheet. The key has been a conversion
of debt to equity. Wang's principal creditors, including suppliers such as
Hewlett-Packard, were persuaded to take stock in the new company.
Before the plan was confirmed, Wang had a negative net worth of Dollars
508m, with combined short-term and long-term debt of Dollars 497m. Now,
coupled with the debt conversion, the company has raised a further Dollars
60m through the placement of preferred stock, and describes itself as having
the strongest balance sheet in the computer industry.
Its justification is a cash level at 20 per cent of total assets, compared
with 8 per cent for Hewlett-Packard and 6 per cent at IBM. Long-term debt is
1 cent of equity, against 28 per cent at IBM and 97 per cent for Unisys.
The essence of the Wang argument was that the company could successfully
move from proprietary hardware and software to open - or industry standard -
systems and 'client-server computing'.
Client-server computing is generally acknowledged as the principal direction
of the computer industry now. It implies networks of low-cost personal
computers linked through a network to larger computers which share the
processing load.
Wang has spent the past three years converting its old proprietary software
to the new client-server systems. It had to be done from scratch; papering
over the deficiencies of the old software simply leads to inefficiencies and
frustrated customers.
Mr Tucci describes negotiations with creditors as 'difficult' and talks of
the due diligence process. 'They went through every line of computer code to
see if we had really moved the software to client-server. In the end, the
survival plan gained the support of 97 per cent of the old and new
shareholders.
His strategy now is to develop the company's office productivity software -
including programs for document management, imaging, workflow and electronic
mail - while continuing to support its line of VS minicomputers.
The line will not develop much further, but there are 20,000 customers who
will continue to need maintenance and support.
Although the company will invest some Dollars 50m in research and
development this year, most of that will go on software development. 'There
will be no next generation of VS computers,' Mr Tucci says.
There is a newly-appointed board of directors.
The new, financially sound, Wang is also receptive to ideas in a way that
would have been alien to its predecessor. 'We are setting no rules.' Mr
Tucci says: 'We are open to every way of working with our customers and with
other suppliers.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

931116

