FT932-3309

FT  15 JUN 93 / Business and the Law: Thresholds of power - Robert Rice
examines controversial proposals to give Brussels greater scope in vetting
large mergers


   By ROBERT RICE


By the end of June, Mr Karel Van Miert, the new EC competition commissioner,
must take what is likely to prove one of the toughest decisions of his
tenure. Should he recommend changes to the rules of the EC merger regulation
to give Brussels greater powers to vet large EC mergers and risk upsetting
Germany, France and the UK? Or should he leave the current system unaltered?
Time is not on his side. When the regulation was adopted by the Council of
Ministers in December 1989, a legal obligation was imposed on the European
Commission to review two of its aspects before the end of 1993  - the
turnover thresholds, above which the Commission has exclusive competence to
investigate mergers; and, the article 9 exception under which the Commission
can refer cases which affect a distinct national or regional market back to
national competition authorities.
A proposal to change the turnover thresholds can be adopted by the Council
on the basis of a qualified majority, but, as Mr Christopher Bright, a
partner with City solicitors Linklaters & Paines points out, only if it is
made before the beginning of 1994. Afterwards, unanimity will be required as
it is for all other changes to the regulation.
Given the stormy history of the regulation (it took 16 years to get it
adopted) unanimity on change is unlikely. So if Mr Van Miert wants to change
the thresholds, he may have to act this year. For practical purposes that
means any proposal for change must be put to the Council by mid-July at the
latest.
His dilemma is a very real one. The presumption recognised at the time the
regulation was adopted was that the thresholds would come down after three
years, thereby increasing the number of mergers examined by Brussels.
At present if the combined worldwide turnover of the companies involved in a
merger or a 'structural' joint venture is Ecu5bn (Pounds 3.95bn) or more,
and the aggregate EC turnover of at least two companies involved is Ecu250m
or more each, then the merger would be dealt with by Brussels. Below those
thresholds, or if each company has more than two-thirds of its EC turnover
in one EC country, mergers are to be dealt with by national authorities. The
presumption in 1989 was that the main threshold would be reduced to Ecu2bn
and the EC threshold would come down in proportion to Ecu100m.
Mr Van Miert recognises that lowering the thresholds in this way would not
only run counter to the increased emphasis on subsidiarity, but also that it
would be opposed by Germany France and the UK.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, UK director-general of fair trading, is believed to feel
an increase in Brussels' jurisdiction over mergers is premature. Equally,
the Bundeskartellamt, the German cartel office, believes it is too early to
make a judgment on change. France, infuriated by the blocking of
Aerospatiale-Alenia's 1992 bid for De Havilland, the Canadian aerospace
company (the only deal to be blocked under the regulation so far), wants
higher thresholds to scale back the Commission's powers.
Against that view the European Parliament has already formally stated that
it favours reducing the thresholds. Similarly, the Commission's Economic and
Social Committee has queried whether the thresholds are unduly high.
Research by the Commission among the EC's 300 leading companies and among
industry organisations shows industry generally in favour of threshold
reduction because of the advantages the regulation offers of 'one-stop shop'
merger control and rapid clearance of deals. The German industry
organisation, Bundesverband Deutscher Industrie, is particularly in favour
of threshold reduction.
The precise impact of lowering the thresholds in terms of increasing
Brussels' power is difficult to gauge. The Commission is known to be
concerned that mergers likely to have a big impact on competition throughout
the EC have slipped through the net.
The Reed/Elsevier publishing merger last year created the largest publishing
group in the EC and second only to Dun & Bradstreet at world level. Yet the
companies combined worldwide turnover was only Ecu3.1bn and so the deal
escaped scrutiny by Brussels.
ICI's swap of its polypropylene activities for BASF's acrylic glass
activities increased ICI's share of certain EC market segments to more than
40 per cent, but the deal escaped scrutiny because BASF's acrylic activities
had an EC turnover of only Ecu165m.
In 1992 when Fried Krupp bought Hoesch, it created one of the world's
largest steel producers with EC turnover of Ecu10bn. The merger required
notification in Germany, France, Italy and Spain, but because both
undertakings had more than two-thirds of their EC turnover in Germany, the
merger was excluded from the scope of the regulation.
The Commission says these are not isolated cases. The survey of the 300
companies suggested that if the thresholds had already been lowered as
envisaged a further 53 cases would have fallen under the regulation since it
came into operation in September 1990. Twenty of them would not have been
notifiable to the Commission if the current two-thirds rule was maintained.
Based on these figures the Commission estimates that the extra number of
cases falling under the regulation each year if the thresholds are lowered
would vary whether or not the two-thirds rule was also abolished. If it was
abolished, the Commission estimates an extra 75 cases a year, but only 50 if
the rule was kept.
If the EC turnover threshold was kept at Ecu250m, as favoured by industry,
the number of extra cases would be much smaller.
This projected shift in power to Brussels is sufficiently modest to persuade
a number of senior Commission competition officials that an attempt to lower
the thresholds should be made. Mr Philip Lowe, the new head of the merger
task force, is believed to favour a reduction. Mr Van Miert, viewed by
Brussels insiders as extremely cautious, is hedging his bets until he knows
more precisely the extent of the trade-off which would have to be made to
win the backing of the Germans, French and British.
For Germany and Britain the price is likely to be a relaxation of the
article 9 exception to allow more cases affecting distinct national or
regional markets to be dealt with by national competition authorities. So
far there have only been five requests for referral back under article 9 and
only one has been granted (Steetley/Tarmac).
Even with a doubling of the number of cases handled by Brussels following a
reduction in the thresholds the number of article 9 requests is unlikely to
increase by more than nine a year. EC industry on the other hand appears
implacably opposed to an enlargement of the scope of article 9. A change to
article 9 is only likely if the thresholds are reduced.
Competition experts warn against over-concentration on the issue of
thresholds. There are other important changes which should be made to the
working of the regulation. By increasing the transparency of the Brussels'
decision making process, some of these might be acceptable to the Germans as
a trade-off for lower thresholds.
Mr Bright says that allowing the Commission to accept undertakings by
companies during a one-month first-stage investigation, and to publish
proposed undertakings so that third parties can comment before a final
decision to accept them is made, would be 'a big step forward in terms of
transparency and third-party rights'.
The time has come for Mr Van Miert to show his hand.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930615

