FT934-11679

FT  30 OCT 93 / Go-ahead for Jubilee Line extension into Docklands


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR and ANDREW BAXTER


THE government gave the go-ahead yesterday for the Pounds 1.9bn London
Underground Jubilee Line extension following a High Court ruling which
released Canary Wharf, the Docklands property development, from UK
insolvency legislation.
The announcement was accompanied by the award of orders worth more than
Pounds 300m to GEC Alsthom, the Anglo-French engineering group, to supply
rolling stock and power systems for the line. This is the first of the
equipment orders to be announced.
A second order for Pounds 150m of construction work for BICC and AMEC was
also signed yesterday. Further orders will be signed over the next week
taking the total 'awarded and confirmed' to Pounds 900m, said Sir Wilfrid
Newton, London Transport chairman.
The decision to build the Jubilee Line ends four years of negotiations. The
government had insisted that the private sector contribute Pounds 400m to
the link. But for the past 18 months Canary Wharf has been in administration
and the development project's bankers said they would provide the funds only
when Canary Wharf was restablished as a going concern.
The extension will be one of the biggest construction projects to be carried
out in Britain and is expected to create 22,000 building and equipment
manufacturing jobs during the 4 1/2 years of construction. Ninety per cent
will be in the UK.
It is the first large-scale addition to London's Underground network in a
generation. The national Council of Building Material Producers said the
Pounds 600m of construction contracts already announced would increase
infrastructure spending by 4 per cent for 3 1/2 years.
The extension will run for 10 miles from Green Park in the west to Stratford
in London's East End and involve the construction of 11 stations. The
journey along the route, which passes under the River Thames four times,
will take 22 minutes.
The line will make a large area of south and east London accessible by
Underground and increase the ease with which travellers can reach the Canary
Wharf development.
Some 7,000 people work at Canary Wharf and this number is expected to rise
to 10,000 by the middle of next year.
Tunnelling is expected to start in the next four to five months. 'It is a
large and complex project, but we will build it well, on time and on
budget,' said Sir Wilfrid.
Canary discharged with seven short words, Page 5

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931030

