FT932-3315

FT  15 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Maastricht tide sweeps into Lords


   By ALISON SMITH


THE EXTENT of the threat-ened tidal wave of amendments for the House of
Lords committee discussion of the Maastricht bill began to emerge yesterday,
with almost 400 tabled so far.
The bulk of the amendments have been put down by two veteran Labour
Euro-sceptics, Lord Bruce of Donington and Lord Stoddart of Swindon. More
than 200 of them would simply exclude from the bill - and thus from UK law -
individual articles and in some cases even sentences in the treaty and its
protocols.
Those put forward tonight by Lord Pearson of Rannoch, the unofficial whip of
the Tory Euro-rebels, included one demanding assurances that Britons will
not be made subject to any 'duties' to the European Union.
Another would require the Act to be delayed until a list has been agreed by
parliament of powers which fall within the 'exclusive competence' of the
Community.
Peers are due to begin discussing the bill in detail a week today, and
amendments can be tabled even then.
Labour's frontbench team has so far tabled only a handful of amendments, and
ministers still expect at least one amendment providing for a referendum.
The only amendment so far from Lord Tebbit, aleading Euro-sceptic, is to
delete the concession the government was forced to make in the Commons,
ensuring a debate on the social chapter before the bill comes into force and
the treaty can be ratified.
Government business managers have already shown by refusing to provide more
than two days for last week's second reading debate on the bill - despite
the record number of speakers - that they would rather have the Lords
sitting into the early hours of the morning to finish discussion than have
the bill's timing knocked off course.
If the bill is given no longer in the Lords committee than the legislation
taking the UK into the European Community, then it could complete its
parliamentary passage soon after the middle of July.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930615

