FT932-268

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (26): Financial turbulence shakes creditors -
Countries which have experienced payments difficulties / Credit Watch


   By JON MARKS


FINANCIAL turbulence in Iran has shaken trade creditors in an important
export market, requiring the deferral of some Dollars 3bn worth of uninsured
letters of credit. Deferrals involve no refinancing, according to bankers,
and are intended to give Tehran time to tackle short-term debt problems.
Contracts awarded by the Islamic Republic became a staple for international
companies in the early 1990s, while the trade in Iranian paper was a highly
profitable feature of the forfaiting market, as exporters scrambled for
financing as Iran rebuilt after its war with Iraq. The arrears crisis which
emerged in late 1992 upset all that, leading many export credit agencies
(ECAs) to go off-cover and closing most exporters' access to commercial
finance.
Creditors reacted quickly to a crisis which took most analysts by surprise.
By April, a group of 11 German banks had agreed to put off for one year the
repayment of over Dollars 900m, setting the pace of the deferrals which
followed, arranged by Tehran with Japanese banks and trading houses owed
about Dollars 1bn, with French banks (Dollars 300m) and, reportedly, with
Swiss banks.
Deferrals should allow Iran to regularise its payments, including making up
an estimated Dollars 2bn of arrears owing on l/cs insured by ECAs. Agencies
like the UK's ECGD have gone off-cover even when their arrears are quite
low. Even if Tehran masters its arrears problem, securing new trade finance
will be problematic. Banks and ECAs remain concerned at the structure of
external debt of around Dollars 30bn, which is weighted towards short-term.
This is despite the assertion of Mohammad Hossain Adeli, Bank Markazi
(central bank) governor, that Iran's debts are trivial when compared with
its potential.
Market reports of large new problems elsewhere may be overstated. Pakistan's
political crisis and a fall in foreign reserves provoked concern, with
substantial payments delays, especially on unconfirmed l/cs. But leading
European banks are still confirming l/cs, provided they are issued by major
Pakistani commercial banks and carry short maturities, usually up to 180
days. Poland is generating new interest despite its debt problems, but l/c
confirmation remains costly. One European bank quoted FT Exporter charges of
7.5 per cent on each commission payable every three months. Another could
offer only sight with three months maximum validity.
There are market reports of arrears on Slovakian l/cs, but these are
selective and talk of a default is overstated. Banks are very cautious,
preferring sight drafts drawn on major institutions like Obchodni Banka and
General Credit Bank.
The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) is introducing new rules
covering documentary credits, to come into effect from 1 January 1994.
Revisions to the ICC's Uniform Customs and Practise are intended to clarify
shipping documentation, payments and other l/c procedures. The ICC believes
this will save exporters time and money by increasing the number of l/cs
paid on first presentation. About half of all l/cs are rejected first time
round.
Jon Marks is associate editor, FT International Trade Finance

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

930629

