FT933-10097

FT  06 AUG 93 / France resists rate cut after sharp decline in reserves:
Belgium and Denmark strive to keep D-Mark link


   By JOHN RIDDING and JAMES BLITZ


   PARIS, LONDON


THE BANK of France yesterday continued to keep its short-term interest rates
high to support the franc in the reformed European exchange rate mechanism,
amid signs that recent intervention in currency markets had heavily depleted
its foreign exchange reserves.
While the French central bank kept its intervention rate, at which it lends
to commercial banks, unchanged at 6.75 per cent, it also ensured that the
cost of borrowing French francs for one day hovered around 12 per cent by
deciding not to cut short-term rates.
Figures released yesterday by the central bank indicate French
foreign-currency reserves fell by more than FFr100bn (Pounds 11bn) in the
week to the July 29 - one day before the franc fell to its old floor in the
ERM, prior to the stretching of the system's limits earlier this week.
The low level of French reserves may be one reason why the government is
maintaining relatively high interest rates to support the currency, in spite
of expectations that widening the ERM's currency margins would allow a quick
easing in borrowing conditions to help economic recovery.
France's policy yesterday coincided with that of Belgium and Denmark, both
of whose currencies have traditionally been closely tied to the D-Mark. The
two countries' central banks continued to ensure yesterday that their money
markets remained fairly illiquid, with the cost of borrowing their
currencies well into double figures for most of the day.
The approach of all three countries appears to be to keep their currencies
as close as possible to their old ERM floors as a way of maintaining a close
D-Mark tie and underlining some semblance of unity on pan-European currency
co-operation.
The heavy selling last week of the French franc and other weak currencies in
the system triggered the institution on Monday of 15 per cent bands against
the D-Mark for all currencies in the system apart from the guilder. These
margins replaced the 2.25 per cent bands for all the ERM currencies except
the Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo which had 6 per cent bands.
Some economists in Paris and London said the large fall in French reserves -
a consequence of last week's large buying by European central banks of weak
currencies for D-Marks - would have left the country's net reserves at less
than FFr15bn.
Others suggested that France's reserves could now technically be negative,
because the figures would not take into account more sophisticated
intervention operations involving swaps and forward contracts in the
currency markets.
French economists said the low level of reserves meant the French
authorities had only the interest rate weapon as a means of supporting the
franc's exchange rate against the D-Mark.
In spite of the high interest rate policy, the franc fell back inside the
ERM yesterday following the announcement on reserves.
After opening in London at FFr3.4625 against the D-Mark, the French currency
fell nearly 2 centimes at one stage to a low of FFr3.4810. It later
recovered to close at FFr3.469, but eased in New York to FFr3.4725.
Letters, Page 12
Set for another charge, Page 15
Government bonds, Page 21
Currencies, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930806

