FT931-4208

FT  12 MAR 93 / Stock market chief quits over Taurus: Scrapping of computer
settlement system to cost 350 jobs


   By RICHARD WATERS


THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE of the London Stock Exchange, Mr Peter Rawlins, resigned
yesterday as its board voted to abandon Taurus, its planned paperless
settlement system.
Mr Rawlins was held responsible for the failure of a 12-year project which
had already cost the exchange Pounds 75m and is thought to have cost other
City institutions much more.
The Bank of England stepped into the breach and announced that it had set up
its own task force to examine how to overhaul settlement arrangements in the
London stock market.
It will be led by Mr Pen Kent, a Bank associate director, who has taken a
close interest in recent years in promoting a better stock market settlement
system.
The task force, set up hastily after news of the Taurus fiasco reached the
Bank on Monday, will look for a 'cheap and quick' solution, a Bank official
said.
The closure of Taurus will mean the loss of 350 jobs at the stock exchange,
130 of them held by contract staff. It will also lead to other job losses as
financial institutions that had been rebuilding their own systems to be
compatible with Taurus reduce their development work.
Sir Andrew Hugh Smith, chairman of the stock exchange, refused to say
whether he had offered his own resignation, but said he had discussed his
future with the board before it was decided that he should stay on. He also
took over as chief executive until a replacement can be found from outside
the exchange.
Sir Andrew said: 'The board as a whole, and I myself, feel great concern at
the human cost, which will be very painful both in my own organisation and
around the City.'
The failure of the project rested in large part on the design that was
adopted in 1989, he said. In an attempt to reconcile many different
interests, the system had been too complex and could not be built without
significant extra cost and time.
He also blamed the exchange's management team for failing to realise early
enough the implications of the project. 'There may have been an element of
self-delusion in this,' he said.
Significant problems became clear to senior executives outside the project
only at the end of last year. It was established in the past 10 days that it
would take a further three years to complete the project, doubling the final
cost to the City. The exchange's own costs are 'only a small proportion of
the total cost', he said. Some estimates have put the cost so far at about
Pounds 400m.
Abandoning Taurus seems likely to lead to legal claims, as institutions
which have spent millions of pounds on the project seek to recover their
costs. 'I'm sure we will get claims,' Sir Andrew said. 'Our advice at the
moment is that it is very unlikely that we will be legally liable.'
The Bank of England task force includes representatives from the Treasury,
the Securities and In- vestments Board, the stock ex- change and other City
interests. It is due to report to the Bank governor by the end of June.
It will consider a partially automated system, allowing private investors to
continue to hold share certificates as at present while automating trading
by large institutions. It will also look at whether any systems in use
outside the UK can be adapted for use in London.
A Bank official said the current paper-based system had fallen behind
international standards and needed to be upgraded. He said scrapping Taurus
did not threaten London's position in international equity markets, because
the system was to handle only UK shares. He also said the UK stock market
could function on the current system for the foreseeable future.
Angry City takes stock of lost time and money, Page 11 Lamont handed pounds
800m windfall, Page 11 Taurus: the plan that fell to earth, Page 19
Editorial Comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930312

