FT933-12549

FT  23 JUL 93 / Behind closed doors


   By WENDY GOLDMAN ROHM


Members of the computer industry and press, waiting in the lobby at 600
Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, for the Federal Trade Commission's
anti-trust decision on Microsoft, were told at about 2pm on Wednesday the
agency would not comment on the stalemate it had reached.
Privately, however, FTC observers said politics had played a role. The group
reached a two-to-two deadlock, with commissioners Janet Steiger and Dennis
Yao voting for an administrative action (seeking changes in business
practice) against Microsoft, and commissioners Deborah Owen and Mary
Aczcuenaga voting against. The group then argued about closing the case.
Owen is a conservative Republican appointed by former President George Bush
in 1989. Aczcuenaga, an independent, has been noticeably hesitant in the
past about intervention in cases of alleged monopoly. Steiger is a liberal
Republican, and Yao is a Democrat.
The complaint voted on by the commissioners involved two main points:
Microsoft's practice of creating the appearance of incompatibilities between
its own and rival products, and its 'per processor' licensing scheme (see
above). The latter was restored to the complaint at the last minute, after
argument by attorneys for Novell, Microsoft's largest competitor in the PC
softare market. Novell had protested that the licensing issue - which it saw
as having an enormous impact on competition - had been thrown out of the
case owing to an objection by one of the commissioners.
FTC insiders said that, despite Owen's insistence that the case be closed,
the other commissioners chose to keep it open. The commission has thus
allowed for the possibility that it or the justice department could
eventually try the case.
The FTC is considering three scenarios. First, the justice department could
ask to take on the case. Ann Bingaman, President Bill Clinton's new
anti-trust chief at the justice department, has acknowledged she is
interested in reviewing it.
Second, commissioner Owen, said to have been looking for another job
recently, might take up a position outside the agency. Clinton could then
name another commissioner, who might break the deadlock.
Third, FTC insiders said commissioner Roscoe Starek, who withdrew himself
from the case, had made inquiries about rejoining it. Having a fifth
commissioner involved could break the deadlock.
Observers of the three-year FTC inquiry into Microsoft's practices said the
best outcome for the FTC would be to finish the case itself, as it would be
an embarrassment if the justice department were to have to finish work it
had started.
'It is unlikely the case will remain open for very long, unless the
department of justice asks for documents, or a change occurs at the FTC,'
said a source close to the agency. If the FTC received a request to take
over the case, Janet Steiger, FTC chairman, would decide whether to grant
it.
Microsoft, which discovered the possible involvement of the justice
department about a week ago, is expected to begin lobbying officials. Late
last week, Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft, and a team of Microsoft
attorneys, met separately with each commissioner, and with FTC staff serving
on two of its investigative arms, its Bureau of Competition and Bureau of
Economics.
If the case moves to the justice department, Microsoft is expected to hear
soon whether the department will proceed against it.
Within the FTC there is a body of opinion that the justice department may
take the case within a month. It could request that some of the FTC lawyers
on the case be 'deputised' to it. A formal request for documents would need
to be issued, according to rules on transferring documents from one agency
to another 'for law-enforcement purposes'.
In the UK, the Office of Fair Trading continues its own six-month-old
investigation of Microsoft. The FTC is expected to provide the OFT with
copies of its subpoenas and requests for evidence from Microsoft. Observers
in the US said that software companies Novell, Borland and WordPerfect have
all been providing information on Microsoft's alleged anti-competitive
practices, both to the OFT and the European Commission.
The author is writing a book on the FTC and Microsoft to be published early
next year

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930723

