FT933-10146

FT  05 AUG 93 / International Company News: Li Ka-shing starts to crack the
whip at Husky Oil - Management changes have brought a mood of optimism at
the Calgary group


   By BERNARD SIMON


SIX years and several hundred million dollars of losses after his first
foray into the North American energy industry, Mr Li Ka-shing, the Hong Kong
billionaire, has quietly begun cracking the whip at Calgary's Husky Oil.
His determination to improve Husky's performance was signalled clearly last
month with the typically low-key replacement of Husky's Canadian chief
executive by an expatriate parachuted into the senior management ranks 18
months earlier from Hong Kong.
The new chief executive, Mr John Lau, has worked for the Li group for 10
years and is described by a former colleague as a 'fixer'.
Mr Lau says 'there won't be substantial differences' under his stewardship.
But the mere fact the former chief executive, Mr Arthur Price, has been
moved at the age of 41 to become a 'special adviser' to another Li company
suggests a new era is dawning at Husky.
Mr Lau has already made an impression as a decisive executive, spearheading
the latest of several cost-cutting exercises. His authority is reinforced by
the presence of Mrs PC Koh, who was also brought in from Hong Kong last year
as vice-president in charge of, among other things, strategic planning.
'Certainly, there are going to be changes,' says one person with an intimate
knowledge of the company. He predicts a 'battening-down of the hatches' and
a sweeping reorganisation which may include the disposal of Husky's offshore
interests in Libya, Indonesia and Vietnam.
The volatile North American oil and gas industry has been a big headache for
Mr Li. Over the past two years, Hutchison Whampoa, the Hong Kong
conglomerate controlled by Mr Li, has taken write-offs totalling HKDollars
2.2bn (USDollars 283.9m) on its 49 per cent stake in Husky.
But Mr Li has so far shown no sign of backing away from his investment. On
the contrary, various family-controlled companies have raised their original
52 per cent stake, bought in 1987, to 95 per cent in 1991. This includes
Hutchison Whampoa's stake. The remaining 5 per cent is owned by Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce. Li companies have subsequently poured several
hundred million dollars of new equity into Husky.
Mr Price, who still works out of Husky's head office, insists there is no
intention for the time being of joining the stampede among Canadian energy
companies to tap the equity markets for funds.
Mr Ian Doig, publisher of an oil industry newsletter in Calgary, says Mr Li
'got taken to the cleaners' with his initial CDollars 484m (USDollars 378m)
investment in Husky.
But based on the price Husky received for various oil and gas properties
which it sold recently, Mr Doig says that Mr Li 'is starting to recover some
of his initial losses.'
Such upbeat comments reflect a widespread impression that, while Husky's
problems are by no means over, its fortunes are more likely to improve than
deteriorate over the next few years.
Husky declines to reveal any sales or earnings figures, but a look at its
businesses suggests its shareholders will be getting both good and bad news
this year. Husky has benefited from a surge in North American natural gas
prices. But these gains are at least partly offset by the depressed sulphur
market, caused by worldwide over-supply. Husky is one of Canada's biggest
sulphur producers.
The news is also mixed from the newly-commissioned Lloydminster heavy oil
upgrader on the Alberta-Saskatchewan border. The upgrader's construction and
financing have pre-occupied Husky for almost a decade. Husky has a 27 per
cent stake in the CDollars 1.6bn project, which processes tar-like heavy oil
into 46,000 barrels a day of synthetic light crude.
From a technical point of view, the long-delayed upgrader is performing
splendidly, but the narrowing price differential between heavy and light
crude oil has severely eroded its financial performance.
Husky and its partners - the Alberta, Saskatchewan and federal governments -
were hoping for a gap averaging CDollars 8 to CDollars 9 a barrel. But
strong demand for heavy oil coupled with the sliding price of light crude
has squeezed margins, narrowing the spread to less than CDollars 5.
The damage to Husky will be limited, provided the depressed margins do not
last too long. The company has long had a reputation as one of the Canadian
oil industry's most politically influential players.
The upgrader deal obliges the government shareholders to absorb the bulk of
any losses in the early years of operation, or to hand over to Husky more
than its proportionate share of profits. However, one of Husky's partners
also expresses concern about the upgrader's longer-term economics, saying
that price forecasts made in the early days of construction in 1988 may no
longer be realistic.
Optimism about Husky's future is based largely on its decision several years
ago to focus on natural gas and heavy oil. It withdrew from light-crude
exploration in 1987, and has consolidated its remaining oil and gas
properties, in the process raising about CDollars 600m from asset disposals.
Much of its exploration and development effort is now concentrated in the
Rockies foothills, west of Calgary. Mr Price claims Husky's gas properties
are 'about the best in the business' measured by quality of reserves and
development costs.
Mr Lau and Mr Price refuse to comment on rumours that Husky's drills have
struck a vast reservoir in the foothills. But they do predict that the
benefits of work being done now will show up in the company's financial
performance over the next three to five years.
Perhaps the most telling sign that Mr Li's investment may at last be paying
off is the recent acquisition by several other prominent Hong Kong
entrepreneurs of Westcoast Petroleum, another western Canadian oil and gas
producer.
Outsiders suspect these investors would not have made their move without a
quiet word from Mr Li that things were starting to look up in Calgary.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930805

