FT931-3975

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (5): Foreign buyers are treated
as saviours - Although German buyers have been active there is a huge
surplus of space, potential occupiers are nervous and values are likely to
continue falling / The UK


   By DAVID LAWSON


A London property deal earlier this year sums up the character of the UK
market at present. United Kingdom House, a single office block in Oxford
Street, was sold to an overseas investor for a huge discount. Buyer and
seller are reported to be congratulating themselves over a profitable deal.
About Pounds 1.2bn worth of UK property was taken by overseas investors last
year, according to DTZ Debenham Thorpe. The inflow of foreign money is less
than half that of a couple of years ago but with UK funds winding down
activity, any buyer is treated as a saviour.
Chesterfield Properties was probably none too happy about selling at almost
a fifth below book value, but the Pounds 85m it shared with a co-owner for
the 160,000 sq ft building was still almost twice what it paid in 1987. It
helped cut the company's gearing in half and boost the share price.
Other companies, such as Hammerson and Stanhope, have trodden the same path
for landmark buildings, and more are in the pipeline. Mr John Stephen of
property consultants Jones Lang Wootton figures that 70 per cent of the
London market could be absorbed this way in 1993.
The lion's share has gone to German buyers who are moving out of the strong
D-Mark since UK interest rates fell and the pound was devalued. With
long-term money at 8.5 per cent and yields as high as 10 per cent, deals
appear self-financing.
Overall property values dropped 10 per cent in the 12 months to January and
rents are down 15 per cent, according to Richard Ellis, the property
consultancy. Prime markets have been hit even harder, with capital values
down by almost a quarter in the City of London.
Things are beginning to look a little better as the supply pipeline dries
but values are likely to continue falling this year as a huge over-supply of
space hangs over the market and potential occupiers remain nervous of the
state the economy. In fact, they, along with UK institutions, remain far
more crucial to the market than a spate of overseas investors chasing an
ephemeral financial advantage.
Without domestic investment, the market will never recover, and British
funds have more than enough reason to continue their long-term withdrawal.
'Downsizing' is common, as managers switch big investments to smaller, more
liquid holdings. And the fashion for showing off good short-term performance
has led to sales which managers might never have contemplated years ago.
This again has opened opportunities for cash-rich foreign buyers. Shell
Pensions, for example, offloaded a 200,000 sq ft block on Victoria Street
for Pounds 70m to BfG, the German bank, while the Prudential picked up
Pounds 40m from PGGM of the Netherlands for 22 Hanover Square, which just
happens to be Mr Stephen's headquarters.
Not all money is coming from abroad, nor is it all aimed at the south-east.
Scottish Amicable partnered PGGM in the London deal and Mr Simon Ives of
Chesterton's points to sales of two Leeds buildings to Philips & Drew fund
managers. But they all show that demand is tightly focused on strong initial
returns and quality occupiers. Development sites, empty and poorly-let or
badly located property attracts no-one. The Leeds blocks boasted yields of
about 9 per cent, good covenants and leases running for at least 15 years.
UK institutions were still net investors in the year to last September,
according to latest government figures extracted by Mr Fred Reeder at JLW.
They bought Pounds 3.8bn worth of property, compared with Pounds 2.4bn of
sales. But they could drop into net disinvestment by next year, adds Mr
Andrew Walker of Institutional Property Forecasting Services. He sees little
justification for buying when property is unlikely to outperform equities or
gilts over the next five years.
Managers are not all as pessimistic, however. Mr Alan Winter, who controls a
Pounds 2bn portfolio for Legal & General, insists that his funds will buy
more property than they sell this year. Over the long-term, property still
outperforms other investments 'unless inflation is dead forever, and that
seems pretty unlikely.'
All this hinges, however, on two vital factors. The economy must improve so
occupiers will take up empty space and pay higher rents. That could be a
long, slow climb. Politicians must also resist calls to ban the long leases
and rent-review structures that attract both UK and overseas funds into
property.
Mr Ives sees the drift to occupier-friendly leases as an inevitable move
into line with the rest of Europe which is far more influential than
Maastricht. Only time will tell whether the institutions can live in such a
world; if not, the property market will need more than a few foraging German
buyers to carry it into the 21st century.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930312

