FT932-3207

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Capital Markets: French yields gain pace on
German counterparts


   By PETER JOHN


THE latest cut in French short-term interest rates has generated fresh
interest in the possibility that long-term rates will finally fall below
their German equivalent.
If that happens, the effect on European monetary stability could be
profound.
The possibility of a shift is not new. Waiting for French and German
long-term bond yields to cross has been like watching sailing ships on the
horizon. The two countries' yields have been creeping towards each other
since German unification in late 1989 and economists waiting with their
telescopes on the shore line are still divided over whether they will
collide, pass each other or drift apart.
However, the story has gathered pace and credence in the past few months. It
built up at the beginning of last week when Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the
vice-president of the Bundesbank, said that French interest rates could
comfortably drop lower.
It gained a wider audience via Mr George Soros who has acquired the mythic
status of a guru having already sent the pound plunging, gold soaring and
property shares up.
The international financial speculator popularised what might have seemed a
dryly academic argument when he pointed out, in an open letter to The Times,
that because the French have lower inflation than Germany and a large
savings surplus they are bound to end up with substantially lower long-term
interest rates. Afterwards, French bond prices rose sharply.
Yesterday, the French central bank cut its short-term intervention rate by
25 basis points to 7.25 per cent, prompting a sharp rise in 10-year French
bond futures on the Matif.
Now, some economists say it could be a matter of months rather than years
before the two countries' long-term yields cross over. The yield spread
between France and Germany has halved over the past months to around 20
basis points. Ms Phyllis Reed, economist with BZW, believes that 10-year OAT
yields will fall below bund yields within the next six months.
Already, French short-dated yields are comfortably below their German
equivalents - three-month money is at 7.25 per cent while Germany's is at
7.47 per cent - but the position is reversed at the two-year maturity level.
Economists are debating two questions: will a crossover at the long end be
sustainable and does it mean the Franc becomes top currency, at least in
Europe, replacing the D-mark as the anchor in the ERM?
Ms Reed, though confident about the change, is cautious about the impact.
She sees it principally as a signal that other European economies will be
able to ease rates independently of Germany rather than following its lead.
She feels that although the D-Mark will become a weak currency it will
remain as Europe's economic anchor.
Others argue that France is in a different position from Holland which has a
10-year bond yield some 60 basis points below the equivalent German rate.
There, the guilder is seen as a surrogate bund without the downside of
unification costs. Also, the country's lower inflation figure of 2.3 per
cent against Germany's 4.2 per cent makes Dutch bonds more attractive.
At SG Warburg, economist Mr George Magnus believes that the yield spread
will tighten but cannot come round to the idea of lasting crossover. The
narrowing of the spread has, after all, been helped by the post-election
honeymoon and Mr Soros. The French economy is far from perfect with
unemployment threatening to hit 12 per cent.
He argues that a significant change in French-German official interest rates
and bond yields, could have fundamental implications in Europe if it became
established.
'If the Germans lose their role of anchor currency in Europe it would cause
serious turbulence,' he says. 'It would be symptomatic of something going
seriously wrong in Germany and if that happens the European Monetary System
breaks up. If the EMS breaks, the single market goes and if that goes, all
hell breaks out.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930615

