FT932-7201

FT  25 MAY 93 / UK Company News: BTR aims to seek further opportunities in
China


   Richard Gourlay
MR ALAN JACKSON, chief executive of BTR, said the joint ventures signed at
the weekend with two Chinese provinces were the first of a number of
commercial opportunities the industrial holding company hoped to enjoy in
China.
He added, however: 'We will be making sure that this one works first.'
Mr Jackson was speaking from Australia after signing agreements to invest
ADollars 270m (Pounds 121m) over three years in two glass bottle plant joint
ventures with China's Guangzhou and Shanghai Municipal governments.
'Guangzhou province has a population is 68m people and only one glass
manufacturing plant,' Mr Jackson said. 'This is a wonderful opportunity to
go into China.'
BTR's 61 per cent-owned Australian subsidiary, BTR Nylex, will take a 70 per
cent stake in the glass bottling ventures. The balance will be held by the
respective municipal governments' Ministry of Light Industry.
The Chinese partners will be transferring existing assets and business of
the bottling plants into the new joint venture. BTR will be importing
equipment - duty free - and knowhow over the three year period and will not
be subscribing any cash to the joint venture. Its investment will be
ADollars 95m in Shanghai and ADollars 175m in Guangzhou.
Mr Jackson said BTR had had an option on the deal since last November and
that he had travelled to China five times since the start of May to conclude
the deal.
The Guangzhou plant has been established for 35 years. BTR will, however,
immediately add four new glass manufacturing lines to the seven that exist.
Combined with the redesign of bottle moulds and the production process, this
investment will more than double the plant's capacity, Mr Jackson said.
At the moment the plant's managers have to ration the supply of bottles to
its customers. Growth of beer consumption was very high and China had become
the third largest consumer of beer in the world.
Glass and plastics packaging has been one of the engines for growth at BTR
Nylex through its ACI packaging subsidiary which will be supplying a manager
for the Chinese ventures.
The joint venture agreements state there will be no restriction of
transmission of dividends. BTR will have a majority of members on the joint
venture boards.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930525

