FT934-8503

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Texas (1): Tradition of self-reliance challenged -
The challenge to Texans is how to adapt to a new world, while retaining the
powerful qualities which have made their state among the most vibrant and
successful. Can Texans remain Texan despite the changes?


   By RICHARD WATERS


TEXAS is facing something of an identity crisis. The proud inhabitants of
the second-biggest state in the union have long fed on myths of Texas's past
to nurture their sense of separateness from the rest of the nation - the
wide open frontier spaces on which vast herds of cattle were reared; the
successive oil booms that have punctuated Texan history from the first
gusher on Spindeltop in 1901 to the boom of the 1970s and early 1980s.
These are the myths that Texans embrace each time they don their cowboy
boots and hats and head off in their pick-up trucks to the local honky-tonk.
The reality of Texan society and its economic base has diverged markedly
from this self-image in the past decade. The challenge to Texans is how to
adapt to this new world, while holding on to the powerful qualities which
have made their state among the most vibrant and successful.
The social changes which are transforming Texas stem from at least three
sources. First, there has been an influx of people over the past 20 years
from other states. Many came from the rustbelt states of the north in the
late 1970s and early 1980s, as steel-making and manufacturing industries
there shrank and manufacturing and energy-related jobs in Texas boomed. The
state's population jumped from 7.7m in 1950 to 17m in 1990. These new Texans
have brought with them new aspirations, nurtured in the cities of the north.
Second, Texas has shifted from a rural to an urban society. While the myths
of Texas are still rooted in the land, the fastest-growing areas have been
the cities of Houston and Dallas. Houston's population climbed from just
over 2m in 1970 to 3.9m in 1990, making it the US's fourth most populous
city. To outsiders, these cities look like most other parts of America: vast
urban sprawls in which the car is king, and where excessive 1980s
development has left the skyline littered with many unremarkable and often
half-empty commercial property developments.
Third, the dominance of the state's white Anglo-Saxon inhabitants has been
diluted by a rapid growth in the Hispanic population. Hispanics accounted
for 18 per cent of the population in 1970: by 1990, the proportion had grown
to 25 per cent, and 30 years from now it will be 38 per cent, according to a
forecast by a group set up by state comptroller, John Sharp.
At the same time, Texas's relative wealth compared with the rest of the US
has declined. In the middle of the last oil boom, its average income per
head rose to 3 per cent above the national average: it has since shrunk back
to 10 per cent below, points out Bernard Weinstein, a professor of economics
at North Texas University. Some 18 per cent of Texans are judged to be below
the poverty level, considerably higher than the national average.
These shifts are challenging the state's traditional belief in self-reliance
and its fear of the corrosive effects of social welfare. The questions now
being asked of Texas' political and social institutions are whether they
have kept pace with the shifts in its social and economic base. The state
can still point proudly to the fact that it does not impose a state-level
income tax, and that it ranks 48th among the 50 states in terms of its total
taxes per head, some 40 per cent below the national average. However,
concern about the quality of public education is high, and many of the new
Texans who come from elsewhere in the US have brought with them a different
attitude to public spending.
The state's economy is also in the midst of a transformation. While much of
the first 157 years of Texan economic history can be summed up in three
words - cattle, agriculture and oil - the future will be much more mixed.
The traumas caused by the last boom-and-bust in the energy sector still
resonate. In 1980, oil and gas accounted for 27 per cent of the Texan
economy. By 1990, it had fallen to only 13 per cent. Nearly half of all jobs
in the energy sector were shed during the 1980s - although the past five
years has witnessed a partial recovery.
Other industries have grown and replaced many of those lost jobs.
Healthcare, electronics, transport, finance, government, retailing, clothing
 -industries which have supported modest industrial growth in other US
states as well. The Texas Medical Centre, a concentration of not-for-profit
hospitals based in the middle of Houston, employs more people in the city
than the oil and gas industry for which it has long been famous.
Texas has benefited by going through its downturn before the rest of the
nation. The property market's tumble - and the collapse of some of the
state's biggest banks - came in 1986 and 1987. While the vacancy rate in
commercial properties in Dallas is 36 per cent, the banks have long since
shed the troubled property loans which threatened to sink them.
The steady but unspectacular pace of economic growth in the state since 1987
looks very un-Texan. True, it has come at a time when the rest of the US has
been struggling to find any growth at all: but when set against the standard
myths of Texan excess, the 1.5-2.5 per cent annual growth rate seems very
anaemic.
The state has benefited greatly from the liberalisation of the Mexican
economy since the mid-1980s, which has spurred trade across the
Texas-Mexican border. If ratified by the US Congress on November 17 - an
outcome which is by no means certain - the North American Free Trade
Agreement will cement this trading relationship with Mexico, underpinning
the state's economic advance of recent years.
Nevertheless, coming after the traumas of the mid-1980s the steady pace of
growth and the more diverse economic base are welcome to most Texans. A more
diverse economic base is, however, making the state look increasingly like
the rest of the US.
Can Texas remain Texan amid all these changes? Mr Richard Kinder, president
of Enron, a natural gas company, is a new Texan, having come from the
mid-West in the 1970s. Chewing a fat cigar in his expansive office in
downtown Houston, he is typical of the outsiders who have wholeheartedly
embraced the Texan myths yet want to see the state progress further away
from its rural, redneck past. 'Texas is very good at attracting the
entrepreneurs and the dreamers,' he says. 'I hope we can throw out the
prejudice, but keep the positive.'
The spirit of Texas may find outward manifestation in the myths of its own
past, but it continues to thrive in the new era. Houston, with its
free-wheeling business culture and open society, and Texas's other cities,
thrive on the same qualities which first made the state great.
It is a spirit captured by Nicholas Lemman in a contribution in 1986 to
Texas Myths, quoted by Bernard Weinstein: 'I used to take the earliest
flight from Austin to Houston a lot, at the end of which the cargo of
businessmen would burst out of the aircraft as if it were a starting gate.
Sometimes the stewardess, after saying goodbye over the public address
system, would add sweetly, 'Hope y'all make a lot of money today'. Texas is
the only place I've been where one hears it said of someone, in a quiet tone
of sympathy mingled with pity, 'Ol' Norman works for a salary'.'

The Financial Times


London Page 29

931115

