FT932-6801

FT  27 MAY 93 / Nato wavers over Bosnia


   By DAVID WHITE


   BRUSSELS


NATO yesterday failed to provide a clear endorsement of the latest
five-nation peace plan for Bosnia, although Mr Les Aspin, US defence
secretary, said most allies were 'pretty receptive' to the proposals.
Mr Aspin and Mr Manfred Worner, Nato secretary-general, said there were many
'unanswered questions' about the joint action programme agreed in Washington
at the weekend, particularly about its proposals for safe areas. They said
the UN Security Council had to make the next move.
Questions raised by Mr Worner included the definition of safe areas, the
kind of forces required and their rules of engagement.
Mr Aspin said the military option on which the US earlier failed to gain
allied support - a lifting of the arms embargo to Moslem-led Bosnian
government forces and air strikes - was still available.
'In the end it may be that we end up going back to that option,' he said.
After criticism of the new plan by Germany and particularly Turkey, Mr Aspin
admitted that 'not everybody was consulted equally'. However, he said he
believed the plan would be implemented. He strongly denied it implied
abandoning the aim of a wider political settlement.
'But it does move towards stopping the killing first,' he said.
A communique issued after a two-day defence ministers' meeting here
conspicuously avoided giving explicit approval to the joint action
programme, saying only that it had been discussed.
The meeting underlined Nato's concerns about the allies' ability to provide
forces for new peacekeeping or peace enforcement missions amid continuing
defence cuts.
Mr Worner said countries needed to invest in properly-prepared forces and it
was 'the duty of the hour' for allies to stabilise their defence spending.
However, Mr Worner angrily contested accusations that the alliance had
proved ineffective in responding to the Bosnian crisis.
Nato should not be blamed for any lack of political will, he said. It was
prepared to do more but could not act unless it was mandated to do so by the
UN.
'It makes no sense to accuse Nato because everybody knows it is the United
Nations and not Nato that handles this crisis,' Mr Worner said.
But he warned that if the international community failed to deal
successfully with the conflict it would damage all international
organisations, Nato included.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930527

