FT934-11525

FT  30 OCT 93 / Fashion: Luxurious, and politically correct - Lucia van der
Post dresses stylishly in lambskin


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


SHEEPSKIN is one of those staples of the classic outdoor wardrobe. Fashions
come and go but the popularity of sheepskin goes on, riding tranquilly above
and beyond the frenetic search for trends and directions. Soft, warm,
wind-proof, it is the garment one reaches for when in need of comfort and
reassurance.
Desirable though sheepskin may be, lambskin is even more sought-after. Much
softer, about a third thinner and 50 per cent lighter than sheepskin, it
drapes better and feels silkier.
Lisa Johnson is a new designer of lambskin who, this autumn, has brought a
collection of four lambskin designs - a short waistcoat, a long waistcoat,
half-length jackets (either single or double-breasted) and a three-quarter
length coat. All are made from lambskins which in these politically correct
days, she is at pains to point out, come from natural casualties (mainly
stillborn lambs) so there is no slaughter.
Lambskin, needless to say, does not come cheap. Coming from such tiny
casualties, many skins are needed to make one coat, the workmanship is fine
and careful and a jacket will sell in the shops for between Pounds 500 and
Pounds 740.
Lambskin can be dyed almost any colour. This season Lisa Johnson is using
black, anthracite, a jeans blue, ice-blue (see photograph) cream, mocha and
dark coffee brown, dark khaki and a mint green.
Already her lambskins are highly sought-after and for next winter a
full-length coat is planned - start saving now for it will cost around
Pounds 2,000. So far Lisa Johnson has concentrated on designing lambskin for
women but a few masculine pieces are also under way.
A good selection can be seen and bought at Space NK, 41 Earlham Street,
Covent Garden, London WC2 and at Questionnaire, 2 the High Street, Wimbledon
Village, London SW19. For further stockists ring 071-613-5239.
For those who want to see a wider range of lambskin coats, Nigel Preston is
another name to look out for. A fine designer who every year does something
new and beautiful with skins, this year he has three main themes: Afghan, a
classic for everyday designs which retails at between Pounds 500 and Pounds
600; Entrefino, a luxury version, which sells at Pounds 1,300; and finally,
the most luxurious range, Snow-tipped, which sells at about Pounds 1,500 and
features everything from a shawl-collared coat to a trench coat. Joseph
stores, Harvey Nichols, Harrods and Matches of Wimbledon all stock the Nigel
Preston label.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

931030

