FT934-11786

FT  29 OCT 93 / Tiphook may seek to reschedule bond interest payments


   By ANDREW BOLGER


TIPHOOK, the UK container leasing and transport rental group, is facing a
key decision regarding its US bondholders, some of whom are threatening to
sue the loss-making group.
The company, which is trying renegotiate new covenants with its bankers, is
due on Monday to pay interest payments on two tranches of unsecured debt,
worth a total of Dollars 350m (Pounds 239m), which Tiphook issued in the US
within the past year.
Tiphook yesterday declined to confirm or deny that the interest payments
would be made. Meetings are still being held with the group's bankers, who
now have an update on Tiphook's finances prepared by Coopers & Lybrand, the
group's auditors.
Bond market specialists said Tiphook could take advantage of a '30-day
grace' period allowed for payment in the US, but any decision will be
closely scrutinised for clues as to how the group will be refinanced.
US bondholders, who have lent Tiphook Dollars 700m in the past year, fear
that any restructuring dictated by the banks could be at the bondholders'
expense.
It is understood that the talks with Tiphook's bankers, led by NatWest, are
'moving along' and that the aim is to reschedule debt and keep the present
financing structure intact, suggesting the interest payments will be met.
Tiphook did pay the interest due on another Dollars 350m tranche of US debt
issued in March. The payment was made on September 15, but that was before
the company warned this month it would breach its bank covenants.
Lehman Bros, the US securities house, declined to comment on rumours that
might sue Tiphook. Lehman acted as lead underwriter in March and April on
separate Tiphook debt issues worth Dollars 550m.
Lehman is likely to face litigation from US funds, who saw the Tiphook debt
downgraded to so-called junk-bond status within months of issue.
In a statement last night, it said: 'Lehman Brothers made markets in the
securities until October 5, when it became restricted from engaging in any
secondary market-making activity. Since that time, Lehman Brothers has been
acting only in capacity as agent. Lehman Brothers is certainly aware of the
situation at Tiphook and is closely monitoring developments at the company.'
Lehman declined to elaborate on why it had become restricted from trading in
Tiphook's bonds.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931029

