FT933-5149

FT  04 SEP 93 / The unsung king of soap opera: Never heard of Reg Grundy? Oh
yes you have


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


REG GRUNDY, an Australian with a neat grey moustache who has just celebrated
his 70th birthday, would not stand out in a crowd. He last did a newspaper
interview 11 years ago and hardly ever appears on television these days if
he can avoid it.
His name, however, is hardly ever off television screens around the world.
It should be well known to anyone who ever watches soaps, game shows and
mini-drama series - as long as their attention span includes the rolling
credits which end with the large initials 'RG.'
Reg Grundy is remarkable for his ordinariness - except for his collection of
Australian art, his enormous ocean-going yacht, his house in Bermuda, his
flat overlooking London's Hyde Park and the fact that he is the man behind
soaps (serial dramas, as he prefers to call them), like Neighbours and Cell
Block H, and game-shows such as Going For Gold or Celebrity Squares.
Then there is the sharp business brain that has created one of the largest
independent production empires in the world. In fact Grundy was an
independent producer decades before anyone thought of the term.
'In 35 years in Australian television there never has been a moment when you
couldn't see Grundy shows', says Reg, who long ago broke out of the
Australian market and invaded New Zealand, Hong Kong and the UK, and is
entrenched in France and Germany.
He has taken 'coals to Newcastle' by updating old American game-shows such
as Sale Of The Century and selling them back to NBC. Now Reg is taking on a
similar challenge by trying to export novellas to South America.
Grundy Worldwide, the master company based in Bermuda, controls 16 Grundy
production companies around the world and makes between 40 and 50 hours of
television a week. Rather than just licensing the formats, Grundy usually
remakes programmes using the nationals of the country involved - 'taking the
kangaroos and kookaburras out' is how he puts it.
But ask Reg what the revenues of Grundy Worldwide are, or how much he is
worth, and the answer is the equivalent of a game-show format he owns, I Got
A Secret. Given the number of hours of television that Grundy produces it is
likely that annual turnover is more than Pounds 100m, and as Reg owns 85 per
cent of the private company it is clear that not all the glittering prizes
are given away to the game-show contestants.
'He's a businessman who makes television by the yard,' says William G
Stewart, an admirer who produces and presents his own game-show on Channel
4, Fifteen To One.
Reg Grundy's first steps towards being a multi-millionaire were taken in
Sydney where, in pre-television days, he desperately wanted to get into
radio. He succeeded, and in 1947 covered the cattle and pig prices at the
Royal Easter Show for Radio 2GZ. Then he became a sports commentator for
Radio 2SM; he covered rugby league games, even though he barely knew the
rules, and reported boxing matches, including a world title fight with the
help of a How To Box book.
His breakthrough came as a result of a radio quiz programme he presented 20
hours a week called The Wheel of Fortune, a game not related to the present
television show. He operated the wheel and had to relay the replies of the
contestants himself because in those days broadcasting the other end of the
conversation was forbidden in case someone said something untoward live on
air.
Reg resigned - '15 seconds before I was fired' - for offering unsought
advice to the owners on how their radio station should really be run.
Unemployed, he approached Ken G Hall, an early power-broker of Australian
television, and suggested turning the quiz into a TV programme.
'I was the producer, the host, wrote the questions, got the prizes and
brought them in a station wagon. I didn't know what I was doing. I didn't
know I was packaging programmes as an independent,' says Reg. He became a
businessman when he offered a second show to Australian television and found
someone else to present it.
One of the greatest influences on Reg Grundy was another Reg - Reg Watson, a
fellow Australian who had written British soaps such as Crossroads. 'His
contribution to my company cannot be measured,' says Reg. Watson had the
idea that you could make a drama out of ordinary people's lives; if there
was a villain, it was life itself. In July they shot the 2,000th episode of
Neighbours.
'It started slowly but it sent out an invisible signal to people out there
to come and watch me and they did,' says Reg who believes that one of the
reasons why it is such a success with teenagers is that children and parents
talk to each other in Neighbours and work out their difficulties and
misunderstandings together.
'Happy endings are important, aren't they?' says Reg. Reg Watson also
created Cell Block H about life in an Australian women's prison. No less
than 684 hours ran in prime-time in Australia and elsewhere.
The Grundy method of producing soaps or serial drama - he believes soaps are
slow-moving whereas serial dramas are much sharper, with higher scene counts
and more humour - involves almost industrial-scale production. Enormous
pre-planning and long runs means that five half-hours a week can be turned
out at Pounds 40,000 a time.
Ask Reg Grundy why the BBC's latest turkey, Eldorado, failed and he points
to basic flaws. It should never have been called that in the first place and
there had to be real doubts whether viewers would be interested in the lives
of expatriates in Spain.
'Neighbours, Coronation Street - these people have to earn their living
every day. I can understand the BBC not staying with Eldorado. I don't think
the whole concept was appealing to the audience,' says Reg.
He talks warmly about popular drama but gets animated about the arcane art
of devising game-shows that work and appeal to the audience. 'To create a
game-show with enduring qualities is the hardest thing I know in the
business. It's not that hard really to create a drama.'
Altogether Grundy says he has produced more than 90 games around the world;
some of them, more than 10 years old, are being recycled on American cable.
Grundy is not a clown desperate to play Hamlet: he intends to stick firmly
to the sort of television he knows best.
A gently-mannered man, Grundy come closest to passion when talking about
broadcasters who try to impose their taste on the public and by implication
look down their noses at the sort of programmes he offers. 'Life's tough
enough for most people. They don't need being told what they should watch
and what they should do,' says Reg.
He controls his empire from his base in Bermuda. Apart from the tax
advantages it is only 100 minutes by air to New York. In Bermuda he has his
own beach. He lives there with his second wife, who is much more famous than
him. As Joy Chambers Grundy she appears from time-to-time in Neighbours as
the character Rosemary Daniels. She has just published her first novel,
Mayfield.
For Reg Grundy, creator of serial dramas and game-shows and recently feted
in Australia for his services to television, it all sounds suspiciously like
a happy ending. 'I hope I haven't come to the ending yet,' says Reg, who
plans to take his programmes to lots more countries where long runs,
cost-effective production and ratings are important.
In recent years the bankers have started offering Reg his own pot of gold
for Grundy Worldwide. Maybe one day he will sell, he says, reaching a little
self-consciously for the title of another famous game show, not one of his
own: 'If the price is right.'

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930904

