FT931-3968

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (12): The market is beginning to
emerge - With its population approaching 40m, Poland represents the largest
potential market in the region. Many western companies rate it as an
important location / Poland


   By ANNE STEADMAN


CONTRARY to fears expressed after last year's Polish elections which left an
even more divided parliament, the new government seems to have managed to
achieve a degree of political stability. However, as the privatisation
programme drags on there are considerable obstacles still to be negotiated
by potential investors and property developers.
Besides continuing disagreements over land ownership and the bureaucracy of
local district councils which combine to make progress complicated and long
drawn-out, there is difficulty in obtaining the necessary funding for
developments - particularly some of the larger and perhaps over-ambitious
projects which were announced in a blaze of publicity but have yet to get
further than the drawing board.
In this respect Poland is not alone. Other eastern and central European
countries have also fallen victim to the new sense of caution and realism
which has replaced the initial burst of enthusiasm immediately after the
fall of communism.
Strict banking and investment criteria now apply, says Mr Phil Hudson of
East 8, the specialist eastern European real estate consultancy.
The Polish property market is beginning to emerge, however - although it is
still less developed than those of some of its neighbours. Poland, with its
population approaching 40m, represents the largest potential market in the
region and many western companies rate it as an important location in which
to become established.
The focus is on Warsaw where there is still a shortage of office
accommodation which comes up to acceptable western standards - and the
city's top office rents are among the highest in central Europe. However, at
about Dollars 45-Dollars 55 a sq m a month for centrally-located space,
rents have fallen from the heady heights of DM85 a sq m a month which was
paid for space in one of the first new high-quality buildings, the LIM
Centre, a couple of years ago.
Mr Michael Hodges, Jones Lang Wootton partner, estimates that some 60,000 sq
m of new space came onto the market in Poland last year - with 80 per cent
of that being either let or sold. Another 25,000 sq m will be added with the
completion of two further buildings in Warsaw - the IPC Business Centre
(15,000 sq m) and the Warsaw Corporate Centre (10,000 sq m).
There are, however, doubts concerning the level of future supply. Two big
projects appear to be on ice, at least in the short term. The first is a
proposed 40-storey, 75,000 sq m office building in central Warsaw where the
developers may be having second thoughts.
The other project on hold is the US Business Centre, a 25,000 sq m office
development adjoining the Polytechnika metro station, south of the central
business district. Here again, problems are mainly with financing, says Mr
Angus Mclntosh of Healey & Baker. He considers that investors are
increasingly nervous of large-scale, long-term projects. They would rather
take the much safer option of small, fast-track developments. It also let
relatively quickly.
International retailers see Warsaw as an important location and there has
been keen competition to secure representation in the better shopping areas.
Rents on the prime Nowy Swiat and Chmielna are now in the region of Dollars
100 a sq m a month.
Shopping provision in Warsaw, though, is generally poor. The city is crying
out, says Mr McIntosh, for a decent shopping centre which could create its
own glamorous aura - independently of the comparative drabness of the city
centre itself.
Away from Warsaw, the ambitious town centre development in Szczecin is
almost completed. In this town of just 400,000 inhabitants, close to the
German border and 1 1/2 hours' drive from Berlin, the project has been
developed in partnership with the Polish Steamship Company. It consists of a
hotel, to be operated by the US Radisson Group, 25,000 sq m of offices,
3,000 sq m of shops and a casino.
The main office tenant is to be the steamship company and the remainder is
intended for letting to western companies. However, so far little news of
leasing progress - or the lack of it - has filtered through.
Funding comes from the Austrian Girozentrale Vienna which is providing a
DM170m syndicated loan, part of which is guaranteed by the Austrian State
Export Promotion Bank. In addition, Girozentrale is putting in equity of
DM85m.
Developers and sources of finance for development in Poland are coming
mainly from Austria and Germany with a sprinkling of other Europeans and a
few from the US. British developers and investors are conspicuous by their
absence.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

930312

