FT932-6870

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (1): Getting their breath back -
Speculators' enthusiasm for attacking currencies may be dimmed, but fears
for the future remain. Events of the past year show how sound economic
policies and internationally compatible interest rates are a necessary, but
not sufficient, condition for currency stability


   By PETER NORMAN


GLOBAL FOREIGN exchange markets have gone through their most turbulent 12
months since the collapse of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system in
the early 1970s.
The European exchange rate mechanism has been in almost continual crisis
since September, with the latest aftershocks to the original eruption
forcing devaluations of the Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo earlier
this month. Unprecedented cross-border flows have forced sterling and the
Italian lira to quit the system and necessitated three devaluations of the
peseta, two of the escudo and one of the Irish punt.
Never has central bank intervention been so large scale or ineffective in
trying to control currency markets. Policy-makers and foreign exchange
market players are still coming to terms with the past eight months' events.
Clearly, special factors exacerbated the original ERM crisis. But in many
ways, the foreign exchange markets were ripe for turmoil.
What was already the world's most liquid market had undergone wide-ranging
changes in the previous five years. Global foreign exchange turnover grew
rapidly with the liberalisation of cross-border financial flows. This rapid
expansion was spurred by the spread and increased sophistication of
technology that reduced transaction costs. At the same time, investment
decisions were increasingly concentrated in the hands of professional fund
managers.
Net turnover in the three largest markets (London, New York and Tokyo) is
estimated to have increased threefold in the past six years: a rate of
growth far exceeding that of world trade or international investment
business. Market surveys conducted by the Bank of England, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York and the Bank of Japan suggest that global net
turnover now approaches Dollars 1,000bn a day - a sum dwarfing the estimated
Dollars 550bn of currency reserves held by the industrialised countries.
The nature of trading has also changed, making developments less predictable
for policy-makers. Trading of derivative securities has expanded rapidly. In
Britain, for example, spot transactions accounted for only 50 per cent of
gross turnover in 1992, compared with 73 per cent in 1986. Trading in
forwards and swaps increased from 27 per cent of gross turnover in 1986 to
47 per cent last year.
Into this volatile mix have come new players, bringing added muscle and new
attitudes to currency trading.
For years, foreign exchange markets were dominated by the large
international banks, the securities houses, corporate treasurers and central
banks.
These long-established participants have since been joined by institutional
investors, such as pension funds, mutual funds and insurance companies, and
the US-based hedge funds. The hedge funds - made famous overnight by the
ability of Mr George Soros's Quantum Fund to make Dollars 1bn from
sterling's devaluation since Wednesday September 16 - have proved to be
especially potent. They are largely unregulated, because they are usually
incorporated in offshore locations, and operate primarily by taking highly
leveraged, speculative positions.
If the hedge funds are the shock troops of the new generation of
speculators, the pension funds are the heavy artillery. A recent study by
the International Monetary Fund cited estimates that the cross-border assets
of the world's leading pension funds could be as high as Dollars 880bn by
the middle of this decade. Already some of this potentially mobile money is
being actively invested in speculative ventures. Hedge fund managers in New
York say that traditionally cautious institutions are entrusting them with a
small portion of their assets in the hope of big gains.
In this volatile climate, the ERM countries paid heavily for failing to
agree a timely adjustment of their parities in response to the exceptional
inflationary pressures unleashed by German unification.
The Danish No vote in the June 1992 referendum on Maastricht exposed the
fragility of so-called convergence plays, in which investors had piled into
high yielding, fundamentally weak ERM currencies such as the peseta, lira
and British pound, in the belief that they would not be devalued in the
approach to economic and monetary union in Europe.
France's decision to hold a referendum on Maastricht on September 20, gave
the markets a firm date to speculate against.
Italy's 7 per cent lira devaluation of early September poured fuel on the
glowing embers, because it was the first ERM devaluation in many years to
exceed the system's pre-set margins of fluctuation and so reward the
speculator.
Reports late on Tuesday September 15 that Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the
Bundesbank president, was dissatisfied because sterling had not devalued
further fanned the flames. Although eventually denied, they made the crisis
unstoppable.
The September crisis produced massive windfall profits for many banks and
financial institutions at the expense of the industrial world's central
banks. Although there were some losers - Bank Negara, the Malaysian central
bank, is thought to have lost heavily by backing sterling, and to have
sharply reduced its speculative forays into the market - there were far more
winners.
These developments have presented the world's monetary and regulatory
authorities with a serious headache. And careful examination of the events
leading up to and beyond last September, by experts in the IMF, the Group of
10 leading industrial countries, as well as by the European Community
monetary committee and the EC committee of central bank governors, have
produced no magic formula for avoiding future mishap.
At European level, there is now a rift between those who acknowledge the
need for greater exchange-rate flexibility and those who want to accelerate
the drive to economic and monetary union as a way of pre-empting further
speculative attacks.
The one unanimous conclusion is that the enhanced volatility of the markets
cannot, and should not, be countered by the re-introduction of exchange
controls. Such action is considered to be folly in an increasingly
interdependent world economy.
Central bank intervention is no longer a sufficiently potent weapon to deter
speculative flows. Net sales of D-marks by European central banks totalled
DM284bn in the second half of 1992. But this massive deployment of currency
reserves and central bank borrowings was unable to prevent the devaluation
or floating of the Finnish, Swedish, Norwegian, Italian, British, Irish,
Spanish and Portuguese currencies.
True, the successful defence of the French franc by the Bundesbank and
Banque de France showed that large scale intervention can work, provided the
markets are convinced of the determination of the monetary authorities
involved and the credibility of the economic policies they represent. But
victory was costly for France, involving increases in interest rates that
damaged the country's government, economy and banks.
The past year's events show how sound economic policies and internationally
compatible interest rates are a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for
currency stability.
The speculators' enthusiasm for attacking currencies may yet be dimmed by
closer international co-operation and more timely adjustments of exchange
rates.
But fears for the future remain, because the power of the investment
community to overcome defenders of exchange rates will increase in the years
ahead as cross-border investments grow and capital markets become more
integrated.
The foreign exchange markets are likely to remain potentially volatile, at
least until the world's monetary authorities have demonstrated an ability to
impose crippling losses on one of the new generation of players.

The Financial Times


London Page I

930526

