FT931-3909

FT  13 MAR 93 / Mediators fail to sway Milosevic


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER


   PARIS


BOSNIA peace mediators Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen last night left a
meeting in Paris with Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian president, with no
more than vague assurances that he will use his influence to back their
peace plan.
After a meeting hosted by President Francois Mitterrand of France, followed
by a dinner at the French Foreign Ministry, Lord Owen and Mr Vance expressed
their habitual public optimism that the peace talks in New York were about
to enter a more positive phase. It had been a good meeting and 'some
progress' was made, they said.
However, apart from extracting a promise from Mr Milosevic that he would do
his best to persuade the Bosnian Serb leader, Mr Radovan Karadzic, to attend
the peace talks in New York next week, the mediators do not appear to have
won any concrete commitments from the Serbian president. Indeed, he stressed
after the first meeting with the mediators and Mr Mitterrand that he had no
direct part to play in the peace negotiations. It was up to the warring
parties to work out an agreement on the controversial map dividing Bosnia
into 10 provinces.
Mr Milosevic's attempt to stand aside from the peace negotiations was not at
all to the taste of the mediators, who had engineered the Paris meeting with
the express objective of persuading Mr Milosevic to put pressure on Mr
Karadzic.
Mr Mitterrand brandished both the carrot and the stick in his approach to
the Serbian president. Though he gave a magisterial outline of Serbia's
historical role in Europe, this was offset by his clear warning that,
whatever the rights and wrongs of the situation in Bosnia, the international
community was determined to take action against Belgrade (in the form of
tighter sanctions) if the Serbs did nothing to help end the conflict in
Bosnia.
Mr Vance and Lord Owen have returned to New York breathing confidence that
their negotiations will resume next week, but on past experience, they
cannot be sure that either Mr Karadzic or Mr Alija Izetbegovic, the Moslem
Bosnian president, will turn up.
However, even if both attend the talks in New York, unless Mr Milosevic is
prepared to play the ace that he undoubtedly holds, the prospects for peace
must still be gloomy.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930313

