FT933-12675

FT  23 JUL 93 / Rebels cave in to Managua troops' assault


   By TIM COONE


   MANAGUA


LEFT-WING rebels who took control of the northern town of Estel in Nicaragua
on Wednesday surrendered to government troops yesterday after a day of heavy
fighting which left 40 people dead and more than 100 wounded.
Several hundred of the rebels, veterans of the war in the 1980s against the
US-backed Contras, had taken control of the town and cut the Pan-American
highway in protest at the government's austere economic policy.
They were led by a former Sandinista major who commanded an elite
counter-insurgency battalion.
The army deployed about 2,000 troops to retake the town, backed by armoured
vehicles and helicopter gunships. However, it said that the heavy weapons
had been used sparingly to minimise civilian casualties.
The rebels' attack was the most serious challenge to the authority of the
government of President Violeta Chamorro since she took power from the
left-wing Sandinistas in April, 1990.
Calling themselves the Workers and Peasants Revolutionary Front (FROC), the
rebels had demanded finance for small farmers and craftsmen, and free health
and education and lifetime pensions for some 100,000 demobilised troops.
They also want to stop gold mines and sugar and banana plantations being
privatised.
However, the government had refused to negotiate, and a spokesman for the
army, which continues under Sandinista control, earlier described the rebels
as 'delinquents' who would be pursued into the mountains and destroyed.
While condemning the rebels, the leadership of the Sandinista party (FSLN)
has called on the government to take urgent action to alleviate growing
poverty in the countryside.
Deep rifts have recently appeared within the party. The radical wing,
supported by leaders of trade unions and peasant farmers, wants to break
away from what has evolved into a coalition government of social democrats,
other centrists and FSLN moderates.
The army, under General Umberto Ortega, is firmly behind the government.
However, the government is now being attacked from both right and left as
austerity measures implemented over the past two years have cut social
services sharply and increased unemployment.
A loose alliance of right-wing and left-wing rebels in the mountains has
been skirmishing with the army for the past year. They are thought to number
around 1,500.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930723

