FT933-10183

FT  05 AUG 93 / Leeds and the bee go for size: John Gapper examines the
logic behind the latest building society merger


   By JOHN GAPPER


The division of spoils between the National & Provincial and Leeds Permanent
building societies in their proposed merger announced yesterday is unusual.
Leeds is to retain its name, its head office, and its chairman. National &
Provincial will contribute its chief executive, and a cartoon bee.
The bee, which is the society's trademark, and the chief executive, Mr David
O'Brien, are already the most recognisable aspects of N&P. Both are likely
to become better known as a result of the merger which is intended to create
the third largest society.
The division of posts, offices and brands are odd enough. But the reasons
for the deal are at least as out of the ordinary. The overwhelming motive
for mergers in the past five years has been the rescue of small troubled
societies by bigger, better capitalised ones.
This merger is different both in scale and significance. It not only creates
a rival to Nationwide in asset size, it has also been negotiated from
positions of mutual strength. In deciding to merge, both societies have
given a signal that industry consolidation is entering a critical stage.
Both managements insist that they are attempting something different from
just a marriage of convenience. 'This is a true merger, not a rescue,' said
Mr Roger Boyes, Leeds' acting chief executive since Mr Mike Blackburn left
in February to take charge of the Halifax.
Yet that difference makes the task harder. In trying to create a larger
force in the overcrowded retail financial services market, the participants
already know the pitfalls. Unless they cut costs and achieve a real merger,
they are in danger of simply growing more unwieldy and bloated.
The example not to follow is Nationwide Building Society, which failed to
merge the Nationwide and Anglia societies properly in 1987. Nationwide is
only now starting to show signs of tackling the high cost to income ratio
and poor returns on capital and assets it inherited.
Yet those involved argued yesterday that they had little choice but to take
the risk. Mr Boyes said consolidation was dividing societies into large
distributors of products that include not only mortgages but life insurance
and equity products; and small local societies.
If the merger proceeds, it will mean that the new top three societies will
hold 48 per cent of the industry's assets, and the top five - including
Alliance & Leicester and Woolwich - 64 per cent. Concentration is such that
the top 20 already hold 99 per cent.
The process of consolidation has implications for other financial services
companies, including banks. First, life insurance companies and retail banks
are also trying to establish dominance in product distribution. Lloyds' bid
to take over Midland last year was intended to aid this.
Second, the emergence of larger societies increases the likelihood that
another will follow Abbey National, the second largest mortgage lender, into
public limited company status. The new Leeds may consider the idea.
But all this turns on Leeds achieving real gains from the merger. The
participants cited three benefits yesterday: economies of scale and cost
savings; more effective distribution of products; better management.
Cost savings are the most obvious. The new society intends to reduce the
combined branch network to 650 from 769, eliminating 1,600 of the combined
9,800 staff.
But both have a mixed history of trimming costs. Their cost to income ratios
of 42.8 per cent for Leeds and 40.1 per cent for N&P are better than
Nationwide and Woolwich. However, they do not match the strict discipline of
Cheltenham & Gloucester's 22.1 per cent.
The likelihood of distributing products better is less certain. N&P is
already tied to its own life insurance subsidiary, but Leeds was about to
set up its own. No clear plan has been settled for combining the operations.
The question the respective chairmen and chief executives had most
difficulty answering yesterday was how their sales would be helped just by
being bigger. Size has helped Halifax, the largest society, to lead the
market, but will a society half its size be big enough?
Finally, there is management improvement. Mr O'Brien has achieved a
reputation at N&P for using analytical methods such as 'process
re-engineering' which are unusual for a society. He said he would apply some
of these to Leeds, but it remains unclear how effective they will prove.
Two audiences will have to be convinced that the merger is worthwhile: the
US ratings agencies, which rate debt and so fix the cost of wholesale
borrowing, and the societies' members.
Mr O'Brien and Mr Boyes are walking a narrow line between the two in
deciding how much - if at all - to reward members for approving the merger.
By giving them bonuses, they would cut the capital ratios to which agencies
such as Moody's and Standard and Poor's attach great importance.
The threat of protests from staff and members, and yesterday's announcement
that the societies' debt ratings face review by Moody's, show that it is a
tricky balance. Many financial institutions will be watching to see if Mr
O'Brien and the bee achieve it.
Lex, Page 16
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
                          Leeds            N&P
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
Branches                  453              316
Employees                 5,591            4,231
Customers                 4.5m             2.76m
Total assets              pounds18.3bn     pounds12bn
League position           5*               8*     (3 combined)
Pre-tax profits           pounds152.7m     pounds80.2m
Cost/income ratio         42.8%            40.9%
Chief executive           vacant           David O'Brien
Chairman                  Malcolm Barr     Richard Newton
Head office               Leeds            Bradford
Credit card               Leeds Visa       N&P Visa
Estate agency             89               14
Tied to                   Norwich Union    N&P Life Assurances Ltd
Current account           No               No
Cash machines             105              67
Agencies                  149              170
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
Leeds: All financial information as at last balance sheet date
audited 30/9/92
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
N&P: All financial information as at last balance sheet date
audited 31/12/92
 ---------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930805

