FT934-8506

FT  15 NOV 93 / Italian Government Bonds: Good response expected to 30-year
sale


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


DESPITE concerns about the Italian government bond market's volatility,
political instability in Italy, and its poor inflation record, the signs are
that the first auction by Rome of 30-year government bonds tomorrow will be
well received by traders.
In the grey market, the new 30-year paper was trading at a yield spread of
50 - 55 basis points over 10-year government bonds at the end of last week.
By comparison, in the French government bond market, 30-year bonds trade at
a spread of nearly 70 basis points above 10-year bonds.
This means that the new Italian bonds could look rather expensive for
investors.
International investors often look at foreign debt ratings (even when
judging domestic debt): France is rated triple-A by both Moody's Investors
Service and Standard & Poor's, while Italy is rated AA by S&P and has
slipped, rather controversially, to A1, according to Moody's.
Investors, therefore, may baulk at paying a higher yield spread over 10-year
bonds for 30-year Italian debt than they would for French.
With 10-year Italian bonds yielding around 9.2 per cent, this means a yield
of around 9.7 per cent for the new 30-year.
The spread between the two is about the same as in the Dutch government bond
market, where 10-year bonds yield 5.8 per cent and 30-year bonds 6.35 per
cent.
No other European country has 30-year government bonds (the longest-dated
gilts mature in 2027), but there are 30-year Ecu bonds.
So why is the spread so tight in the grey market? The main reason seems to
be lack of supply.
The size of the first auction is only L2,000bn, and the novelty of the issue
appears to have attracted droves of traders ahead of the auction.
However, grey market prices are not always reflected in auction results,
according to traders.
Many fund managers are likely to stand back until prices have had a chance
to settle down.
'We are very bullish (on the Italian market) and we like the idea of a
30-year,' said Mr Andy Seaman, a bond fund manager at Guinness Flight in
London. 'Inflation will remain low and real yields are among the highest
around.'
However, Mr Seaman says he will 'wait to see what happens' before buying any
paper, arguing that off-the-run 10-year bonds appear to offer better value
currently.
The Italian government bond market has been one of the success stories of
the year, posting total returns of around 28 per cent for the first 10
months of the year, according to JP Morgan's government bond index.
But the market has also been highly volatile and it lost substantial ground
earlier this month, underperforming other markets when they were all dragged
down by US Treasury market weakness. This could discourage some investors
from buying 30-year paper, particularly if it is tightly priced.
'The inflation story in Italy is still that its track record is quite poor,
and 30-year stock will be extremely volatile and risky because these fears
will be reflected,' said Mr Jouni Kokko, an international economist at SG
Warburg.
At the end of last week, the Italian market perked up again, buoyed by
several pieces of long-awaited good news; in particular, the budget approval
by the senate, and the approval of new rules on refunding withholding tax to
foreign investors.
For the Italian government, the expected success of the 30-year deal will be
another step in its efforts to bring its heavy debt burden under control.
One target has been to extend the average maturity of its debt, which is
currently just three years. The Republic launched a successful Dollars 5.5bn
global offering of 10-year and 30-year bonds in September.
According to a Treasury official, only 26 per cent of Italian debt is
long-term and fixed-rate.
Despite the likely success of the 30-year issue, and a short burst of good
news, the chances are that the market will remain volatile. With elections
likely early next year, and political scandal still rife, investors in
30-year bonds could find that they get a rather bumpy ride.
However, given the general view that European interest rates are set to fall
further, and Italy will be one of the main beneficiaries - and given that
yields approaching double-digits are increasingly hard to come by - there
are good reasons for buying the paper, even if not at the first auction.
The Treasury is promising to provide enough paper to ensure liquidity, and
the initial L2,000bn is 'certainly not enough,' said the official.
He said that he was encouraged by the strong trading of the new bonds in the
grey market, 'but we will do more anyway'.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

931115

