FT933-10018

FT  06 AUG 93 / Roads bring growing tensions to Whitehall


   By BRONWEN MADDOX, Environment Correspondent


MEASURES announced yesterday to cut red tape surrounding new road projects
throw a spotlight on growing tensions between transport and environmental
policies.
The two government departments concerned occupy opposite ends of the same
1970s tower block in Westminster. Environmentalists - and some government
officials in private - wonder whether that is all they share.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England said it was 'dismayed' that
road planning would be speeded up. It added: 'The Department of Transport is
in a world of its own. The government as a whole is committed to achieving
more environmentally sustainable transport policies.'
The past few weeks have seen fierce battles between environmental
campaigners and the government's roads programme. Yesterday's announcement
came as six people who protested against the extension of the M3 at Twyford
Down, Hampshire, were released from prison on remission after serving half
their 28-day sentences for defying an injunction. They went straight to the
Department of Transport to continue their protest.
A month ago the government dropped plans to build a highway through the
ancient Oxleas Wood in south-east London, after local and national
opposition of similar intensity. But just two weeks ago it announced that
the M25 motorway encircling the capital would be widened to 14 lanes at its
busiest point.
The Department of the Environment has stayed quiet on most of these
proposals, although Mr John Gummer, environment secretary, has welcomed the
Oxleas Wood reprieve. He and Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, say
they work closely with each other.
The UK's Pounds 23bn road building programme poses several problems for
environment policy. Traffic fumes are the fastest growing factor in air
pollution - some doctors hold them responsible for soaring cases of asthma
in children. Carbon dioxide from vehicles also threatens the UK's ability to
meet international environmental targets.
Friends of the Earth, the pressure group, was sceptical that yesterday's
measures would succeed in speeding up road planning.
The environment department has acknowledged that growth in traffic emissions
is one of the most intractable pollution trends. But it said the roads
programme would help reduce traffic jams. It added: 'We've always said that
it is better to have cars moving than waiting idly putting out fumes.' It
said there would be no 'open sprawl' of construction. Planning measures,
such as the 'green belt' around London, were already in place.
It may take more than that ring of foliage, however, to persuade
environmentalists that common ground can be found between the transport and
environment policies.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930806

