FT934-11120

FT  02 NOV 93 / International Company News: Unions agree to staff cuts at
Aer Lingus


   By TIM COONE


   DUBLIN


AGREEMENT was reached yesterday between management and unions at Aer Lingus,
the Irish Republic's troubled state-run airline, on IPounds 21m (Pounds
19.8m) of payroll cuts being sought by the company, out of a total of
IPounds 50m in a cost-pruning rescue plan to bring the airline back from the
brink of financial disaster.
The agreement accepts 800 job losses from the airline's 5,500 workforce, and
'radical' changes to work practices. The deal has still to be approved by
the workforce in a secret ballot of union members, but union officials
yesterday acknowledged that they would be unable to get better terms from
the company.
A clearly relieved Mr Bernie Cahill, the airline's executive chairman, said:
'A few months ago there was no future for the airline. Now there is. I
believe the rescue plan will work, I have no doubt about that.'
Mr Paul O'Sullivan, the negotiating official for Siptu, the trade union
representing the bulk of the Aer Lingus workforce, described the
negotiations as the toughest he had ever been through in an industrial
relations dispute.
He said it was 'heartbreaking' to negotiate away 800 jobs and that 'the
changes being asked of the workforce are enormous, but are necessary to
create an airline capable of competing in a deregulated market.'
The airline was seeking cuts of 1,280 man-years in labour costs, but
received acceptances for only 800 voluntary redundancies. Management then
argued that only 300 of these could be released, unless there were major
changes in work practices. These have now been conceded by the unions.
Still to be negotiated are IPounds 14m cuts in labour costs from the
airline's aircraft maintenance subsidiary, Team, and IPounds 15m in
non-labour overheads.
The company said that more rapid progress was now expected in those areas,
with the core agreement now settled with staff in the main airline business.
Two obstacles still lie in the path of finally wrapping up the rescue plan,
assuming the secret ballot approves the deal.
First, management and unions have agreed to go to arbitration over pay
settlements for the coming year - the airline management says no pay award
can be made next year.
Second, a IPounds 175m equity injection promised by the government in the
event of IPounds 50m of cost savings being achieved, is still dependent upon
approval by the EC Commission.
Aer Lingus's rivals on the intensely competitive Dublin-London route are
waging a lobbying campaign in Brussels to block approval, arguing that the
government support would create unfair competition for their operations.
Without the IPounds 175m support, yesterday's deal with the unions will come
unravelled.
The airline is currently losing about IPounds 1.2m a week and last month
reported a pre-tax deficit of IPounds 190.7m for the year ending March 31
1993 on turnover of IPounds 817m.
With net debt of IPounds 540m at the last financial year-end, gearing was
533 per cent. In the summer, the airline's bank creditors threatened to shut
off lines of credit to the airline unless a viable rescue plan was put in
place by the autumn.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

931102

