FT932-3377

FT  15 JUN 93 / World Trade News: US pacts must be 'results-oriented'


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


THE US Council on Competitiveness has joined a growing number of influential
private-sector groups recommending Washington negotiate 'results-oriented'
pacts, including market-share goals, when strong companies cannot gain
foreign market access.
In its latest report - Roadmap for Results: Trade Policy, Technology and
American Competitiveness - the council also endorses the use of trade
sanctions if necessary.
The council is headed by Mr George Fisher, chairman of Motorola, who was one
of the few private-sector representatives invited to dine on Friday night
with a Japanese delegation in Washington for trade negotiations. It played a
key role in developing the Clinton administration's technology policy.
The new report offers some insight into US strategy towards Japan, which it
names as a candidate for results-oriented pacts because 'its structural
barriers and discriminatory private-sector linkages are often more
entrenched than in other parts of the world'.
The report acknowledges that the US has, in the past, relied too heavily on
trade policy instead of addressing basic competitiveness problems, such as
insufficient research and development, 'impatient capital markets and a
burdensome regulatory environment'.
US trade policy has been poorly co-ordinated among government agencies and
with other policies, the report says. This has led to numerous
inconsistencies; for example Washington rejecting subsidies in multilateral
steel talks, while making plans to subsidise high-technology R&D.
The administration has already moved to correct past deficiencies. Its Japan
policy has been developed in the interagency National Economic Council in
tandem with the National Security Agency. It is insisting on some kind of
measurable indicators, and has the broad backing of both Republicans and
Democrats in Congress.
Although the administration has pledged not to retaliate if negotiated goals
are not met, it will use sanctions to enforce trade US laws.
The options for leverage are numerous. A higher mini-van tariff, now buried
in a Treasury review process, could be called into play or US officials
could return to talking up the yen.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930615

