FT933-9912

FT  06 AUG 93 / International Company News: Mixed returns from US retailers


   By NIKKI TAIT


   NEW YORK


LARGE US retailers yesterday reported widely differing sales patterns during
July, suggesting that recovery in the stores sector remains patchy and
subject to promotional activity and regional trends.
One of the best performers was Sears, Roebuck, the Chicago-based department
store group, which recorded a 15.4 per cent improvement in domestic
same-store sales last month.
Mr Arthur Martinez, the merchandise group's chairman, said the gain had been
'broadly-based', with noticeably strong results from clothing lines and some
'hardlines', especially tyres.
The heatwave which has engulfed parts of the US for the past month had
produced double-digit sales of air conditioners, while Sears was also seeing
an increase in demand for repairs and services from consumers in flooded
areas of the Mid-west.
Kmart, the discount store and specialty retailer which this week disclosed
it was considering the sale of its PayLess drug store chain, also notched up
a much-improved performance last month.
Same-store sales growth reached 3.7 per cent overall, and the domestic
general merchandise side registered a 6.3 per cent advance.
This compared with 1.4 per cent and 3 per cent respectively for the first
six months of the financial year.
Mr Joseph Antonini, chairman, said the company was 'particularly encouraged
by the continuing strength in our hardline merchandise categories', although
he admitted the increase in clothing sales had been more modest.
Also faring fairly well last month were Wal-Mart Stores, the nation's
top-selling retailer, which posted a 9 per cent same-store sales gain in
July, and May Department Stores, which saw a 7.1 per cent same-store sales
advance in its main department store division.
Among specialist retailers, The Limited posted an 8 per cent increase in
comparable store sales, while several electronic goods retailers - such as
Tandy and Circuit City - also reported significant advances.
But a handful of retail groups told a less encouraging story.
Woolworth, for example, saw domestic comparable store sales fall by 3.3 per
cent in July, while JC Penney reported a 3.1 per cent decline in its
mainline stores.
The latter said sales in its children's and home divisions had been affected
by the moving of promotional events from July 1992 to August this year.
Federated Department Stores, which takes in chains such as Bloomingdale's
and The Bon Marche, saw a 0.2 per cent decline in same-store sales last
month.
Mr Allen Questrom, chairman, blamed inadequate stocks, plus some planned
August promotional activity, for the disappointing returns.
But he added that the July figures 'should have no bearing on our business
or our performance expectations for the remainder of the year'.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930806

