FT934-10205

FT  06 NOV 93 / International Company News: Telephone trio in talks on
setting up 'supercarrier'


   By ALAN CANE


THE THREE largest inter-national telephone companies are in talks which
could lead to the creation of a 'global supercarrier' which will redraw the
map of telecommunications competition in Europe.
Sources close to Deutsche Bundespost Telekom and France Telecom say the
companies have submitted a proposal to Brussels seeking approval for a
merger of all their core activities other than basic voice services.
The proposal says the two companies would first merge the management of
telephone lines, leased lines and data services. They also plan to create a
pan-European intelligent voice network.
Such a venture would compete directly with the Dollars 5.3bn partnership
announced earlier this year between BT and MCI Communications Corporation.
The proposal goes on to say that the new joint company will be seeking a US
partner. Both companies are talking intensively to AT&T, the world's largest
carrier about Eunetcom, a Franco-German joint venture which operates global
telephone networks for large corporate customers.
According to Communications Week International, a trade magazine which will
publish details of the proposed alliance on Monday, a memorandum of
understanding between the three companies has been drawn up but not yet
signed.
It is understood that Mr Marcel Roulet, chairman of France Telecom and Mr
Helmut Ricke, chairman of Deutsche Telekom, have already discussed the
project - known internally as Project Atlantic with Mr Jacques Delors,
European Commission President.
BT said yesterday that it knew the companies were in discussions but was
'incredulous' that the potential partners believed such a joint venture
would pass EC anti-trust scrutiny.
Combining the international business of the French and German telecoms
companies would create a carrier with annual revenues in excess of Dollars
9bn, most coming from the lucrative European and transatlantic routes.
The three companies have been working for months to evolve a strategy which
all three could agree on and which would not violate EC competition rules.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931106

