FT932-180

FT  30 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Speaking out on a delicate matter
of principle / A look at Michael Mates's clash with Betty Boothroyd


   By ALISON SMITH and ROBERT RICE


THE DRAMATIC clashes in the Commons as Miss Betty Boothroyd, the speaker,
repeatedly warned Mr Michael Mates to look again at what he was planning to
say, brought an often-unnoticed area of Westminster procedure into the
spotlight - the sub judice rule.
Although such speeches are normally heard in silence, Miss Boothroyd was
driven again and again to interrupt Mr Mates's personal statement, insisting
that he should not give MPs information that could be used in a future
trial.
The legislation about contempt of court does not apply to the House of
Commons, but MPs are bound by a self-denying ordinance that dates from 1963.
After an inquiry by a cross-party committee the Commons decided that, in
general, matters awaiting decision in the criminal court should not be
raised in debates, motions or questions, from the time proceedings were set
in motion until the court's decision. A similar bar would operate if an
appeal were launched until that too had been resolved.
At the heart of the rule is the risk of the Commons affecting the outcome of
proceedings so it includes any matters that might prejudice a case, beyond
simply the question of expressing a view on whether a defendant is guilty.
There are parallel rules about matters before the civil courts, which were
slightly amended in 1972.
Few areas at Westminster are completely clear-cut, however, and there are
exceptions to this self-denial on the part of the Commons - notably in the
speaker's discretion to allow matters to be referred to in spite of
impending proceedings.
Usually this discretion is exercised to allow matters to be mentioned where
the risk of prejudice to proceedings is slight.
This might be, for example, because a case is awaiting appeal in a higher
court and judges can reasonably be thought to be less affected by what is
said in the Commons than a jury might be.
Another example might be where it was clear that there was no possible
likelihood of the defendant being brought to justice.
Lawyers yesterday said it was doubtful that even had Mr Mates made his
remarks outside Parliament they would have resulted in contempt-of-court
proceedings against him.
Mr David Kirk, head of the fraud unit at City solicitors Stephenson Harwood,
said that although the Polly Peck case was technically sub judice, Miss
Boothroyd appeared to have taken the sub judice rule too far.
For there to be a contempt there had to be 'a substantial risk of serious
prejudice' to a fair trial. It was arguable that there was no realistic
prospect of a trial now taking place which could be prejudiced by Mr Mates's
statement.
If the case against Mr Nadir did eventually come to court it was unlikely to
be within the next two years. 'The courts have always taken the view that
time is a great healer as far as prejudice is concerned', Mr Kirk said.
If Miss Boothroyd's argument were followed to its logical conclusion and the
trial never took place, then no one would ever be able to comment on the
case again, he added.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930630

