FT934-11179

FT  02 NOV 93 / Why judges are jumping


   By JOE ROGALY


As Britain's elected politicians become less judicious, the country's judges
become more political. It is not surprising that the judiciary is expanding
its influence. The government thinks only of its day-to-day survival; the
opposition is immobilised by fear of upsetting anyone. Our politicians are a
sorry lot. The courts are presided over by some of the brightest minds in
public life. Like it or not, the latter are doing their best to compensate
for the deficiencies of the former.
We have seen much evidence of this over the past few years. The modern half
of the story begins in 1987, when the then new Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay,
intimated that judges could decide for themselves whether they wished to
address the general public by talking to the media. He thus abolished the
convention established in a letter written to the BBC by one of his
predecessors, Lord Kilmuir, in 1955. The essence of the 'Kilmuir rules' was
that, in order to keep the judiciary 'insulated from the controversies of
the day', their lordships should keep their honourable traps shut when off
the bench.
Two years later the judges rewarded Lord Mackay's liberalism by publishing
their objections to his proposals for reform of the legal profession. Senior
judges handled the back-up campaign on TV. The result is instructive. The
Mackay reforms have been, shall we say, modified on legal advice. Call it a
positive result of open government.
It is not possible to be so kind about the government's strategies for the
control of crime, the dispensation of punishment, and the administration of
justice. The 1991 Criminal Justice Act was in need of urgent repair the day
after it became law. Prisoners rioted at Strangeways; Lord Woolf was asked
to find out why. His subsequent report awaits implementation. Spectacular
miscarriages of justice were revealed. Lord Runciman was asked to make
recommendations. His report, delivered in July, has been used as a bran-box
from which to pick measures that suit the home secretary's mood.
Enter Lord Taylor. At the end of April 1992, a few weeks after one of the
most ill-starred administrations since 1979 had been returned to office, the
erstwhile Sir Peter Taylor became Lord Chief Justice. Unlike his
predecessor, Lord Lane, the new top judge is willing, anxious even, to speak
his mind. Just 18 months on, he has become a serious player in the political
game. He appears at social events around town, cheerful and chatty. His
demeanour is that of a public office holder campaigning to reshape parts of
the law.
The new Lord Chief Justice led the assault on Lord Mackay for the latter's
parsimony with legal aid. Result: zilch. He demanded more judges, and got
them. He was critical of the 1991 Criminal Justice Act; his points of
substance will doubtless be incorporated in a bill to be presented next
month. The Judges Party is determined that Britain shall incorporate the
European convention on human rights into domestic law; if not by Parliament,
then by judicial stealth. Lord Woolf, a fellow crusader for better
governance, recently slipped. In an otherwise brilliant address on the
inadequacy of merely building more jails which produce more criminals, he
spoke of prosecuting property owners who failed to burglar-proof their
houses or cars. Enemies of the Judges Party trained their fire upon him.
Outspoken judges are not unique in British history. A biography* of Lord
Denning by Iris Freeman, just published, will convince you of that. Still
alive at 94, the former Master of the Rolls was in his time the most popular
jurist anyone could recall. He stayed on the bench too long and made some
silly mistakes towards the end of his career, but prior to that he was
outstanding, the most brilliant legal mind of the century.
A grammar school boy like Lord Taylor, Lord Denning used the law creatively
in order to change it. His views were made plain in many books and speeches,
but he owed his appointment as Master of the Rolls to Lord Kilmuir, he of
the Trappist rules for judges. 'In general,' says Freeman, 'Tom agreed with
the rules for others, if not for himself . . .' He was most effective on the
bench, where, ever the opportunist, he grabbed at cases that he could
manipulate to make a particular point. His first-class mind and
encyclopaedic memory enabled him to devise fresh interpretations of both
statute and, more particularly, common law.
The present generation of reforming judges may have profited from the
Denning example, which, of course, they all know by heart. Like him, many of
them have learnt to speak plain English, without pomposity. Unlike him, they
are not absolutely in tune with common opinion - although, to be fair, we
live in a more heterogeneous society. Tom Denning, born to a Hampshire
draper in 1899 and a believing Christian, could be ever the English
pragmatist. His successors must grapple with Europe, the break-up of the
family, the decline of the inner city, and the social chaos we all know and
love.
Lord Denning led a frontal assault on the iron rule of precedent, which
obliged judges to deliver patently absurd verdicts. The Law Lords freed
themselves, but not lower courts, from the rule. He insisted on reading past
the text to establish what legislators intended. Today judges may at least
consult Hansard. He extended the law of negligence, and defended the
ordinary subject's right to compensation from ministers. He was a corkscrew:
finding against a Labour trade union law here and a Conservative one there.
Catholics, Jews, the Irish, blacks and others may feel slighted by some of
the references in this otherwise sympathetic book. My reading of it is that,
if Lord Denning harboured the prejudices of his fellow Englishmen, he did
not allow them to influence his judgments.
Iris Freeman gives us a great many facts. She lists all the Dennings'
travels and refers to more than 150 cases. She does not, however, spend much
space putting his legal achievements in context. Perhaps it is too soon. We
cannot yet know which judges will have turned out to be the most effective:
the cunning maverick Denning, or the more overtly political Taylor & Co.
Meanwhile, if you're worried about judge-made law, elect better politicians.
*Lord Denning, by Iris Freeman, Hutchinson, 449 pages, Pounds 25

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931102

