FT932-3363

FT  15 JUN 93 / Japan 'to hold interest rates' as yen rises


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


JAPAN will not adjust interest rates to stem the yen's continued rise
against the dollar, Mr Yasushi Mieno, the Bank of Japan's governor, said
yesterday after the dollar fell to an all-time low of Y105.20 at the close
of trading in Tokyo.
Mr Mieno's remarks at his regular press conference are likely to fuel a
further rise in the yen over the next few days, say Tokyo foreign exchange
dealers. The dollar fell by Y1.12 in Tokyo yesterday.
Many Tokyo dealers believe the dollar will continue to slide against the yen
until the US authorities intervene to support the dollar to prevent US
import prices and inflation from rising.
The yen's rise is being fuelled by several factors, chiefly the rising
Japanese trade surplus. US-Japanese government talks over the weekend in
Washington failed to agree a framework for cutting the surplus.
Mr Mieno's rejection of a change in monetary policy is part of a subtle
shift in Tokyo's approach to the yen's rise, which may senior officials
privately acknowledge is heading for Y100 to the dollar.
In late April, when the dollar fell sharply from about Y115 to about Y110,
the Bank of Japan joined a fierce attack on the Clinton administration for
allegedly encouraging the yen to rise. Business leaders and politicians
warned that the yen's appreciation could choke off the recovery of the
Japanese economy.
In contrast the yen's most recent rise to about Y105 has not been
accompanied by criticism of the US. The government's claim that
international co-ordination to stabilise exchange rates, which Tokyo says
was agreed at an April meeting of Group of Seven finance ministers, is
looking increasingly tattered.
Instead Tokyo policy makers now acknowledge that the dollar will probably
stop falling only when Washington decides to support the US currency.
Mr Yuji Tanahashi, vice minister of the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry, warned US inflation would soon start rising, threatening a rise in
US interest rates, if the dollar fall continues.
The change of tone is not simply a reflection of the Japanese authorities'
powerlessness in preventing the yen's rise. It also reflects a reassessment
of the impact upon the economy.
The Bank of Japan believes that in the short term the yen's appreciation
could stifle the incipient recovery in the Japanese economy. However it
believes in the long run the Japanese economy may benefit as manufacturing
companies will become more efficient to cope with the yen's rise.
Mr Mieno emphasised yesterday he would take into account both the positive
and negative effects of the yen's rise in deciding the bank's policy.
Equally significant were comments by Mr Sieroku Kajiyama, secretary general
of the ruling Liberal Democratic party, that a stronger yen could be
tolerated in the long run.
Mr Mieno said it was still too early to say that the Japanese economy was
bottoming out as signs of recovery were too weak. The question of whether
the economy has hit the bottom of the cycle has sharply divided economic
ministers over the past week.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930615

