FT933-5106

FT  06 SEP 93 / US investors turn from UK to continental Europe


   By TERRY BYLAND and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


US INVESTORS who helped drive the London stock market to new peaks in the
last days of August are turning their attention to other European bourses,
threatening to undermine the UK equity market's recent rally.
Concern over US investment diverting to other European markets, particularly
France, Spain and Italy, may cast a shadow over the UK market this week
after contributing to a 1.4 per cent fall last week.
Some US funds have doubled their rate of investment in European equities
since the widening of ERM currency bands at the beginning of August.
The ensuing falls in French and German interest rates have reduced the
relative advantages of UK equities, according to London and New York
analysts with leading US investment banks.
US securities analysts and fund managers in New York, Boston and London said
they are now attracted to continental European markets after their recent
buying spree in London.
Mr Marcus Grub, of Salomon Brothers International in London, said he
favoured France, Spain, Italy and Germany over the UK. Goldman Sachs
International, is advising US investors to be 'overweight Europe', but puts
the focus on France and Spain rather than the UK.
US-based analysts are cooling on UK stocks. Mr Kevin McCarey, who runs a
Dollars 150m (Pounds 99m) pension fund that invests in European equities for
the Boston-based Fidelity group, says he has been shifting some money out of
the UK recently.
Mr McCarey is hoping to find bargains in continental Europe, especially
Italy, Spain and Germany. He explained: 'Interest rates are the highest in
Spain and Italy; therefore they have the most room to come down.'
Mr Heydon Traub, a fund manager with State Street Global Advisers in Boston
who runs a Dollars 2bn global equity fund that is 50 per cent invested in
Europe, and 10 per cent in the UK, has not taken any money out of the London
market recently because the fund has been underweight in UK stocks for a
long time.
Mr Traub said: 'The UK went through some tough economic times over the last
couple of years, and the market did not go down very much to reflect that,
so from our point of view it has been overvalued for a year or two. Given
that, we don't expect it to be a strong performer.'
Mr Traub said that in spite of strong earnings this year UK shares would
still not be as attractive as other European stocks: 'We expect UK earnings
growth to be really strong, but the price you have to pay for that is pretty
high now. You don't have to pay up as much in other markets like France.'
London has been the main beneficiary of recent US investment in Europe,
which is by far the most favoured destination for US stock investment.
Europe accounts for about 72 per cent of US investment portfolio overseas.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930906

