FT932-6

FT  30 JUN 93 / Management: Dispelling the macho myth / Experiencing the
pleasure and pain of outdoor training courses


   By TIM DICKSON


Overgrown boy scouts who derive pleasure from other people's pain? Or
underrated professionals who help companies achieve their business goals?
Earlier this year a British television documentary on outdoor management
trainers lent weight to the more sadistic view. Using vivid footage from six
days of apparent purgatory in Scotland, the programme included images of
acute executive suffering, even humiliation. The man who ran the course
complained that he had been unfairly represented, but other 'outdoor'
specialists worried that they might be tarred with the same brush.
Chris Cotton, a director of Truro-based Training In Action, was one of them.
He therefore invited me to join 10 personnel, training and other middle to
senior managers on one of his quarterly 'appreciation' courses run from a
converted 16th century thatched barn and round-house on the edge of
Dartmoor. The thinking behind these 36-hour 'experiences' is to let
participants judge the value of the outdoor training approach for
themselves.
The core of our programme, which ran from late on a Tuesday afternoon to
early Thursday morning, comprised three well-conceived and entertaining
outdoor exercises, involving an emergency rescue, raft and bridge building
to tight deadlines, and a night-time search - with compasses and flashlights
 -for a long-lost 'glass chalice'.
As Cotton emphasised, the outdoors is only a vehicle for the overall process
of learning about communication, team roles and development and the
management of change at work (topics covered on our course). Training in
Action uses the so-called experimental learning approach which incorporates
review sessions - in which groups are encouraged to analyse the process by
which the task was (or was not) achieved - and teaching modules. As well as
muddy boots, participants therefore take away some understanding of concepts
like Johari Windows (a framework for improving self-perception and the
perception of others) and snippets of the work of management gurus such as
Meredith Belbin.
Most 'appreciation course' members endorsed Cotton's claim that outdoor
training can be 'a memorable experience' which is sufficiently different
from a manager's everyday work that it becomes possible 'to concentrate on
the management process rather than getting bogged down in the task itself'.
Kevin Murphy, training manager of HMS Personnel Services (part of BET), says
it is always an advantage not to have 'the usual clutter of departmental
restrictions or traditional limitations' on a course.
'The outdoors can also offer a much safer environment for people to fail; in
the workplace the perception is that reputations, even careers, can be at
stake. Making it safe to fail encourages people to take chances and try out
new ideas, methods etc - this is when the greatest benefits can be derived.'
Lesley Dayson, training manager of computer distributors Front Line
Distribution, was not alone in arriving on Dartmoor 'with the impression
that it was all about having a good time'. But the experience changed her
opinion.
Training in Action scored high marks - particularly from the five women on
the course - for disavowing the 'macho' approach. 'It is my belief that
participants should not be forced into situations that cause serious
physical or mental stress, as this is often counterproductive,' says the
development trainer of a multinational company.
That point was illustrated when one hitherto intrepid member of our team
suddenly felt claustrophobic inside a cave, and was quickly accompanied back
to base.
'Safety conscious', 'never confrontational' and 'possessed of a strong
vision' were other tributes paid to Cotton and his colleague Richard Jones.
'The course was enjoyable, not physical and put greater emphasis on brain
power than on physical activity,' comments Lawrence Mitchell, senior
personnel manager at the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Simon Davey, finance director of GMTV, cites the significance of what he
called the 'extra touches' - notably several 'bit parts' in the three
exercises played by a neighbouring farmer. 'I have been on courses which
were unrealistic in this regard and simply led to frustration and
exhaustion,' he says.
The acid test for Training in Action, though, is whether flattering words
will ultimately be matched with corporate training budget deeds. Most of the
participants said that they would happily send junior or middle managers on
a course - even board members in one case - but that money, senior colleages
and established consultancy arrangements were among the obstacles. 'I'd like
to . . . but it's a big sell,' is how the management development manager of
a leading retailer sums it up.
Cotton says training managers often share his convictions, but that 'a
problem is persuading senior managers that they are not going to be keel
hauled in some out-of-the-way place'. Two months after the 'appreciation'
event he has no firm bookings but hopes that three or four of the companies
will consider signing up in the autumn.
Training in Action, 5 The Avenue, Truro, Cornwall TR1 1HT. Tel: 0872-78358.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930630

