FT932-3290

FT  15 JUN 93 / Arts: Wedlock - The Opera


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Babel Theatre won a London Fringe award for Best Musical last year with Pin
Money Opera. Now writer Tina Jones and composer Warren Wills have come up
with Wedlock - The Opera, which takes a mordant, not to say apocalyptic,
view, of the run up to a wedding. Marriage rituals have always provided good
material for studying contemporary hypocrisies. Add a touch of Lear, with a
single parent and three daughters, and you are well on the way to delivering
a script.
Sister Sarah (Lisa Bowerman), normality incarnate, is getting married.
Sister Kate (Anna-Juliana Clare), gay, sensible, and very much the heroine,
advises caution. Sister Rachel (Rosamund Shelley), whose problems provide
full employment for a stream of social workers, plans to use the ceremony
for an act of domestic revenge. Mother Sylvia (Pauline Monro) buries herself
in shopping and sherry. Will the ceremony draw the family together, or
provide the catalyst for radical re-appraisal?
There is something about music theatre which shrinks characters to a single
dimension. It is as if you cannot sing and develop a role at the same time.
But the gain is that however simple - not to say banal - the plot, the music
can raise the experience. Jones and Wills are not over-ambitious but they
have developed an attractive formula, which is neither opera, nor pop, nor
Andrew Lloyd Webber. The songs are simple, but sometimes have a haunting
innocence, sometimes a haunting power, and propel a broken backed story
line.
Despite yourself you get drawn into this unlikely family, with more
skeletons in its cupboard than the Black Museum. Of course, with the
predictable child abuse, infidelity, and lies, the institution of marriage
has acquired responsibility for all the evils of our generation. Wedlock
recklessly perpetuates the myth.
Yet it delivers the message with passion. Su Bentinck's set at the Battersea
Arts Centre, in which cupboards replace doors, is worrying rather than
useful, but the piece spins the imagination, thanks to the music. Warren
Mills mans the piano; Anthony Cornish directs.
BAC 071-223 2223. Until July 4

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930615

