FT932-6780

FT  27 MAY 93 / Keating pays price of promises: Australian budgeting after
unexpected election win


   By EMILIA TAGAZA


AS THE Australian budget-framing season gets under way the newly re-elected
Labor government is buckling down to the task with a starting-point deficit
of at least ADollars 15.9bn (Pounds 7.1bn).
Mr Paul Keating, the prime minister, grappling with record unemployment, has
promised to create 500,000 jobs during his three-year term. The extra
stimulatory spending required is in addition to the ADollars 4.5bn he has
injected over the past 12 months to prod the stubborn economy into life and
pull down the unemployment rate.
The problem for Mr Keating is that even without additional new spending, the
deficit over the next three years, barring an economic miracle, is likely to
remain high.
His government is pledged to deliver personal tax cuts, worth ADollars 8.6bn
between 1994 and 1996. Other expensive pre-election spending promises are
expected to cost another ADollars 2.2bn over the next three years.
The package is part of a Dutch auction between Labor and the opposition
conservative coalition parties - a cynical vote-buying exercise by a
demoralised Labor party which had held little hope of being re-elected.
Perhaps it was for this reason that it did not count on having to deliver
the package which offered something to important voting blocs: women,
pensioners and small business.
Few were surprised when only two months after its return to power, the
government backed down on some of its pledges, including an ADollars 100m to
buy out private hospital places to reduce surgery queues.
The promised tax cuts will be more difficult to break because they have been
enshrined in law.
Mr John Dawkins, the federal treasurer, said this week the government would
have to cut ADollars 2bn from existing programmes to keep the 1993-94 budget
deficit to ADollars 16bn.
It may have just about exhausted its arsenal however. All the fiscal
stimulus of the last 12 months and all the interest rate cuts over the last
two years have not delivered the hoped-for private investment.
Official figures released yesterday show a 9 per cent drop in Australian
capital spending during the three months to March.
Mr Keating's forecast of an average 4 per cent growth between 1992 and 1993
has been adjusted to between 2.5 and 3 per cent.
Labor's hopes that import tariff reductions (from 20 per cent in the
mid-1980s to 5 per cent by the end of the century) would, by exposing it to
international competition, make Australian industry more efficient and
provide long-term economic growth have so far been unfulfilled.
Jobs have been lost rather than gained. Manufacturing turnover in 1991-92
was 2 per cent less than the previous year.
The government is under pressure to pause, or at least slow down, the
scheduled tariff cuts. A pause could bring in ADollars 2bn in revenue that
would otherwise be lost to tariff cuts.
Meanwhile, the continuing deficit in the current account puts extra
constraints on government spending. The latest monthly figure, a deficit of
ADollars 2.1bn, was the highest monthly shortfall in more than three years.
The high current account deficits recorded in the last several years have
left net foreign debt of ADollars 168bn or 43 per cent of gross domestic
product. For the moment, low world interest rates have reduced that service
to 14.5 per cent of export income from a peak of 21 per cent.
An alternative measure which could help keep the lid on the budget deficit
is to raise taxes. However, Mr Keating is not prepared to discuss this, at
least for the moment.
He is in the prime minister's seat today because he ran a scare campaign
against the conservative opposition's proposed goods and services tax. To
talk about it early in this term would dent his political credibility.
However, the national interest may yet cause him to back down on another
election promise.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930527

