FT931-4102

FT  12 MAR 93 / Arts: 'Divine Words' on degradation - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


If you can take Lorca's The House of Bernarda Alba without finding it
unbearably harrowing, you might move on to Divine Words by Ramon Del
Valle-Inclan which, I believe, is having its first English language
performance in London.
Valle-Inclan was born a generation before Lorca, but died in the same year -
1936. His writing life began conventionally enough. He was a journalist in
Mexico, a literary figure in Madrid, then after the first world war reacted
against classicism and wrote about poverty in his native Galicia.
'Poverty' is putting it politely. Divine Words, written in 1920, is more
about degradation, superstition and all forms of primitivism than about the
absence of sustenance. The one thing that the people never lack completely
is money - and brandy. One of the reasons for seeing the play is to
understand why there was a Spanish civil war. The priests are as ignorant as
the laity. The police are feared, but are neither intelligent nor competent.
Here is a society wholly cut off from civilising influences.
Another reason for seeing Divine Words is that this production by the Loose
Change Company, directed by Tessa Schneideman, is supremely well done.
Altogether 14 people are employed, including three musicians. Between them
they tell you as much about a certain view of Galicia as you need to know.
If you want to see a Spanish hydro-cephalic dwarf, footless and speechless,
towed around the countryside in a barrow as his pushers hope to earn a few
pesetas, here he is. The dwarf eventually dies of an epileptic fit, having
consumed too much brandy. He is given the drink because in order to get it,
he is prepared to croak like a frog.
This is perhaps the most grotesque scene in a gruesome play, but there are
others which run it close, like the near communal rape of the priest's
woman. Hysteria is never far below the surface, though surprisingly Divine
Words seems to end on a note of christian forgiveness: 'Let he is who is
without sin cast the first stone.' The priest's woman is thus saved from
being stoned to death.
I would not pretend that it is a good, rather than an interesting, play,
largely because for enjoyment you have to rely on intellectual curiosity and
the strength of the performances. There is not much relief. But this is the
value of the fringe theatre: as a collector's item it should be seen. There
is some outstanding playing by Cleo Sylvestre as an almost toothless,
gossipy but not entirely humourless hag, though also by the entire cast. Ms
Schneideman has made the cast speak with southern Irish accents. I am not
sure that is necessary.
Battersea Arts until March 21 (071) 223 2223

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930312

