FT934-8427

FT  16 NOV 93 / Civil servants 'fear the sack'


   By JIMMY BURNS


CIVIL servants should have the right of appeal to the Privy Council against
carrying out ministerial decisions which they consider unethical, a trade
union leader said yesterday.
Mrs Elizabeth Symons, general secretary of the Association of First Division
Civil Servants, which represents middle- and high-ranking officers, said
recent experience was that civil servants were 'afraid to question their
ministers for fear of losing their jobs or being prosecuted'.
Ms Symons was speaking after her union submitted a report to Lord Justice
Scott urging a new code of ethics for Whitehall in the light of evidence
emerging in the arms-for-Iraq inquiry.
'It is clear that recent developments within the civil service have led to
some doubt as to whether the accountability of ministers is as robust a
concept as used to be the case,' the report says.
The union released its submission to the Scott probe in response to a report
by Sir Peter Kemp, former second permanent secretary in the Cabinet Office,
which accused Whitehall of inefficiency.
Sir Peter claims that senior civil servants give poor quality advice to
ministers, who would be better served by 'political advisers'.
Ms Symons said that the Scott inquiry had put pressure on civil servants to
explain publicly their responsibility for conveying the truth of government
policy.
'The whole point is that the responsibility lies with ministers. If civil
servants have to go along with half-truths it is because they fear being
sacked or prosecuted,' she said.
The union report reveals for the first time the existence of guidance notes
in all government departments which deal with the handling of intelligence
information covered by the Official Secrets Act.
The union argues that in the absence of a Civil Service Act or a written
constitution, guidelines to civil servants are 'in some cases, if not
contradictory, not wholly consistent'.
Editorial comment, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931116

