FT933-5147

FT  04 SEP 93 / Travel: Hopping about in the sun - A sophisticate's guide to
inter-island Caribbean travel


   By JAMES HENDERSON


IT WAS A bouncy landing. A difficult one, granted, but bouncy, and in a
19-seater that can be a bit alarming. Still, if the aircraft and passengers
shuddered a little, the pilot was unfazed. Applying reverse thrust with a
flourish, he piped up on the intercom with an almost audible smirk: 'Ladies
and gentlemen, we have just landed . . . for the third time . . . on
Mustique. Please remain seated, etc. I hope you enjoy your stay and take the
opportunity of flying with us again.'
Island-hopping is one of the great pleasures of the Caribbean.
Each island has a different, distinctive feel. You might be lucky and find
one that captivates you for ever - often this is a thing you know
instinctively, almost the moment you put your foot on the wharf or the
airport tarmac. It is easy to get from one island to the next now, and
combining islands can make a more satisfying Caribbean stay.
An hour on a yacht can take you from a busy city waterfront to a deserted
strip of sand and palms while a short air-hop can link tropical France,
replete with chic restaurants, with a slumberstruck cay. If you style
yourself a traveller, getting from one place to the next in tiny aircraft
and leaky local boats can be part of the fun.
Islands are really best approached by sea. You get the measure of them, as
they grow from a grey stain on the horizon to a steep-sided, forested
colossus looming over a tiny settlement. And there is a time-honoured feel
in cruising into a busy wharfside, so rarely experienced now because of air
travel. The Grenadines, of which Mustique is probably the best known, are
particularly good for island-hopping by boat because there is a large number
of islands within such a short distance of one another.
You may choose to travel by gin palace, but there is a lot to be said for
taking the local mail-boat, the MV Snapper, named after a Caribbean fish
rather than the over-large island mosquitos. The Snapper, an old Norwegian
ferry, works its way along the island chain twice a week, carrying
provisions, building materials, soft drinks, livestock and - presumably -
mail. I arrived at dawn and boarding was in process. The scene was of
theatrical and demonstrative West Indian chaos.
I made for an empty seat and found myself next to a goat wrapped in a sack;
only its head protruded. It cocked its eyes at me occasionally, appealing to
me in its bemusement and panic.
It is an hour's ride to Beguia, where you put into a charming waterfront in
Admiralty Bay. Beguia is perhaps the perfect pretty Caribbean island - all
the prettiness of a coastal Cornwall village transported to the tropics.
Past the T-shirt sentry, with her wares slung between the trees as though it
were washing day, you come to a waterfront path where lazy bars in old (some
new) wooden houses are hidden among the frangipani.
But this time I headed on for tiny Mayreau, where there is lazy island life
of a more West Indian kind. Life is hard for the 180-odd islanders, who are
fishermen or work for the government, but they are easy-going and extremely
welcoming. Mayreau is so small and isolated that electricity has not yet
reached it, but you can play dominoes by gas-light, or sit on Dennis's
wooden veranda while he plays the guitar.
Arrival in Mayreau is a novelty in itself because there is no pier big
enough even to take the Snapper, so I had to clamber down into a
coracle-sized lighter along with crates of Coke and the poor old goat in his
sack. He was lucky, though; travelling cattle are simply driven off the
side.
The Grenadine islanders have long been ship-builders. The master-builders
were from Carriacou, an island to the south of Mayreau. Getting there took a
ride in a puttering outboard with a studiedly silent lobster fisherman and
then a hop by local sailboat, but it was worth it. Carriacou has an
enchanting, sedated air, with superb coves and a string of easy-going bars.
Here you can try out the local rum, jackiron. It is extremely strong and has
the curious quality of making ice sink.
The ship-building industry has declined now, though there are still a few
hulls taking shape on the water's edge. As well as boat-builders, the
Grenadine islanders have long been smugglers. Boats from Carriacou travel as
far north as Sint Maarten in the Leeward islands, where they pick up goods
imported directly from Europe: wines, export beers, washing machines and
other white goods.
Carriacou has an easy airstrip in that it is straight and flat, but
occasionally you will find that the pilots make a pass before coming in to
land, in order to buzz cattle that are wandering on the strip. You might be
surprised to see cars beetling across it too - the island's road borrows the
tarmac for a while.
The little island-hopping aircraft, many of them Twin Otters, are jokingly
known as the island bus service. You cannot quite hitch a ride, but you will
find that if there is nobody to pick up or set down at a particular stop,
the aircraft simply flies on by. Certainly you should not expect a direct
flight; en route to your destination you might touch down at five or six
airstrips, each of them a different country.
Flying in this manner has an intimacy with the elements that you don't
experience in a Jumbo. Taking off is entertaining. Landing is another
matter. There is a pecking order of airstrips around the islands (Mustique
rates in the top 10). The second most hair-raising landing strip is on chic
St Barts, in an area aptly named the Plaine de la Tourmente. The problem
here is that there are hills exactly where you would hope the pilot would
make his approach - at both ends. The result is best described as a banana
run-in, close enough one end to pick the flowers and the other to read the
car-drivers' T-shirts.
But most fearsome of all is Saba, a tiny forested pimple in the Leeward
Islands. The airstrip is set on Flat Point (hardly flat, but the nearest
thing Saba has to it). It is 400 yards long - shorter than most
self-respecting aircraft carriers - and there is a 100ft drop into the sea
at either end. It makes Heathrow seem quite boring.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

930904

