FT934-10083

FT  08 NOV 93 / Italians braced for more shocks


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


THE coming week could bring new tremors to the tense political climate and
further volatility to Italy's financial markets in the wake of allegations
about links between senior politicians and the security services.
The risk of new political bombshells follows the arrest on Saturday of Mrs
Rosa Maria Sorrentino, one of six top members of the security services
either already detained or being sought by police investigating political
corruption.
In recent testimony to magistrates, senior state security officials have
claimed covert funds, destined for the security services, were channelled to
politicians, notably from the Christian Democrat party
The allegations, made in leaked testimony to Rome magistrates, have focused
on the interior ministry, which is responsible for the secret service. The
ministry has been a power base for the Christian Democrats, which have
appointed each of its incumbents since Italy's postwar return to democracy.
Among the incumbents was Mr Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, now head of state. In a
late night television address to the nation on Wednesday, he asserted that
the presidency should not be subjected to such attacks.
However, some of the mud being slung by the discredited security officials
is starting to stick. Newspapers yesterday published leaked claims by the
defendants outlining substantial payments made from covert funds to purchase
lavish furnishings for the homes and office of senior ex-ministers.
While many observers have stressed that the testimony should be treated with
extreme caution, as it may be deliberately inflammatory, others have noted
that Mr Scalfaro's television speech failed to address the substance of the
allegations against him.
Leading politicians have already rallied round the president in an attempt
to limit the damage to one of the few political institutions still
commanding widespread respect in Italy. Attempts to discredit the claims
were reinforced at the weekend after Rome prosecutors added the charge of
attempting to destabilise the constitution to the count of corruption on
which the accused are already being interrogated.
However, some of the damage has already been done. After dropping sharply on
Thursday, Italian share prices and the lira fell further on Friday after
another bout of nerves by investors worried by rising political tension. In
a brief stint of panic selling, shares and government bonds plummeted in the
wake of a rumour that Mr Scalfaro was about to resign.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931108

