FT932-6586

FT  27 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russian oil joint venture
partners in crisis meeting


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THE PARTNERS in Russia's foremost joint venture in the vital oil sector meet
today in the city of Raduzhny in the Tyumen region to decide whether or not
to continue an increasingly fractious - and apparently unprofitable -
relationship.
White Knights,a joint enterprise between the state-owned oil company
Varyeganneftegas (50 per cent), the Phibro Energy subsidiary of Salomon
Brothers (45 per cent), and Anglo-Suisse (5 per cent) has in little over two
years produced some oil but seems to be drowning in irreconcilable
differences between the main partners, Varyeganneftegas and Phibro.
The outcome of the last-ditch talks today will be closely watched by the oil
majors, all of which are trying to establish toe-holds in the Russian market
but none of which have made really major investments because of continuing
confusion over the law, taxes and - above all - the attitude of Russian
production companies and the government.
Phibro has alleged that the Russian side had threatened to halt payment of
contracts, to stop payment of US workers on the site, to confiscate half of
the production of the enteprise and stop efforts to obtain the necessary
licenses and export tax exemptions.
Mr Robert Baker, a spokesman for the parent company Salomon, said earlier
this month that 'These steps, if taken, would destroy our investment,
destroy the economic base of the project and cause it to close down'. The
company has warned the industry that if it feels itself forced to break off
the two-year co-operation, it will endeavour to broadcast widely its version
of the reasons for failure.
The US company has spent some Dollars 115m on the project, which presently
produces 8,000 barrels of crude a day. Mr Robert Denham, chairman of
Salomon, has told Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US Treasury Secretary, that the
action contemplated by Varyeganneftegas was 'theft' and asked him to make
clear to the Russians that the government's actions 'are inconsistent with
the fundamental premises of US economic assistance'.
Phibro's investment represents probably the largest sum put into the Russian
oil industry by a foreign company to date - though the feasibility study
conducted off the coast of Sakhalin in the far east by a US-Japanese
consortium including Shell and Mitsui is understood to have cost around
Dollars 100m. The French oil company Elf-Aquitaine is also to make a
medium-sized investment in the Volga region.
The failure of Phibro would be a major blow for foreign hopes that the
Russians are willing to see foreign companies operate with relative freedom.
All oil majors complain that they suffer from high and constantly changing
tax rates and from a lack of interest from the Russian side in allowing
profitable exploitation.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930527

