FT934-11086

FT  02 NOV 93 / International Bonds: Offerings from Andalucia, Depfa in the
pipeline


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


ISSUANCE in the international bond market was minimal yesterday as many
financial centres in continental Europe were closed for All Saints' Day.
However, some interesting Eurobond offerings are expected this week. The
Spanish region of Andalucia is expected to raise FFr1.3bn through an
offering of 10-year Eurobonds. Paribas, Banco Central Hispano and
Commerzbank are arranging the deal.
The bonds are likely to be priced to yield 20 to 25 basis points over
underlying French government bonds. Andalucia last tapped the Eurobond
market in February when it raised DM400m through an offering of five-year
Eurobonds.
Depfa, the German mortgage bank, is expected to launch a French franc
Eurobond issue next week.
The 10-year offering, to be jointly led by BNP and SBC, is expected to raise
between FFr2bn and FFr3bn.
Among yesterday's issues, China Travel, a mainland Chinese freight and
holiday company which is listed in Hong Kong, launched a Dollars 125m
offering of five-year convertible bonds, via Merrill Lynch.
The indicated coupon is between 4.25 per cent and 4.75 per cent and the
indicated conversion premium is between 19 per cent and 23 per cent. The
deal is expected to be priced later this week.
Banco Bradesco, Brazil's largest private-sector bank, raised Dollars 50m
through an offering of three-year Eurobonds. The bonds were priced to yield
355 basis points over the 4 3/8 per cent US Treasury due 1996. When the
bonds were freed to trade, they were quoted at par bid, according to lead
manager Salomon Brothers.
STANDARD & Poor's, the US rating agency, has raised its credit ratings on
GPA Group, the troubled Irish aircraft leasing company which has been
rescued by GE Electric of the US. About Dollars 2bn worth of debt is
affected.
GPA's ratings have also been removed from S&P's credit-watch, where they
were placed in November 1992. By contrast, GPA's ratings remain on Moody's
watch list where they were placed in May this year.
S&P said that the upgrade was based on GPA's improved liquidity and deferral
of cash commitments arising from the completion of an extensive financial
restructuring.
However, S&P said that the outlook on GPA was 'developing' which indicated
that its ratings could be raised if the company was able to achieve the
aircraft sales needed to meet remaining debt maturities and lowered if it
failed.
S&P raised GPA's unsecured senior debt ratings to triple C from triple C
minus, while the ratings on equipment trust certificates are raised to B
minus from triple C plus. Both ratings are below investment grade.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

931102

