FT932-201

FT  30 JUN 93 / Setback for Virgin's hopes of FM band


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR RICHARD Branson's hopes of getting an FM frequency for hisnational Virgin
Radio station faded yesterday, when the Radio Authority warned it would
block any such move.
Mr Branson, who launched Virgin Radio on AM at the end of April, has
proposed a frequency swap to the BBC. The corporation would get the Virgin
AM frequency, which would be suitable for speech, and Mr Branson hoped he
could get a BBC FM frequency.
Lord Chalfont, chairman of the Radio Authority, the regulatory body for
commercial radio, said yesterday that even if the BBC were to agree to such
a swap, he would find the idea 'totally unacceptable'.
The authority had advertised an AM frequency and higher bids might have come
forward if there had been any indication that an FM frequency might be
available.
Lord Chalfont added that if Mr Branson were able to winkle out FM
frequencies not being fully used by the BBC for commercial use, they would
be advertised.
This means that Virgin Radio will have to remain on AM at least until the
arrival of digital broadcasting later in the decade.
Lord Chalfont was speaking after the Radio Authority awarded a franchise for
the north-east of England.
The licence has gone to Radio North East, a consortium that includes Border
Television, the Carlisle-based ITV company. Radio North East, which plans
speech programming combined with easy-listening and country music, fought
off four rivals. The award was the third of five new regional commercial
stations.
Lord Chalfont also said yesterday that there were no plans to bring forward
the launch of the third national commercial station, which which will be
primarily speech-based. The new national franchise will be advertised
towards the end of this year and would go on air in 1995.
The Radio Authority said yesterday that new FM frequencies would become
available for commercial radio in 1996 - enough for a further national
channel or a greater number of stations if they were restricted to larger
towns.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930630

