FT932-13438

FT  23 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Tricky time still faces the treaty
 -David Owen tracks the remaining hurdles for the Maastricht bill


   By DAVID OWEN


YESTERDAY'S completion of the Maastricht bill's marathon committee stage
does not guarantee the government a problem-free run to ratification.
The Commons report stage looks set to get under way early next month. The
second Danish referendum on May 18 will be followed quickly - if the Danes
vote Yes - by what should be a comparatively untroubled third reading
debate.
After that the bill moves to the House of Lords where Euro-sceptic peers
spearheaded by Lady Thatcher and Lord Tebbit may try to delay it further and
will press the case for a referendum.
The Commons would be able to vote out any amendments inserted by the Lords
but this would require an additional debate that the government wants to
avoid.
If the measure is still on course, there is an outside chance the government
could trip up in an eleventh-hour debate on the treaty's social chapter, due
to come after Maastricht has been made part of British law.
The critical question at next month's report stage is whether Labour manages
to engineer a vote on its amendment 27 which would delete the protocol
containing Britain's opt out from the social chapter.
This is the only mechanism yet devised which might force the government to
choose between the social chapter and the treaty without requiring at least
some Tory Euro-sceptics first to vote explicitly for the chapter.
The Liberal Democrats have also indicated they will make forcing the
government to embrace the social chapter their main priority during the
report stage.
After an average of nearly 40 minutes devoted in committee to each word of
the bill, progress through report will be comparatively rapid.
The bill's passage through the Lords is arguably the least predictable
obstacle - rules of procedure in the Upper House provide anti-Maastricht
peers with virtually limitless scope to delay it.
This flexibility is rarely exploited to its limit. But with emotions running
high and a passionate anti-Maastricht campaign in prospect, the government
may have to bide its time for a month or two.
The question of a Maastricht referendum - decisively rejected by MPs in the
early hours of yesterday morning - is expected to be among the most ardently
debated subjects in the Lords, particularly if the Danish plebiscite
resulted in a narrow 'Yes' vote.
The likelihood of a difficult Lords passage has been increased by the
disenchantment of some prominent peers with the government's recent Commons
manoeuvrings.
If all else fails, Tory Euro-sceptics could make a last-ditch effort to
derail the treaty by voting explicitly for the social chapter - which they
loathe - in a separate debate due to take place after the bill has received
Royal Assent.
If they did so, Mr John Major could be forced to choose between accepting
the social chapter, from which he took such pains to negotiate a British
opt-out, and tearing up the treaty.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930423

