FT934-8708

FT  13 NOV 93 / Seasonal food and drink - The best of British: Wagga Wagga
in Berkshire - Jancis Robinson raises her glass in appreciation of English
wine


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


'England is the least advanced place I've ever been to.'
THIS IS the sort of thing that gets John Worontschak into trouble with
fellow winemakers in England. And how about this extract from an article he
wrote in last month's Which? Wine Monthly about his introduction to English
wine: 'On arrival in 1988, I tasted many bottles of weird-sounding wine -
Reichensteiner, Schonburger, etc - all of which purported to have captured
that delicate and crisp nature that only England's gentle summers can
provide.
'What I had in my glass was generally thin, over-acidic, oxidised, phenolic
and reeking of hydrogen sulphide. My lecturers at wine college used to
doctor down wines to this standard and mark the bottles: 'For teaching
purposes only. Do not drink'.'
Worontschak's fax machine at Twyford in Berkshire has since been buzzing
with incoming invective addressed to 'Arrogant Aussie' and worse. He swears
there are English producers he admires: Three Choirs in Gloucestershire, for
instance. But what must be all the more infuriating for his critics is that
Worontschak's English wines are so good, picking up a disproportionate
number of accolades and awards.
They have done so by ignoring the German recipe used by most English
producers and making dry, fruity, reasonably full-bodied, sometimes oaked,
rarely aromatic wines. He has applied theory learnt at Wagga Wagga in torrid
New South Wales - of all places - to England's quintessentially cool climate
in which grapes have to struggle to ripen at all. This year, though, with
its lack of warmth and surfeit of rain producing the worst vintage he has
seen since arriving at Thames Valley Vineyards in 1988, should certainly
test him.
It started when Worontschak, in his late 20s and having worked 17 vintages
in three continents as a cellar rat and progressing towards becoming a
consultant oenologist, had despaired of finding the right wine job in France
and was working in tele-sales in London.
Out of the blue, he rang a much older Wagga graduate in viticulture, Jon
Leighton, knowing vaguely that Leighton had returned to the English home
counties where he had spent his youth. Leighton finds himself with 28 acres
of Berkshire vineyard because 'for some reason I went to the English Wine
Festival in 1978 and haven't been quite the same since'.
Leighton is a first-class empirical vine grower, forever refining his
trellis systems and pruning regimes, but was in serious need of help in the
winery. Ecco Worontschak. By the 1989 vintage, many thousands of pounds had
been spent on the sort of batterie de cave that a modern Australian
wine-maker demands: the gentlest of air bag presses shielded carefully from
oxygen; a crusher that filters out the astringent stalks which Worontschak
thinks mar so many other English wines; the filter that allows them the
luxury of using only free run juice in their own bottlings and transforms
the pressings into usable raw material.
But one small winery in some old Berkshire farm buildings was unlikely to
hold Worontschak (ex-Penfolds, ex-Mondavi, ex-Beaune) for long. Thus was
born the Harvest Wine Group, an association of about 10 vineyards all over
southern England for which Worontschak helps make the wine, either at
Twyford or on the spot. A recent visit during the vintage was punctuated by
telephone messages for Worontschak such as: 'He's got the grapes sitting in
the press, but he doesn't know what setting he should have it on.'
The full Harvest Wine Group range (of about 500,000 bottles in a good year)
is sold by a third colleague based in another spartan outhouse at Thames
Valley Vineyards. Maurice Moore also displays a degree of professionalism
that is rare in the renascent but still miniature English wine business. The
entire range is on sale here at ex-cellar, or farm gate, prices.
But he can also talk major multiples with the best of them and has
negotiated own label English wines chez Tesco and Safeway for under Pounds 4
a bottle. The focus of the group, however, is on making money out of English
wine by selling serious quality at serious prices, rather than bottled
souvenirs on the tourist trail.
A new round of spending has therefore been embarked upon, on the
champagne-making equivalent of one of those John Bull DIY printing kits sold
in the 1950s and 1960s: lone automatic riddling pallet, mini disgorger etc.
The long term aim is to transform more than half the Twyford grapes into
bottle fermented sparkling wine (prizewinners on naming this stuff to be
announced shortly).
This takes advantage of their innate high acidity and neutral flavours,
while adding value (for which read price). They claim that their top of the
line fizz Leightons, made from Champagne grapes to be released next year at
about Pounds 12, has been taken for Bollinger by some Champenois.
Good on them. I have tasted only their lesser sparkling blend of English
grapes, Ascot at around Pounds 9.99, and was less impressed by it than by
HWG's admirable range of still wines, which I have served with pride.
Worontschak has been hired by Tesco to make 1993 wine on its behalf in the
Czech Republic and will probably be working for the company in Cyprus, South
Africa, and possibly even Tasmania, next year. Coals to Newcastle, surely?
Wines to confound sceptics: Stanlake 1992, Safeway Pounds 3.99; Heritage
Fume 1992, Pounds 5.49 Thresher next month; Mersea 1992 about Pounds 6.50 at
Thos Peatling, Lay & Wheeler of Colchester and some branches of Waitrose;
Valley Vineyards Fume 1991 (English Wine of the Year), Pounds 7.99 Thresher
Wine Shops and Bibendum of London NW1. All these wines are available from
the Harvest Wine Group, Clocktower Mews, Stanlake Park, Twyford, Berks. Tel:
0734-344290. Fax: 0734-320914.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

931113

