FT934-8681

FT  13 NOV 93 / Arts: Morals through the ages - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


THE QUESTION-mark is vital in Radio 4's New Society? that begins this week.
Four writers give their views of life as they see it. Dave Hill, a
sociologist new to me, reckons to see sexual deviance everywhere. David and
Andrew live together and give elegant dinners. Their neighbours accept their
hospitality without questioning their sexual affairs. Rude word games are
common, and Ann Summers parties. In today's society there is much dispute
about what is wrong and what is not.
Victorian values, it seems, never bit too deep. Erotic books were traded.
There was 'quite extensive' fraud; what are now categorised as 'dangerous
drugs' were obtainable at the chemist's by the housemaid for the home. Lord
Deedes, for many years editor of the respectable Daily Telegraph, kept his
potentially offensive news firmly on page 3; he reckoned morals were much
the same in all classes. If we follow John Major's advice about Victorian
values, they must be properly discussed.
For a long time I have reckoned that the BBC's best radio drama is Radio 3's
on Sunday night and Radio 4's on Monday. Times change: two weeks running,
Radio 3 has given us duds. Joy Hendry's The Wa' at the World's End on
October 31, about the bedridden Scots poet William Soutar was simply dull.
Authentic, yes - it was derived from Soutar's own Diary of a Dying Man.
Nothing in it persuaded me that he was an interesting chap, even if one
enjoys his verse.
Then last Sunday, we had Karim Akrawi's The Genie and the Playwright, a wild
account of a writer's struggles with the censor in Egypt. The Genie gave
more comment than help, though he finally took over the writer's girl. The
writer, after disputes on political, social, religious and linguistic
grounds, was advised by the censor to 'consume himself', and this he
actually did. The humour was childlike, the literary politics familiar.
Radio 4's Monday Play spread a modest plot over at least half an hour too
long. Robert Paterson's The 50 Friends of Simon Goberschmitt told simply of
the curiosity of a nice bunch of Scottish girl students about the
correspondence of this eponymous fellow-resident. Having booked in, he left
for a long time but got letters from everywhere, left unopened. In time, he
returned, with an all-too-simple explanation of their origins - and of his.
His affairs were less everyday than the students', but his story was over in
a moment, and certainly not worth waiting 90 minutes for.
A special word, though, for Radio 4's Classic Serial, John Fowles's The
French Lieutenant's Woman, ably adapted by Frederick Bradnum, which ended
this week. The characters, as vivid as on the page, were well contrasted,
and Fowles's personal interpolations into the narrative given a proper
suggestion of radio presentation. Amanda Redman as Sarah, David Threlfall as
Charles and Teresa Gallacher as Ernestina hit their several marks precisely
under Janet Whitaker's direction.
Stacey Aumonier, a familiar magazine-writer of the 1920s, has been accorded
a season (two stories, two dramatic adaptations) on Radio 4. They are highly
imaginative, full of bad jokes, but just as acceptable as they must have
been in the Windsor or the Strand or wherever. I think he really belongs on
Radio 2, where yesterday's stars are celebrated.
Really funny people are adept at spotting the mechanics of other people's
fun. Miles Kington, who is funny, began It's a Funny Old World on Radio 4 on
Wednesday. An examination of the humour of different lands, he had an easy
start with the Irish. How will he fare with the French, next week, or the
Jamaicans after them?

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

931113

