FT934-8448

FT  16 NOV 93 / UK generator in Rs30bn Indian power station venture


   By STEPHEN WAGSTYL


   NEW DELHI


NATIONAL Power, the UK generating company, and Ashok Leyland, the Indian
operating company of the London-based Hinduja trading company, are due today
to sign a memorandum of understanding for a Rs30bn (Pounds 645m) power
station project in India.
The agreement is expected to be a commercial highlight of a two-day visit to
India by Mr Douglas Hurd, British foreign secretary, who has made the trip
partly to promote Indo-British trade and investment.
The UK and India have put a high priority on strengthening commercial links
since Mr John Major, British prime minister, visited Delhi earlier this
year, and together with Mr P V Narasimha Rao, his Indian counterpart,
launched the Indo-British Partnership Initiative, a forum for boosting
business ties.
Mr Hurd yesterday met Mr Rao and other ministers and discussed subjects
including economic ties and the troubled northern Indian state of Kashmir.
He also exchanged documents for the ratification of an extradition treaty.
Today Mr Hurd is due to travel to Bombay, India's commercial capital, where
he planned to address an audience of leading British and Indian businessmen
aboard the Royal yacht Britannia, which has sailed to India to help promote
a week of British-linked business events in Bombay.
The agreement between National Power and Ashok Leyland is for a 1,000 MW
coal-fired power station at Visakhapatnam in the central Indian state of
Andhra Pradesh. The project is one of 46 which private investors have put
forward since the Indian government last year opened up the power sector to
private capital in an effort to alleviate widespread electricity shortages.
However government officials and the promoters of various projects have yet
to settle important issues such as the terms of agreements for financing,
fuel purchases and electricity sales.
While National Power and Ashok Leyland have made more progress with their
scheme than many others, the project has still to be finalised.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931116

