FT934-8683

FT  13 NOV 93 / Arts: Free Spirits electrified


   By GARRY BOOTH


GUITARIST John McLaughlin is electrified again. After a long relationship
with the acoustic instrument and natural accompaniment, the super guitarist
has teamed up with heavyweight drummer Dennis Chambers and Hammond organist
Joey DeFrancesco to form an electric and electrifying new trio.
The British fusion pioneer is always good value. He seems to carry good
karma with him whatever the material, from improv to flamenco by way of
Mahavishnu. Free Spirits, as the three month old group is to be known, is
different again and does not disappoint. McLaughlin, coiffed platinum hair
and tanned complexion, in overpressed casual clothes, looks just like the
well-to-do Yorkshireman who now lives in Monte Carlo that he is.
DeFrancesco, winding up the Hammond into action, has the appearance of a man
who does not get out from behind the keyboard much. Chambers, a terrifying
spectacle in cap and headphones, if firmly rooted behind a large drum kit
which trembles in front of him, like a dragster with the handbrake on.
Between them they provide strangely contrasting textures in this mix of new
and old McLaughlin composition. The classical, sometimes Spanish tones of
McLaughlin are intermingled with RSI defying, squiggling solos; the
right-handed, shrill treble of the DeFrancesco's urging in the foreground.
Chambers, who is known as a powerhouse drummer, rumbles behind, controlling
the dynamic in a sometimes overwhelming manner.
In a concert of two halves at the Festival Hall on Tuesday, the first set
worked beautifully as an extension of what has gone before with McLaughlin.
Sensitive balladeering mixed with chattering solo parts from each corner of
the trio gave way to convivial and folky swing. In a peaceful moment without
Chambers, DeFrancesco emerged from behind the organ keyboard to duet with
the by now peripatetic leader, on wistful and often Milesian muted trumpet.
After the interval, the mood changed, however, with the trio slamming into a
soul jazz session, which slid greasily into a long and gratifying blues jam.
Possibly not planned as such a lengthy work-out, tremendous reaction from
the packed house prolonged McLaughlin's heroics and egged Chambers on to
greater, more deeply bruising snare action, cleverly lifting and lowering
the tempo on the cymbals.
As a precursor to the recording promised for the New Year, the omens are
good - though Strong Spirits might be a more appropriate name for this tough
trio.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

931113

