FT931-4112

FT  12 MAR 93 / Technology: A freer flow of goods - How trucks of the future
could transform freight delivery on Europe's congested roads


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


Some shoppers travel across town in search of a favourite food item, but
this is nothing compared with the distances the goods have to travel to
reach the shelves. It is estimated the contents of the average weekend
shopper's supermarket trolley have already covered 4,000km by truck or van.
With freight volumes set to soar on Europe's already congested roads - the
EC forecasts that the volume of freight on EC roads will reach 16.5bn tonnes
by 2010, nearly double the 1989 level - truck makers are pushing for heavier
trucks to be allowed on long-distance routes.
They argue that a rise to vehicles of 48 tonnes or more from the 40 tonnes
permitted at present would mean fewer journeys and thus a smaller number of
trucks.
Manufacturers have made considerable progress in increasing vehicles'
carrying capacity through new designs and the use of lighter materials. But
the problem goes beyond advances in truck design and raises questions about
the way in which freight transport is organised on Europe's increasingly
congested roads. For coming decades, some far-sighted executives argue that
new types of truck must be developed to cut down on congestion and exhaust
emissions.
Prominent among them is Cor Baan, whose main energies in recent weeks have
been devoted to helping stave off financial collapse, since he is chairman
of Daf trucks. He also heads the new Daf company created with Dutch and
Belgian backing.
Baan has been thinking along lines which lead a long way from Daf's present
troubles. In his view, the trucks of the future would have hybrid
diesel-electric engines and all-wheel steering.
They would be quiet and flexible enough to deliver standardised 'modules' of
all types of goods to city stores and other urban businesses through the
night, using automated reception and storage systems which would require no
manning. These would complement larger trucks transporting goods across the
EC.
Urban goods movement is the area where the biggest problems occur due to
congestion, smog and excessive noise, stresses Baan, who gave his views at a
recent commercial vehicle symposium organised in Brussels by FEBIAC,
Belgium's motor industry trade association.
'With road transport organised as it is at present, can you imagine a
further growth of tens of per cent in transport volumes in and around cities
such as Paris, Frankfurt or London,' he asks.
In the small Dutch city of Maastricht, for example, with 116,000
inhabitants, some 5,200 consignments are delivered daily, of which more than
70 per cent take up less than one cubic metre. About 3,800 journeys are
made, totalling 38,000km. Baan contends that as companies continue to cut
the volume of stocks, deliveries will increase as consignments become
smaller, requiring a 'totally new' approach to distribution. However, while
urban centres cannot cope properly with this volume during the day, their
streets are largely empty at night.
Using this slack time could not only greatly increase distribution
efficiency, but reduce vehicle exhaust emission problems. Emissions of
pollutants like oxides of nitrogen are 65 per cent less in free-flowing
traffic than when the roads are congested.
In Baan's vision of a distribution system of the future, goods would be
brought together at distribution centres on the outskirts of cities and
packaged into consignments for individual recipients, thus eliminating many
duplicated journeys. Intrinsic to the concept is a goods 'module' which
would have to conform to an EC-wide specification on durability, easy
handling and dimensions.
Dutch universities have already researched such a module, based on two
International Standards Organisation pallets. Their use would open the way
to a new type of standardised goods reception system in shops or shopping
centres. These would not require overnight manning. Roller-tracked chutes
would accept new containers and return old ones, with 'paper work' carried
out electronically between truck and shop computer.
It is the clear unacceptability of noise in such an operation which has
prompted the suggestion of diesel-electric hybrid trucks, capable of using
battery-only operation in town. Apart from being near-silent, such trucks
would have to be highly manoeuvrable, hence the idea for all-wheel steering.
The loading/unloading system would also have to be capable of operating
vertically and horizontally.
Despite the concept's radical nature, Baan believes it is fully realisable
in the 21st century. 'It may look very futuristic but in fact all the
techniques used in it are already available.'
Until such ideas are translated into practice, however, manufacturers'
efforts will continue to be concentrated on maximising the carrying capacity
of trucks. These have led to vehicles with very low chassis, and even
low-profile tyres, to raise carrying space within overall EC length and
height restrictions.
But this only increases the volume of goods which can be carried. So
manufacturers have shown equal adroitness in reducing unladen vehicle weight
 -thus increasing the weight of goods which can be carried per vehicle -
through the use of lighter materials and more efficient design.
Leif Ostling, general manager of Scania, the Swedish group, says the unladen
weight of one of its heavy trucks has been cut from 10 tonnes to nine tonnes
over the past two decades and that scope still exists to save weight. Yet
while today's vehicles undoubtedly can and will be improved, it is
innovations like that proposed by Baan that will be closely studied for
solutions to future traffic problems.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930312

