FT933-12832

FT  22 JUL 93 / Technology: On the road to a slicker operation - The Peugeot
plant in Coventry has adopted leaner manufacturing, standardisation and a
just-in-time philosophy / Software at work


   By CLAIRE GOODING


The assembly line at Peugeot's Ryton plant in Coventry stops and a group of
men and women converge on one car. There is an urgent, almost wordless, team
effort, with people pulling, prodding and drilling at parts of the car, an
embryonic Peugeot 405, before they rush back to their production jobs along
the line. The delay while the problem is fixed in just 10 seconds. Then the
line restarts and the vehicle's individual build-chart receives a tick and a
comment.
'Quality is something you build in; it can't be inspected into a vehicle'
says Colin Poynton, materials handling manager at Ryton. Two hours
previously, the car did not exist. In another 10 hours, it will roll off the
assembly line, ready to drive away. The people around the assembly line
appear to be performing a precise, high-pressure formation dance, in an
endless race with the slow-moving line. The plant produces right and
left-hand drive 306 and 405 family models for the UK, New Zealand, Cyprus
and parts of Africa and left-hand drive vehicles for most of Europe.
The process of building a new car has come a long way since Henry Ford
decreed 'any colour so long as it's black'. Customers hold the whip hand on
choice of specification and colour. Each car that comes off the line has
been specified, with dozens of choices already made, down to the colour of
the seats, trim and even the fascia. More than 57 per cent of the cars'
contents originate in the UK.
Computerisation was introduced to the Ryton plant in 1985. It had to come to
grips with the immense changes brought about by 'lean manufacturing', but
now has a smooth kanban operation - a Japanese-derived form of stock control
 -in which parts are replenished within five, and sometimes only two hours.
'We're continually aiming to reduce the stock we hold,' explains Poynton. He
recalls when the cavernous factory was filled almost to the roof with
racking for components and the metal 'stillage' trays used for large
sub-assembled parts. Now, the stacks carry only the parts used for the cars
within view and fork lift trucks pass constantly up the empty aisles
replenishing the queues, carrying parts that have been assembled and
delivered in a couple of hours.
'There was a time when everybody wanted to build up stocks, and make time
for themselves. There is a different attitude now. What we want is a
consistent work rate, keeping the stock level right. Now it's second nature,
but only as a benefit of re-education,' says Poynton. The slick operation
puts high demands on suppliers to Peugeot Talbot, the UK operation of the
French group. In common with many manufacturers, Peugeot is developing
'partnership' deals, aiming for one supplier per part. The suppliers for its
8,300 components have been reduced from 600 to 380. In the case of the
fascias, the supplier, Hills Precision Components, is nearby, but most
communications are done through electronic data interchange (EDI). Poynton
gives as an example the eight cars being built for New Zealand.
'Until we have the first four on the line here, we won't even pass the order
for the fascias and seats to the supplier for the next four.' Twelve times a
day, faxes arrive on the HPC shop floor, specifying fascia assemblies for
delivery to Ryton. There is a precise requirement for each one, including
left or right-hand drive and four colours. The company assembles them from
its stock, and delivers the completed components within two hours. Seats,
door casings and steering wheels are on continuous order, in a constant flow
for individual cars. Part of the job was creating single supplier
relationships, along the same lines as Peugeot Talbot.
This meant reducing the supplier base to 250 reliable 'partners' for the
3,000 or so different components. Even when the system of Bill McGilvray,
the supply manager, had halved the inventory, he estimated that around
Pounds 550,000 worth was 'still floating around in the manufacturing
process'. This is another classic manufacturing conundrum, as people tend to
squirrel away their own supplies - a 'just in case' mentality that
undermines 'just-in-time' methodology. 'It was difficult to get across who
owned that material. People always think there's something else on the way,
but it doesn't work like that.'
Peugeot Talbot is a part-owner of HPC, and its largest customer, but by no
means its only one. From 1987 onwards, HPC's customer base expanded to
include Jaguar Cars, Rover and Honda. Its product range, once limited to
soft trim and plastic moulding, was extended to include the entire seat,
steering wheels and fascias. With a 20-fold increase in turnover between
1983 and 1993, it became clear that new systems were needed to accommodate
the variety of work and customers.
Two years ago, HPC decided to invest in a broader-based manufacturing system
that would support all aspects of the cycle. The decision came at a time
when an associated company in HPC's parent group was reviewing and
standardising software systems. HPC decided to tap into central expertise,
and took a version of the Data 3 package from its French parent. A steering
committee, and a constant updating of skills eased the introduction of the
new system at HPC. Nevertheless, the implementation was not without hiccups,
mainly because of problems with customisation and associated training
requirements.
In 1991, HPC was falling so far behind schedule that it decided to take the
French version of the system from its parent. This is used throughout France
and Europe, with new releases verified centrally before implementation. This
results in group-wide standardisation, well worth the effort of using
screens in French according to McGilvray. The Data 3 software now provides
full control over in-process stocks, enabling HPC to pass some of the
just-in-time philosophy on to its own suppliers.
McGilvray has been able to introduce some local flexibility. For instance,
he buys foam from an English supplier and uses a local transport company to
provide a buffer by storing the foam, a sort of halfway house which saves on
space at the HPC site.
'Data 3 has focused us on how we look at the business in a structured way.
The mentality has changed. At the monthly meetings on sales and operations
planning, we now look at what's happened, and at the next four months and
its implications, something we could not have done before.'
Both Poynton at Peugeot Talbot, and McGilvray at HPC, have had to give up
individual systems that have served them well, in the cause of
standardisation. McGilvray misses his trusty Adds Mentor receiving system
which in some areas provided more tailored functions than Data 3. But both
managers were enthusiastic about the benefits of standardisation and
improvement of communication throughout the Peugeot group.
'More resources going into standardisation means more ideas' says Poynton.
'We now have the benefit of people throughout Europe feeding good ideas into
the system and thinking of ways to improve it.'
BUZZWORDS
LEAN MANUFACTURING (originated at Toyota), refers to the production of a
varied product with fewer people, less space, and a smaller inventory,
underpinned by flexible MRP II (Management Resources Planning) software.
This also means multi-skilled teams and flexible mechanisation, catering for
volume and variety.
JUST-IN-TIME (JIT) systems, refers to the process where each component is
flagged by a card (kanban). When the rack, bin, or container is empty, the
return of the card down the line to the shop floor indicates the need to
replenish the bin. At Peugeot Talbot the kanban is an electronic barcode and
messages are sent electronically.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930722

