FT934-11449

FT  01 NOV 93 / Critical week in N Korea nuclear inspection dispute


   By JOHN BURTON


   SEOUL


A TURNING point may be reached this week in a looming crisis over the
international inspection of North Korean nuclear facilities.
North Korea is under growing pressure to allow International Atomic Energy
Agency inspectors renewed access to its nuclear facilities at Yongbyon since
the agency's monitoring cameras are expected to run out of film soon.
Pyongyang recently broke off negotiations with the IAEA on the inspection
issue, claiming the agency was biased.
Mr Hans Blix, the IAEA director-general, is due to report on the North
Korean nuclear issue to the UN General Assembly today.
He is expected to say North Korea is hampering the agency's ability to
verify that Pyongyang is adhering to the nuclear safeguards accord, but to
stop short of declaring that the continuity of inspections has been broken.
The General Assembly is then expected to debate a resolution urging Pyonyang
to continue IAEA inspections.
This could eventually set the stage for the UN Security Council to consider
the question of imposing economic sanctions on North Korea for failing to
carry out its obligations under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT).
But China has recently indicated that it would block a sanctions resolution,
while Russia and Japan are also believed to have reservations.
The US has been holding discussions with North Korean representatives at the
UN in New York since mid-October to persuade Pyongyang to allow resumption
of the routine IAEA inspections that began last year.
North Korea is seeking an end to the Team Spirit military exercise, which is
held annually each spring in South Korea by the US, in return for allowing
the entry of the IAEA inspection team, according to South Korean officials.
But the US wants North Korea to accept the IAEA inspectors and arrange a
meeting of presidential envoys with South Korea before the 1994 Team Spirit
manoeuvres are cancelled.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931101

