FT931-4077

FT  12 MAR 93 / Ford shelves plan for forced job cuts after market growth


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


FORD UK yesterday suspended its plan for compulsory redundancies for manual
workers, saying a recent improvement in the British car market would enable
it to increase planned production.
After talks with union leaders, Mr Bob Hill, Ford's industrial relations
director, said: 'Five successive months of improvement in car sales was the
key factor in our decision.'
As a result of the 'slight but still fragile' growth in the market, he said,
Ford did not need to cut its 24,000 manual workforce by 980, as originally
called for last December, but instead by 685. Ford now predicts 4 per cent
growth in the UK market this year to 1.65m new cars.
Voluntary redundancies, redeployment of workers and an increase in
production would enable Ford to achieve the staff cuts needed without any
compulsory redundancies, he said.
Mr Hill added that 'maintaining a good relationship' with its workforce was
also an important reason for Ford's move. But the company refused to concede
a union demand to guarantee no future compulsory redundancies.
Ford also agreed that its leaked plan to contract out 1,300 service jobs to
other companies was to be abandoned. Instead the company will conduct
negotiations at plant level about the most efficient way of carrying out the
work.
Mr Jimmy Airlie, chief negotiator for the AEEU engineering union, said that
Ford's change of mind was 'a great victory for common sense'. He claimed the
company had backed down because of the 'clear determination of the workforce
to resist compulsory redundancies'.
He added that the company's decision to drop the compulsory redundancy
threat was also a sign Ford wanted 'co-operation not confrontation. It is
anxious to avoid any disruption to the launch of the new Mondeo this
spring.'
The company's move came less than 24 hours after Mr Ian McAllister, Ford UK
chairman and managing director, told the House of Commons employment
committee why the company considered compulsory redundancies were needed.
Ford said it had revised daily production targets at its main plants from
April 1. These still mean fewer cars will be built than now but the cuts
will not be as great as planned last December.
At Halewood, Merseyside, the target will be 780 vehicles a day compared with
810 produced daily there now. At Dagenham, Essex, the new target is 750
against 980 a day built now.
The compulsory redundancies decision does not apply to white-collar staff
who voted this week to authorise industrial action.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930312

