FT933-5237

FT  04 SEP 93 / Leading Article: Slow-motion economics


WORLD ECONOMIC recovery looks like being painfully slow. Ironically, the
upturn is being hampered by a legacy that derives in equal measure from
opposite sides of old ideological divides. The high tide of interventionism
and welfarism may have ebbed, but the public deficits remain to inhibit
fiscal policy, regardless of the political stripe of incumbent governments.
At the same time, an accumulation of private debt prompted by financial
liberalisation has severely limited the usefulness of monetary policy in
putting the economic show back on the road. The result is that economic
recovery looks like being an unduly protracted affair. Is there anything
that governments can do to reassert control over the business cycle?
Undoubtedly there is; but if the industrialised countries are to accelerate
the growth process, they will have to learn some new tricks. For another
striking feature of the world economy at present is that many of the
traditional escape routes from recession are blocked.
The weakness of the US external account means that the world's largest
economy will not embark on another experiment in global Keynesianism of the
kind initiated by President Ronald Reagan in the 1980s. The Germans, who
traditionally rely on an upturn in exports to pull themselves out of
recovery, suffer from an unaccustomed lack of competitiveness, which will
prevent them enjoying an adequate external boost. Domestic demand is
constrained by the Bundesbank's tight monetary policy, while the federal
government is being forced to confront the fiscal laxity that followed
German unification.
Joyless time
Japan has some room for fiscal manoeuvre and modest scope for further
monetary loosening. But there are doubts about how far a new and wobbly
coalition government will be willing or able to go. With the world's big
three economies thus constrained, the other participants at the party are
condemned to a fairly joyless time - especially if they impose on themselves
excessive real rates of interest, as the French persist in doing. The few
bright spots are to be found mainly among the devaluationists like Britain,
Italy and Spain; and even their pleasure will be severely diminished if the
French response to the collapse of the exchange rate mechanism involves
throwing an eleventh-hour spanner into the works of the Uruguay round of
trade talks.
Against that background, governments have rightly perceived that the way to
re-establish control over domestic demand is to combine fiscal retrenchment
with reforms to the supply side of the economy. Yet this is easier said than
done. The verdict on President Bill Clinton's budgetary package must await
the full details of his healthcare reforms; but his much-trumpeted,
narrowly-won deal with Congress was notably soft in tackling the structural
element of the deficit. Similarly in the UK the jury will have to wait until
November, when an untried chancellor will unveil the first budget combining
revenue and expenditure proposals.
Productivity advantage
The more interesting experiments are being carried out in the two miracle
economies of the post-war world, Germany and Japan, where a consensual
approach to economic management has been combined with heavy-handed
regulation that has favoured producers over consumers. This week Mr Gunter
Rexrodt, the German economics minister, shocked people with a government
discussion paper which suggested that Germans, were overpaid, over-regulated
and over-subsidised.
In effect he was acknowledging that in a world without capital controls the
comparative productivity advantage of Germany and other developed countries
is being rapidly eroded and that a structural loss of employment to the
developing world calls for some hard thinking about federal, state and local
government benefits and subsidies that now exceed 50 per cent of gross
domestic product.
For its part, the new seven-party coalition in Japan has announced a list of
60 deregulatory measures designed to loosen up the notoriously inefficient
distribution system and reduce the prices of many goods to the consumer.
In economies that traditionally move by consensus, these are big changes.
Paradoxically Japan, which is usually regarded as the most rigid of the
Group of Seven countries in matters economic, may be better placed than
Germany to change gear. Even if the present coalition collapses, a
generational change is firmly under way in the Liberal Democratic party.
Taken together with the attempt to reform corrupt money politics, it could
imply that the country is close to one of those turning points in its
history when the formation of a new consensus leads to very rapid political
and economic change.
The impact of rapid economic growth in Asia will be painful for the older
industries of the developed world. But in the long run trade remains a
positive sum game in which all will ultimately benefit from the dynamism of
these new entrants to the market system.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930904

