FT934-8678

FT  13 NOV 93 / Private View: When work is a perk: Guy Standing thinks every
citizen should get welfare benefit


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


AS THE unemployed slumdweller in Jamaica said when quizzed by a visiting
economist: 'Man, I don't want a job. I want to work.' But in an era when
jobs are increasingly - perhaps permanently - scarce, the distinction
between a 'job' and 'work' is no longer a matter of semantics only.
According to Dr Guy Standing, the economist of the anecdote, it becomes the
starting point for a humane response to a struggling labour market and
shrinking welfare state. If we are to help the unemployed, we must change
our definition of employment.
Standing, an officer of the UN International Labour Organisation, has
studied the labour markets of western Europe, eastern Europe and Russia. For
the past five years, he has been privately promoting the idea of a
'citizenship income guarantee.' The idea is seductively simple: give every
citizen, regardless of age, work or marital status, a guaranteed minimum
income. Children might receive a portion, the poorest a supplement.
For non-earners, it could be an automatic payment or a lifetime credit
acquired at birth and drawn down when needed. For earners, it would take the
form of a tax credit. The aim, says Standing, is to combine the virtues of
labour flexibility (giving people more choice about when and how they work)
with the justice of income security. And the way to do it is to sever the
link between welfare and work.
His project is not new: in its various guises, it has been called a negative
income tax, social dividend, social credit or basic income. And, as Standing
confesses, it has in the past attracted its fair share of cranks as well as
the academically respectable. But with unemployment in the European Union
heading towards 18m, and in Russia towards 20m, he says the citizens' wage
is winning converts.
Standing's underlying assumption is that while there will be work, there
will not be so many jobs. Does that mean, I asked him, that people will have
to be paid not to join the labour market - at least, not full-time?
'Yes. It's a regrettable fact that the era of full employment in the old
sense is past; and while the notion of full work opportunities for all is
something we should cherish and promote, the idea of everybody being in
full-time, regular, protected employment is now not likely to return.'
You have said that full employment is not all that wonderful. What do you
mean?
'Full employment would not be wonderful if it meant putting large numbers of
people into low-wage jobs with poor working conditions and a lack of basic
rights.
'If you remove all protective regulations and institutional support -
including trade unions - the labour market you create at the bottom is very
unedifying. After all the social and economic progress that Europe has
achieved, to return to that model would be a monumental historical defeat.'
He sees the citizenship wage as an answer to the failure of full employment
strategies (communist as well as capitalist) and as a counter to the growing
popularity of workfare - the principle that the unemployed should be
compelled to work for their welfare cheque. Workfare, he said, was both
immoral and uneconomic. 'You create a low-wage stratum of people who would
bump out others who were doing the work before. It can be an obstacle to
skill development.'
It also corrected the failure of the benefit system. (Only 30 per cent of
unemployed Britons actually receive unemployment benefit. The fraction in
Russia is even smaller). In any system, people fall through the net.
Meanwhile, payments are being reduced and qualifying criteria stiffened.
Means testing is on the increase.
Standing is chairman of a little-known body called Bien, a punning acronym
for Basic Income European Network. His 15 minutes of fame came aged 23,
when, fresh from a PhD in labour economics at Cambridge, he combed the UK
census figures and announced that the unemployment rate was really 1m, not
the 700,000 the government had announced.
Offered a job at the UK Department of Employment, he chose the ILO instead.
Why? 'Because I believed, and I still believe, that to have civilised labour
markets requires an institutional approach.' These days, he works in
Budapest directing a team of ILO field-workers throughout central and
eastern Europe. Significantly, the ILO has not adopted the basic income idea
itself.
I asked Standing how he would sell his ideas to governments.
'The politicians have gone for efficiency and improving the flexibility of
labour markets. These are worthy objectives. With income support, more
people will be able to take part-time jobs, to take risks, to experiment
with training, to move in and out of the market.' The poor would be helped
out of the unemployment trap (when loss of benefit is a disincentive to
working) and the poverty trap (when the loss is a disincentive to working
harder).
What about the black economy and welfare-scrounger argument?
'Politicians are ambivalent. Sometimes they talk of scrounging, sometimes
about personal initiative and entrepreneurial talent. Most people doing well
in the informal economy are the ones who tend to have regular jobs -
savings, contacts, etc - whereas most unemployed do not have those things.
'You either go for more policing, which leads in rather worrying directions,
or you have to find ways of legitimising many forms of activity that are
only illegitimate in dysfunctional systems.'
Would the basic income be enough to live on?
'We're hoping that, gradually, you move in the direction of providing an
income where people could, if necessary, survive without earnings for a
period. But we're not so naive as to think that is a realistic possibility
in the near future.'
How would you sell it to workers for whom unemployment is the great stigma?
'Look, unemployment is a reality in Europe now. Most people are afraid of
it, particularly those in manual jobs. You offer them different types of
work, waged jobs for a certain period, or training, or self-employment. I am
convinced of the attractions, particularly to those who feel frustrated in a
narrow, static job.
'And despite what some trade union leaders say, this prevents sweated
labour. You wouldn't be forced to take the terrible jobs any more.'
What you describe sounds like communism, I said. It's the iron rice bowl
again.
'No, it's moving away from old labels altogether. Under the Leninist model,
there was a guarantee of some sort of income, but it was for workers. If you
were not a wage labourer - and usually a manual labourer - then you didn't
have any entitlements to society's surplus and you were regarded as a social
parasite. And there was a compulsion to do waged labour.'
But wouldn't it be fabulously expensive?
'No, because there is a lot of churning in the existing system: benefits to
middle-income groups, waste, duplication, administration. The Dutch have
costed it and found they could provide a reasonable level of basic income
with only a small rise in the average tax rate.
'Then, if you turn benefit receivers into tax-paying workers, you are
increasing the tax base. One of the problems of recent years has been the
erosion of the tax base, with people at both ends of the income scale
bypassing it.'
So, some of the middle-class tax perks would be removed?
'I think that's essential.'
The 1990s, he said, was an era for experimentation: with new kinds of
working, social protection and wealth distribution. A citizenship wage was
only one of many techniques to be employed on the road to economic and
social democracy without which political democracy could not survive.
'In the end, it's a question of what sort of democracy you want to create.'
People detached from the labour market had to be re-attached. 'Should it be
by paternalistic direction and regulation, or by maintaining a liberal
attitude and letting them make their own choices - giving them education,
training, the opportunity for different occupations . . ?'
Including the the opportunity not to work?
'Exactly. But if they take that opportunity, the consequences are a pretty
low income. I have never met anyone content to live on a bare survival
income. It takes a very strange view of human nature to think that large
numbers of people would want to be idle. Human beings are not like that.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

931113

