FT933-12828

FT  22 JUL 93 / Arts: From Twin Peaks to a trough of tedium - Cinema


   By STEPHEN AMIDON


STORYVILLE (15)
Mark Frost
TANGO (15)
Patrice Laconte
BAMBI (U)
Walt Disney
As one of the principal writers of Twin Peaks and Hill Street Blues, Mark
Frost was responsible for some of the more daring and accomplished work to
hit the small screen in recent years. It is therefore a surprise and a
disappointment that his movie debut, Storyville, should be an anaemic
formula thriller, lacking the dramatic drive and quirky detail of his
previous work.
Set in and about New Orleans, Storyville concerns itself with Cray Fowler, a
young lawyer from a wealthy Louisiana dynasty who is running for Congress.
His ill-considered tryst with sexy karate instructor Lee (Charlotte Lewis)
lands him in big trouble when her pimp father is murdered after secretly
filming them making steam in a jacuzzi. Lee is accused of the crime and Cray
decides to defend her, in the process uncovering some disturbing facts about
his own father's death. Murder, mayhem and scandal ensue, resulting in a
courtroom scene that ends in a slow motion gunfight (including the judge)
just as the plot teeters on the edge of pure confusion.
Storyville starts out looking like a hot-blooded Southern political
thriller, thought it soon loses its way, branching out to include racial
politics, murky family relations, Vietnam atrocities, oil scandals, even
transvestitism. Frost as director proves to be competent if a bit slow,
though as a writer he seems not to understand that a 100-minute movie
requires more discipline than a television series. Every time the movie
threatens to become comprehensible Frost switches tracks. There are so many
loose ends here that it winds up resembling a ball of yarn after being
discovered by a kitten. After a while you feel that there is really no
reason to pay attention.
As for the cast, some turn in stridently hammy performances, such as Jason
Robards as a drunken family patriarch and Piper Laurie, who behaves as if
she had just wandered in from a Tennessee Williams play. Others, like Spader
and Joanna Whalley-Kilmer as a tough lawyer, merely look stricken. The
film's only bright spot is the presence of Michael Warren and Charles Haid,
the duo who played Hill and Renko on Hill Street Blues. Haid is robustly
vulgar as a pornographer, while Warren, balding gracefully, sums up
proceedings best of all when he proclaims that 'there's a mighty big turd in
the punch bowl.'
If Frost's film wanders off down too many thematic avenues, then Patrice
Leconte's Tango suffers from the opposite fate. Early on, it promises to be
a fulsome black comedy examining that dark part of every married man's
psyche that wishes for his wife to be out of the picture - permanently. But
after sounding this intriguing and potentially resonant note, Leconte bangs
away at it until it rings hollow.
The film deals with Paul (Thierry Lhermitte), a philandering husband whose
wife turns the tables on him when she finds out about his cheating. She has
a very public affair, then leaves him. At first he thinks her absence is a
blessing, but he soon discovers that he cannot be happy as long as he knows
that she is off betraying him somewhere.
He asks the advice of his confirmed bachelor uncle (Philippe Noiret), who
suggests that Paul should kill her, reasoning that a being a widower is a
lot less taxing on the mind than being divorced. They hire Vincent (Richard
Bohringer) to do the job, who several years earlier had killed his own wife
when he discovered her infidelity. The three set off on a search for their
prey that will eventually lead them to Africa, where Paul's wife is working
for a medical charity.
Leconte's previous films, especially Monsieur Hire and The Hairdresser's
Husband, were exquisite blends of Gallic whimsy and real feeling that were
able to catch the viewer off-guard without ever alienating him. And for its
first half-hour Tango promises to do the same, captivating us with a brand
of dark comedy that manages to be charming in spite of its seemingly
unpleasant subject matter. The best scenes are the opening ones, in which
Vincent, a skywriter, is cuckolded by a wife who watches him paint the sky
while she is with her lover. Vincent suspects something is up and tries to
spy on her, but she realises that he is nearby upon seeing that the
skywriting is not his.
However, such wonderfully inventive moments cannot sustain what is a rather
flimsy film. By the midway point Leconte seems to run out of ideas and
starts repeating himself. The film loses its freshness, it stops surprising
us and descends into a sort of manic predictability that leaves the viewer
cold. There is a pointless fight with a truck driver, a senseless sequence
of aerial acrobatics with two teenage girls. Even a cameo by Carole Bouquet
seems artificial, her cool beauty serving as an illustration to the
director's thematic agenda rather than an alluring summons into the heart of
the film. With Tango, the music stops long before the dancing is over.
*****
I wonder, if Bambi were made today and given a Royal Premiere, which member
of the gun-toting, blood-sporting Windsors would dare show their face and
thereby risk being set upon by an audience of children hungry for revenge?
Actually, they need not worry - by today's standards of cartoon carnage,
Bambi's off-screen violence will probably fail to raise many young eyebrows,
whereas 50 years ago it sent kids and parents alike blubbing from the
theatre.
Although it remains far better than most things for children, it must be
admitted that Bambi is not always up to Disney's high standards, somehow
just missing that blend of humour, sentimentality and menace that made other
Disney animated films so great. And I wonder how many parents are up to
explaining to their five-year-olds what all those couples of rabbits and
skunks were hurrying off to do during the spring sequence? Still, anyone who
has to read a review to decide whether or not to see Bambi either has no
kids or does not pay any attention to them.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930722

