FT933-12669

FT  23 JUL 93 / Miyazawa resigns as LDP leader


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


MR Kiichi Miyazawa, citing a Confucian saying that 'the righteous worry
not', yesterday announced his resignation as president of the Liberal
Democratic party, setting off a brawl over the choice of Japan's next prime
minister.
Party executives had wanted to form an exclusive committee among themselves
to hand-pick a successor, but young LDP parliamentarians rebelled, accusing
the elders of 'undermining public confidence' in the party and forcing a
vote on the issue.
In the past, a new LDP president has simultaneously become prime minister,
but the party's loss of a parliamentary majority in last Sunday's election
has meant that the next leader of the LDP will not necessarily lead the
country.
Mr Miyazawa will be prime minister until an extraordinary session of
parliament early next month, when a new leader will be chosen.
If opposition parties are able to form a coalition and agree on a candidate,
they will have the numbers to defeat the LDP candidate in the Japanese
parliament.
In the meantime, the LDP's five large factions must select a successor
acceptable both to the party and to the coalition partner that they will
need to ensure that their choice does become prime minister.
If yesterday's meeting is a guide, the party faces a torrid couple of weeks
in satisfying older leaders, who want their turn at the top, and younger
MPs, who want the party to appoint a proven reformer to lead an overhaul of
the political system.
Mr Seiroku Kajiyama, the LDP secretary-general, suggested the formation of a
'unity and progress association' to select a successor. However, the idea
provoked outrage among younger members, one of whom said that the 'public
detests the look and the smell of the LDP.'
Seeing himself as the party's new fixer, replacing Mr Shin Kanemaru, whose
tax evasion trial began yesterday, Mr Kajiyama has blundered in recent weeks
and is blamed by some young MPs for the splitting of the party last month
and the loss of a majority.
'I regard Prime Minister Miyazawa as a class C war criminal, and I demand
that class A and class B war criminals also take responsibility,' the head
of an LDP reform committee told the meeting, referring to the political
fray.
In conveying his decision, Mr Miyazawa preferred to see himself as a
Confucian scholar, as he recalled the saying:'Sages do not suffer confusion,
the righteous worry not, and the courageous fear not.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930723

