FT934-11644

FT  30 OCT 93 / Lossmaking BR lines 'may attract most bids'


   By ROLAND RUDD


BRITISH RAIL'S lossmaking lines are likely to appeal to the private sector
more than the flagship InterCity services, thanks to public subsidies,
according to the government.
Mr Roger Freeman, transport minister, said yesterday that he thought the
subsidies would make lossmaking Regional Railways and Network SouthEast
attractive to bidders. Almost half their operating costs will be met by the
government over seven years.
The argument that bidders may be most interested in services which need big
subsidies was one factor which helped defuse a potential Tory backbench
revolt over the rail privatisation bill.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, this week outlined the
government's response to the amendment passed in the Lords which would have
allowed BR to bid for franchises. Under the new rules BR will only be
allowed to bid if there are no 'credible alternatives' from the private
sector or management buy-outs.
Labour has accused the government of negating the Lords' amendment.
Mr Freeman dismissed Labour fears that the private sector may 'cherry-pick'
the most profitable services. He said: 'The franchising director will fix
the subsidy for seven years; half the operating costs will be underwritten
by the government. This will give those interested in running the franchises
an ability to plan over the long term.'
BR now receives an annual subsidy and decides how to share it between its
different services.
Mr Freeman said: 'What we are proposing is a fundamental change in the way
we subsidise our railways.'
This appears to have been one of factors which swayed a number of potential
rebels to support the government when the bill returns to the Commons for
its third reading on Monday.
Mr Gary Waller, Tory MP for Keighley who had threatened to vote against the
privatisation proposals, said: 'The Labour party has overlooked the fact
that so-called rump railways, which are making a loss, could become the most
attractive franchises.'
Mr Chris Green, who will run Scot-Rail from April as a 'shadow franchise'
said: 'After we see the figures our team may well be interested in forming a
management buy-out.'
ScotRail relies on an annual government subsidy of Pounds 120m on a turnover
of Pounds 240m. However, the east coast line from London to Edinburgh and
Glasgow, which is responsible for InterCity remaining in profit, has not yet
attracted any serious potential bidders.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931030

