FT934-11294

FT  02 NOV 93 / Kuwait ponders radical action


   By MARK NICHOLSON


   CAIRO


KUWAIT is considering unprecedented moves to trim a KD1.5bn (Pounds 3.3bn)
budget deficit for the current year, including charging fees for public
services, allowing foreign participation in upstream oil operations and
possibly levying taxes on its citizens.
Mr Nasser al-Rodhan, Kuwait's finance minister, told the local Al-Seyaaseh
newspaper that the 'decision is approved' to charge for some services,
though he did not specify which, or when fees would begin. Kuwaitis enjoy
considerable subsidies on power, water and local telephone services.
Mr Al-Rodhan said the fees would be introduced only after consultation with
the Gulf state's parliament, which reconvened last week, and that low-income
Kuwaitis would be exempt.
The minister also said that allowing foreign oil companies to participate
with the state Kuwait Oil Company in drilling and exploration was 'under
study', adding: 'The motives behind such decisions are economic.'
Kuwait has since the Gulf war entered joint contracts with BP for technical
support and Union Carbide for construction of a petrochemicals plant. But
upstream activities have been kept in state hands since Kuwait became the
first Gulf state to buy control of its oil production industry in 1975.
Diplomats in Kuwait City said talks between KOC and some oil groups had
already begun on possible opportunities, which Mr al-Rodhan said would offer
Kuwait both fresh foreign expertise and, more particularly, foreign capital.
The government is doing more than ever to trim outgoings in the face of a
budget deficit of KD1.49bn - including statutory expropriations for the
Reserve Fund for Future Generations - and under the close eye of the
country's increasingly economically sophisticated parliament. The true
deficit in Kuwait's public finances is almost certainly bigger than the
published figure, which does not include all Kuwait's military spending or
foreign debt repayments.
Mr al-Rodhan said that 'until now and with our financial resources we can
cope with the demands', but added: 'The situation in the next stage will
make it necessary for us to start thinking seriously of taxation.'
Mr al-Rodhan's remarks follow leaks in Kuwaiti papers of an International
Monetary Fund report, handed to the government in late August, which
recommended cuts in subsidies, shrinkage of the public sector and other
revenue-raising measures, including limited privatisation.
Economists in Kuwait reckon that service fees could raise KD300m a year.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931102

