FT932-3098

FT  16 JUN 93 / Bupa urges flexibility for private investment in NHS


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


BUPA, Britain's biggest private healthcare group, is urging the government
to be more flexible in efforts to attract private capital to the National
Health Service.
Mr Peter Jacobs, Bupa chief executive, yesterday said that while he believed
ministers and senior officials wanted partnerships between the public and
private sectors, the government initiative was in danger of collapsing 'if
the private sector keeps facing blockages'.
In April the government relaxed arrangements for the use of private finance
in the NHS. This included raising from Pounds 250,000 to Pounds 10m the
financial ceiling at which health service managers need Treasury approval
for contracts with the private sector.
But, said Mr Jacobs, 50 per cent of projects worth between Pounds 1m and
Pounds 10m would still be scrutinised by the government under sampling
procedures set up to monitor the new arrangements.
While it was necessary to maintain public accountability, he said, calling
in one in two projects for sampling and the potential resulting delay was
likely to prove a considerable disincentive to the private sector. He
suggested that the government should begin by sampling about one project in
six.
Bupa has begun discussions with health service hospitals and health
authorities on possible joint ventures, including a cardiac centre.
'The time has come for private-sector involvement in the NHS to move from
support services like cleaning to the core business, which is healthcare,'
said Mr Jacobs.
'We are putting a good deal of management time into this. But the government
must address the reasonable concerns of the private sector if the policy is
to succeed.'
Mr Jacobs is concerned that, if the government insists on all joint projects
going out to tender, potential private partners may be discouraged from
planning ventures with health service hospitals if there is a risk of losing
their ideas to competitors at the tendering stage.
Mr Jacobs said a stock market flotation of Bupa, now a provident
association, remained only one of a number of possibilities if it needed to
raise funds in the future.
He said: 'As insurance businesses develop they need money. We launched a
Pounds 100m Eurobond earlier this year and do not need more money at
present. There has been no decision about an eventual flotation.'
Frenchay NHS trust in Bristol announced yesterday that it is to shed 89 jobs
to help cut spending by Pounds 2.3m over the next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930616

