FT932-3110

FT  16 JUN 93 / High hopes of Brazil's latest plan


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


   RIO DE JANEIRO


BRAZIL'S latest economic plan, the seventh in as many years and the second
in just two months, has been met by a mixture of approval and
disappointment, summed up by a cartoon on the front of yesterday's O Globo
newspaper.
It shows Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the finance minister, clad in white
leather and bursting into a saloon with guns waving. But when he fires, only
a disappointing little 'pam' sound emerges.
Mr Cardoso describes the plan, unveiled on Monday night, as 'the start of a
new attitude'. The plano verdade (real plan) consists of a federal
government spending cut equivalent to Dollars 6bn and various
revenue-raising measures aimed to 'put the government's house in order'.
The plan was welcomed by business as the first to begin attacking the public
deficit, rather than interfering with the private sector. The main Sao Paulo
stock exchange index rose initially by 5.2 per cent but fell later to close
1.6 per cent up.
But there was a general feeling that the measures did not go far enough, and
would not bridge this year's Dollars 12bn budget deficit or reduce
inflation, now above 30 per cent a month.
Mr Igor Cornelsen, director of Chartered West LB in Sao Paulo, said: 'For
the first time, we have a plan aiming at the heart of the inflationary
process - the public accounts.
However, while the diagnosis is right and the medicine good, it is nowhere
near the dosage sufficient for a lasting cure.'
The plan, which needs congressional approval, has six main points.
Faster privatisation.
A crackdown on tax evasion, with offenders to be jailed for the first time.
Suspension of transfers to states and municipalities so as to make them
start repaying the Dollars 40bn-plus they owe the federal government.
Stricter controls on state banks and auditing of the Banco do Brasil and the
National Savings Bank, with possible job cuts and branch closures.
A new cheque tax (awaiting congressional approval).
Commitment to reduce interest rates.
Many economists said they would like to have seen bolder measures, such as
the announcement of a major privatisation, the closure of bankrupt state
banks or more autonomy for the central bank.
Mr Jose Lus Miranda, president of Banco Interatlantico, said: 'This plan is
just buying time to set the preconditions for a successful shock'.
Finance ministry officials argue that it is the only realistic course. In
his impassioned televised address to the nation, Mr Cardoso said: 'I'm no
superman, I'm just an ordinary citizen. I come not with promises and
illusions but the hard truth that inflation will not end from one day to the
next.'
The government has little scope for cuts because the constitution requires
that much of its Dollars 240bn (Pounds 155.80bn) budget go to local
governments, interest payments and wages. The government can operate on just
Dollars 14bn, which is where it is cutting the Dollars 6bn.
Mr Cardoso's plan is seen as the government's last chance tor curb inflation
before elections next year. He says its success now depends on widespread
co-operation.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930616

