FT933-10188

FT  05 AUG 93 / Rhone-Poulenc warns of 10% decline in first half


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


MR JEAN-RENE Fourtou, chairman of Rhone-Poulenc, the French chemicals group
and one of the companies which will spearhead the government's privatisation
programme, yesterday warned of a fall in profits for the first half of 1993
and for the year as a whole.
Mr Fourtou told Les Echos, the financial newspaper, that the group's net
profits for the first half of 1993 were expected to be about 10 per cent
down on the FFr1.55bn (Pounds 175m) in the same period last year. This was
later confirmed by the company. The share price fell from FFr159 to FFr154
yesterday.
Two other companies on the shortlist of four groups to launch the
privatisation programme, Elf-Aquitaine, the oil group, and Banque Nationale
de Paris, also expect lower first-half profits.
Mr Fourtou said it was difficult to establish estimates for the full year
because of currency movements, possible cuts in interest rates and continued
uncertainty in several of the group's markets. 'But taking these elements
into account we think today that our results for the full year could be less
than those for 1992,' he said.
'The outlook for the year 1993 does not put into question the capacity for
our results in the medium term,' the chairman added.
According to Mr Fourtou, the expected fall in first-half profits reflected
the impact of recession in Europe which became more serious in the first
half of the year. He said that the group's organic chemicals and fibres
businesses had suffered from a decline in volumes and prices and that the
downturn in these markets had been more severe than expected.
Results in the speciality chemicals division, which produces food additives,
silicon, and chemicals for the paper and paint industry, were also below
target levels.
The agricultural chemicals and fertilisers business was hit harder than
forecast as reform of the EC's common agricultural policy cut demand.
On a positive note, Mr Fourtou said that interest payments should continue
to fall for the rest of the year as a result of improved cashflow and from
receipts from the sale of non-strategic assets. Last month, the group raised
an estimated FFr4.5bn from the sale of its 35 per cent stake in
Roussel-Uclaf, the chemicals group.
Mr Fourtou said the group's health and agricultural businesses would benefit
from the launch of new products which are in development.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930805

