FT931-3951

FT  12 MAR 93 / The Taurus Collapse: Finger of blame pointed as job losses
announced


   By RICHARD WATERS and ANDREW JACK


'THIS TAURUS thing is an industry, not a project,' said a consultant with
knowledge of the Stock Exchange's abandoned settlement system yesterday.
His thoughts were graphically borne out by the size of the clear-out
accompanying its formal cancellation. Together with the resignation of Mr
Peter Rawlins as chief executive, the departures of 220 exchange staff and a
further 130 on contracts were also announced. Many more jobs are expected to
be lost in the City as financial institutions curtail their own Taurus work.
With the news of the clear-out, the search for culprits began.
Until August 1989 there was no project director with overall responsibility
for Taurus, only a technical team working on the project. The exchange
brought in Mr John Watson, a consultant from Deloitte Haskins & Sells, which
merged later with Coopers & Lybrand.
Yesterday his team was by implication blamed for failing to realise earlier
that the project could not be completed at an acceptable cost. Sir Andrew
Hugh Smith, the exchange's chairman, did not name him but said: 'We were
testing parts of the system while others had not been designed or built. It
was only at the heart of the project that this was known.'
He added that 'there may have been an element of self-delusion' among the
Taurus project staff which had prevented them from seeing the enormity of
the problems at an earlier stage.
Mr Watson had been a former deputy chief executive of the exchange, who had
lost out in the race for the chief executive's job to Mr Jeffery Knight, Mr
Rawlins' predecessor. Mr Watson whipped momentum into the project and won
widespread support in the City. A dogged, hard-working man, he was seen as
giving the project the best chance it had. There have been few if any calls
for his resignation over the years.
Doubts began to gather last autumn, and Andersen Consulting was called in to
examine the project. Its advice, which came as a shock, was that the project
was inoperable and should be scrapped.
Early this year the technical side of the project was taken out of Mr
Watson's hands and given to Mr Stewart Senior, a consultant with Coopers &
Lybrand, and an urgent review was undertaken to see if anything could be
done.
Mr Peter Rawlins was blamed yesterday for his failure to exert more control
over the project. When he became chief executive in 1990 he turned his
attention to other matters: how to cut costs and streamline the exchange.
A former senior employee at the exchange said: 'Taurus was either going to
be Peter Rawlins' crowning glory or his nemesis. He never gripped it.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930312

