FT934-11334

FT  01 NOV 93 / Monday Interview: Tackler who can fight dirty - Sir Peter
Levene, new chairman and chief executive of Canary Wharf, talks to Robert
Peston


   By ROBERT PESTON


As a life-long supporter of Chelsea Football Club, Sir Peter Levene, the
prime minister's personal adviser on efficiency in government, has become
used to sharp reversals of fortune. Though he says that his patron, Mr John
Major, has lost his stomach for the fortnightly punishment at Stamford
Bridge, Chelsea's stadium, Sir Peter continues to occupy his season ticket
seat, week-in week-out, together with his three children.
Coping with Chelsea's vicissitudes is probably ideal training for his latest
job, starting today, as chairman and chief executive of Canary Wharf, owner
of the Pounds 2bn east London property development.
Though Canary Wharf was conceived in the mid-1980s as London's second
business centre after the City, when confidence in the future of the
Docklands development in east London was at a peak, its financial
difficulties led to the collapse of one of the world's most powerful
property empires, Mr Paul Reichmann's group of Olympia & York companies.
They also meant colossal losses for 12 commercial banks which lent Mr
Reichmann Pounds 671m for the project.
Indeed, the failure to find many tenants for the 4.3m sq ft of new office
space - by next year it will be half let and the latest tenant, the Daily
Mirror, was lured by the offer of rent-free offices for five years - cast a
blight on the entire Docklands development.
But Sir Peter - son of a dealer in antique silver and who as an alderman of
the City of London is likely to be Lord Mayor around the year 2000 - is in
optimistic and combative mood: 'The reality is that it's a great
development. There is nowhere else in the UK where a big company can find
enough space to bring together all its head-office functions in one
high-quality building.'
Mr Reichmann originally tried to recruit Sir Peter before Canary Wharf went
into administration in 1992. With Canary Wharf out of administration last
week, Sir Peter was offered the job by the banks which lent Mr Reichmann
money and now own the properties.
Sir Peter says there is a vital difference between Mr Reichmann and himself:
'I fight dirtier.' His tough-tackling approach is evident in his role as Mr
Major's efficiency adviser and overseer of the efficiency unit, which he
intends to retain despite taking on the Canary Wharf job. Last week there
was controversy over reports that the unit plans to recommend that all state
pension recipients should be issued with plastic cards to allow their
identity to be checked by computer.
Although Sir Peter refused to comment on the reports, colleagues say he is
lobbying hard for the scheme, which he estimates could eliminate more than
Pounds 800m a year in social security fraud.
He will ruffle more feathers this week when Mr William Waldegrave, the
public services minister, announces the results of the efficiency unit's
most important project, the market-testing programme. This was a project
launched last November whose object was to put out to tender Pounds 1.5bn of
work done by government departments, from cleaning and secretarial services
to the collection of official statistics and naval surveillance operations
for Customs.
In the event, several hundred million pounds of work has been subjected to
the tendering process, about half being awarded to the private sector. Sir
Peter is thus braced for criticism that he is not introducing competition
fast enough.
Although he cannot comment until Mr Waldegrave has made his statement,
colleagues say the Pounds 1.5bn target was unrealistically high, given that
it was 60 times greater than the pilot programme. They add he believes that
success depends not on how much is awarded to the private sector, but on
whether the civil service has been made more efficient.
However, some private sector companies complain their bids have been
obstructed by conservative department heads, who actually choose between the
competing tenders, though the process is overseen by the efficiency unit.
Sir Peter is unmoved: 'I have had an equal number of complaints from civil
servants that we are making it too easy for the private sector. If both
sides are complaining, I reckon I must have got it about right.'
He has got used to measuring his success by the level of criticism he
receives - and the more the better. His first government appointment came in
1985, when he was picked to be chief of defence procurement by the then
defence secretary, Mr Michael Heseltine, who became a close friend. This
caused a furore as Sir Peter was chairman and managing director of a
fast-growing defence contractor, United Scientific Holdings, at the time.
Civil servants were outraged that Sir Peter was being paid Pounds 95,000 a
year, more than twice the rate of his predecessor.
He also earned the ire of defence companies by more than doubling the
proportion of contracts subject to competitive tendering and then making
payments to contractors conditional on the progress of projects. He says
these measures led to savings of about Pounds 800m. 'When I got to the MoD,
companies thought we were an easy touch. When I left, they regarded us as an
awkward customer.'
His 'most daunting challenge', he says, came when he left the Ministry of
Defence in 1991 and took over the chairmanship of the Docklands Light
Railway, the new railway through London's east end to Canary Wharf. 'The DLR
was so unreliable it had become a national joke,' he says.
Because he 'knew absolutely nothing about railways', he decided to treat the
DLR as if it were 'a high-tech computerised system with software which did
not work', analogous to some defence projects overseen by the MoD. He
recruited MoD colleagues and the trains now run smoothly.
He has reluctantly given up the DLR chairmanship now that he is at Canary
Wharf. Although adept at dodging conflicts of interest, he complains that
'some people actually thought that, as chairman of both, I would alter the
timetable and run more trains to Canary Wharf'.
He is also giving up his positions as deputy chairman and managing director
at the UK operations of Wasserstein Perella, the US investment bank, though
he will remain as a non-executive director.
Because he has never before worked in the property industry, he accepts that
people will question his suitability for the Canary Wharf job. But Sir Peter
believes his success at the DLR shows that direct experience of an industry
is not vital. He also points out that the bulk of his job will be selling
the attractions of the development to potential tenants. 'As chairman of
United Scientific my business was marketing,' he says.
His initial idea is to locate 'the best restaurant in London' at the top of
the Canary Wharf tower, the tallest building in the UK. 'It would be the
sort of place where the chairmen of big companies would go,' he says. 'Once
they have been down to the site, I am sure I can persuade them of the merits
of moving their companies to Canary Wharf.'
His confidence is such that he talks of developing the entire 90-acre site,
which would mean the construction of 13m sq ft of office space in total,
enough for 50,000 people.
Although he relishes the challenge at Canary Wharf, there was one job he
coveted more than any other and which has now probably slipped from his
grasp forever. In the autumn of 1991, he and his 'good friend' Lord
Weinstock, managing director of the General Electric Company, discussed a
plan which would have involved GEC taking a big stake in British Aerospace
and Sir Peter then joining the board of BAe, the UK's biggest defence
contractor. The plan foundered on BAe's hostility and Sir Peter was
disappointed, though GEC remains keen on BAe.
'I would have liked to play a part in it, because it was what I was trained
to do,' he says. 'On the other hand, the defence industry is pretty tough at
the moment, probably even tougher than the property industry.'
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
        PERSONAL FILE
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1941    Born Pinner, Middlesex.
1960-63 University of Manchester, BA in Economics and Politics.
1963    Joined United Scientific: man. director, 1968-85; chairman,
        1981-85.
1984    Elected alderman of the City of London.
1985-91 Chief of Defence Procurement, Ministry of Defence.
1991-4  Chairman, Docklands Light Railway.
1992-   Prime Minister's Adviser on Efficiency, and Special Adviser to
        Trade and Industry Secretary.
1993-   Chairman and chief executive of Canary Wharf.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 32

931101

