FT934-11256

FT  02 NOV 93 / Lamont hits at 'fantasy' of EC union


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR NORMAN LAMONT, the former chancellor, warned yesterday that Britain was
in danger of being drawn into a new 'bout of fantasy' by its European
Community partners as the new European Union received a low-key reception at
Westminster.
As Mr John Major told MPs that last week's EC summit had confirmed a new
spirit of 'realism', Mr Lamont attacked the decision to press ahead with the
creation in January of the European Monetary Institute.
Confirming his position as one of the leading sceptics on the backbenches,
the former chancellor said the timetable for economic and monetary union
drawn up in the Maastricht treaty had been shown to be totally unrealistic.
But by giving its consent to the establishment of the European Monetary
Institute in Frankfurt, the government was 'in danger of being drawn into a
further bout of fantasy by the European Community from which we will find it
difficult to extricate ourselves'.
Acknowledging the timetable for economic and monetary union as unrealistic,
Mr Major insisted nevertheless that Britain's agenda for the Community was
now centre-stage.
Every leader had agreed that the highest priority was to 'restore
sustainable non-inflationary growth and increase employment'.
Mr Major, who made no explicit reference in his prepared remarks to the
establishment of Maastricht's three-pillared union, said that he also
expected concrete proposals next month from the European Commission to give
force to the principle of subsidiarity, or decentralisation of
decision-making.
Brussels officials said the Commission would consider tomorrow a radical
list of Community directives that might be repealed under the subsidiarity
provision. But Britain's claim to authorship of the principle drew a laconic
response. During the negotiations that preceded Maastricht, Mr Major had
originally opposed German suggestions that subsidiarity be incorporated in
the treaty, the officials said.
Britain's fears that its planned white paper on growth, competitiveness and
employment might be used by the Commission as an excuse to propose rises in
spending were partially allayed.
A draft of the paper does suggest a significant expansion of trans-European
networks to give force to the single market. But it concentrates on a range
of measures - many of them tax changes - through which governments could
make their economies more 'employment-friendly'.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931102

