FT932-13498

FT  23 APR 93 / Russian Referendum: Tired Yeltsin may win apathetic Yes - A
faltering president has failed to inspire the Russian people


   By JOHN LLOYD


THE Russian referendum on Sunday is likely to be as fateful a vote as any
which Russians have made in their brief period of statehood. But the
campaign has not been inspiring.
Mr Yeltsin, on his own admission yesterday, is exhausted. He has acted like
it: he appeared briefly at a heavy metal rock concert outside the Kremlin on
Wednesday night with an aide supporting his elbow (though perhaps it was the
appalling sound from the loudspeakers which made him queasy).
On the campaign trail he has rejected the opportunity to energise and
inspire his fellow Russians. Instead he has chosen largely to ignore them.
His public appearances, as yesterday in Izhevsk in Udmurtia, have been curt
and downbeat, his speeches bland, his message crudely simplified.
The referendum itself is the result of horse trading between a president and
parliament who had grown not just to distrust, but to hate, each other.
Mr Yeltsin's original impulse, to seek a simple vote of trust, was amplified
at the last Congress of People's Deputies in early April into a
four-question ballot on trust, approval of the government's economic and
social programme and early elections for president and parliament.
The outcome is uncertain: polling in Russia is in its infancy, and the
better established organisations such as Mnenie (Opinion) point to wide
regional disparities and a very high proportion of people still undecided.
The consensus is that Mr Yeltsin will win on 'trust' and may lose on support
for his economic programme, and that those voting either for or against the
two questions on early elections for parliament and presidency will not have
sufficient numbers to cross the threshold of 50 per cent of the electorate
required by these two questions.
Insofar as Mr Yeltsin and his associates have elaborated themes, they have
been simple and stark. Mr Yeltsin has posed the choice as being between
himself and chaos - and communist chaos, at that. In this he has been
supported by a number of his ministers.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the foreign minister, said in Arkhangelsk earlier this
week that 'a No vote would mean that Russia will be forced back into
isolation and confrontation with the world'.
Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy prime minister for privatisation, said that
'battle hardened communist forces', already attacking his privatisation
drive, would 'wholly reverse' the reforms if the referendum was lost.
Against this, the opposition have focused on the issue of corruption,
undoubtedly striking a popular chord.
Since the scabrous speech by Vice-President Alexander Rutskoi to parliament
last week, much attention has focused on his allegations of criminality or
criminal negligence against the government and the inner circle of Yeltsin
advisers.
Yesterday the prosecutor-general's office said it was investigating
allegations that defence minister Pavel Grachev was involved in a swindle
involving property belonging to Soviet troops in eastern Germany.
How far Mr Yeltsin himself has been touched by this cannot be ascertained -
though his press secretary expressly denied a story published by Pravda
alleging that he had built himself palatial dachas in various locations in
Russia.
For the poor, who form a large proportion of the Russian population and who
 -on polling evidence - are largely against Mr Yeltsin, the undoubted
corruption of state officials is a terrible added insult to their mean
lives.
To offset such sentiments Mr Yeltsin has issued a series of decrees over the
last two weeks which have been nakedly aimed at buying support: one doubled
the minimum wage to Rbs4,500 a month, albeit still below the poverty level.
The real issues facing the country - the largely unfulfilled prospectus of
economic reform above all - have not had much of an outing, certainly not
from the president, whose most animated utterance yesterday came when he
shouted to a crowd of supporters in Izhevsk: 'I have come to solve all your
problems.'
Beneath the surface, a scarcely-disguised anxiety is evident among the
radicals who still form the economic backbone of Mr Yeltsin's team. Former
prime minister Yegor Gaidar warned in St Petersburg on Tuesday: 'A retreat
has started in economic policy and forces are at work which could restore
state control over the economy'.
Mr Chubais, asked about Mr Yeltsin's appointment of his long-time associate
Mr Oleg Lobov as first deputy prime minister for the economy, saw it as the
possible reassertion of the rule of Gosplan, the once-dominant central
planning ministry.
Mr Yeltsin has said he will resign if he loses. He may, of course, change
his mind if he is persuaded that to hand over power (as the constitution
demands) to Gen Rutskoi would be to betray his reform path.
In this case a dangerous situation arises: Gen Rutskoi has been drawn
increasingly into the hardline camp led by the Russian Unity group, whose
leader, Mr Vladimir Isakov, yesterday announced that a newly-formed union of
hardline forces would use force if they felt the constitution was being
threatened.
The much-mooted civil war could find its origin there.
If he does lose and does go, the chaos predicted by himself and his
supporters would ensue only if Gen Rutskoi tried to make his temporary
guardianship of the presidency until elections into a more permanent one,
and cracked down on Mr Yeltsin's supporters and appointees.
There is a growing field of reformist politicians willing to compete for the
top job: both Mr Sergei Shakhrai, the deputy prime minister, and Mr Grigory
Yavlinsky, the prominent economist, have said they will stand if Mr Yeltsin
steps down. Mr Gaidar is a political as well as an administrative figure,
and the cabinet contains other ministers - such as Mr Boris Fyodorov, Mr
Chubais and Mr Alexander Shokhin, all with deputy premier's rank - who are
competent and capable of standing the strain.
In the more likely eventuality of a victory on Sunday, Mr Yeltsin has
several times indicated that he will embark on radical reforms. Last week he
said he would bring in decrees aimed at widening private ownership and
introduce a new phase of radical reform.
Yesterday in Izhevsk he said that he would institute 'tough measures'
against his opponents: Mr Sergei Filatov, his chief of staff, said on
Tuesday that a victorious Yeltsin would immediately seek to introduce a new
constitution to replace the present one.
Most of these actions are likely to be unconstitutional: indeed, the tougher
they are, the further outside the current law they will be.
Since the referendum carries no constitutional weight, the formal power
structure will be the same on April 26 as it is today; and it is on this
structure, with its vested interests, many of which have retained their
power and privileges from the Communist era, on which Mr Yeltsin and his
team must launch themselves.
Maybe Mr Yeltsin has already discounted the referendum, and is garnering
strength for the larger battle. He will need fresh strength if this
referendum, meaningless in most obvious respects, is to take on symbolic
value as an opening to further reform.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930423

