FT932-3137

FT  16 JUN 93 / UN called on to revise its rules on peacekeeping


   By REUTER


   STOCKHOLM


THE United Nations must work out new rules for peacekeeping in crises like
the former Yugoslavia and Somalia, the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute (Sipri) said yesterday, Reuter reports from Stockholm.
The collapse of totalitarian communism has led to civil wars which the world
body is powerless to stop at present, Sipri experts said at a news
conference to launch its 1993 year book.
Authors of the year book, considered the standard reference work on world
arms and disarmament, commented that in 1992 the UN moved towards a policy
of imposing or promoting peace rather than maintaining the status quo. 'The
problem with Yugoslavia is that there is no peace to be kept, and
enforcement activity cannot come about because there is no outside, agreed
policy,' said spokeswoman, Ms Regina Cowen-Kemp.
Sipri said the number of military personnel involved in peacekeeping had
soared last year to more than 62,000 from about 15,000 in 1991 but warned
against a tendency to see peacekeeping as a panacea for all the world's
conflicts.
'The expectations are exaggerated. Peacekeeping should be used only in the
last resort. Preventive diplomacy and crisis management are more important,'
said Mr Adam Daniel Rotfeld, Sipri director.
World military spending fell by 15 per cent in 1992 but civil wars flared in
29 different places, according to Sipri. It gave no overall figures, but
officials said industrialised countries spent about Dollars 540bn (Pounds
350.6bn) in 1992, about 65 per cent of the world total.
Mr Rotfeld said the collapse of totalitarian regimes in eastern Europe and
the former Soviet Union had raised, then dashed, hopes of an improvement. He
said that 1992 had brought neither well-being nor respect for democracy and
the rule of law in former Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union.
On a positive note, Mr Rotfeld mentioned the 1992 Start II treaty in which
the United States and Russia agreed to limit their strategic nuclear forces,
and the chemical weapons treaty opened for signature in Paris this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930616

