FT933-5090

FT  06 SEP 93 / Milk, honey, razor wire: Julian Ozanne and Andrew Gowers in
an unlikely Promised Land


   By JULIAN OZANNE and ANDREW GOWERS


   IT TAKES imagination to conceive of the Gaza Strip


360 square kilometres of desert dotted with squalid Palestinian refugee
camps and shanty towns - as the Promised Land. But that is what it has
become for 5,000 Jewish settlers who live there in red-tiled homes
surrounded by well-tended lawns.
Mediterranean waves break on deserted beaches, and fields full of ripening
vegetables and high-tech glasshouses sprout from the parched sand dunes. A
horse ranch offers pony-trekking for tourists, and Jewish settlers say they
never lock their homes and caravans. The Palm Beach Hotel, which caters for
ultra-orthodox Jews, even has a coffee shop called Milk and Honey.
The seeming idyllic life enjoyed by Jewish pioneers who have settled beyond
the 'Green Line' dividing Jews and Arabs is slightly surreal, however. The
coils of razor-wire and electrified fences, and the revolvers on the hips of
many settlers, serve as reminders of how tenuous life has been in the
settlement of Gush Katif, surrounded by 800,000 Palestinians.
Now, under a plan for Palestinian self-rule agreed in principle by Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organisation, the settlers of Gaza face an
uncertain future. Many see history repeating itself. They predict that they
will be sacrificed in the end by the government - just as the settlers in
the Egyptian Sinai desert were when Israel, in 1978, handed back the land it
had captured in 1967. (At least 70 of the families who made a last stand of
civil disobedience at the Yamit settlement in the Sinai, before being
forcibly evacuated by Israeli troops, now live in Gush Katif.)
'Morale could drop and people will leave, so the government hopes it will
have less of a problem down the road getting the rest of the Jews out,' said
Mr Yosef Shomron, an American who settled in Gush Katif nine months ago, for
a mixture of ideological and economic reasons.
'We are very angry and upset by the plan. There will be resistance to
leaving, like in Yamit, and one or two guys might go and shoot - but Jews
won't fight against other Jews, There will be no cult of violence,' he said,
sitting outside his prefabricated home.
Mr Shomron supports the Kach movement, which wants to transfer all the 1.9m
Palestinians out of the occupied territories. Others oppose the self-rule
plan for religious reasons. They believe that Gaza, Judea and Samaria
(otherwise called the West Bank) are part of the biblical Eretz Yisrael
(land of Israel).
'There will be no peace. Arab will kill Arab and they will turn their
violence against the Jewish state,' said Mrs Roberta Bienenfeld, a
translator who has lived here for 12 years. 'God is taking his revenge
against the state of Israel and all its unbelievers. We hope the plan won't
go through so we can keep our land that God gave us.'
Some settlers are more pragmatic. Mr Michael Goldschmidt, an immigrant from
South Africa and one of the founders of Gush Katif, has invested more than
Shk1m over 16 years in an agricultural business growing cherry tomatoes and
flower bulbs in greenhouses for export to the US and Europe. He said he
would be prepared to leave if the agreement with Palestinians delivered
'real peace to Israel'. 'We are very happy here but we will have to give up
one day,' he said, watching a group of Palestinian workers wash his flower
bulbs.
But even more moderate settlers, such as Mr Goldschmidt, are bewildered by
the agreement: 'We built everything here out of sand. It was nothing before
we came. Why do we have to give it up? We fought for it and captured it.
Israel is a small country - there is no gold here, so why do the Arabs want
our land? We have nowhere else to go. But we have to give it back because we
are weak and we are Jews.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930906

