FT932-13533

FT  22 APR 93 / Ukraine seeks area security zone


   By CHRYSTIA FREELAND


   KIEV


A TOP Ukraine official yesterday said that his country is spearheading an
effort to form a central European zone of stability and security which would
embrace Ukraine and its eastern European neighbours.
'Today, the most serious potential source of instability in Europe is
tension between the countries of central and eastern Europe,' Mr Boris
Tarasiuk, Ukraine's deputy foreign minister, said. 'To help resolve these
tensions we propose the creation of an organisation of states in this region
which have common interests.'
Mr Tarasiuk said that the idea of a central European security zone was first
broached by Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk on a visit to Hungary in
February. Since then, Mr Tarasiuk said, Ukraine had begun 'serious work' on
the project and expected results in the 'near future'.
Mr Tarasiuk said such a zone would not be a military alliance or bloc but
that member states would pledge not to advance territorial claims to one
another, respect national minorities and increase economic co-operation.
Mr Tarasiuk said that for eastern European states such as Hungary, Poland,
Romania, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Bulgaria such an organisation
could smooth the transition to fuller integration into Europe.
'They would prefer rapid integration into the west, but the west does not
want them immediately,' Mr Tarasiuk said. 'The west is not willing to accept
the countries of eastern Europe immediately into Nato, but they need some
sort of security structure.'
For Ukraine, a central European security zone would provide an alternative
to the Commonwealth of Independent States' military bloc being patched
together by Russia. Ukraine has steadfastly refused to join any CIS military
or political structures.
However, Mr Tarasiuk insisted that 'our goal would not be to cut Russia off
from Europe. On the contrary, it would be to serve as a bridge between
Russia and the west.'
Ukraine is notably more enthusiastic about the creation of such an
organisation than its eastern European neighbours, whose sights are still
focused on the west. But the past few months have seen a marked upswing in
diplomatic activity between Ukraine and Poland, Hungary and Romania which
has yielded a number of political, economic and military agreements.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

930422

