FT934-11464

FT  01 NOV 93 / The European Union slips quietly into life: The Maastricht
treaty, which takes effect today


   By LIONEL BARBER


THE 340m citizens of the European Community may hardly have noticed, but
despite the absence of fanfares, history will record that Monday, November
1, 1993, marked the entry into force of the Maastricht treaty and the birth
of the European Union.
Maastricht provides for small, but potentially significant changes in how
Europe does business. It will increase the powers of the European
parliament, and deepen collaboration between governments on drugs,
immigration and crime. It also lays the groundwork for greater co-operation
on foreign policy, and provides for a move to a single European currency by
1999 at the latest.
Some of these changes look incremental; others such as the move to European
economic and monetary union look doubtful, at least in the light of the
recent de facto suspension of the exchange rate mechanism.
Maastricht's proponents insist that the treaty is one of the most
misunderstood documents in modern times, perhaps because it is about as
readable as a London bus timetable. Yet the opaque, bureaucratic language
reflects the ambiguity inherent in a treaty which was a compromise between
federally minded states such as the Netherlands and Belgium and those who
jealously guard national sovereignty such as the UK and France.
The treaty contains suggestions for intensifying European co-operation on
education, health and culture; but it sets clear limits against centralising
tendencies in Brussels. The doctrine of subsidiarity - devolving power to
the lowest appropriate national and regional level - is a double insurance
for member states.
The hybrid nature of Maastricht also means that the European Community will
still exist beside the new European Union. Roughly speaking, Europeans
should speak of the Union when referring to the 'intergovernmental' pillars
of foreign policy and judicial co-operation; but they should retain the more
familiar 'EC' or 'Community' when referring to normal EC business under the
Treaty of Rome.
The obvious winner among institutions is the European Parliament. Under
Article 189b, it gains the right of 'co-decision' on legislation, to be
shared with the council of ministers. This does not extend to core areas
such as foreign policy, defence, judicial co-operation or economic policy,
rather to more mundane matters such as the internal market.
A senior Commission official predicts that the legislative struggle between
EC ministers and parliament could make decision-making more difficult in the
short-term. One analogy is the bargaining between House and Senate in the
US, with the Commission playing the broker.
Other important changes foreshadowed by the Maastricht treaty include:
More qualified majority voting in social policy legislation. Britain has a
treaty opt-out, but remains involved in discussions.
The right of EC citizens to vote or stand as a candidate in local and
European parliament elections.
Establishment of 'joint actions' in foreign and security policy, a code word
for less reactive diplomacy rather than the dispatch of combat troops.
Maastricht also provides for closer collaboration between the European Union
and the Western European Union, the military organisation based in Brussels.
The creation of a committee of the regions. This reflects the influence of
the German Lander who were anxious not be left out in the cold; but it could
again complicate decision-making if the new body gains stature.
The one institution which will be literally cut down to size is the European
Commission. Under Maastricht, the Commission should comprise the president
(Mr Jacques Delors) and one or two vice-presidents only, rather than the
current six 'veeps'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931101

