FT933-12699

FT  23 JUL 93 / Ship of state shudders on day of destiny


   By RALPH ATKINS


IT WAS a moment of history. Labour MPs punched the air and shouted 'hold the
front page' to the Commons press gallery even before the final vote was
announced.
The government defeated, Mr John Major tried to look dignified as he sat,
ready to read from the sheet of paper he had already placed on the despatch
box.
His attempts to conjure an image of serene determination had been shattered
like a still pond hit by a boulder. The prime minister had tried to see
Maastricht as a determined swan, inexorably drifting towards ratification.
It was a day for a spot of fishing or baiting the opposition parties, he
implied.
But beneath the surface, government business managers paddled frantically to
stop the ship sinking. Even an understanding - if not quite a deal - with
the nine Ulster Unionist MPs was not enough.
Last night, as the cabinet met for the third time in a day, Downing Street
officials were playing the ultimate card - the threat of a general election.
The drama had lasted all day. Cabinet ministers met; the whips began their
calculations. On the terrace at lunchtime, it was jolly weather for messing
about with votes.
By afternoon a shaft of July sun through the high windows of the Commons'
chamber turned the prime minister's grey hair to a bright silver as he
opened the defence for the government.
On the benches opposite sat the menacing figure of Mr James Molyneaux,
Ulster Unionist leader, and - in an eagle's nest position in the gallery -
the bespectacled Mr James Cran, a Tory Eurosceptic ring-leader.
As rational debate turned to fractious political point-scoring, it was clear
the plot was being hatched elsewhere. Mr Richard Ryder, the chief whip, was
not in his usual seat; Mr Molyneaux held his order papers to his lips as he
conferred with colleagues.
At first, Tory Eurosceptics were confident. Later their song changed. 'The
social chapter is difficult for some of our boys to vote for,' admitted one.
By evening, as Mr Major gave his end-of-term pep talk to the 1922 Committee,
there was loud desk-thumping. Later news of an emergency cabinet meeting
triggered deep Tory fears that his appeal to loyalty would not be enough.
As the 10pm vote approached, government whips raced along Westminster
corridors, Tory Eurosceptics gathered. The nine Ulster Unionist MPs enjoyed
a rare burst of publicity. 'I am always delighted to accept a sinner
returning home,' Mr Major said as Mr John Carlisle renounced his Euro-rebel
links.
With his meek grin and the air of a man staking his political reputation on
the Commons' eventually backing him, the prime minister might have chosen
words direct from the Old Testament: 'Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we
die.'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930723

