FT933-5141

FT  04 SEP 93 / Food & Drink: A new Arran malt - Appetisers


   By GILES MACDONOGH and PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


IT IS not every day that a new malt whisky distillery is set up in Scotland.
Indeed, one sees far more of them being mothballed or even demolished. It is
therefore particularly brave of Harold Currie, former managing director of
Chivas Regal, to want to set up new stills on the Isle of Arran, a Hebridean
island between the Mull of Kintyre and the Scottish mainland. There will be
no malt bottled before the year 2001, but for anyone interested, bonds' may
be bought at a cost of Pounds 450 each. These entitle you to a case of
Lochranza blended whisky 1998 (containing whisky from the new distillery on
Arran) and a case of the real thing in 2001. Inquiries to Isle of Arran
Distillers. Tel: 0290-52282. Fax: 0290-50177.
                   *          *          *
MICHAELMAS goose is back on British menus. Last year, a fair number of
Weekend FT readers were tempted to savour the pleasures of autumn goose,
considered traditionally to be even finer than goose at Christmas.
This year Goodman's Geese is rearing 400 birds which should be ready for the
table in late September and October. What is more, Mrs Goodman has agreed
once again, if so requested by Weekend FT readers, to cut the necks of the
birds in a manner suitable for making goose neck pudding. But this offer
applies only to advance orders for Michaelmas birds to be collected from the
farm or despatched by overnight delivery in September and October. Later in
the year, she will be too busy coping with Christmas orders to prepare goose
necks in this way.
For a copy of my recipe for goose neck pudding, write (enclosing sae) to
Louise Gordon-Foxwell at the Weekend FT. Inquiries and orders to Goodman's
Geese, Walsgrove Farm, Great Witley, Worcester WR6 6JJ. Tel. 0299-896272.
                   *          *          *
IT ALL BEGAN in my house with Gala, Gala Royal and Braeburn from New
Zealand. All three eat well and are useful for tiding apple addicts over
between one British apple season and the next. My objection is the sticky
name-tapes worn by each and every fruit. It is a nuisance far worse than
refrigerator magnets. Magnets may multiply overnight but at least they know
their place. Apple stickers get everywhere.
Now, the French, Germans and South Africans are at it and British growers
plan to join in this autumn - at the insistence, apparently, of supermarkets
which are reluctant to sell loose apples without individual identification.
The litter problem looks set to grow.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

930904

