FT933-12801

FT  22 JUL 93 / Three top groups head French sell-off agenda: Government
lists 21 companies for privatisation


   By JOHN RIDDING and DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


THE French government yesterday named three of the country's leading
industrial and financial groups to spearhead its ambitious privatisation
programme.
The planned sale of Elf-Aquitaine, the oil group which is France's largest
industrial concern, Rhone-Poulenc, the chemicals group, and Banque Nationale
de Paris (BNP) could raise more than FFr90bn (Pounds 10.31bn), brokers
estimated last night. The first sale is due this autumn.
The three groups are among the biggest and most solid institutions in the
state sector and had been expected to figure among the first to be sold off.
The fourth concern named yesterday was Banque Hervet, a small
property-oriented bank, which acknowledged its surprise at being included in
the first wave of the state sell-off.
The scale of the share sale, aimed at international as well as French
investors, will depend on market conditions and whether the state decides to
sell its stakes entirely or in tranches. The proceeds will fund public
housing and infrastructure to help pull the economy out of recession, as
well as to restrain the budget deficit, estimated this year at FFr317bn.
Mr Edouard Balladur's government has named another 17 companies for sale.
Since many of these currently suffer losses - such as Bull, the computer
company, and Air France, the airline - it has set no deadline for the
completion of its programme.
The conservative government hopes in the longer term to reduce significantly
the size of what is western Europe's largest public sector after Italy.
Heads of the companies selected yesterday have said that privatisation would
not alter their strategies, which have allowed for partial sales of
state-owned shares even under the preceding Socialist government.
'I am the manager of the company, not the owner,' said Mr Loik Le Floch
Prigent, Elf's president, shortly before the sell-off announcement.
Privatisation will facilitate the raising of the new capital that the
heavily-indebted French state has been increasingly unable to provide.
Yesterday's announcement is to be followed within two weeks by the naming of
a special privatisation committee, which will value the four companies with
the help of domestic and international banking advisers.
The finance ministry did not exclude the possibility that the government
might make changes at the top of the four companies before privatisation.
By naming four companies in three different sectors for early sale, the
government has given itself the flexibility to decide in September which it
will float off first.
It is generally confident about the demand for privatisation shares,
following the success of the Balladur bond issue this month. The bond, which
can be converted into equity of privatised companies, raised almost three
times the target amount.
The privatisation bill allows the government to retain a golden share to
maintain strategic control over companies involved in sensitive sectors such
as energy, defence and high-technology. President Francois Mitterrand named
Elf among several companies which required 'extreme caution' in putting them
into private hands.
France starts with the cream, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930722

