FT932-145

FT  30 JUN 93 / Arts: The Very Big Carla Bley Band - Jazz


   By GARRY BOOTH


Without leaders like Carla Bley, the big band format would be in danger of
becoming a part of the musical heritage industry. Turned on to jazz as a
girl by the showmanship and antics of Lionel Hampton and his orchestra, her
development through bebop into abstract and long narrative works has
produced a writer who breathes new life into the large ensemble.
The mixed colours of Afro-American jazz with shades of the exotic in her
scores have reflections of Charles Mingus. But less gothic than the late
bass player's dark and dangerous arrangements, Bley's big-hearted work is
home to more approachable demons.
Like the best of all big band music, The Very Big Band's large mass of bass
bears down on the listener with irresistible force. At the Royal Festival
Hall on Monday with charts ranging from the newest 'On The Stage In Cages'
to the oldest 'All Fall Down', the 13-strong brass section featured soloists
Lew Soloff on trumpet and British tenor saxophonist Andy Sheppard. Delicious
mood swings from movement to movement allowed soloists to break easily from
the ranks, roaring New Orleans style or squiggling atonally: the crazy
sleaze of Gary Valente's hellfire trombone pitted against the slippery notes
of Wolfgang Puschnig's alto. Placing a few chords at the piano and looking
like the rogue replicant from Blade Runner in her electrified mop-top, the
willowy 55 year old leader directed elegantly.
'Strange Arrangement' was a choice piece of squeaky and off kilter Bley,
while 'Who Will Rescue Your?' opened with melodious melodrama finally
crossing over into rocky rhythms projected into the middle of next week by
Valente's supersonic trombone (why is this person not seen more outside the
Bley bands?). After the interval, the second set began with a wilful
experiment in glumness by the addition of violinist Alex Balenescu, relieved
by slick and speedy changes from Sheppard and Soloff and a clashing of brass
which Balenescu's sawing finally made sense of. 'Permanent Wave' was
described by Bley as slow and soft and she hoped it would stay that way. It
didn't, and once Valente had a hold of it, the rest of the band rose
grandiosely with him.
Finally and gloriously, Bley gave in to the trombones' bristling slides
completely and with Charles Mingus's 'Goodbye Pork Pie Hat' consolidated her
role as natural successor to the demon big band leader.
Sponsored by Silk Cut

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930630

