FT934-8637

FT  15 NOV 93 / Chernobyl death toll put at 42


   By BRONWEN MADDOX, Environment Correspondent


A TOTAL of 42 deaths can be definitely attributed to the 1986 explosion at
the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in Ukraine, European scientists said this
weekend.
The figure is in apparent contrast to the Ukrainian government's claim that
8,000 people have died so far from the effects of the world's worst nuclear
disaster.
Apart from increased rates of thyroid cancer in children, no clear signs
have yet been detected of an increase in radiation-related illnesses or
deaths, European scientists visiting the region said. They expected a
long-term rise in cancer rates, but said some reports of increased illness
in Ukraine, Belarus and Russia, the three former Soviet republics most
heavily contaminated by radioactive fallout, were unverifiable or premature.
Mr Boris Prister, first deputy minister of Ukraine for protection of the
population from the consequences of the Chernobyl accident, said: 'We are
often asked how many people died from Chernobyl, but the truth is, that is
one of the most complicated questions of all.'
Part of the difficulty in judging the effects of the disaster is the lack of
reliable data in some regions from before 1986.
Cancer experts, some of whom have been studying health effects since the
explosion, were accompanying a European Community delegation to Chernobyl
last week, which included members of the European parliament and the
Commission.
In the past two years, the group has conducted a joint research programme,
funded by the European Union and the three republics, which have invested
Ecu14.2m (Pounds 11m) in 16 projects.
Scientists have agreed that the increased rate of normally rare thyroid
cancer in children in the contaminated regions can be blamed on the
explosion.
Scientists in the EC team say that 35 of the 42 known deaths were people who
suffered severe radiation sickness during the past seven years.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931115

