FT934-8652

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Cut-price mortgage launched - A look
at a novel scheme by broker John Charcol


   By DAMIAN REECE


A VARIABLE rate mortgage which undercuts the standard building society rate
of 7.99 per cent by a full 1 percentage point has been launched by broker
John Charcol.
The product's competitiveness stems from its link to the London InterBank
Offer Rate, known as Libor. Normal building society mortgage rates are set
with reference to the rates paid to savers.
Libor is the rate at which commercial banks will lend to each other over
various periods and is also an indicator of the wholesale money market's
expectations for future base rate movements. Three month Libor is currently
5.66 per cent compared with base rates of 6 per cent and the standard
building society mortgage rate of 7.99 per cent.
John Charcol's offer of a mortgage set at Libor plus 1 per cent looks
extremely attractive at present rates. But taking out a Libor-linked
mortgage could prove costly, as the chart shows.
Until the middle of 1988, the City was anticipating base rate cuts and Libor
was leading base rates down. But once the wholesale money markets sensed a
turn in the interest rate cycle, Libor shot up and continued to rise at a
premium to base rates and building society rates.
As a result, when base rates reached 15 per cent, borrowers with a
Libor-linked mortgage were paying over 16 per cent, compared with building
society borrowers on 15.4 per cent.
The new John Charcol offer allows borrowers to switch to a standard variable
rate, a fixed rate, or a rate linked to the average of the top 10 building
society rates should Libor begin to rise out of line with other mortgage
rates. Borrowers can opt for these options without any redemption penalties
and with only one month's notice required.
The Libor-linked rate of interest on the loan is recalculated every three
months and adjusted if rates have changed. The initial rate has been set at
6.99 per cent.
The company is also offering a version which caps the Libor-linked loan at
7.99 per cent for 36 months from completion. This means borrowers will
benefit from any further fall in Libor but would be protected from any
increase in the rate above 7.99 per cent. This option is slightly more
expensive - at 1.25 per cent above Libor - and carries redemption penalties
but offers protection against a repeat of the 1990 experience.
The lender charges a Pounds 295 arrangement fee. John Charcol earns its
money either from commission (depending on the method of repayment, eg
endowment or Pep, used), or from a fee, depending on individual
circumstances. This reduces the cost saving compared with a conventional
variable rate. There are no insurance policies tied to the mortgage.
A big advantage for Libor-linked borrowers is that any future cut in
interest rates will be passed on in full whereas it is unlikely that
building societies will be able to cut their mortgage rates by much because
of their need to maintain savings rates.
It is reasonable to expect that, if base rates fell to 5 per cent, the
average building society mortgage rate would fall only 0.5 per cent to 7.49
per cent. John Charcol's Libor-linked loan would enjoy the full benefit of
the cut and would fall to 5.909 per cent.
In 1986, Citibank launched the first Libor-linked mortgage in the UK and
successfully lent Pounds 50m but has since been unable to generate much
interest in spite of a relaunch in March of this year. Stephen Balme,
marketing director of Citibank Mortgage, said that the company may well
consider another relaunch now that wholesale money market rates are so low.
'There is always the problem that the consumer doesn't fully understand
Libor,' said Balme.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

931113

