FT932-7122

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (2): Reforms are a high priority -
Prospects for sustainable growth / The economy


   By JOSE GALANG


AFTER a decade marked by recession, government indecision and missed
opportunities, the Philippine economy again seems to be preparing for a
long-delayed take-off.
Economists believe the new government of President Fidel Ramos has a better
chance than its predecessors of achieving sustainable economic growth,
partly because it has inherited some healthy macroeconomic reforms from the
previous administration.
Further, the ten-month-old government has demonstrated a keen determination
to pursue crucial reforms - backed by the International Monetary Fund - to
open the economy and pave the way for robust growth. In the past, similar
attempts wilted amidst the politically destabilising effects of the reforms.
The medium-term outlook, however, will continue to be hampered by the
inadequacy of the country's infrastructure. Among the worst problems are the
shortage of electricity generating capacity and the inefficient transport
systems in the archipelago of 7,100 islands.
In common with other developing countries, the Philippines has only scarce
resources for its myriad programmes. Low domestic savings rates have been a
chronic problem, which gives the country no recourse but to tap foreign
financing. Even now the cost of servicing the country's foreign debt of some
Dollars 30bn remains a large item on the budget. While efforts to reduce the
debt burden continue, the government also needs to increase revenues by
improving the efficiency of tax collection and boosting exports.
Beyond these roadblocks, however, the Ramos administration has set targets
designed to put the economy on track towards modernisation as it steps into
the next century. The three main goals of the Ramos economic agenda are:
To raise economic growth rates to double digits by 1998.
To raise per capita income to at least Dollars 1,000, from about Dollars 730
at present.
To reduce poverty incidence to 30 per cent of the population, from about
half now.
Mr Ramos and his economic managers, led by Mr Ramon del Rosario, the finance
secretary, have already put market-opening policies in place. In August 1992
most restrictions on foreign-exchange transactions were lifted. This was
followed in April this year by a decision to allow the use of medium and
long-term foreign loans to cover exporters' costs, which previously was
restricted to import costs of materials.
Among the policy measures initiated by the previous administration of Mrs
Corazon Aquino is the Foreign Investment Act, which allows up to 100 per
cent foreign equity in local enterprises. This is now being followed up by
the new government with more specific measures to open up certain sectors
previously restricted to Filipino interests, such as in land usage and
minerals exploration.
The ongoing tariff reform programme has also reduced nominal import tariffs
to an average 23 per cent, from about 42 per cent at the start of the 1980s.
By 1995, the effective protection will be down further to 19 per cent,
making the Philippines one of the most liberal markets in the region.
While the Aquino government's dissolution of monopolies in the agricultural
sector early during its term saw almost immediate results in boosting farm
incomes, the response to the Ramos administration's initial round of reforms
has yet to be felt.
This is because of other fundamental problems, such as high domestic
interest rates and the strength of the peso against the dollar over the last
year. Inflation has been brought down to an average 8.9 per cent in 1992,
from 18.7 in 1991, and the current programme targets a 1993 average of 7.5
per cent.
INTEREST rates softened in April, prompting speculators to sell the peso and
boosting the stock market to a record high. Costs of financial
intermediation have fallen with the reduced level of reserves that banks are
required to hold against bank deposits and the increase in the amounts that
state banks can lend in proportion to their deposit bases.
Even greater benefits are expected from the move to replace the Central Bank
of the Philippines with a more independent Central Monetary Authority with a
healthier financial base. The Central Bank's activities towards maintaining
price stability are being hampered by huge deficits, particularly those
incurred under the late dictator, Ferdinand Marcos. A law is expected to be
passed by Congress by mid-year creating the new CMA. Without the crippling
deficits, the new agency should be able to steer monetary expansion more
efficiently.
Barring a further deterioration in the electric power situation, business
expects a more favourable climate following these changes in the
macro-economic environment. However, given that the daily power failures are
expected to continue to curtail operations until the third quarter of the
year, overall economic growth is now forecast by independent economists at
no more than 2.5 per cent, substantially lower than the government's
forecast.
Mr Jose Pardo, president of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry,
says: 'Amidst the darkness (caused by power failures or 'outages'), we see
somehow a growth in 1993 - perhaps the recovery that we had anticipated in
1992.'
The more significant business expansion, Mr Pardo believes, can be expected
to start next year. But even the slow rate of growth this year should not be
a problem.
While government officials insist that the 4.5 per cent growth target this
year is in fact 'achievable,' a low growth rate that is accompanied by
suitable reform measures should over the long run be more beneficial for the
Philippines. The economic 'dragons' of East Asia, which the Philippines is
using as models for its shift away from its current Latin American-type
dilemma, started out with small growth rates on their way to rapid economic
advance.
Besides, past experience shows that high-growth periods in the Philippines
were usually cut short by balance-of-payments crises. This was due to the
increase in consumption spending's share of GNP, as opposed to a healthier
expansion supported by increased capital spending.
The government aims to channel increasing amounts into capital investments
via an aggressive infrastructure projects. This year, for instance, it has
front-loaded spendings for infrastructure projects in a 'pump-priming'
programme that will seek to increase capital expenditures and perk up
domestic demand.
It would be short-sighted to judge the prospects for the Philippine economy
purely on the outlook for electricity supplies. Agriculture, for instance,
which is still the main source of livelihood for most Filipinos, is expected
to record significant gains this year with the expected improvement in
weather conditions. Crop production in the past two years had been affected
by drought in most provinces and typhoons in others. The Department of
Agriculture expects self-sufficiency in rice this year with production
reaching 10m tonnes. Sugar output will also increase, with producers already
looking at the attractive prices on the world market.
Remittances from Filipino overseas workers, estimated to top Dollars 2bn
again this year, will continue to play a key role in the economy. In the
past two years, the foreign exchange brought home by two million Filipinos
employed abroad has helped offset the poor performance of the domestic
economy. The growth in remittances has already outpaced that of exports,
although this is likely to change if the exchange rate becomes favourable to
exporters again.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930525

