FT932-6851

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(10): Users upgrade as prices fall - Printers


   By GEORGE BLACK


DESPITE the recession, the printer market has remained buoyant. As prices
fall, users upgrade, writes George Black.
The market is split into three roughly equal sectors: dot matrix, inkjet and
laser. Sales of dot matrix machines have fallen sharply, but this has been
offset by higher sales of inkjet and laser models.
While the volume of printer sales has gone up by around 20 per cent, prices
have come down around 30 per cent, so the market has probably grown only
slightly by value.
Increasing demand for better quality documents is the main force which is
driving sales up. Dot matrix printers are becoming steadily less popular,
even though prices are very low and the quality of output has improved.
Inkjet is much the fastest growing sector by units, up 85 per cent last
year, according to market researchers Romtec. These machines are bought
mainly by small businesses and home users who consider laser prices still
too high but want better quality than they get from their old nine-pin or
24-pin dot matrix printers. Inkjets now offer 300-360 dots per inch.
The boom in sales of inkjet models is also related to the fact that they are
quieter than dot matrix models, which is especially important for home use.
Colour inkjet sales have more than doubled in the past year; output is slow,
but many users are willing to sacrifice speed for colour. Colour laser
printing is still prohibitively expensive for most purposes.
However, inkjet is now seen by many users as a low-end solution. A
laser-printed document looks printed where an inkjet-printed document looks
no more than nicely typed. Laser printers are replacing inkjets in many
businesses as they become cheaper.
Lasers are classed as a 'mature' market compared to inkjets, but they are
nonetheless the fastest-growing sector by value of sales.
Laser quality is also improving, which matters to users who want to print
complex graphics; 300 dpi is the current standard, 600 dpi is spreading.
Many large companies looking for economies during the recession have been
sharing laser printers among staff on their local area networks. To do this,
they need machines capable of eight or 16 pages per minute output, rather
than two or four pages output by the slower ones.
Ms Nicky Ayre, Hewlett-Packard's UK peripherals programme manager, says that
network managers now spend a lot of their time dealing with printer
problems. The result is a growing market for slot-in cards, which report
printer faults to the network manager and allow many of them to be solved by
remote diagnostics.
Prices keep being pushed down by strong competition and the fall in the cost
of processors and memory. The market is extremely price-sensitive and most
suppliers have to offer discounts.
Laser prices have fallen sharply; most now cost Pounds 600-Pounds 700, some
as little as Pounds 400. Average inkjet prices are Pounds 300-Pounds 400,
but some are as low as Pounds 250, and dot matrixes Pounds 150-Pounds 200.
This could be almost as low as prices can go because of the inherent
manufacturing cost. High volume manufacturers can take this, but some
smaller players may soon find the market very tough.
Hewlett-Packard remains clear market leader, with around half the sales of
lasers and around 40 per cent of the whole market by value. Its dominance is
re-enforced by its close relationship with Canon, which makes its laser
printer engines.
In the past couple of years a number of printer makers have begun to market
their products by stressing environmental aspects.
Kyocera, a Japanese laser printer manufacturer, highlights its ability to
use 100 per cent recycled paper and its use of toner containers which can be
burned, rather than non-biodegradable ones which end up as toxic landfill.
Mr Phil Murphy, Kyocera's UK general manager, says that many large firms now
have environmental representatives who are taking an interest in these
issues. He also points out that there are European Commission directives to
member states to increase the amount of recycling of paper and packaging.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930526

