FT934-10131

FT  06 NOV 93 / Travel: 'Temple,' said Hubert. 'Caves.' 'River.' - Kieran
Cooke travels through Sri Lanka with a Sinhalese driver who turns out to be
a master of the one-liner


   By KIERAN COOKE


HUBERT, the driver, had ears the size of cabbage leaves. They had great
bushes of hair trailing out of them. At times the light would filter through
them, like butterfly wings at sunset.
We rattled and jostled over the roads of Sri Lanka.
Hubert was a man of few words. 'School,' he would say as we passed a school.
An hour would go by. 'Buffalo,' he would grunt, and sure enough there was a
water buffalo, cavorting in a pond.
Another interval. We approached a church. I waited. 'Cemetery,' said Hubert.
Then, in a flush of verbosity: 'Dead people.'
I read somewhere that when the Dutch, good Christians to the core, arrived
in Sri Lanka, they carried their tombstones with them. Everything was
engraved on the stone but the final date of departure.
A good job colonialism took place in the age of the boat and not the jet.
'Any hand luggage, sir?' 'No, only my tombstone. Can I put it under the
seat?'
I shared these thoughts with Hubert. He wobbled his head but said nothing.
We went from Colombo to Nuwara Eliya in the hills. We stayed at the Hill
Club, where the termites are steadily chomping their way through the
library. The waiters, venerable men with grey moustaches, wore white gloves.
Hubert slurped the Brown Windsor soup appreciatively. He worked his way
through the steak and kidney. Hubert liked English food. He said spicy Sri
Lankan food gave him terrible wind. He asked for seconds of the apple
crumble.
We went on to Trincomalee on the east coast. Going through parts of Sri
Lanka is a bit like riding through Northern Ireland. Sailing along, not a
care in the world and suddenly, round a bend, there is a road block, with
men in khaki bristling with guns.
They say there are plenty of Tamil Tiger separatists round Trincomalee.
People refer to the Tigers, rather quaintly, as 'those boys.' But the Tigers
are fierce and frightening and best avoided.
There are ways of dealing with road blocks. I once had a driver in Belfast
called Carruthers. We never had any problems with the police or military.
Hubert worked a similar magic. He would say a few rushed words in Sinhalese.
He would point a thumb over his shoulder at me.
For all I knew he was telling them he had Mountbatten in the back of the
car. The soldier would wobble his head. Hubert wobbled back. We were waved
through.
Trincomalee, now sadly run down and neglected, has one of the world's finest
harbours. In the old days, when the British had a base there, 'Trinco' was
regarded as a plum posting.
'Cemetery,' said Hubert. 'For animals. British.' It was near the sea. Little
tombstones eaten away by the salt. But on some the writing was still
visible. 'Ned. A spaniel, always faithful. Died December 1909.'
Fort Frederick is on a magnificent spit of land jutting out into the Indian
ocean. Wellington stopped off there in 1799 after a bit of fun and games in
India. Stricken by malaria, the Duke missed his boat out, which subsequently
went down with all hands in the Gulf of Aden.
I pointed out to Hubert that if it hadn't been for Wellington's Trinco
stopover, Napoleon would probably have won at Waterloo and Britain would
have been eating croissants for breakfast for the last 180-odd years.
But then someone told me that the reason Napoleon lost was not because of
Wellington's cunning and superior tactics. Rather, the poor Frenchman was
suffering from terrible trouble with his teeth and could barely keep his
mind on matters at hand.
I laid these observations before Hubert. He listened gravely, wobbled his
head and cleared his throat loudly. He said nothing.
I met Mr Li in Trinco. Originally from Soochow, near Shanghai, war had
followed Mr Li around like the faithful spaniel in the cemetery. As a
teenager in the mid-1930s Mr Li had travelled with his father to Hong Kong,
Singapore and Penang, selling Soochow's famous silk to the hoi polloi.
Mr Li's father had gone missing, presumed dead, in Singapore. The Japanese
were in control of north China, the war broke out in the far east. Mr Li
carried on travelling and working. By the end of the war he was in Ceylon.
Just as Mr Li was ready to return to China, Mao Tse Tung marched into
Peking. Mr Li does not speak much Chinese now. He never really learned how
to cook Chinese food. The war with the Tamil Tigers has reduced the flow of
tourists to his small guesthouse. 'What to do?' says Mr Li. He has given up
any idea of ever returning to Soochow.
Hubert and I went back to Colombo. A seven-hour journey. From time to time I
nodded off in the back of the car.
'Train,' said Hubert. We bumped across a railway line. Years ago I'd
travelled on the now-closed line from Jaffna in the north to Colombo.
At one stage on the journey the carriages had gently come off the tracks.
People were calm. They climbed from the train and sought shade. A
conversation cranked its way into life between two elderly gentlemen. The
subject was trousers. Both had bought them at Marks and Spencer in London,
but at different branches.
'I always say the Edgware Road shop is better,' said one. 'Me, I always go
to the one in Oxford Street,' said the other.
I snoozed in the afternoon heat.
'Temple,' said Hubert. 'Caves.' 'River.'
I dreamt of big, green Irish cabbages.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

931106

