FT933-5313

FT  03 SEP 93 / London Stock Exchange: Selling pressure in equities
increases


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


STORM clouds were gathering over the London stock market yesterday and US
support for the drug stocks finally proved unable to counterbalance downward
pressures across the wider range of equities. Weakness in UK government
bonds, another round of unsettling company trading statements, and the first
of the feared rights issues, combined to fuel profit-taking selling
pressure.
Traders were divided between those who hoped that the easier trends of the
past two sessions were only to be expected in view of the close tonight of
the extended three week equity trading account, and those who believe that
the market may face a more fundamental correction. However, the big
investment institutions remained unwilling to sell stocks and confidence in
year-end predictions remained sound.
The setback was the more significant in view of strong gains in the
international drug stocks which were heavily bought from across the Atlantic
at first on reports from Washington that President Clinton has dropped the
idea of short term price controls on the healthcare industry . The sector
led the London market ahead to a gain of 8.9 in early trading but buying
support was soon lacking.
Losses in UK bonds, finally extending to around half a point in the longer
dates, cut into equity gains. The market took a further tumble when a slow
start on Wall Street appeared to leave London without the US support that
has been significant in recent sessions.
The final reading on the FT-SE Index showed a fall of 12.5 to 3,072.6, just
above the day's low. But gains in the drug sector, notably Glaxo, SmithKline
Beecham, Wellcome and Zeneca, were worth plus nine points on the Footsie,
indicating the depth of underlying weakness in the domestic stocks.
This raised concerns about predictions in the market that a shakeout was
likely in the near term. Confidence sounded uncertain last night as market
traders watched the bond market and the company reporting list with some
degree of apprehension.
The Pounds 307m rights issue call from Rolls-Royce, the aero-engine group,
was slightly smaller than feared, while a maintained dividend at Ladbroke,
the leisure group, was welcomed. However, worries over impending company
results came into sharper focus in late dealings when Bowater fell sharply
despite good profits news after upsetting the stock market with a cautious
interim statement.
The reaction to the Bowater statement appeared to underline the current
nervousness on the company front, which in turn reflects its need for
confirmation of recovery in the domestic economy.
Once again, trading volume increased as the Footsie fell away, and the final
total of 674.3m shares traded through Seaq compared with 612.2m on the
previous day. More significantly, retail, or customer business rose to
Pounds 1.45bn on Wednesday when the equity market began to turn lower.
The UK corporate reporting diary is light today but equity strategists will
scan the domestic money supply data for signs of further recovery in the UK
economy, and the leading US economic indicators for similar evidence from
across the Atlantic.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

930903

