FT934-11075

FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of Corporate Treasury Management (4): Lower rates
bring new problems - Debt management


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


UK COMPANIES breathed a huge sigh of relief when interest rates started to
come down late last year, but at the time only a few believed that rates
would fall as far as they did.
One of the main advantages of a low interest rate environment is that
companies have been able to make substantial savings by re-financing old,
high-coupon debt with cheaper debt.
Investor demand for long-dated paper has also enabled companies to extend
the maturity of their debt profiles. By issuing long-dated bonds and
redeeming short-dated debt, many companies have achieved an average life for
their debt of more than five years at the lowest interest rates in 20 years.
At the same time, the lack of supply of corporate debt, especially in the UK
bond market where demand has been great, has resulted in a dramatic
tightening in the spread on such paper, that is, the premium which issuers
have to pay above the yield on government bonds.
Many companies have also shifted the balance of their fixed-rate and
floating-rate debt in favour of floating-rate debt, in order to make the
most of further falls in interest rates.
Although the benefits to companies of lower interest rates cannot be
under-estimated, the sheer pace of the fall in rates has created a new
series of problems for company treasurers to solve.
Companies which find themselves in the most difficult position are those
with a high proportion of their debt fixed at a rate well above the current
interest rate.
Since they are having to pay more than the market rate to service their
debt, this places them at a competitive disadvantage to their rivals who
have a far greater proportion of their debt with a floating or market rate.
Each time rates fall, the competitive disadvantage becomes greater.
'It hurts to admit that you are paying well above the going interest rate
for your debt,' says a banker at a leading investment bank.
As a result, banks are noticing a rise in demand from companies for
derivative products that enable them to cut the cost of servicing their
fixed-rate debt, says Mr Paul Ward, director in the fixed-income department
at Salomon Brothers in London.
The derivative product designed to help companies in this situation is
called an 'interest-rate swap'. Using this structure, the company enters an
agreement with a counterparty, usually the derivatives unit of an investment
bank, to swap the fixed rate on its debt for a floating rate.
It is likely that the company will end up having to pay a substantial margin
above the London interbank offered rate (Libor), because of current market
conditions.
However, it will reap the benefit of the swap when Libor falls, because its
interest costs will decline accordingly. Had the company decided to stay
with fixed-rate debt, its borrowing costs would have remained the same.
Falling interest rates also harm companies which relied on the interest
income generated by their cash mountains during the period of high interest
rates. 'Corporates do not usually buy protection against falling interest
rates,' says Mr Marco Ferrazzi, senior vice-president at Chase Manhatten
Bank in London.
One solution for a company in this situation would be to enter a swap which
allows it end up receiving a fixed rate on its cash mountain. In return it
pays a floating rate to the counterparty. This is effectively the reverse of
the swap taken out by a company looking for a solution to its fixed-rate
debt problem.
Mr Ferrazzi says that another way that a company can insure itself against
falling interest rates is to buy a 'floor' or a minimum interest rate, which
it will continue to receive on its cash even if rates go below the level
specified by the floor.
Alternatively, the company can sell a 'cap' or a maximum interest rate
against its cash, whereby it gives up any potential returns above the cap in
return for a fee.
Companies also use swaps as an efficient way to adjust the
fixed-rate/floating-rate split of their debt portfolio depending on the
trend in interest rates.
Mr Arthur Burgess, group treasurer at British Gas, says that British Gas
aims to have three-quarters of its debt in fixed rate and one-quarter in
floating rate, but that the split can vary to half-and-half depending on the
company's view on interest rates. 'We use the swaps market to switch from
fixed to floating,' he says.
Derivatives are becoming an increasingly important part of a company's
strategy to manage debt. Indeed, a recent court decision in the US has
potentially opened the door for directors to be sued for failing to use
derivatives to protect their companies against volatility in the financial
markets.
The Indiana court of appeals (Brane v Roth) held that the directors of an
agricultural co-operative had been negligent in not considering the
possibility of hedging their company's grain holdings by using the futures
market.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

931102

