FT933-12548

FT  23 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Life or death for Mr Major


EIGHTEEN MONTHS after his self-styled triumph in negotiating a modified
Maastricht treaty and at the end of the most arduous parliamentary ordeal
endured by any post-war prime minister, Mr John Major has made his final
gamble.
If he cannot win today's confidence motion, he will cast his party into
almost certain defeat in a general election. He is thus inviting his rebel
backbenchers to choose to face the voters at a time when the Conservative
Party is running third in the opinion polls, with a paltry 24 per cent share
of the electorate's support. The party must decide whether it prefers office
or infighting.
Given yesterday's votes in the House of Commons, the prime minister had
little option but to pursue this course. With a handful of his own
backbenchers prepared to humiliate him all the way to the finishing line,
only a confidence motion and the threat of electoral self-destruction offers
the prospect of even a sullen party unity in the house today.
Such is the bitterness within the Conservative Party on this issue that it
cannot be stated with certainty that Mr Major will win today's vote. If he
does not, British politics will enter a maelstrom in which every aspect of
Britain's relationship with the European community will be called into
question.
It is more likely, however, that Mr Major will win, having paid the price of
yet another unseemly deal with the Ulster Unionists, and with a legacy of
rancour inside his party which will not be easily sweetened. Many think that
the prime minister will be so weakened by his Maastricht wounds that he will
be flung aside this year, exhausted, to make way for a new leader.
This is not necessarily so. The economy continues to strengthen. Turbulence
within the ERM threatens to inflict upon others bruises as painful as those
Britain suffered last September. And above all, Mr Major's opponents outside
his own party still fail to impress. Yesterday's debate saw the Liberal
Democrats still pirouetting on the Euro-ice, facing different directions at
bewildering speed. Meanwhile Labour, tactically triumphant in the first tied
vote last night and victorious in the second, is enjoying only the hollowest
of victories. The credibility of Mr John Smith, a career Euro-enthusiast,
has been more severely damaged by Maastricht than even that of his weary
opponent on the other side of the despatch box.
The process of taking the Maastricht treaty through the British political
process has damaged all the parties and brought discredit and confusion to
the parliamentary process itself. But the fact remains that there is a
majority in the House of Commons in favour of this treaty and that it is in
Britain's interest to be inside, not outside post-Maastricht Europe. Mr
Major deserves to win today.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930723

