FT934-8879

FT  13 NOV 93 / Divers find hidden charms of the Ruhr: Tourism has come to
an industrial heartland


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


SCUBA diving in a flooded coal bunker may not be everyone's idea of fun. The
same could apply to hiking over slag heaps, especially in Germany's Ruhr
valley. But there is a demand, and there is a supplier.
It is the job of IBA Emscher Park, a North Rhine-Westphalian state
development company, to seek out new ways of enhancing the charms - for
investors, visitors and residents - of Germany's one-time industrial heart.
It has an eye for the unusual, and no shortage of willing voluntary helpers.
For example, the potential of the flooded honeycomb of underground shafts
and ore and coke bunkers beneath the redundant Meiderich steelworks, closed
in 1986, and now part of the North Duisburg Country Park, was first detected
by members of the Duisburg diving club.
Recently given permission to explore, they surfaced bubbling with reports of
clear waters and still-intact hydraulics systems and complete electrical
installations. Even the public address loudspeakers were still there.
The club's subsequent request to have the works' redundant gas holder
converted into a 7-metre-deep training tank is currently under
consideration, according to the IBA's Ms Anette Kolkau.
For the less adventurous, the park's surface attractions include the
preserved remains of three blast furnaces.
For those with the legs, there is a hiking trail, more than 100km long and
meticulously marked, which arches across the northern reaches of Dortmund,
through pockets of greenery, over slag heaps, past pit heads and through the
ageing workers' settlements of the Ruhr. The route, taking in such unlikely
tourist destinations as Kamen to the north-east of Dortmund and
Castrop-Rauxel to the north-west, was mapped out by the Sauerland mountain
club and is also now under the IBA's custodianship.
According to the IBA, the route offers walkers a broad insight into an
industrial region in the process of structural change.
As if to quell any doubts about the scenic attractions of the Ruhr, last
summer's opening to the public by the energy group Ruhrkohle of its private
industrial railway is said to have attracted 8,000 visitors, who were able
to travel on the 1928-vintage Rheingold train.
Unlucky or unwise?, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931113

