FT934-8707

FT  13 NOV 93 / Seasonal food and drink - The best of British: Shop until
you drop for quality - Cookery


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


AS THE old proverb says, you cannot make an omelette without breaking eggs.
I would add that you cannot hope to make a really good omelette without good
butter and good eggs.
Equally, you cannot expect to create authentic quennelles de brochet sauce
Nantua without first tracking down a trustworthy source of fresh pike and
freshwater crayfish. In other words, good cooking begins with good shopping.
If you know what to look for and where to buy it, you have the edge over
other cooks. So, whether your culinary aspirations are modest or incline
towards supercheffery, one of the first things you might sensibly put on
your next shopping list is Henrietta Green's Food Lover's Guide to Britain
(BBC Books, Pounds 9.99). This is a shopping primer by the greedy for the
greedy, a directory of some of the best food producers and food shops in
England, Scotland and Wales.
Like all guide books, this one is out of date in a few places even before it
reaches the bookshops. The index is much less helpful than it might be. The
boxed recipes that are dropped in here and there seem to me quite
unnecessary. I find they distract from the main thrust of the book.
It is, I suppose, in the nature of an anthology to disappoint sometimes by
omission and to raise queries about what is included. An anthology reflects
the compiler's tastes, not the reader's, and Green displays an
understandable urge to leaven her listings of well known and established
producers and shopkeepers with less obvious names and new 'discoveries'.
Some of them possibly more novel than great finds?
Maybe I am carping. The value of the book vastly outweighs its shortcomings.
Green has packed in an impressive great deal of research and she uses her
head as well as her stomach. This is not just a source book, listing
addresses and services, though there is plenty of that. It is also - and
this is the great forte of the book as I see it - richly informative about
how various foods are farmed and produced. It is opinionated, very readable
and fun, a book to dip into and to learn from.
Now that many good food producers sell via special courier delivery rather
than an expensive shopfront, Green's book should prove valuable reference
for armchair shopping. The other natural home for the book is the car. Along
with Ordnance Survey maps, restaurant guides and an up-to-date copy of
Historic Houses, Castles & Gardens, I see it as part of the traveller's
basic library for weekends away and holiday rentals exploring the
countryside.
Flicking through the pages heightens my sense of wanderlust. I have half a
mind to set off now for Charles Trollope's quince farm at Clay Barn Orchard,
near Colchester in Essex. Or to St Ann's Well in Buxton, Derbyshire, where
you can take your own bottles and fill them for free with mineral water.
Even more beguiling is the thought of visiting Coads Green, near Launceston
in Cornwall, where Barbara Lake makes clotted cream and clotted cream butter
entirely by hand using the milk of her eight Guernsey cows.
Nearer to home for me is the Oxford Pick-Your-Own Shop, Elsfield, nr Oxford,
which Green commends for its unrivalled choice and for encouraging the
customer to pick (or dig) young and small. The selection (according to
season) includes globe artichokes, mangetout peas, round carrots, patty
pans, yellow courgettes, green and ruby spinach, pak-choi, Florentine
fennel, celeriac and pink fir apple potatoes.
At Shipton Mill near Tetbury, Gloucester,(tel: 0666- 505050), she tells us,
there are more than 30 different flours to choose from, 'including four
different grades of rye flour . . . and a ciabatta flour milled from a blend
of hard American, Canadian and a little English wheats.'
The entry for F C Phipps, of Mareham Le Fen, near Boston, Lincs
(0507-568235) rejoices that this is a traditional pork butcher who buys on
the hoof, slaughters in his own slaughterhouse, and makes fine hams,
sausages, pies and Lincolnshire chine, a local speciality cut that is cured
and lavishly stuffed with green herbs. It also tells the tale of Mr Phipps'
adamant defence of Lincolnshire chine. He took on MAFF and the EC and won.
Lincolnshire Chine lives on.
At Inverawe Smokehouses, Taynuilt, Argyll (08662-446) Green falls for trout
roe botargo 'bright orange with a mild saltiness and a delicate taste of
fish . . . poor man's caviar but far more interesting than the ubiquitous
lumpfish roe'.
Some of her highest praise is reserved for fruit vinegars made by Martin and
Aline Parsons of Womersley Crafts & Herbs, nr Doncaster, in Yorkshire
(0977-620294). These are 'serious vinegars'. The difference between them and
other fruit vinegars is 'like trying to compare an industrially made
balsamic vinegar with a traditionally made one. Basically you can't'.
She gives the method, offers some suggested uses and lists the choice of
flavours: loganberry, mulberry, blackberry, pink and yellow raspberry.
Equally carefully made and intensely flavoured, from the same makers, are
French tarragon and dark opal basil herb vinegars and a range of 11 softly
set herb and flower jellies.
Note: where telephone numbers are given, items are available by courier
delivery service.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

931113

