FT932-3244

FT  15 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Second half recovery helps Kenwood rise 4%


   By ANGUS FOSTER


KENWOOD APPLIANCES, the household appliance company, yesterday reported
slightly higher than expected profits for the year to March 31, the first
since the company came to the stock market last July.
Pro forma pre-tax profits, adjusted for the benefits of the flotation,
increased 4 per cent from Pounds 9.29m to Pounds 9.62m. Actual profits,
taking into account interest costs of Pounds 1.84m, were Pounds 8.39m.
After a poor summer, which led to an embarrassing profit warning three
months after going public, second half profits recovered strongly helped by
sterling's devaluation.
Mr Tim Parker, chief executive, said the UK economy also improved, as had
Kenwood's share of overseas markets. 'I think all of that's pretty
encouraging,' he said.
He said sales to continental Europe, which account for about a third of the
total, should continue to improve despite mounting recession in Germany and
France. Kenwood hoped growth would come from new products, helped by
sterling's competitiveness.
Turnover increased 10 per cent to Pounds 101.6m, lifted by UK sales of new
products like kettles and hair dryers. However, another new product, a water
filter, performed poorly despite heavy marketing costs.
One-off costs linked to the flotation and the acquisition in November of
Tricom, the Hong Kong-based manufacturer, depressed operating margins
slightly. Operating profits increased 7.6 per cent to Pounds 10.3m. Kenwood
used the Pounds 39.5m raised by the flotation to reduce debts and the
company moved to net cash of Pounds 146,000 by the year end.
Earnings were depressed by a higher tax charge and fell 6 per cent to 17.8p
per share. A recommended final dividend of 4.35p makes a total of 5.85p.
COMMENT
The stock market's nerve was strongly tested at the time of the profits
warning, but those with strong stomachs have been rewarded and the shares
closed yesterday up 10p at a record 321p. Forecast profits this year of
Pounds 11m put the shares on a multiple approaching 16, already a premium to
the market. Kenwood is a quality company with promising new products coming
through. The Hong Kong acquisition should allow more manufacturing to be
brought in-house, thereby improving margins - although plans to attack the
Chinese market should be treated with circumspection. The currency factor
should give comfort if a European price war develops later this year.
Despite the attractions, Kenwood's short exposure on the public stage
suggests investors may prefer to wait for a longer track record before
chasing the shares any higher.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930615

