FT933-9897

FT  06 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Ecuador opens oil blocks to
private sector


   By RAYMOND COLITT


   QUITO


IN AN effort to attract capital investment and boost production, Ecuador is
opening significant sectors of its petroleum industry to private enterprise.
Service contracts for oil exploration and production will be open for
bidding during September.
The government is also soliciting bids for a project to increase the
capacity of the country's two oil refineries and the Trans Ecuadorean
pipeline.
Increasing the capacity of the Refineria de Esmeraldas on the Pacific coast
will cost about Dollars 120m, while work on the Refineria Amazonas is
expected to cost Dollars 22.6m.
Work on the projects is expected to be completed within two years and four
years respectively.
The pipes leading from the Amazonian rain forest across the Andes to the
Pacific ports are to be fitted with higher capacity pumps, enabling them to
transport more heavy crude oil, the principal type of crude discovered
recently in the region.
Ecuador's new foreign investment regulations give foreign and national
investors equal opportunities.
Foreign oil companies are still subject to a flat 44.4 per cent income tax
for repatriated profits compared with 25 per cent for Ecuador companies.
A Bill is to be presented to congress shortly in an attempt to equalise this
tax structure.
Mr Hans Collin, executive president of Petroecuador, said between 40 and 45
foreign and national companies have shown interest in bidding for the
projects in this seventh solicitation round.
He estimated that the country's oil industry required about Dollars 5bn in
capital investment over the next five years to produce the projected 470m
barrels a day by 1995, up from 273,000 b/d last year.
Several area blocks which are now open for private sector exploitation in
the Amazon region as well as on the Pacific coast had previously been
reserved for Petroecuador.
Mr Henri Bergasse, general manager of the French company Elf Hydrocarbures
Equateur, said there were potentially interesting blocks opening up but that
there was a risk of encountering heavy crude oil again.
Production and transportation costs for heavy crude are considerably higher
than for light crude oil and will thus cut in to profits.
The solicitation will likely include Block 22, an area that has been subject
to considerable controversy due to its importance as an ecological 'hot
spot' and one of the last protected areas for indigenous people of the
region.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930806

