FT934-8770

FT  13 NOV 93 / London Stock Exchange: Equity account ends with strong rally


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


THE EQUITY trading account ended in a blaze of activity, with share prices
rallying strongly on the back of a strong government bond market and a firm
opening to the new Wall Street session. UK bonds followed sterling in a
vigorous response to an unexpected shrinking in the UK trade deficit to
Pounds 419m in October.
The FT-SE Index was down by nearly 25 points in early trading, hit by
further pressure from stock index futures, where the December contract on
the Footsie remained at a discount against the cash market during the first
half of the session. But most of the loss reflected falls in Shell, Unilever
and Glaxo, and by the close, the December contract had returned to a
premium.
After rallying slowly following the trade figures, the stock market edged
slowly upwards in modest trading volume. The excitement came in the final
two hours of dealing when Wall Street responded to strong US sales data for
October. Firmness in sterling enabled UK bonds to shrug off weakness in
Federal bonds in New York. Long-dated gilts gained nearly a full point,
while base rate optimism held the shorts steady; index linked added of a
point.
The FT-SE Index closed just short of the 3,100 mark, with the day's final
net loss of a mere 0.6 points giving a reading of 3,099.1. The FT-SE Mid 250
Index, still at the mercy of profit-takers, shed 13.5 to 3,421.1.
The recovery in equities surprised traders the more because a large UK fund
had been switching out of UK shares and into gilt-edged stocks all day -
Pounds 250m each way was reportedly the price tag. This came on top of heavy
selling this week of UK equities by a large European fund which was believed
to have unloaded around Pounds 300m worth of stocks.
Over the two-week account, the Footsie has lost 71.9 points, or about 2.3
per cent, having this week recouped 13.5 points as worries over rising bond
yields in the US have abated somewhat. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index, more
vulnerable to price mark downs by nervous marketmakers, is down by 3 per
cent over the trading account.
Seaq volume increased towards the close to give a final total of 639.4m
shares, still short of Thursday's 743.1m which was worth Pounds 1.65bn in
retail business; with Friday's total yet to come, the week's retail business
has already topped Pounds 6bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931113

