FT934-11429

FT  01 NOV 93 / Court action against fishing curb starts today


   By ALISON MAITLAND


FISHERMEN today go to the High Court to try to overturn legislation that
will restrict from January the number of days they can spend at sea.
The National Federation of Fishermen's Organisations, which represents 6,000
fishermen from all over the UK except Scotland, is applying for judicial
review of the restrictions, which they say could destroy their livelihoods.
The government is introducing the limits as part of its obligation under EC
fisheries policy to reduce the capacity of the UK fleet by 19 per cent by
the end of 1996 in order to halt overfishing. It is also running a Pounds
25m decommissioning programme and tightening up on licensing of vessels.
The limits on days at sea, which apply to trawlers over 10 metres long, will
initially restrict vessels to the number of days they spent at sea in 1991
and may later reduce the number further.
The measures, which have triggered blockades of ports around the country,
were condemned as 'unnecessarily draconian' by the Commons agriculture
committee in August.
Mr David Vaughan QC will argue for the federation in the High Court that the
restrictions breach EC law by placing a disproportionate burden of the cuts
on the fishermen's own incomes.
The fishermen say the government has not made an appropriate contribution to
controlling the fishing effort because it failed to decommission vessels
under the previous EC cuts programme between 1986 and 1991. Instead, the UK
fleet was allowed to expand.
The federation is also objecting to the blanket prohibition on all
fishermen, regardless of whether they catch species that are over-exploited,
such as cod or haddock, or species that are still plentiful.
It argues that the legislation is unfair because only one other EC state,
the Netherlands, operates such restrictions, and these apply only to
trawlers fishing for particular species such as plaice and sole.
The High Court hearing is expected to last several days, although the case
may be referred to the European Court. If that happens, the federation will
ask for the rules to be suspended until the European Court hearing, which
could involve a wait of a couple of years.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931101

