FT932-7215

FT  25 MAY 93 / US deal will speed start of HDTV


   By MARTIN DICKSON


   NEW YORK


THE THREE rival consortia seeking to set the technical standards for
high-definition television in the US yesterday agreed to combine their
systems. Their decision will speed up HDTV's introduction in America and
give the country a powerful lead in the establishment of a global HDTV
standard.
HDTV offers viewers much sharper pictures and clearer sound than current
systems and yesterday's deal means it could be in operation in the US in
time for the Olympic Games in Atlanta in the summer of 1996.
The groups reached a business and technical agreement on a so-called 'grand
alliance' which will submit a single HDTV proposal to the Federal
Communications Commission, the government agency that oversees the
communications industry and has to approve a standard.
Provided the FCC supports the agreement, it should speed up HDTV
implementation in the US because rival tests and the threat of litigation
from losing consortia will be eliminated.
The FCC's decision may strongly influence HDTV standards in Europe, in the
wake of the disintegration of European Community efforts to develop a
home-grown version. It is also likely to have a powerful impact on Japan,
which has developed an HDTV system based on less versatile analogue
technology.
An FCC advisory committee on advanced television had been due yesterday to
start costly tests between four rival HDTV systems.
However, the FCC panel had for weeks pressed the consortia to agree on a
single system. Mr Richard Wiley, head of the advisory committee, said the
grand alliance would mean the development of a digital system incorporating
the best elements of the four proposals.
The consortia consist of Zenith Electronics and American Telephone &
Telegraph; NBC, the US television station, Thomson of France, Philips of the
Netherlands and America's David Sarnoff Research Center and Compression
Labs; and General Instrument and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The FCC had previously rejected an HDTV standard from NHK, Japan's public
broadcasting corporation, because it uses analogue technology. Links with
computers are easier through digital systems.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930525

