FT931-3920

FT  13 MAR 93 / Lisbon intervenes to defend escudo: Resignation of Bank
deputy puts pressure on currency


   By PETER WISE


   LISBON


THE BANK of Portugal intervened heavily to defend the escudo yesterday after
Mr Antonio Borges, its deputy governor, resigned in a rift with the
government over monetary policy.
The escudo fell to a record low of DM94 before central bank buying pushed
the currency back up to about DM92.75. The stock market also reacted to the
uncertainties raised by Mr Borges' resignation with the the Bolsa de Valores
de Lisboa index falling 1.15 per cent on the day.
Mr Jose Fonseca Goncalves, an analyst with Totta Dealer, said: 'Mr Borges
was someone they could depend on for a firm policy line. Now nobody is sure
what to expect.'
Mr Borges resigned on Thursday night in reaction to a speech by Mr Jorge
Braga de Macedo, finance minister, in which he criticised the central bank
for failing to heed the needs of the real economy and lower interest rates.
Rumours were rife in financial markets yesterday that Mr Miguel Beleza,
governor of the Bank of Portugal, might also resign unless he could secure a
guarantee from Mr Anibal Cavaco Silva, prime minister, that the central bank
would have full freedom to conduct exchange rate and monetary policy as it
saw fit.
The divide between the government and the central bank on interest rates has
been growing for several weeks. Mr Borges, responsible for exchange rate
control, believes that the escudo should be kept strong and interest rates
should only be allowed to fall as inflation comes down.
He has warned that this would mean heavy casualties, particularly among
small and medium-sized companies that make up the bulk of Portuguese
industry. But, he argued, it was a necessary step to make the economy more
competitive and ensure the transfer of resources to efficient firms.
Mr Braga de Macedo, under pressure from export companies caught between the
high cost of money and the strength of the escudo, favours a more rapid
descent of interest rates.
Interest rates have been falling steadily in Portugal as inflation came down
from 11.4 per cent in 1991 to 8.9 per cent in 1992.
But there remains a wide difference between prime rates offered to the best
companies and the much higher rates available to small companies.
The central bank has been regularly drawing from massive foreign exchange
reserves to defend the escudo. But it took the unusual step yesterday of
publically acknowledging heavy intervention.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930313

