FT931-3900

FT  13 MAR 93 / Clinton backs anti-trust move


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


THE White House has given strong backing to legislation which could
discriminate against US subsidiaries of foreign companies in relaxing
anti-trust penalties for joint production ventures.
The bill, introduced by Congressman Jack Brooks and Senator Patrick Leahy,
was hailed by President Bill Clinton as 'just the kind of forward-thinking
initiative we need.' With White House backing, it is expected to move
swiftly through Congress.
The National Co-operative Research Act Extension is modelled on legislation
passed in 1984 which allowed US companies to join together for research and
development. This made way for the formation of Sematech, an
industry-government venture which has been credited with helping to restore
the US lead in semiconductor manufacturing technology.
Now, said Mr Clinton, it is 'altogether appropriate to lift the legal
barriers that prevent good companies from playing to win in the global
market - provided, of course, that our anti-trust laws continue to prevent
improper collusion.'
The legislation removes the threat of treble damages in anti-trust
violations providing that the joint ventures' principal production
facilities are located in the US. The companies must also be American or
from countries which 'treat US companies fairly under their anti-trust laws
governing joint production ventures'.
A Congressional aide declined to say which foreign governments deny US
subsidiaries 'fair treatment'.
Lawyers say this creative use of 'reciprocity' for anti-trust exemptions
will discourage foreign participation in joint ventures or throw into the
courts the difficulty of determining which countries accord 'fair treatment'
to subsidiaries of American companies abroad.'
'The ambiguities undermine the aims of the anti-trust laws - to encourage
efficient economic activity and to promote consumer welfare,' said one
Washington lawyer. 'Faced with these unresolved questions, many US companies
may simply forego joint ventures with certain foreign parties.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930313

