FT931-3899

FT  13 MAR 93 / US steps up skirmish with EC over state procurement


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


THE US yesterday raised the stakes in its trade conflict with the EC by
closing off an estimated Dollars 40-50m chunk of its government procurement
market to EC companies. The action is in retaliation for the Community's
government procurement rules which the US claims 'discriminate' against
foreign companies.
Mr Mickey Kantor, the US Trade Representative, yesterday said he had
cancelled a meeting planned for next week which might have averted the
sanctions. They are to go into effect on March 22.
At the EC delegation in Washington, Ms Ella Krucoff, said officials in
Brussels had been caught off guard by the cancellation, which was
'unnecessarily aggressive' and 'very unbusiness-like'. She asked: 'How can
progress be made if the negotiators aren't even allowed to meet?'
US and EC negotiators have discussed the issue by telephone and made no
progress. 'There is no reason to hold a meeting unless there was some
prospect of success,' Mr Kantor said. 'The sanctions will go into effect as
planned.'
The sanctions will set off a minor explosion in Brussels, where fears of
trade wars have been building over a wide range of bilateral disputes and
where the Clinton Administration is seen to be less seriously committed to
the Uruguay Round than its predecessor.
In this fracas, the US threatened sanctions when the EC put into effect a
new community-wide utilities directive, in January. It gives a 3 per cent
price preference to bids on telecom and electric power equipment from EC
firms.
The US had hoped for gains for its telecommunications companies in the EC
market. They are seen as part of the vanguard of particularly competitive US
industries, and the Administration is determined to take a strong stand.
The sanctions will hit EC companies whose products are not covered by the
multilateral government procurement code - telecommunications, airports,
power equipment, waterways and services. The US estimates that those
contracts were worth Dollars 40-50m in 1991.
The EC has argued that AT&T ought to be subject to the same disciplines as
EC companies, even though most are government owned. The US refused saying
it will not interfere with a private entity.
Mr Kantor yesterday denied Japanese charges that US semiconductor
manufacturers had cancelled orders from Japan thus defeating Japanese
efforts to increase chip imports.
The charges have inflamed the decade-long semidispute.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930313

