FT934-11544

FT  30 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: Penny shares - why you should beware
/ The Speculator


   By PHILIP COGGAN


WHEN INVESTORS start to get interested in penny shares, that is often the
sign of a flourishing bull market. If blue chip share prices start to run
out of steam, the spotlight turns to less well-known companies which seem to
present the chance for speculative profits.
Penny shares are merely stocks with share prices of under Pounds 1 (in some
cases, under 10p). What makes them a potentially attractive investment is
that they often fall into two categories:
Those where profits have collapsed and there is the hope that the market has
under-estimated the chance for recovery.
'Shells' where there is no substantial business left. Here, the main value
of the company is the stock market quote itself. This can be used by
acquisition-minded entrepreneurs, or by other businesses which want a
listing and can 'reverse' into the shell.
Both these classes of stocks can provide attractive returns, although at a
risk; recovery stocks do not always recover and moribund shells can remain
moribund for a long time.
Investors. however, seem to have a mystical belief that penny shares must be
bargains simply by virtue of their low prices. Indeed, some may remember the
phenomenal rise of Polly Peck in the 1980s and are hoping to catch its
1990s' equivalent.
Part of the enthusiasm could be due to the feeling that investors get more
for their money with a penny share stock. Put Pounds 1,000 in ICI and you
will get 140 only shares; put Pounds 1,000 in the Millwall soccer club and
you get around 25,000. The problem with this theory is that if Millwall goes
bust, you still lose Pounds 1,000.
In fact, there is nothing magic about the share price of the company. If
someone whispers to you in the street: 'Psst. Want to buy some beer for
50p?' you would be wise to ask: 'How much beer exactly?' If the reply is a
teaspoonful, then you are being offered a bad bargain; if the answer is a
gallon, the deal might be attractive.
The key questions about a share price are not 'Is the price above or below
Pounds 1?' but 'What are the assets and the profits (or potential profits)
of the company?' and 'What proportion of those assets (and profits) do those
shares represent?' If, for instance, there were only two shares in British
Petroleum, and each was priced at Pounds 1bn, they would still be a bargain
since the whole of BP is valued at more than Pounds 18bn. But shares in a
company about to go bankrupt would be worthless at 1p, 0.5p, or 0.25p, since
shareholders would get back nothing when the company went bust.
Any quoted company could easily turn itself into a penny stock simply by
making a scrip issue; that is, issuing enough free shares. The company would
still have exactly the same assets and profits as it did before and the
shares ought to be no more or less attractive.
In practice, however, the 'bargain' effect does mean that shares tend to
rise because of a scrip issue. Scrips do not always result in penny shares;
often, they are undertaken by companies with so-called 'heavy' shares,
trading at more than Pounds 10 or so, and bring the price down to a more
palatable Pounds 4-5.
It is one thing to accept that the market can be irrational in favouring
companies with low share prices; it is a much greater leap to state that
penny shares automatically are cheap. Many investors make dangerous
assumptions, such as: 'The shares are trading at only 2p so, if they go up
to 3p, I will have made a 50 per cent profit.'
That ignores the very wide bid-offer spreads (the different prices for
buying and selling) which often apply to penny shares.
Take Dares Estates and Tamaris, two companies which were shown as trading at
2p earlier this week. That figure is, of course, just the mid-price; the
bid-offer spreads were 1 3/4 p-2 1/4 p for Dares and 1 1/2 p-2 1/2 p for
Tamaris.
In short, buy the shares of Dares and you start off with a 22.2 per cent
loss, not counting the cost of commission and stamp duty; buy Tamaris, and
you are 40 per cent in the red.
To make a 10 per cent profit on, say, 40,000 shares in Tamaris (costing
Pounds 1,000, plus Pounds 5 in stamp duty and Pounds 40 in commission), you
would need the bid price of the shares to double to 3p. Furthermore, the
'value' of penny shares often consists of the hope, or expectation of future
developments; sometimes there can be no dividend, no profits and not much in
the way of assets.
Even if the business of the company does improve, it can take a long time
for the fundamentals to catch up with the effect that sentiment has had on
the price. And if sentiment changes for the worse, the small investor will
probably be the last to hear.
So, is there any merit at all in penny shares? There can be, but only to the
extent that often they are small companies or recovery plays. Penny shares
are far more likely to be small, than large, companies; at present, the only
FT-SE 100 index constituent at present with a share price of under Pounds 1
is Asda.
The work of Elroy Dimson and Paul Marsh, of the London Business School, has
shown that small company shares have tended to outperform their larger
brethren over the long run. One reason is that there is more scope for small
companies to grow; another is that they tend to be under-researched and,
therefore, under-valued.
Recently, however, investors have endured four successive calendar years -
from 1989-92 - of smaller company underperformance. The small company effect
is thus not inevitable (although such shares have outperformed this year).
For the private investor, the risk of investing in individual small
companies is high; because they are highly vulnerable to the fortunes of a
major customer or a particular sector of the UK economy. The safest way of
backing the small company effect is via a specialist unit or investment
trust.
The same factors apply to recovery situations. As the long-term success of
funds such as M&G Recovery has shown, it is possible to earn excess returns
by picking on stocks which the market has written off. There have been some
splendid examples of penny stock recoveries in the recent recession; Next
has climbed from 12.5p early in 1991 to near 200p today.
The O'Higgins theory, which we have written about many times in the Weekend
FT, depends partly on choosing shares with low nominal share prices. But it
limits itself to major companies, on the ground that the low price indicates
the chance to buy a sound business while it is temporarily in the doldrums.
Shares, however, do not collapse for no reason at all. Many companies which
have fallen to the status of penny shares have very real problems, which
often prove fatal. For the private investor, a broadly-spread fund of
recovery stocks is a better bet.
In short, penny stocks can have their attractions - but not because of their
price. It is the recovery or growth potential of the company that creates
the investment opportunity, not the level of the share price.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

931030

