FT932-7128

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (1): Strong wind in the
east - Throughout the next decade, demand for new power generating equipment
will continue to shift from the US and western Europe to Asia. The trend is
recognised by all the big equipment producers, who are laying plans
accordingly


   By ANDREW BAXTER


LAYMEN who assume that the world market for power generating equipment is
just a matter of selling turbines, boilers and generators to utilities might
wonder where, and why, rolling brown-outs and boiled chicken heads come into
the equation.
Rolling brown-outs are the power cuts that countries such as Taiwan and the
Philippines impose as they struggle to keep power output up with the needs
created by rapid economic growth. Boiled chicken heads are the kind of
banquet delicacy faced by western equipment salesmen during the battle for
orders in key markets such as China.
Over the past five years, and throughout the next decade, demand for new
power generating equipment has been and will continue to shift from the US
and western Europe to Asia. The trend is recognised by all the big equipment
producers, who are laying plans accordingly.
'It is quite clear that Asia will be the highest economic growth area for
several decades,' says Mr Frank Bakos, vice president and general manager at
the Westinghouse Electric power generation business unit. 'Whoever can
deliver the best product at the most reasonable prices will be most
successful in supplying the needs of the industrialising countries.'
However the projected statistics for the next few years are displayed, Asia
looks like coming out on top in a world market that Westinghouse expects to
be worth Dollars 25bn a year by the year 2000 - with annual order volume up
40 per cent from today.
General Electric, the world's biggest power generating equipment supplier,
forecasts that 180 gigawatts (GW or thousands of megawatts) of new power
capacity will be needed in the Asia Pacific region from 1993-2002,
equivalent to annual growth of 6.2 per cent.
That excludes a forecast 46GW of additional capacity needs in Japan, and
comes out of a total world forecast of 610GW of new capacity needs -
implying a reasonable growth rate of three per cent.
Asea Brown Boveri, the big Swiss-Swedish supplier, expresses the growth
differently. Mr Goran Lindahl, the Swiss-Swedish group's executive
vice-president for both Asia and for its power plants business, says China
and Hong Kong will be adding 12-15GW of new power capacity every year for
the rest of this decade.
This is the equivalent of Switzerland's entire installed power capacity.
Overall, says ABB, power capacity additions in Asia are running at triple
the rate seen in the 1970s, while in western markets new capacity is being
added at only two-thirds of rates seen 20 years ago.
Precise descriptions might vary, but few would quibble with GE's description
of the Asia Pacific region as a targeted 'megamarket' for power generation.
Strong economic growth in several countries, including Taiwan, China, South
Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and China is producing large infrastructure
investments and continuing electrification, says GE.
In particular, demand for nuclear plants in Taiwan, Korea and China comes as
an immense relief to suppliers facing bleak prospects for plant orders
virtually everywhere else outside Asia.
However, the growth in the Asian market creates two problems for western
suppliers. First, they have to decide the extent to which it is necessary to
enter into joint ventures and local manufacturing deals with domestic
suppliers, and understand the different nuances in what is by no means a
unified market.
Korea, for example, is more interested in developing its heavy equipment
industry than is Taiwan. In China, according to Mr Hans Bohm, vice president
of Siemens, it is very important that the market is approached via local
manufacturing deals, which will allow the majority of plant investment to be
financed locally.
There is also, he says, a need to develop local manufacturing so that its
capacity to handle larger unit sizes can be increased.
Siemens is negotiating joint ventures in China in steam turbines and in
hydro-electric power. Westinghouse, too is looking to strengthen its
position in Asia through new joint ventures, and developing existing ones in
China and Korea. GE and ABB have several negotiations underway - the
Canadian arm of GE recently concluded a hydro-electric technology transfer
deal in China. The Anglo-French GEC Alsthom also has a strong position in
China.
A second, and related, poser for equipment suppliers is the extent to which
they should become financially involved in the many independent power
projects which are proposed or planned in the region. US suppliers have
greater experience of such projects because of the phenomenal growth of
non-utility power producers in the home market, but the political risks are
much greater overseas.
Overall, equipment suppliers are wary of long-term involvement in Asian
'build-own-operate' (BOO) or 'build-operate-transfer' (BOT) arrangements.
'We are investing only to drive our core business,' says Mr Bohm. 'We are
not an investor like a bank.'
If Asia is the main current theme in the generating equipment industry there
are a number of sub-plots - in some of which the denouement is as far away
as ever.
In the US, a combination of 'repowering' of existing plants, modernisation
and life extension and new thermal plants is providing steady growth
opportunities in a market that is still likely to account for almost a sixth
of new capacity needs over the next 10 years.
In Europe, overall growth is relatively sluggish but the market is becoming
increasingly technology-led, with environmentally-related equipment
accounting for as much as 30 per cent of the cost of a power station. The
dominant themes will be examined at the three-day Power-Gen Europe
conference and exhibition which opens today in Paris.
An important development over the past year in Europe has been the
resolution - at least as regards power plant - of a dispute between the US
and the European Community over public procurement.
US suppliers are relieved to have won a waiver on controversial articles in
the EC utilities directive, in particular the rule stipulating that public
utilities must prefer a European bid where it is no more than 3 per cent
dearer than the best bid from overseas.
GE sees the deal as opening the way to selling its steam turbines in Europe
for the first time since the era of the Marshall Plan. 'This was the key
trade issue in the industry,' says Mr Del Williamson, vice-president for
sales at GE Industrial & Power Systems.
Mr Williamson recalls a bid which GE made last year to build a power plant
in Germany. The US company lost out in spite of having a lower price and a 1
percentage point edge on thermal efficiency - although the project was later
cancelled.
The situation in eastern Europe remains, in the words of John Yasinsky,
group president at Westinghouse Electric, 'exciting and frustrating'. Most
suppliers have had their share of both sides of the story, where the key
issue remains the need for western finance to complete, update or replace
with alternative power generating plant the 81 Soviet-built nuclear plants
in eastern Europe, Russia and the Ukraine.
Some progress has been made on this issue, but suppliers complain of
bureaucratic delays hampering the raising of money that has already been
agreed - such as the Dollars 700m approved at the G7 meeting in Munich last
June. Westinghouse is attaching particular importance to a Dollars 220m
contract it has tied up to supply the instrumentation and control system to
the partially-completed Temelin nuclear project in the Czech Republic. The
deal could open the way for further work on the newer, safer VVER 1000 type
of stations, Westinghouse believes.
Siemens has already won a contract to update the instruments and controls of
the second generation VVER440-type station under construction at Mochovce in
the Slovak Republic.
Meanwhile, says Mr Bohm, it is confident of winning soon an order for three
450MW combined cycle power units in St Petersburg, providing district
heating and fired by gas turbines to be produced at Interturbo, Siemens'
joint venture company in the city.

The Financial Times


London Page I

930525

