FT933-5168

FT  04 SEP 93 / Markets: Bottom fishers: avoid the dregs - Serious Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


A LONG-standing investment theory is that it is far better to buy the worst
performing fund in a sector than the best performer.
A swift look at the UK Equity Growth sector seems to bear out the
hypothesis. At the start of September 1992, Guinness Flight Recovery was
bottom of the 146 funds in the sector, having lost its investors an
impressive 41.2 per cent over the previous year. Over the year to September
1993, the same fund was top of the sector, with a gain (offer-to-bid, with
net income reinvested) of 83.26 per cent.
Looking further down the tables, we find that Exeter Capital Growth is
third, having been 140th over the year to September 1992. And Brown Shipley
Recovery is 4th in the sector, a heady rebound from its previous position of
139th.
Conversely, if you take the funds that were in the top 10 in September 1992,
you find that two of them were among the worst 10 performers over the
following year.
But before you all race off to buy the worst performing fund in the sector
at the moment, (PC CAM British Growth) a note of caution. Doing the same
exercise over the 1991-92 period produced different results. Of the bottom
10 funds in September 1991, six were in the fourth quartile (lowest 25 per
cent) of funds over the following year. One of those was Brown Shipley
Recovery, 147th in 1990-91, 139th in 1991-92.
A more fundamental factor has caused the tables to reverse themselves over
the past year - Black Wednesday. Sterling's departure from the Exchange Rate
Mechanism, and the subsequent falls in interest rates, have boosted those
cyclical stocks which tend to be held by recovery funds. The top 10 funds in
the UK equity growth sector over the past year include six with 'recovery'
and three with 'special situations' in the title.
In contrast, the year that followed September 1991, was similar to the year
that preceded it. Economic growth was still sluggish, interest rates were
still relatively high. Recovery stocks were stuck in the mire.
There are some good reasons why badly performing funds will eventually
rebound. One is that the fund management company will take action to revive
the fund, perhaps by appointing a new manager; an example might be Guinness
Flight Recovery, where Michael Beggs took charge in the summer of 1992.
A second, is that luck plays a fair part in fund management. It is not
unusual for someone tossing a coin to record three heads in a row; but if
they toss a sufficient number of coins, the result will eventually tend
towards an equal number of heads and tails. Similarly, fund managers may
'regress towards the mean'.
But the trick in 'bottom-fishing' is not a purely mechanical one. For year
after year in the 1980s, the worst performing funds were in the gold sector;
anyone who picked one in the hope of recovery was disappointed. Only in
1992-93 has a revival occurred with gold funds topping the one year tables.
All this has proved, however, is the volatility of gold investment; Mercury
Gold & General is the best performing unit trust over one year and the worst
over one month.
Investors should also be aware that there are reasons why poor performance
might continue for a long time. One is that a fund manager might simply be
incompetent; another is that it is becomes progressively harder to manage a
poorly performing unit trust. As investors notice the poor performance, they
sell their holdings; the manager then has to raise cash to meet redemptions;
quality stocks (no-one will want to buy his poor-quality stocks). Thus, the
manager gradually gets left with the real dregs of his portfolio.
Bottom-fishing will only work if two conditions are fulfilled; the area is
sufficiently volatile, and the investor's timing is virtually perfect. The
consequence is that it is a highly risky strategy.
of bottom-fishing. However, since it involves individual shares rather than
collective funds, and limits itself to the blue chip end of the stock
market, it avoids some of the flaws described above.
As adapted for the UK, Michael O'Higgins's theory involves finding the 10
stocks in the FT-30 with the highest yields and then ticking off the five
with the lowest nominal share prices. In January, it selected Blue Circle,
British Gas, Forte, Hanson and Lucas.
Since we are two-thirds through the year, and the market has been reaching
all-time highs, I thought I would update readers on the progress of the
theory. Blue Circle is up 34.2 per cent, British Gas has risen 13.9 per
cent, Forte is 29.8 per cent higher, Hanson has increased 8.4 per cent and
Lucas is up 23.5 per cent. The average rise is thus just under 22 per cent,
compared with a 11.8 per cent increase in the FT-A All-Share Index over the
same period. And that understates the outperformance, because the stocks
provide a higher yield than average.
Of course, good contrarians will realise that, just because the theory has
worked in the past, does not mean it will work in the future and the same
five stocks would not necessarily be picked if the exercise was done today.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930904

