FT932-13348

FT  23 APR 93 / International Company News: Axa posts decline of 35% in
group profits for year


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


AXA, the French insurance company, yesterday announced a 35 per cent fall in
group profits for the year and expressed confidence about the future
profitability of its investment in The Equitable of the US.
Mr Claude Bebear, Axa president, said the chief reason for the group's 35
per cent fall in profit to FFr1.54bn (Dollars 284m) last year from FFr2.38bn
was the drop in capital gains from asset sales, due to poor market
conditions.
Axa has set a net dividend of FFr23, up from FFr22.
Mr Bebear said the group had some FFr16bn cash in hand.
This might be spent on new acquisitions, he said, but not necessarily in
buying into the three big French state-owned insurers which are on the
newly-elected Balladur government's privatisation list.
He indicated that Axa's gaze was more international, either towards Mexico,
soon to be integrated into the North American market, or in south-east Asia,
where 'the entry ticket is cheap' for a market which in a decade or two
could be the world's biggest.
Axa's French rivals have snapped up most takeover candidates in Germany, and
therefore Axa is now contemplating selling non-life insurance to Germans
directly from France.
Mr Bebear predicted that after last year, in which the US insurance company
produced a FFr77m (Dollars 14m) loss for Axa, 'the evolution of Equitable
will be positive' this year with the cutting of costs and development of new
products.
But he refrained from forecasting when The Equitable, which is America's
fourth-largest life insurer and makes Axa the world's fourth-biggest fund
manager, would be back in profit.
Axa made a Dollars 1bn investment in The Equitable, which bought it a 49 per
cent stake in the US insurer when The Equitable demutualised last year.
This week Axa maintained its stake in The Equitable by buying 49 per cent of
an Dollars 800m convertible bond issue by the US group.
The purchase was made out of the proceeds of Axa's own FFr3.65bn convertible
bond issue in February.
Lex, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930423

