FT933-12628

FT  23 JUL 93 / Extra London runway may be delayed


   By TIM KING


A NEW runway to relieve congestion at London's airports might not be needed
until 2015, 10 years later than previously thought, says a
government-appointed working party.
In a report published yesterday, the working party - made up of
representatives from the government, the aviation industry, local
authorities and environmental groups - substantially changed previous
estimates of the capacity of the south-east's runways.
In 1990 the Civil Aviation Authority predicted that another runway would be
needed by 2005. Yesterday's report said there would be a case for a further
runway at either Heathrow or Gatwick by 2010 or, if this were not provided,
at Stansted by 2015.
Even without the construction of more runways, it estimated that the main
south-east airports could handle a maximum of 170m passengers a year by
2015. Last year 69m passengers used the airports.
BAA, which owns and runs the three London airports, said the report showed
runway capacity was not the immediate issue. Sir John Egan, chief executive,
said its priority was to build Terminal Five at Heathrow to make 'full use
of the existing runways'.
But British Airways argued that a third runway at Heathrow would best meet
the needs of passengers.
The working party said only the four main south-east airports - Heathrow,
Gatwick, Stansted and Luton - offered worthwhile prospects for accommodating
a new runway, though it acknowledged that expansion of regional airports
would help meet growth in passenger demand. It said a new runway would add
at least 40m passengers a year to capacity, while extending the runway at
Luton would add 10m.
Department of Transport sources admitted that any decision would be highly
charged politically.
The report said a new runway at Heathrow would provide the greatest benefits
to the air transport industry and passengers, but would have the greatest
disadvantages in terms of noise, demolition of homes and land use.
Gatwick is judged to have a high level of benefits but would also be faced
with substantial environmental problems. Stansted has lower benefits but
similar environmental problems to Gatwick. Extending at Luton would merely
delay a decision on expansion elsewhere by three years.
The report sets out detailed development options for runways at each
airport, and estimates that 3,300 homes would have to demolished if the new
runway was built at Heathrow, 100 at Gatwick and 80 at Stansted.
Runway Capacity to Serve the South East. Department of Transport. 081-429
5186. Pounds 5.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930723

