FT932-3136

FT  16 JUN 93 / Russia criticises military mandate


   By PATRICK BLUM


   VIENNA


RUSSIA is willing to send troops to protect Moslem enclaves in Bosnia
provided there is a clear framework and mandate from the United Nations
security council, Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister,
reiterated yesterday in Vienna.
Russian troops, however, would not be sent to 'besieged fortresses under
fire'. Mr Kozyrev suggested a new UN Security Council resolution would be
needed to define objectives clearly.
In a separate statement made at the UN World Conference on Human Rights
taking place in the Austrian capital, Mr Kozyrev also warned of the growing
dangers of nationalism and of adopting a selective approach to human rights.
'We cannot accept references to the non-interference principle . . . when
violations of individual rights and freedom are involved,' he said.
He warned that policies of ethnic cleansing, as had happened in the former
Yugoslavia, posed a threat to democracy worldwide.
He said the lack of attention to the rights of national minorities 'risks
damaging the Baltic region and turning Europe into a zone of . . . lower and
double standards.'
In a day dominated by developments in eastern and south-eastern Europe,
conference delegates also heard a call for UN action in the Yugoslav
province of Kosovo.
Mr Sali Berisha, president of Albania, called for the UN to place Kosovo
under UN control and declare it a neutral zone. He warned of the growing
dangers of war stemming from Serbian actions in Kosovo, whose population is
95 per cent ethnic Albanian. He called for further tightening of sanctions
against Serbia.
The conference unanimously endorsed an appeal by Mr Haris Silajdzic, the
Bosnian foreign minister, for immediate action by the UN to end atrocities
in Bosnia.
In an emotional statement that galvanised delegates, Mr Silajdzic criticised
the lack of adequate international reaction in the face of increasing
atrocities in Bosnia. He called on the conference 'to stop the genocide in
at least one town'. He was referring to the Moslem enclave of Gorazde, which
has been declared a 'safe area' by the UN but which is besieged by Serb
forces.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930616

