FT934-10215

FT  06 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Ferranti agrees pref bid terms


   By PAUL TAYLOR


FERRANTI International, the troubled defence electronics group, yesterday
agreed terms with GEC on recommended cash offers for its three classes of
preference shares totalling Pounds 1.29m.
GEC had already proposed a Pounds 10.1m bid, worth 1p a share, for
Ferranti's ordinary shares which was recommended by the Ferranti board but
which is being fiercely opposed by some of the group's 48,000 shareholders.
GEC, which is expected to finalise its formal offer in the next few days,
has said its bid will be conditional on shareholders representing at least
90 per cent of each class of share accepting the offer.
Under the terms of the proposed preference share offers GEC will pay 69p for
each 5.6 per cent first cumulative preference share and 47p for each 3.5 per
cent second redeemable preference share and each 3.85 per cent third
cumulative preference share.
The Ferranti board, advised by Baring Brothers, said it believed the offers
to be fair and reasonable and in the best interests of preference
shareholders. Mr Eugene Anderson, Ferranti's chairman, has acknowledged that
the GEC offer faces a number of significant hurdles, not least the
opposition of some individual shareholders. However, he has warned that the
only alternative to the bid is receivership.
Ferranti's 10 largest shareholders own 38 per cent of the equity and the top
100 own 59 per cent of the shares. But in order to clear the 90 per cent
hurdle, virtually all of Ferranti's 8,000 largest shareholders will have to
accept the deal.
The final 10 per cent of the stock is in the hands of some 40,000 individual
shareholders, some of whom have commissioned Mr John Katz, an investment
consultant, to explore alternatives to the GEC bid. Mr Katz has warned that
the offer 'is likely to be massively rejected.'
Ferranti's complex share structure also poses a potential obstacle to the
deal. Ferranti's special shares are to be converted into ordinary shares on
a 1-for-1 basis but this will require 75 per cent approval at an
extraordinary general meeting.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931106

