FT933-5197

FT  04 SEP 93 / International Company News: Yamaichi Securities to
compensate its clients


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


YAMAICHI Securities, one of Japan's Big Four stockbrokers, is to reimburse
investors who blamed improper sales techniques by the broker for losses on
investments in mortgage-linked funds.
Yamaichi will repay up to Y10bn (Dollars 94.33m) to clients, who claim to
have not received information on the risks concerning the investment
product.
Mr Ryuji Shirai, senior managing director, said there was a 'high
possibility' that sales staff had breached industry regulations, which
require brokers to warn investors of risks involved in investment products.
Nomura Securities last year paid out over Y20bn compensation to investors
who made similar claims over foreign property-backed securities.
Yamaichi sold Y290bn worth of 'Mortgage Jumbo' investment trust funds in
1991, of which Y170bn fell short of their principal value.
Japan's ailing securities industry was hit with further problems yesterday
as the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission, the securities
watchdog, recommended that the government punish Yamaichi Securities, Kyosei
Securities, and Universal Securities, for manipulating the stock price of
Nihon Unisys in 1990 and 1991.
Meanwhile, the Japan Securities Dealers' Association ordered Cosmo
Securities to pay a Y40m penalty for tobashi deals, or manipulation of
investors' accounts to hide unrealised losses.
Cosmo has been bailed out by Daiwa Bank due to extraordinary losses of
Y69.8bn from the tobashi deals.
The association also fined Daiwa Securities Y25bn for a fraud scandal
involving a former manager of a branch in suburban Tokyo.
The Japanese finance ministry has given the go-ahead to subsidiaries owned
100 per cent by Japan's Big Four brokerages and Bank of Tokyo to start
ordinary banking and trust business next month.
They are: Nomura Trust and Banking, a subsidiary of Nomura Securities; Daiwa
International Trust Bank, a subsidiary of Daiwa Securities; Nikko Trust and
Banking Corp and Yamaichi Trust and Bank Ltd, subsidiaries of Nikko
Securities and Yamaichi Securities respectively; and Tokyo Trust Bank, a
Bank of Tokyo subsidiary.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930904

