FT932-172

FT  30 JUN 93 / Building chiefs to question banks on 'harmful' policy


   By ANDREW BAXTER


THE CHARTERED Institute of Building, which represents building managers and
directors, is to hold meetings with the four main clearing banks in the next
two months to discuss concerns about the banks' attitude to the construction
industry.
The move follows publication of a survey this week by the institute which
found that, of 1,300 members questioned, three quarters believed that banks
had a negative policy towards the industry.
The survey also found that 49 per cent of those questioned felt the industry
was moving out of recession, but was not being helped by the banks.
The survey could fuel the often acrimonious debate about the banks' attitude
to industry, but the institute said yesterday it was not aiming to 'hit the
banks'.
The institute said: 'We want to make them aware of the problems of our
members, and we also want to have a teamwork approach to finding a solution.
We know that the banks have their shareholders to consider.'
As a result of the survey the big banks were criticised yesterday by Mr
Nigel Jones, the Liberal Democrat housing spokesman.
Mr Jones said: 'Construction is the key to recovery. The banks by their
attitude are harming any recovery in the building and construction
industry.'
Mr Jones said the Department of Trade and Industry should take action to
ensure that the construction industry received the support it needs from the
big banks. 'If there ever was a case for intervention this is it,' he said.
Mr Jones tabled three Commons questions last week on the issue, for answer
by Mr John Gummer, environment secretary. He has asked Mr Gummer what steps
he is taking to ensure that the construction industry is given enough
financial support to enable it to expand.
It is understood that the banks are upset by the institute's survey, and
that their own studies have produced different conclusions. An unpublished
study for Barclays in March found that 60 per cent of construction companies
had a 'good or excellent' relationship with their bank.
Among other findings of the institute's survey, 41 per cent of those polled
envisaged they would be making further redundancies this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930630

