FT932-3182

FT  15 JUN 93 / London Stock Exchange: Futures drive equities to testing
point


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


NERVES WERE drawn as tight as piano wires on the UK equity trading desks
yesterday as the London market tested the higher end of its trading range
amid heavy arbitrage dealings between blue chip equities and stock index
futures. The FT-SE 100 Index closed at 2,885.5, a gain of 23.7 points
bringing it to the very peak of existing investment confidence, and leaving
the market poised on the edge of uncertainty.
UK stocks were also responding to renewed optimism on interest rates ahead
of tonight's important Mansion House speech in the City of London by Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor of the exchequer. A cut in rates in
France, hard on the heels of the similar move in Italy on Friday, raised
hopes in London that the new chancellor might seize the opportunity to
reduce UK base rates soon, if not tonight.
Strategists also pointed out that the wider political backcloth might have
become more favourable for equities, in spite of the uncertainties
overhanging the position of Mr John Major, the UK prime minister. Political
commentators in the UK press have suggested that the government, and the new
chancellor, are focusing on cuts in public expenditure and that increases in
taxation are regarded as less likely.
But traders warned that much of yesterday's business in equities was driven
by arbitrage activity spurred by the expiry this Friday of both the FT-SE
100 June future contract and also the range of stock index options.
Trading volume in equities was slow to develop until the futures markets got
into their stride; Seaq turnover was still under 90m shares at 10.00am. By
the close the total had reached 500.1m shares, against 528.9m on Friday when
retail, or customer, business was worth Pounds 1.17bn.
At best, the Footsie reached 2,891.6 yesterday, only about 2.2 per cent
below the peak attained at the beginning of March. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index,
although driven less strongly than the Footsie yesterday, rose 10.3 to an
all-time peak of 3,213.2.
Caution was expressed by several market strategists, who pointed to this
week's heavy list of UK economic data. While there was little immediate
response to the news yesterday that factory gate output prices had risen by
an annualised 4 per cent in May, London markets still have to face the
latest data on UK industrial production, today, and retail sales, wages,
unemployment, money supply and the retail price index, all due this week.
Further doubt over yesterday's upsurge in share prices was cast by clear
signs that the marketmakers had been 'caught all the wrong way', as one
dealer expressed it. They were trying to sell the June stock index future
and buy the underlying equities from one another just when, unfortunately,
all their rivals wanted to do the same to them.
Amid this confusion, it was hardly surprising that many analysts continued
to warn against the high valuations now showing in the UK equity market, in
tandem with a somewhat unimpressive round of company results in the past
fortnight.
While the stock market may hang fire today as it waits for the chancellor to
address the City dignitaries, the Footsie is likely to be tested strongly
when equities open on Wednesday.

The Financial Times


London Page 44

930615

