FT933-5151

FT  04 SEP 93 / Despatches: A dictator's legacy


   By JAMES GEARY


THE FIRST things that catch the visitor's eye during the 45-minute drive
from Albania's Rinas Airport to Tirana, the capital, are the countless
pillboxes scattered haphazardly across the countryside.
Intended to defend Albania against invasion from the west, these domed
concrete bunkers now serve as children's playgrounds. Strewn everywhere, the
bunkers represent one of the perverse legacies of Albania's former dictator,
Enver Hohxa.
The communist party exercised absolute control over every aspect of life and
backed its policies with the clout of the Sigurimi, the secret police. Hohxa
ruthlessly cut his country off from all contact with the outside world. As a
result, Albania retreated to the furthermost corner of Europe's collective
unconscious - where it has remained.
Just 50 miles across the Adriatic Sea from Italy, Albania is, after Norway,
Europe's most mountainous country. Its landscape is stark, imposing, raw,
uncanny. The rugged coastline that fringes the Adriatic, from Durres in the
north to Vlora in the south, is breathtakingly beautiful. Still largely wild
and undeveloped, Albania supports a population of some 3.3m, almost
two-thirds of whom live in remote mountain villages where blood feuds and
bartered brides are still the norm.
With the economy a shambles and war still raging next door in former
Yugoslavia, Albania is unlikely to become a popular tourist spot any time
soon, despite its natural splendour. Roaming the broad, dusty avenues of
downtown Tirana, it was easy to see why.
Everywhere, I was confronted by graphic reminders of how Albania has fallen
into disuse. Without exception, all the city's buildings are dilapidated;
electricity and water supplies are interrupted daily, and donkey carts are
still as numerous as cars on Tirana's streets. I was told of one rural
hospital that had only a single light bulb, passed around as necessary, for
a total of eight rooms.
Armed with an Albanian-English-German phrase book, I ventured into one of
Tirana's nondescript book shops, keen to discover what foreign literature
had infiltrated the country since democratisation. Two of the authors whose
names were legible to me included Stefan Zweig and Graham Greene. Dashiell
Hammett was also generously represented.
However, all these books had been printed before the country's Quiet
Revolution in 1991, so that each bore the imprint of the censor. Out of
curiosity, I asked the girl behind the counter for a translation of James
Joyce's Ulysses. In a mixture of Albanian and broken English, she told me
that a translation of Ulysses did not yet exist and that, formerly, even
mentioning Joyce's name was liable to incur a minimum sentence of three
years' clink.
She then ducked into a back room and reappeared waving a book with 'Enver
Hohxa' embossed in gold on the cover. 'Hohxa, Hohxa,' she sneered, then
tossed the book onto a pile of old newspapers in disgust.
The next day I hired a driver to take me to Elbasan, about 90 minutes south
of Tirana over treacherous mountain roads. As we negotiated astounding
curves with seeming unconcern, I tried to focus on the gorgeous panorama: a
phalanx of jagged peaks stretching to the distance. As we descended the
mountain, I saw the city of Elbasan sprawled below.
Elbasan seemed to have tumbled down the mountainside and come to rest
randomly. Its main thoroughfare, deeply worn and rutted, was flanked by a
string of ramshackle huts from which everything from ice-cream cones to
panty hose was sold. This part of Albania was once its industrial heartland.
But, like everything else, the mining industry had slowly ground to a halt
because of lack of equipment and materials. All that remains is the vast,
decrepit hulk of an abandoned factory and a few cows grazing among the
ruins.
Back in Tirana, I heard of another aspect of Albanian patriotism. Over
several glasses of raki, Marion Sahatci, my host in the city, told me how
every Albanian was forced to become a master electrician. 'Before 1991, it
was strictly forbidden to receive foreign television broadcasts,' he said,
proudly displaying the confused jumble of wires that enabled him to receive,
illegally, Italian TV transmissions. 'But television was our only contact
with the outside world. We watched communism fall in Romania on Italian TV
and knew that the same thing was going to happen here. We just didn't know
when.'
After all religious institutions were closed in 1967, Hohxa often boasted
that he had created the first true atheistic state. But on the afternoon of
my departure I heard the muezzin's call to prayer resounding once again from
Tirana's mosque.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930904

