FT932-13285

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (12): Strong
government support helps the Tokyo market to recover - Equities


   From EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


AFTER A bleak 1992, the Tokyo stock market closed the first quarter on a
firm note, helped by strong government support, dubbed the 'price-keeping
operation'.
The leading Nikkei average of 225 stocks defied persistent rumours of a
pre-book closing crash, and finally finished up 9.8 per cent on the quarter,
ending the financial year to March at 18,591.45.
A widespread fear prevailed during the beginning of the quarter, that the
market might face a large bout of selling by investors who wanted to realise
profits ahead of the financial year-end.
The banks, which face a sharp fall in profits, due to bad loan exposure,
were expected to unload some of their long-term stock holdings in order to
prop up earnings figures, as were life assurers, which hold heavy losses on
international bond investments.
Industrial companies, which were enthusiastic investors in the stock market
during the late 1980s, were also seen as potential sellers, because many
expressed the need to liquidate loss-making stock portfolios.
However, continued buying of shares by public funds, including postal
savings and social welfare money, flowed into the market, eventually
reassuring even the most pessimistic investor. The government alleviated
fears by telling banks and life insurance companies not to sell shares to
realise profits.
The support by public funds was a part of a salvage plan for the ailing
market which, at 14,309.41, had last August been at its lowest level for six
years. The government allocated an extra Y1,120bn to be invested in the
stock market.
Another support for Japanese shares has been the sharp rise in Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone, the country's most widely held stock.
After sliding steadily for five years, the semi-privatised telecom company
surged 53.5 per cent during the three months to March, on hints by
government officials of a hike in call rates, and talk of public investment
projects in a new telecommunications infrastructure.
NTT symbolised the woes of Japanese investors, many of whom had invested in
stocks for the first time when the government sold its first tranche in
February 1987 for Y1.19m a share. After a peak of Y3.18m, the issue plunged
on the fall in the Tokyo stock market and concerns over the company's
business prospects, and hit an all time low of Y453,000 last August.
The recovery of NTT, hopes of an additional fiscal package, low interest
rates - all these have changed the outlook for share prices; and while the
overall economy still shows evidence of continued weakness, the market has
surged on high trading volumes.
Foreign investors, led by US and UK pension funds, were active. But while
analysts are expecting the Nikkei to rise above 21,000, and the Tokyo market
may offer higher returns than the US or Hong Kong markets in the medium
term, some investors fear that the recent surge may be a 'mini-bubble',
induced by low interest rates. The second quarter may see some profit-taking
as investors await corporate profit announcements in mid-May, for the year
that ended in March.
Meanwhile, elsewhere in the Asia Pacific region, the Australian market
surged ahead, with the All Ordinaries Index rising 7.6 per cent on the
quarter, to 1,667.4. The strengthening of the currency has boosted the bond
market, and the rise in gold prices and the re-election of Mr Paul Keating
also provided underlying support.
G260
In Hong Kong, the Hang Seng Index showed surprising resilience to the
current political turmoil created by disagreement with China. After falling
sharply in February, the stock market has recovered, and the index closed up
15.9 per cent at 6,388.86.
The Straits Times Index of the Singapore stock market received a boost from
a reduction in corporate tax rates to 27 per cent, and finished the quarter
at 1,668.30, up 9.4 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

930423

