FT932-7161

FT  25 MAY 93 / International Company News: US marketmakers fight back
against the nerds - Small investors, defined as 'professional traders', are
upsetting some of Wall Street's biggest firms


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


ON THE wall of an office at the small upstate New York securities firm of
All-Tech Investment Group, a magazine headline is proudly displayed. It
reads: 'Revenge of the Nerds'.
To the All-Tech clients occupying the office, the headline is an in-joke, a
reference to the fact they spend their days in windowless rooms staring at
computer screens filled with stock prices.
To the marketmakers and dealers of the big Wall Street firms, the people at
All-Tech - a collection of former bartenders, truck drivers, accountants and
beauty consultants turned 'professional investors' - are nerds of the most
annoying kind.
Although they classify themselves as investors, the men and women who have
found a second career buying and selling small amounts of stock via a
computerised automatic share execution system, are essentially stock market
traders. They spend their days trading on the Small Order Execution System,
a system run by the National Association of Securities Dealers. SOES was
established in 1988 to allow individual investors to buy and sell small
amounts of stock, without having to go through an intermediary.
At All-Tech, the SOES traders concentrate on the marketmakers' quotes - the
prices at which marketmaking firms indicate they are willing to buy and sell
shares - waiting for one marketmaker to lag behind in updating his quote
when a share price moves.
When they spot these temporary price discrepancies, SOES traders immediately
buy or sell the stock at the price quoted by the slow marketmaker. The
marketmakers cannot escape the trade, because under SOES rules, they must
take up to 5,000 shares worth of trades before changing their quote.
A few minutes later, when all the prices have moved back in line, the
traders unwind their earlier order. If they bought a stock low, they sell it
back high, if they sold high, they buy it back low. The difference
represents their profit.
Although the amount of stock traded each time is small, those profits can
add up. If a trader exploits a quarter of a point (25 cents) difference
between marketmakers' prices, he can earn a Dollars 250 profit on the
maximum SOES trade of 1,000 shares.
Good SOES traders can pocket several thousand dollars a week, and the very
best earn an annual income well into six figures. And they do not need that
much capital - a minimum of Dollars 15,000. There is nothing illegal about
what traders do, yet marketmaking firms are so angry at being 'picked off'
by the traders that they have pushed the NASD into taking action.
In the past few months the NASD has tried to change some key SOES rules to
curb the SOES traders. It narrowed the definition of 'professional traders',
who are banned from using SOES, to anyone trading on the system more than
four times a day.
Since then, the NASD has proposed other changes, including reducing the
order size from 1,000 shares to 500 for which marketmakers must guarantee
firm quotes on SOES, and giving marketmakers more time to change their
quotes after taking the first automatic order. Ultimately, the NASD wants to
change SOES from an automatic trade execution system to a simple order
delivery system that will give marketmakers the choice of accepting or
rejecting customer business.
The tightening of the 'professional trader' definition has not hurt the SOES
traders because the rule change has been temporarily blocked while All-Tech
and other firms challenge it in the courts. The other proposed changes are
before the Securities and Exchange Commission, awaiting approval.
The NASD justifies attempts to shut the traders out of SOES on the grounds
they are exploiting a system designed for small investors, not professional
traders. A NASD spokeswoman says: 'They are not investors, because they
immediately unwind their trades after executing them.'
The NASD also contends marketmakers are losing money because of the SOES
traders. There are 29 brokerage firms offering a home to SOES traders, and
at times, says the NASD, marketmakers are hit by 'wave after wave' of
automatic orders from these traders, leaving them thousands of dollars out
of pocket each time.
Moreover, the NASD insists marketmakers are not the only ones to suffer from
the SOES traders' activities. It says that, to make up for losses incurred
at the hands of the SOES traders, marketmakers have been widening price
spreads - something that hurts all investors who use the system.
Additionally, the NASD says the traders' activity increases stock price
volatility and damages liquidity.
The SOES traders deny such claims. Mr Harvey Houtkin, chief executive of
All-Tech, says there is no convincing evidence the traders have either
forced marketmakers to widen their spreads, or their activities have added
to volatility. Mr Houtkin says his customers add liquidity to the market.
He fears if the NASD is allowed to change its rules SOES will be placed
off-limits not just to his clients but to a wide range of users, hindering
efficiency and liquidity in the OTC market. Ultimately, Mr Houtkin says the
NASD, which bills itself as the stock market of the 21st century, will kill
off the one system with the po-tential to be the blueprint for the market of
the future.
There is now an uneasy impasse between the two sides, with the court not
expected to rule on All-Tech's appeal for several months.
While trading on SOES is only a small part of the total business conducted
on US stock markets, the row between the NASD and the traders has wider
implications.
At a time when the Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating
possible changes to the structure of US stock markets, the SOES controversy
raises an important question: who does the NASD run its stock market for -
investors, or the marketmaking professionals who operate the system?
The people at All-Tech and advocates of computerised trading in the US argue
that if the NASD were putting investors' interests first, it would not only
allow them to trade on SOES, but would also develop SOES into an automated
trading system on which everyone - big and small investors, brokers and
marketmakers - could trade directly with each other. Only then, says Mr
Houtkin, would the NASD live up to its billing as the stock market for the
next 100 years.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930525

