FT934-8307

FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Former M&A king opts to join
Morgan Stanley


   By RICHARD WATERS


   NEW YORK


MR JOSEPH Perella, one half of Wall Street's most successful mergers and
acquisitions double act in the 1980s, moved back into the mainstream of
investment banking yesterday. He announced he would join Morgan Stanley.
Mr Perella resigned two months ago from Wasserstein Perella, the M&A
boutique he founded with long-term associate Bruce Wasserstein in 1988. He
left behind his name and what he said was a 'significant' equity interest in
the firm.
Mr Perella, 52, will join Morgan Stanley's operating committee, but have no
involvement in the management of its investment banking department. He said
he had not discussed a management role with any of the banks he talked to.
The move to Morgan follows intense competition from several Wall Street
houses for his services, indicating the sharp increase in M&A activity this
year after a two-year lull.
It also pointed to the ambition of a number of securities houses to expand
their investment banking operations.
Mr Perella eventually chose Morgan Stanley, an established house, over
Merrill Lynch, which has sought to graft a stronger investment banking
operation on to its substantial broking and trading activities.
He will fill the gap left at Morgan Stanley by the departure this year of Mr
Robert Greenhill, the bank's former president, who went to Smith Barney. But
both Mr Perella and Morgan Stanley said the appointment would have been made
even if Mr Greenhill had still been at the firm.
Mr Greenhill has remained the leading adviser to Viacom in its bid to
acquire Paramount, leaving Morgan Stanley with only a supporting role in the
biggest contested takeover battle since the late 1980s - advising Nynex on
its investment in Viascom.
However, the bank's work for Merck in the acquisition of Medco Containment
Services, and for AT&T in its purchase of McCaw, will put Morgan back among
the leaders in the M&A business for this year.
Mr Perella refuses to comment on why he parted company with Mr Wasserstein.
'I have an amicable relationship with Bruce. I just thought it was time to
move on,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

931116

