FT933-5232

FT  04 SEP 93 / Crime and punishment: Are the Tories losing the initiative
on law and order?


   By JOHN WILLMAN


Across Britain, a new spirit of vigilantism is taking root as people despair
of the rising tide of crime.
Recent examples include:
The Norfolk village that united to protest at five-year gaol sentences for
two men convicted of kidnapping a 16-year-old wrongly suspected of being
behind a local crime wave.
The gang of vigilantes in Newtown, Powys, calling themselves the 'twelve
just men', who administered rough justice on local hooligans by inserting a
ferret into their trousers.
Mr Stanley Kalms, chairman of Dixons Group, the UK's largest electrical
retailing chain, who said in June that shopkeepers were forced to adopt
vigilante tactics to stem the rising tide of property crime.
This week, a Gallup opinion poll in the Daily Telegraph found that
three-quarters of those questioned thought that vigilante actions such as
these could sometimes be justified.
The reason? Nearly half those questioned had little or no confidence in the
police. Only 9 per cent saw justice being done in trial sentencing and 77
per cent thought sentences were too light.
This will make worrying reading for Mr Michael Howard, home secretary since
May, as he approaches this year's Conservative party conference. The
conference has often been an uncomfortable occasion for Tory home
secretaries. The assembled representatives regard a tough line on law and
order as one of the party's core values. Many would like to see a return of
hanging, some of flogging.
They will want to be reassured that he can reverse the rising tide of crime,
which has doubled the number of annual recorded offences in England and
Wales from 2.5m in 1979 to 5.6m in 1992.
He will not find it easy. Crimes affecting the everyday life of ordinary
people have reached record proportions. Domestic burglaries totalled 708,200
in 1992, thefts of vehicles 587,900 and thefts from vehicles 954,200. There
were 902,500 offences of criminal damage, including vandalism, which
provides an all-to-visible reminder of rising crime.
The growth has been enormous. Domestic burglary has almost trebled since
1979, thefts from vehicles are up 243 per cent and criminal damage has risen
180 per cent. Growth rates in most crimes have accelerated since 1989.
Some of the rise reflects greater reporting by victims, who increasingly
have insurance cover and need a police report to make a claim. But the
British Crime Survey - which is based on asking people about their
experience of crime - suggests the recorded figures seriously underestimate
the crime rate.
Actual crime levels for the offences that can be surveyed by this means may
be three times the recorded crime figures. The 1992 survey found that twice
as many domestic burglaries were committed as recorded, three times as many
thefts from vehicles and seven times as many offences of vandalism.
Most crimes go unreported, says the survey, because the victims either
regard the offences as trivial or feel that the police would be unable to
take any effective action.
On the latter point, the popular wisdom may be right. Though crime rates
have risen, clear-up rates have declined. In 1979, over 42 per cent of
notifiable offences were cleared up: by 1992, the figure had fallen to 26
per cent.
More than three-quarters of serious offences, such as violence against
people and sexual offences, are cleared up. But fewer than one in five
domestic burglaries, vehicle crimes and criminal damage offences are solved.
Adding to the government's discomfort over these figures is the fact that
some of the biggest rises have been recorded in the Tory heartlands.
Gloucestershire, for example, has seen home burglaries rise by 552 per cent
since 1979 while car crime is up 489 per cent. Leicestershire, Avon and
Somerset, Warwickshire, Lincolnshire and Norfolk are all at the top of the
league tables for growth in crime.
This rising tide of crime has been skilfully exploited by Mr Tony Blair, the
shadow Home Secretary and one of the most adroit strategists on Labour's
front bench. He recognised that previous attempts to capitalise on the
government's crime record had failed because Labour was seen as 'soft' on
criminals. He has therefore placed himself at the forefront of attacks
against the government for failing to be tough on crime, wrong-footing
Conservatives who see this as their constituency.
Mr Blair has linked this with an older Labour refrain on the importance of
tackling the underlying causes of crime, including youth unemployment,
absence of training opportunities, poor housing and falling standards of
living among the lowest-income households.
This perspective has received unexpected backing from Home Office research
published in 1990 that provided evidence of a link between the state of the
economy and crime levels. The study showed that levels of crimes against
property grow faster when the economy is in recession and more slowly when
the economy is growing.
If Mr Howard hopes to reduce the crime level without waiting for the
recovery, he will have to find ways of improving the clear-up rate.
'A 1 per cent increase in the clear-up rate would, on average, reduce the
number of burglaries by 1.6 per cent,' according to Dr David Pyle, an
economist at Leicester University.
Certainty of punishment is more important in deterring crime than its
severity, says Dr Pyle. However, increasing the severity of punishment by
imposing more and longer prison sentences appears to be cheaper than
increases in police manpower.
The government has already chosen the more cost-effective route. Prison
numbers are again rising following the decision to revoke elements of the
1991 Criminal Justice Act designed to reduce Britain's high prison
population. This week's announcements on increasing private sector
involvement in Britain's prisons should allow the Prison Service to increase
capacity without a leap in its budget. By contrast, police numbers are
unlikely to rise. The priority will be implementing Sir Patrick Sheehy's
report as part of the package of reforms to the police service. Additional
funds for police resources are unlikely with a public sector borrowing
requirement of Pounds 50bn.
For Mr Howard, therefore, the options are relatively limited as he works on
his speech for the October conference. He cannot offer the delegates more
police officers, though he may encourage further use of unpaid special
constables. He can also try to legitimise vigilantism volunteer schemes,
such as the 'parish wardens' pioneered this week in three Herefordshire
villages.
But the home secretary will promise more custodial sentences for convicted
criminals and fewer cautions. He will also say that sentences will be
longer, as courts regain the right to consider previous convictions when
sentencing. And he will curdle the constituency representatives' blood with
pledges to make prison regimes less comfortable.
Whether this will satisfy the 'twelve just men' and their avenging ferret
remains to be seen. But it is all Mr Howard can offer in present
circumstances.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930904

