FT934-8592

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Harrogate (4): A symbol of determination -
Conference Trade


   By HARRIET ARNOLD


THE MODERN conference and exhibition centre set amid the elegance of
Harrogate's spa resort architecture is a symbol of the town's continuing
determination and willingness to change.
Growth and prosperity had come in the nineteenth century from catering to
the Victorian interest and enthusiasm in hydropathy, or water cures. In more
recent years the availability of more scientific treatment and a withdrawal
of National Health Service support for spa cures heralded a period of
decline for the resort's water facilities.
Harrogate turned instead to the conference and exhibitions industry. But a
report prepared for the borough council in the late 1970s delivered an
ultimatum: a substantial investment in new facilities was necessary or it
would lose its share of the UK and international market. This would be bad
news for a town bursting with hotels - 80 per cent of the area's tourist
accommodation is in Harrogate.
In 1982 the Harrogate International Centre opened, ranking in the top five
in the UK, with a 2,000-seat auditorium, six exhibition halls (about to
become seven) and the 1,300-seat Royal Hall, formerly the Kursaal in
Victorian spa days. The adjoining Moat House International Hotel is the
first hotel to be built this century in the town centre.
Since then employment in the area has been buoyed by the centre, which hosts
national and international events. That did not stopped detractors labelling
it a great white elephant, as the original estimated costs of nearly Pounds
8m grew like Topsy to nearly Pounds 34m, and the Centre - built without
support from central government - failed for years to operate at a profit.
In a buyers' market and suffering the effects of recession, the Centre has
fought hard to maintain market share. 'In a difficult three years, we have
done well,' says Mr Paul Lewis, director of the Harrogate International
Centre, whose strategy has been to market the centre while undertaking
substantial improvements.
Harrogate has seen the number of conferences grow from about 1,100 in 1991
to about 1,300 in 1992-93 with the number of conferences linked to
exhibitions increasing from 14 to 18 in the same period. The number of trade
fairs has dropped by three to 25, but the centre is confident that old or
new clients can be brought back into the fold soon. Despite the dip in trade
fairs, the total number of delegates has risen to 275,000 in 1992-3 from
272,000 in 1991.
The centre's corporate sector business has been worst affected by recession,
but its core growth business has been the expanding market of conferences
linked to exhibitions. In addition, a number of clients have committed
themselves to the centre for at least three consecutive years. 'Associations
have to meet,' observes Mr Lewis, who also notes that the recession has
meant that clients are looking for value for money.
Mr Lewis is particularly targeting the growing medical sector. Recent
conferences linked with exhibitions included the European Wound Management
conference, while forthcoming examples include the Royal College of Nursing
and Healthcare Computing, both on long-term contracts. Mr Lewis estimates
that about 10 per cent of the centre's business is from overseas.
The marketing programme includes taking a stand at International Confex, the
exhibition industry's annual show.
The visitor attractions, such as the central large, high-class hotels and
the town atmosphere, are part of the package to customers. 'I sell the
destination as well as the centre itself,' says Mr Stuart Mackay head of
marketing and sales at the Centre. 'Visitors to Harrogate can easily walk to
their conference, exhibitions, shops, restaurants, and other tourist
attractions.' As Mr Lewis says: 'If we can't rival Birmingham for space, we
can offer the quality of facilities, service, and the ambience of the town
and district.'
When delegates to the conference of the Institute of Personnel
Management,which has been held in Harrogate for 47 years, were asked if it
was time for a change of venue, 'respondents said overwhelmingly 'Please do
not move',' says Ms Marie Ricot, organiser of the conference. She, too,
cites the proximity of all the locations that delegates need or want to
visit, and the ambience of the town.
The centre's quality facilities and the village atmosphere attract national
and international rather regional customers. Many are prestige events, such
as the Confederation of British Industry conference this week, which marks
the first time the CBI has returned to the same venue for two consecutive
years.
The latest developments at the Centre again grew out of the findings of
another report, by Peat Marwick McLintock in 1987, which examined its future
role, funding options and management. It found that although many customers
were very loyal to Harrogate, the exhibition facilities were becoming
dilapidated and demand for extra space could not easily be satisfied.
Since then, a development programme in three phases has been initiated.
Phase 1 was a refurbishment programme of the exhibition space to upgrade the
roofs, air conditioning, toilets, floors, lighting and organisers'
accommodation, with the last work scheduled to end by January 1994.
Phase 2 will implement a new catering facility, with bars, restaurants and
entertainment areas, to be completed over three to four years.
Phase 3 aims to build a new exhibition hall on the Royal Hall carpark. It
will be funded by profits from the centre, which traded profitably for the
first time last year, and is scheduled to be in place by the end of the
decade.
But the greatest current project for the Centre is the opening in April 1994
of a new exhibition space, Hall Q, in place of a superstore which has moved
to a new site. 'It will give us a new dimension in marketing for new
business,' says Mr Lewis. 'Now we can accommodate larger events, with 1,740
sq m in net saleable exhibition space in the new hall'.
Not only will Mr Lewis be able to target bigger event holders, but in a
development that he calls pioneering, the Centre will 'sell the whole
product - hall hire, stands, electricity, even carpets, will all be laid on.
The user can just walk in and set up.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931115

