FT932-6786

FT  27 MAY 93 / Court gives power back to Sharif


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


   ISLAMABAD


PAKISTAN'S supreme court yesterday restored Mr Nawaz Sharif to office as
prime minister, apparently delivering a severe setback to President Ghulam
Ishaq Khan, who had dismissed him five weeks ago.
The National Assembly, the lower house of parliament, was also reinstated
after being dissolved by the president. A presidential spokesman said that
Mr Khan would honour the court's decision.
The judgment, supported by 10 out of 11 judges, came after a three-week
hearing on a petition filed by Mr Sharif challenging the presidential order.
'We hold that the order of April 18, 1993, passed by the president of
Pakistan, is not within the ambit of the powers conferred on the president.
. . and has therefore been passed without lawful authority,' the court said.
The decision removed from office an interim government installed by the
president which had included members of Ms Benazir Bhutto's opposition
party. It meant that elections which Mr Khan had called for July 14 would
not be necessary.
However, Mr Sharif's future remained uncertain amid talk of moves to remove
him through a vote of no confidence in the National Assembly, perhaps as
early as today.
Ms Bhutto said: 'The political reality is that the people and the country
want fresh elections to choose a representative government.' Boarding a
flight from Karachi to Islamabad, she said: 'We must proceed with great
caution to see that Pakistan is safe from any chaos.'
The detailed judgment has not been published. It is believed to have been
made partly on the grounds that the president acted in haste without trying
to resolve a government crisis through mediation. Mr Sharif had been seeking
to remove the presidential powers which Mr Khan used to dismiss him, as well
to eject Ms Bhutto's government in 1990.
Mr Sharif described the judgment as an important milestone in Pakistan's
history. He led a crowd to Islamabad's Faisal mosque where he offered
prayers of thanksgiving.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930527

