FT932-13500

FT  23 APR 93 / EBRD Annual Report: You win some .. you lose some .. - Some
bankers are questioning EBRD's expertise as well as its luck / EBRD steps in
where others fear to tread


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


ANY investing institution has its share of successes and failures. The
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has proved no exception. It
is unfortunate for the EBRD's reputation however that the bank's first and
most closely watched equity involvement, in Microsystem of Hungary, is one
disappointment.
Microsystem, a leading private computer company, looked a good prospect when
the EBRD in December 1991 approved an investment.
Eight software experts had founded the company in 1983 with 'some
programming expertise, Dollars 2,000 and a pencil.' Microsystem rode the
back of the personal computer boom to expand rapidly in the second half of
the decade. The company evaded Cocom restrictions on technology transfers,
imported clones from Asia and added huge mark-ups to the prices charged to
Hungarians.
In the early 1990s Microsystem diversified into telecommunications, a
growing sector in eastern Europe. The company's managers did not, however,
want to lose their independence by teaming up with a large western computer
company.
So Salomon Brothers, the company's advisers, brought in the EBRD as a core
outside shareholder around which other investors would congregate. The EBRD
paid Dollars 3m (Pounds 1.95m) for a 17 per cent stake.
The bank held up the investment as a model. The transaction countered
criticism that the bank was dealing too much with state companies and
institutions, rather than encouraging the nascent private sector in eastern
Europe.
'Everybody was happy,' says Mr Peter Vadasz, chairman of Microsystem. That
is no longer so, as Microsystem's financial performance rapidly soured the
relationship with EBRD.
Fierce price competition in the computer business worldwide combined with
the opening of the local market to legitimate imports. Companies such as
Microsystem, which developed high overheads in the days of high profits,
suffered from undercutting by western distributors.
Microsystem plunged into loss in 1992 and turnover slumped 24 per cent to
Ft1.8bn (Pounds 1.3m), although the company now detects a recovery in
profitability.
The EBRD is clearly dissatisfied with Microsystem's financial performance.
For his part, Mr Vadasz has expressed irritation at constant demands for
information from shareholders. Mr Vadasz is also disappointed that the
EBRD's seal of approval carried so little weight for customers.
'We promised high profits; they promised help; neither of us kept our
promises 100 per cent,' Mr Vadasz says.
Nevertheless EBRD officials adopt a stoical stance. The name of the game is
investment, says one: 'You win some, you lose some.' EBRD's Budapest office
prefers to point to winners such as Petofi Nyomda, a successful privatised
printer which has received EBRD credits.
But some bankers question the EBRD's expertise as much as its luck. One
senior figure who was invited to participate in the Microsystem placement,
said he thought the deal was misplaced and doubted if the company had a
future.'
Judgments of this kind are damaging for the bank. For the EBRD prides itself
on a catalytic role. The bank boasts that its presence gives a seal of
approval to a transaction and attracts other investors.
But that depends on the investor community's confidence in the EBRD's
judgment. The bank cannot afford too many Microsystems.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930423

