FT934-8382

FT  16 NOV 93 / Arts: Wayward spirit from St Ives - Review of Roger Hilton
at the Hayward Gallery


   By WILLIAM PACKER


The opening last summer of the Tate's new gallery at St Ives and the Ben
Nicholson retrospective running on into the new year at the parent Tate on
Millbank have emphasised the role of the school of St Ives as a crucible of
British modernism. The somewhat smaller retrospective of the work of Roger
Hilton that has just opened at the Hayward can only keep that interest
alive.
While any serious reassessment of the received critical wisdom is
necessarily a good thing - especially of whether or not that immediate
post-Nicholson, post-war generation of which Hilton was a part made a
significant contribution on an international scale - the effect upon
Hilton's own standing is not quite so certain.
The difficulty with Hilton is that his reputation carries with it a romantic
aura of wildness, dissipation and talent cut off unfulfilled. The curious
thing is that this works to his advantage independent of the paintings
themselves. We look at the collective achievement of his peers, at Heron,
Frost, Lanyon, Gear and Scott, who proved more consistent, dogged and
workaday in their careers, and still we tend to say: ah, but Hilton's was
always essentially the more original, the more brilliant talent: what a pity
he died so soon. In fact, he was 64 when he died of a stroke in 1975.
There is certainly no denying him his place in British abstraction of the
1950s and 1960s, in particular in the evolution of the imagery and
sensibility peculiar to St Ives. In his work almost from the start we find
that characteristic, decorative lightness of touch, those swooping linear
motifs, the flat, frontal, unmodulated areas of paint, those combinations of
colour, so bold and pure, white and black, ochre and umber, orange and
scarlet. And there, too, is the intelligent, sensitive response to the
abstract expressionism that in the 1950s was sweeping in from New York. The
St Ives position was sympathetic, but properly independent and distinctive
and in international terms it has still to be given its due acknowledgement.
Hilton was part of it.
But he is no longer so special. The curious effect of this selection of his
work is to make that of his absent friends, of Terry Frost in particular,
seem the more substantial, thorough and sustained.
The chronology is a revelation. Through the late 1940s he was picking up
again the interests and contacts he had formed in Paris before the war, and
was responding particularly to the newer, post-Picasso abstraction of such
painters as Bissiere, Manessier and Bazaine, Poliakoff, de Stael and
Constant. In London at the turn of that decade he was clearly influenced by
Victor Pasmore at just the moment when he was 'going abstract' so
controversially, and he was also in touch with William Gear, Patrick Heron,
Adrian Heath and Terry Frost.
So he was one among many, an artist responding to the currency of the visual
debate rather than leading and influencing it. He was certainly quick on the
uptake, intelligent, sensitive and, above all, articulate in his responses
and blessed with a marked technical facility. Wearing his New Statesman
critic's hat, the painter Patrick Heron said as much in his review of
Hilton's show at Gimpel Fils in 1952: 'Roger Hilton is a natural painter.
That is to say he cannot put a brush to canvas without creating a splotch,
smear, streak, stain or smudge . . . that is charged with expressive quality
. . . The precise character, the texture, size, colour, tone, direction and
rhythm of each ragged touch is his main conscious preoccupation.'
The trouble was that this preoccupation became more and more perfunctory as
the years went by - the line, whether in paint or charcoal, more suggested
than certain and established, the painted surface often barely more than an
indication of intent. He had his successes, certainly, for he was being
shown widely abroad by the early 1960s, both commercially and officially, at
the Documenta of 1959 and the Venice Biennale of 1964. And yet time and
again in this show we find that what was once construed as energy and
commitment to be manifest desperation. With his alcoholism an ever-present
and worsening condition, he had plenty to be desperate about; but the old
energy, fluency and invention never quite deserted him. It was only the
final resolution of promise into real achievement that was missing.
Indeed he, and we, might have been better served by a comparative study that
set him alongside his peers, Frost, Gear and Pasmore, in the context of the
1950s. By a happy chance, two new, albeit small, displays at the Tate at
Millbank and at St Ives drawn from the permanent collections, offer us at
least a view of the work of Terry Frost in that period. 'A Walk along the
Quay' at St Ives is especially useful, focusing upon Frost's imagery at the
critical stage in its evolution from associative to absolute abstraction.
The boats rocking in visual counter-point on the tide, or tipping all ways
on the sand, the gulls swinging on the sea breeze, the sunshine glancing off
the waves - it is all there. Frost saw and responded directly to it. More to
the point, while lacking Hilton's conspicuous fluency of touch and
statement, he worked upon it consistently to produce over a period a body of
work of true substance and creative authority. And having established it, he
has stuck to it all these years.
Roger Hilton: The Hayward Gallery, South Bank Centre SE1, until February 6,
then on to the Ikon, Birmingham, and the Whitworth, Manchester. Terry Frost:
'A Walk along the Quay', The Tate Gallery, St Ives.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931116

