FT934-8524

FT  15 NOV 93 / UK Company News: A return from the wilderness - How Philip
Swinstead has begun to build up Comac


   By ALAN CANE


MR PHILIP Swinstead at 50 has clear objectives for his next half decade in
the computing services business. 'In five years', he says, 'I intend to hand
over to another chief executive. I shall become a non-executive director,
and one of the managers I've recruited will take my place.'
He was speaking late last month as Comac, the small employment agency for
computer specialists of which he is chairman, announced the Pounds 18.5m
acquisition of Computer Search and Selection (CSS), the privately held
largest independent contract agency for freelance computer consultants. The
enlarged group will be the UK market leader with some 1,200 contractors in
place.
Mr Swinstead says: 'My aim is to make money in terms of building a business
showing capital growth and a rising share price. I have not taken a penny in
salary from Comac so far and my salary in this new, quite big, company will
be only Pounds 75,000 a year.'
Mr Swinstead became chairman of Comac earlier in the year after spending
Pounds 750,000 to take a 20 per cent stake in the company. The move
attracted attention in the City as it signalled Mr Swinstead's return to the
information technology business after two years in the wilderness (or, more
accurately, fishing on his estate in Perthshire, Scotland).
Founder of Systems Designers, he was chief executive of SD-Scicon, one of
the UK's largest systems companies, until its acquisition in 1991 by EDS of
the US after a lengthy takeover battle.
The UK company was in difficulties after provisions on a series of contracts
forced it into a Pounds 20m loss. Mr Swinstead insists the damage had been
repaired by the time of the acquisition, but ruefully admits: 'We learned
that we could not walk on water.'
The contrast between SD-Scicon, which had peak revenues of Pounds 256m and
prestigious defence and financial sector contracts, and the enlarged Comac
group with combined revenues of about Pounds 65m from 'body-shopping', as
the agency business is sometimes slightingly described, could not be more
marked.
Agencies like Comac have thousands of freelance, self-employed computer
consultants on their books. They earn between Pounds 45,000 and Pounds
55,000 a year. Comac's sales team tries to match the contractors' skills to
its customers' requirements.
'It is very basic, very low-tech', Mr Swinstead says. 'It was a real shock
to my system after selling software to the Ministry of Defence.'
However, he has long recovered from the bitterness he felt over EDS'
victory. Furthermore, he believes he has purchased a foothold in the future
of computing services. 'The agency market is growing. It is fragmented just
like the software business in the 1970s when there were thousands of small
software houses'.
His intention is to build a services company with three legs: a strategic
information technology consultancy, a systems integration company and an
agency. He sees the agency as the key. As conventional software and services
companies grew they acquired acres of office space to house thousands of
programmers. When the recession struck, even the best managed found
themselves shedding staff and taking charges against often unlettable office
space.
Mr Swinstead's idea is to build a company along the lines of an engineering
contractor. 'The key commercial and technical staff are employed by the
company but when you win a bid you pull in freelance consultants from
outside. These are skilled people but we can pull them in and that gives us
a price advantage. We will not be paying for their downtime and it will give
us considerable flexibility.'
'The prime contractor on a construction project employs the key commercial,
technical and project management people but its does not employ the
riveters.'
The acquisition of CSS gives Comac economies of scale. With turnover last
year of Pounds 53m and pre-tax profits of Pounds 2m, it is a well-run
company but it has built up Pounds 2.5m of debt through rapid expansion.
The existing management, including Mr John Sharpe, the co-founder and chief
executive, will stay on to run the agency business. Mr Swinstead believes it
will benefit from the broader experience of the computing services he and Mr
Ian Scoggins, also an SD-Scicon director, can bring to the business. Mr Paul
Davies, formerly with SD-Scicon and more recently managing director at GEC
Easams, has been appointed to the board and will run the non-agency side.
'In five years' time I would like to think Comac will be a systems company
with a very good strategic information technology arm - that will provide us
with public visibility and the high level contacts we need to sell our
services. The agency side will be less publicly visible.'
Even Cap Gemini Sogeti of France, Europe's largest computing services
company, started as a 'body shop'. So there are sound precedents for Mr
Swinstead's belief in his strategy. Last month he backed his judgment,
putting a further Pounds 750,000 of his own money into the merger.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931115

