FT932-6846

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(12): Rival threatens Unix - Open systems


   By PHIL MANCHESTER


DESPITE their long history, open systems are only now becoming a meaningful
reality. The trap of closed proprietary systems, which held most large
computer users in thrall for three decades, is finally fading to be replaced
by a freer, more flexible world of open systems, writes Phil Manchester.
In March this year an important group of leading computer manufacturers and
software developers announced its intention to put differences on one side
and co-operate in devising a Common Open Software Environment (Cose).
Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Santa Cruz Operation, Sunsoft, Univel and Unix Systems
Laboratories agreed to work towards a Cose 'standard' based on the Unix
operating system.
Cose aims to define broad standards for desktop user interfaces, graphics,
networking, multimedia computing and systems management. Theoretically, any
Unix software developed by the Cose companies will be able to run on the
other member companies' platforms.
But there were two notable absentees from the initiative. Microsoft - which
is working on a rival operating environment based on its Windows software -
was not invited and neither was Apple.
The Cose announcement is the latest in a succession of alliances aimed at
promoting a single software environment for the computer industry - a factor
which has led the move to be viewed with some cynicism by commentators and
users. IBM and HP were already working together within the Open Software
Foundation, an alliance set up in the late 1980s to promote their respective
'flavours' of Unix.
OSF was established in competition with AT&T, the originator of Unix, which
was promoting its own standards under an alliance called Unix International.
Its members included USL (now part of Novell) and Sun Microsystems -
Sunsoft's parent company.
The two rival groupings have been moving together for two or three years -
with Unix International adopting several OSF-sponsored standards and vice
versa.
The Cose standard, therefore, is a ratification of a process which was
already well under way.
The movement towards open systems began in the early 1980s, when many
companies noticed that their ability to take advantage of information
technology advances was constrained by the inertia of their investment
applications based on single manufacturer systems. If they were dissatisfied
with their hardware supplier, there was little they could do about it. They
either threw everything away and started again or they continued to dig
themselves deeper into the proprietary systems hole.
The advent of personal computing served to highlight the disadvantages of a
fragmented market. The quick acceptance of the IBM/MS/DOS personal computer
boosted the market and gave manufacturers and software developers a common
technology to build on.
More important, it meant that customers could - to a large extent - rely on
compatibility across different manufacturers' systems. At the same time, it
brought software prices down because development costs could be amortised
across a much large market. Much of the activity in open systems over the
last two or three years has been aimed at extending the idea of a common
open standard to large computer systems.
Mr Bernard Guidon, European marketing manager for Hewlett-Packard and a key
participant in the Cose discussions, says that the move was a response to
pressure from customers: 'Large global companies have systems from many
different manufacturers and want their applications software to be
consistent across different hardware,' he explains.
'If we want the Unix market to grow - then we need to get our act together
and come up with a common Unix.'
He adds that it was surprisingly easy to get technicians from the various
Cose members to devise a set of standards on which everyone could agree.
'We told them not to look at what they had done in the past - but to work on
the best technology for the future.'
The simple fact that all of the participants were already working with the
Unix operating system - despite small, annoying differences between the
different versions - made things easier.
Unix has been synonymous with open systems since the mid-1980s when it was
widely adopted by leading manufacturers as a way to offer a common platform
to build applications on.
But there is a growing school of thought which runs against Unix -
particularly with the increased dominance of Microsoft in the operating
systems market. About 200m personal computers around the world use Microsoft
operating software - either in the form of MS/DOS or the more recent Windows
environment. Microsoft hopes that they will move on to its Windows NT
environment - once it becomes established. Windows NT offers many of the
features which have made Unix attractive as the foundation for larger
computer systems.
Microsoft has good reason to feel confident that it will prevail. Software
application developers are strongly committed to re-developing their
products to work under Windows NT and many users will be looking for a
smooth upward migration path from their current personal computer systems.
But Mr Guidon is also optimistic. He expects Microsoft will be forced to
move closer to Cose standards. 'Large companies will put pressure on
Microsoft to conform in the long term,' he predicts.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930526

