FT934-8474

FT  16 NOV 93 / Heseltine and Clarke speak out for Europe


   By TONY JACKSON, ROLAND RUDD and PAUL CHEESERIGHT


TWO OF the government's most prominent cabinet ministers fought back
yesterday to preserve the Tory party's pro-European credentials in the face
of recent strong criticism from industry.
Implicitly attacking the party's Eurosceptics in a speech at the
Confederation of British Industry's conference, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade
and industry secretary, warned against alienating Britain's main business
allies with insults.
He told the conference in Harrogate: 'We will serve ourselves not at all if
the language with which we describe our Continental partners, the imagery in
which we paint them and the insularity with which we attempt to rewrite the
history of the past 40 years has the effect of alienating ourselves and our
self-interest from the very people upon whom we are most dependent.'
Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor, said he continued to support economic and
monetary union, but without adhering to artificial timetables. At a press
conference before his speech to the CBI, he said: 'The next thing we should
pursue is economic convergence. That is the real day-to-day task of European
ministers now.' Mr Clarke said the argument over membership of the European
exchange rate mechanism had been dramatised in a British political context.
'A mythology has sprung up that our recession was caused by the ERM and that
when we left the ERM, happy dawn was here again. But the present recovery,
it is now plain, had started before we left.'
Referring to last week's reported criticism of the government's stance on
the ERM by Mr Howard Davies, CBI director-general, he said: 'There is
certainly no difference as far as I can see between myself and the CBI, or
the government and the CBI.'
The remarks by the two ministers were seen as an attempt by the left of the
Tory party to regain ground lost at the party conference. Speeches by
ministers such as Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, had drawn
applause for their attacks on the European Commission.
Some industrialists were critical of the rightwing position. Mr Iain
Vallance, BT chairman, said: 'UK business's European credentials are second
to none, which is why I and many of my business colleagues despaired at some
of the damaging and xenophobic political posturing in Westminster over the
past year.' He added: 'Britain must not allow itself to be marginalised.' Mr
Heseltine said the issue of a single European currency was one of timing.
'The British government has negotiated a position in which it can make up
its mind.
'What will happen is that either the economies of Europe will converge, or
they won't. If they do, they will either converge on the D-Mark as the
dominant currency or there will be an institutionalised currency which the
Europeans will decide to put in place of the D-Mark.'
CBI reports Page 10
Editorial Comment and Observer Page 21
More private finance sought for public sector Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931116

