FT932-7058

FT  26 MAY 93 / Sharp decline in US consumer confidence


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


US CONSUMER confidence fell sharply this month to its lowest level since
October, adding to doubts about the momentum of the US economic recovery.
The Conference Board, a New York business analysis group, said its
confidence index fell to 61.5, more than reversing a brief rebound in
consumer sentiment in the spring that had lifted the index to 67.6 per cent
last month.
The latest figures indicate that the surge in confidence that followed
President Bill Clinton's election victory last November has completely
evaporated. In a strong recovery, the index would be expected to climb above
100.
Separate figures yesterday showed a 2.7 per cent gain in sales of existing
homes between March and April, a modest rebound after bad weather hit sales
in the first quarter. Sales, however, were still running 0.9 per cent below
the level of April 1992.
In financial markets, analysts attribute the lack of confidence partly to
uncertainty about the fate of the Clinton economic plan, which is now under
attack from moderate congressional Democrats as well as Republicans.
Mr David Jones, chief economist at Aubrey G Lanston, a New York brokerage,
said the tax rises proposed by the Clinton administration had undermined the
confidence of small and medium-sized businesses.
Leaks in Washington suggesting the White House was considering new payroll
taxes to pay for an expensive reform of healthcare were the 'last straw' for
many businessmen.
'Consumers are increasingly worried about job prospects,' said Mr Fabian
Linden, a spokesman for the Conference Board.
Only 13 per cent of people surveyed believed there would be more jobs in the
months ahead - the lowest reading in well over a year, he said. Fewer people
were expecting an improvement in business conditions over the next six
months than in April.
The weak figures highlight the dilemma facing the Federal Reserve. If the
recovery were stronger, the Fed might already be nudging interest rates
higher in response to signs of higher inflationary pressures in recent
months.
But with parts of the economy apparently still struggling, many analysts
expect the Fed to postpone a tightening of policy until clearer evidence of
sustained growth and higher inflation emerges.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930526

