FT934-11575

FT  30 OCT 93 / World Stock Markets: Mexico recovers from its NAFTA worries
 -But investors remain unenthusiastic about poor recent third quarter
results


   By DAMIAN FRASER


The optimism of the Mexican stock market returned yesterday as investors put
behind them worries over disapointing third quarter results and obstacles to
the passage of the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement. The
impressive rally over the previous month faltered badly earlier in the week.
However, the market ended up only marginally down over the week. Yesterday
the index leapt 42.28, or 2.1 per cent, to 2,020.26 - still 14 per cent
higher than September 21 and 15 per cent up on January 1.
The majority of the blue chip companies reported third quarter earnings
during the week, and in many cases they were below expectations. Cemex, the
construction company, Vitro, the glass company, TMM, the shipping group and
Dina, the truckmaker, among others, saw sharp falls in their prices, as the
weak economy and high interest rates took their toll.
Even the 15.3 per cent increase in profits at Telmex, the telephone
monopoly, failed to stem a short-term sell-off.
The market rally over the month as a whole comes as investors appear
increasingly confident that the economy will start to pick up towards the
end of this year and that, regardless of NAFTA, growth in 1994 will exceed
the modest 1.5 per cent expected this year.
Optimism is partly based on the steady fall in interest rates on news of
lower inflation and a reduced trade deficit, as well as the government's
intention to boost spending and cut taxes in the run-up to next year's
election.
The market has also been more confident about the prospects for Nafta, the
fate of which is expected to be decided by the US House of Representatives
in November.
But uncertainties have never been far away. The near universal view among
brokers is that rejection of Nafta would lead to sharp reversal in the
market in the short term, with some predicting a return to the 1,500 or
1,600 level.
The sweeping victory of Canada's Liberal party in last Sunday's general
election, and its demand that parts of Nafta should be renegotiated came as
a blow, although it was widely expected. The fear is that Canada's
opposition could provide cover for US congressmen wanting to oppose the
treaty.
Political uncertainty is also beginning to climb. The ruling party is set to
nominate a presidential candidate, probably by the end of the year: this
person will be the overwhelming favourite to win next August's election.
Investors recall that the candidacy of President Salinas in 1987 led to a
spectacular market rise. If Mr Pedro Aspe, the finance minister, is chosen,
the market might be expected to take off again. However, if one of the less
economically experienced candidates is selected a reversal could be in
store.
Third quarter earnings seem set to follow the pattern of results over the
past year. Industrial companies facing international competition, and those
depending on trade, have performed poorly throughout the year. However,
consumer-orientated businesses, such as Maseca, the flour producer, have
continued to show strong gains.
The government's recently announced economic pact for next year is not
expected to help industrial conglomerates. The pact would reduce energy
prices but, in theory at least, the savings have to be passed on to the
consumer. On the other hand, the pact will lead to a pick-up in wages and a
rise in costs.
The industrial sector has also been hit by an exchange rate which, adjusted
for inflation, has appreciated against the dollar every year since 1989, and
remained strong throughout this year. If Nafta is rejected, the government
has said that it will defend the currency with high interest rates, thereby
hurting the generally indebted industrial companies.
By pushing interest rates down, SG Warburg expects Nafta to raise economic
growth next year by an additional 50 basis points to 3.5 per cent, and
increase earnings growth from 13 per cent to 17 per cent. Faster growth, a
stronger currency and lower interest rates, should help retail companies,
such as Cifra, Gigante, Liverpool, construction concerns such as ICA and
Cemex, and banks such as Banamex and Banacci. Their earnings are sensitive
to economic growth and greater consumer and government spending.
Picking companies that would be relatively unaffected by Nafta's rejection
depends on whether or not the government reacts with higher interest rates,
as well as the effect such a decision would have on the currency. Some
companies, such as Vitro, that might do well under devaluation, are also
heavily indebted, and would suffer from high interest rates.
Companies with low net interest payments are Cifra, Kimberly Clark, Telmex
and Liverpool, according to Baring Securities, and might be relatively
unaffected by higher interest rates. Industrial conglomerates with revenues
in dollars, such as Vitro, or mining companies, would gain from a
devaluation.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931030

