FT934-8815

FT  13 NOV 93 / Flash cash isn't all that glitters: As champagne corks start
popping in the City again, can industry compete in the career stakes


   By ROBERT PESTON


In the City of London's champagne bars, teeming again after three bleak
years, dealers and financiers are regaling each other with stories of their
fabulous earnings.
Here is one: 'A foreign exchange trader (at a Swiss bank based in London)
was paid such a big bonus, well over Pounds 1m, that the computer which the
firm uses to calculate bonuses could not cope - once the number reached
seven digits, the computer aborted the program.'
Then there is the spend-spend-spend version: 'The boys were paid such big
bonuses that they popped out of an afternoon (sic) to buy their girlfriends
new cars.'
Conspicuous consumption is back in the Square Mile, as the profits of
stockbrokers and securities firms soar. Trading volumes in the stock market
have risen; there has been a glut of securities issues and new businesses
have sprung up to deal in the complicated financial products known as
derivatives.
Last week SG Warburg, a leading UK investment bank, reported that its
profits for the first half of the current financial year had almost trebled
to Pounds 149m. A few days earlier, it had been reported that Mr Kaveh
Alamouti, a dealer in London for Japan's Tokai Bank, had earned Pounds 9m
last year.
There are very few City earners in Mr Alamouti's league. But many of his
colleagues and competitors are expecting substantial Christmas bonuses.
'There are more than 100 people in our London office who will get a bonus
exceeding Dollars 100,000,' said a 32-year-old executive at a US investment
bank.
As these City tyros toast their good fortune, there is a less celebratory
mood in British industry. When glasses are raised in a manufacturing
company's boardroom, it is often to salute senior managers, with 20 or 30
years service, taking early retirement as part of cost-saving programmes.
In many parts of industry, the end of the recession is barely noticeable -
belts are still being tightened. Though profits of many big companies, such
as Imperial Chemical Industries, are recovering, they remain well below
their peak.
Given the stark contrast between the fortunes of the City and industry, what
do the graduates who entered the job market between 1980 and 1987 think
about their career choices and prospects? Has going into the City lived up
to its glittering promise? Or do young industrial managers derive sufficient
satisfaction from their jobs to compensate for their lower earnings?
Collecting responses from the City, which is thronging with young men and
women in their late 20s and early 30s doing interesting, highly paid and
responsible jobs, was easy. However, thirtysomethings in charge of
production or sales divisions at manufacturing companies were more elusive.
Several avenues proved dead-ends: a couple of business consultancies failed
to suggest manufacturers with suitable interviewees; the chairman of a
leading manufacturer said he would scour his myriad subsidiaries for a
bright young industrialist but his office later left a message that 'we have
plenty of people who are between 37-45 but no one in the age group you
want'; Imperial Chemical Industries imaginatively put forward an
untraditional subject - a woman manager, Ms Ginny East, from Kingston
Polytechnic.
But Ms East turned out to be an accountant, who has always worked on the
financial side of ICI and is currently in investor relations - in other
words, she is doing what is effectively a City job.
So where are all the young industrialists? A whole generation appears to be
under-represented in British industry. Statistics provided by Mr Michel
Ozaria, the French director of the London Business School's Career
Management Centre, indicate what happened. Almost half of the LBS's business
graduates in 1985 went into financial services and only 11 per cent into
manufacturing industry.
A 32-year-old investment banker, expecting a Pounds 300,000 bonus this year,
says: 'I don't know anyone who had a good degree from a good university in
the 1980s who went into industry, because the opportunities were not there.'
In part, he is referring to the substantial sums which can be earned in the
City. Mr Ozaria says the average starting salary, ignoring bonuses, for a
1985 MBA graduate was Pounds 27,500 in the City, compared with under Pounds
21,000 in manufacturing.
He is also referring to promotion prospects. ICI says its graduate intake in
1979 is only now being promoted to relatively senior production or marketing
roles. The Institution of Mechanical Engineers says that out of 2,194
members in senior management jobs, only 55 are aged 28 to 34.
But industry does provide compensations apart from money for the rare
individuals who are promoted young. Three who have climbed the corporate
ladder quickly are: Mr David Lewis, a 28-year-old company operations manager
with Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch conglomerate; Mr Alan Rosling, currently with
the Downing Street policy unit which advises John Major, who at 31 has
already been chief executive of a lingerie business for Courtaulds Textiles
and is about to become marketing and planning director of United Distillers;
and a former stockbroker, who asked to remain anonymous, now running a
medium-size manufacturer of consumer goods.
All are enthusiastic about their careers and believe that 'making things'
provides satisfaction difficult to obtain in the City. Only the former
stockbroker shows any bitterness about City extravagance. He says: 'When we
go into the wood-panelled gents at our financial advisers, we always say
that if anyone offered us an office decorated quite as opulently we would
move in tomorrow.'
Mr Lewis has not had the time to ponder City lifestyles. Unilever has pushed
him hard, giving him six different jobs since he joined its graduate
training scheme in 1987 from Trent Polytechnic. He now has 33 people
reporting to him and is in charge of co-ordinating the marketing plans for
the detergents produced by Unilever's Lever Europe subsidiary. Though
department managers at Lever Brothers earn about Pounds 30,000 a year,
excluding London weighting, Mr Lewis shows no trace of regret at having
turned his back on the far higher salaries available in City firms.
Though the financial service industry has been a powerful magnet for talent,
industry's attempts to counter the attraction appear half-hearted. After Mr
Rosling graduated from Harvard Business School in 1988, he did not find
British industry rolling out the red carpet: 'I had written to 50 of the
leading companies in the country when I came out of business school. Most
did not reply, most were not interested in someone of my background.'
Eventually Mr Martin Taylor, recently appointed chief executive of Barclays
and then in charge of Courtaulds Textiles, took him on with the promise:
'I'll either give you a management role in a year or sack you.' Within a few
months, Mr Rosling was sent to Bristol to run Piersons, which makes Marks
and Spencer's lingerie.
However, Unilever and Courtaulds are unusual in giving considerable
responsibility to younger executives. 'Promotion in industry comes with
age,' says Mr Paul Compton, a stockbroker who began his career with the
engineering firm AE. 'Even Leonardo would have found it difficult to get a
decent job with a British manufacturer until he was 30.'
After Cambridge, where he was sponsored in his engineering degree by AE, Mr
Compton spent a year as an assistant to its manufacturing director, but
decided to quit when told that his next job was 'effectively as a foreman
producing a particular type of piston in a factory employing 200 people'.
He says: 'Going to a piston factory in the north feels like going to do
national service.' He would have been away from his Cambridge friends and
contemporaries for several years and the prospect of a senior management job
was remote.
So in 1986, Mr Compton sent applications to several City firms. At 30, he is
now an analyst of engineering companies for the stockbroker, Credit Lyonnais
Securities, and talks frequently to Mr Colin Hope, chairman of T&N, which
bought AE. 'When I was at AE, I met the head once and was told about it
three months in advance.'
Rubbing shoulders with those at the top is fairly commonplace in the City.
In general, firms are prepared to give considerable status and power to
young people.
'I chose financial services because I wanted to work for an international
business and one which presented greater challenges,' says Mr Martin
Fraenkel, a 33-year-old vice-president of Chase Manhattan, the US bank, who
is in charge of bullion trading and the fashionable business of constructing
complicated deals involving commodities and derivatives. 'Apart from the
financial inducements, there was also the opportunity to acquire more
responsibility earlier than in manufacturing.'
A graduate of Oxford University, Johns Hopkins in the US and the business
school, Insead, in France, he says: 'I have never actively talked to a
manufacturing company about employment.'
While Chase offers a diverse career because of its size and geographical
spread, many City firms do not. Nor do most most of them offer much scope to
manage people. Such opportunities are limited because of the flat management
structures of most financial institutions.
This can be a disadvantage for some. Though Mr Compton loves his job, he
says it has not changed very much for years. Others who joined the City
during the mid-1980s boom are more despondent. 'Of course I earn far more
than I could in industry,' says one broker. 'But I am bored out of my
skull.'
Some of the 1980s graduates have risen through the City as far as they can.
There are simply not enough senior jobs to go round. Now, manufacturing may
be able to woo them if it has the confidence to give them top jobs. Industry
has one significant advantage over the City, for all its handicaps - it can
offer a long and varied management career.
So although the champagne corks are popping again in the Square Mile, the
less flamboyant lifestyle of an industrial manager no longer seems so
unattractive for an increasing number of City executives. They want more
from life than chasing big deals and an end-of-year bonus, however fat.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931113

