FT934-11587

FT  30 OCT 93 / International Company News: Volvo chairman moves to assuage
Renault link fears


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   STOCKHOLM


VOLVO, the Swedish vehicle manufacturer, yesterday stepped up efforts to
persuade sceptical shareholders to support the proposed merger of its car
and truck operations with France's Renault. The move came as uncertainty
grew over the outcome of a stockholders meeting to decide the issue.
Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, Volvo chairman, acknowledged the goal for the merged
company, of achieving average operating returns of 7 per cent, was high in a
tough industry.
However, he said: 'That shows how beneficial we believe the merger will be.'
Addressing concern that the 65 per cent balance to be held by state-owned
Renault amounted to a French government takeover of Volvo, Mr Gyllenhammar
said the merger could not be delayed until after Renault was privatised.
He said this could delay the privatisation because potential investors
needed to know the extent of Volvo's commitment to the merger.
Mr Gyllenhammar and Mr Louis Schweitzer, the Renault chief executive, told a
Swedish newspaper that a letter or public statement from the French
government to Volvo shareholders spelling out its commitment to Renault's
privatisation would be helpful.
The fate of the merger depends on a group of Swedish institutional
shareholders who have yet to decide how they will vote at the shareholders
meeting on November 9.
Yesterday the insurance group Skandia, which holds 3.7 per cent of the
voting capital, delayed its expected decision, saying it needed more time to
analyse the merger deal.
Other fund managers said they were still pressing Volvo for more information
before making up their minds. A key participant, a government pension fund
which is the second-largest shareholder after Renault with 7.5 per cent of
the votes, has retreated from its earlier positive position. It now says it
will make its final decision next Wednesday.
Another state pension fund, with a 2.5 per cent stake, has already said it
will vote against the merger.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931030

