FT931-3997

FT  12 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: PNG's mining adviser offers
'bridge' to foreign investors


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


   KALGOORLIE


MR ROBERT Needham, whose appointment as mining adviser to Papua New Guinea's
new government is creating considerable controversy, yesterday gave some
indications about how he intended to operate in future. He said the Mineral
Resources Development Company, which will hold the PNG government's stakes
in natural resource companies and of which he is managing director, would
not be a passive partner but 'will look closely at all operations to see if
they can be improved.
'We are there to ensure that the government gets the best deal possible for
its stake in the major developments,' he explained. 'In order to do this
MRDC will also attempt to ensure that the profits of each operation that it
invests in are maximised.'
Mr Needham, an Australian, was once chief executive of Placer Pacific, the
company at present in dispute with the PNG government over Porgera, a gold
mine in which the government wants to increase its shareholding. When it was
suggested that his appointment had caused the friction over Porgera, he
likened his position to that of a lawyer who had given good advice to a
client only for the client's opponents to say: 'Hang the lawyer'. The PNG
government was being underestimated, he said - 'They make up their own
minds'.
Mr Needham faced a series of hostile questions after speaking at the
Australian Gold Conference and defending PNG's record in the areas of
sovereign risk, access to land, social and civil unrest and bureaucracy. He
recalled that it had long been PNG government policy to take up to 30 per
cent of the equity in any major developments too large for PNG companies.
The level of equity taken up would depend on the economics of individual
projects. MRDC should 'be viewed as a partner in these projects that can
help foreign companies obtain access to mineral resources and at the same
time provide the necessary bridge for communications with government'.
MRDC was recruiting a team of about 25 analysts, geologists and mining
engineers and would also promote the development of local small mining
companies by paying for equity stakes in them. Mr Needham was asked if the
giant Lihir Island project, involving one of the world's biggest gold
deposits, was 'on hold'. He said that the licence application submitted by
the joint venturers, RTZ Corporation and Nuigini Mining, was 'full of
qualifications they have set themselves. Until these qualifications have
been addressed, it is not really an application'.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930312

