FT934-8705

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (11):
Ski the US, more ups, few downs - Arnie Wilson explains why the American
approach is winning more and more fans


   By ARNIE WILSON


THEY MAKE snow in America while the reddening leaves are still clinging to
the aspen trees. They started over two months ago. In Copper Mountain,
Summit County, for example, the first snow cannon were switched on back in
September. That is the first secret of skiing in the Rockies.
The second is probably the pleasant, painless and ultra-civilised queueing,
monitored by (usually) unofficious lift attendants. There is little more
infuriating - except perhaps being cut up in slow-moving London traffic -
than a bunch of Euro-yobs pushing, shoving and elbowing you in a lift-queue,
trampling all over the backs of your skis in the process. In the US queueing
 -when necessary - is usually as genteel as waiting to meet the bride's
parents after a wedding, or forming a line to meet your hostess at a
Buckingham Palace garden party.
When snow arrives 'on time' in the Alps, and keeps coming, aficionados of
European skiing do not concern themselves with the US, where making snow is
a multi-million dollar industry. But when - as happened frequently in the
late 1980s - the snow record in Europe is poor, the US suddenly becomes a
very attractive option.
The truth is that America is always an attractive option, even when Europe
has good snow. No one would deny that in terms of size, scenery and vertical
drop, Europe has a distinct edge. But in terms of the overall quality and
pleasure of a ski holiday experience - that sometimes elusive cocktail of
good snow, well-groomed runs, enjoyable ski-school, inspiring scenery,
pleasant company, entertaining apres-ski and sheer joie de vivre - America
competes favourably.
The seemingly inherent friendliness and politeness of Rocky Mountain
Americans usually extends from the ski areas to the local towns. In the
hugely atmospheric old mining town of Telluride, Colorado - where traffic
moves at a snail's pace anyway - if a driver senses that you are even
thinking of crossing Colorado Avenue, he will slow down even more to let you
pass. Telluride must be one of the most difficult towns in the world in
which to get run over.
Which is yet another reason why, when asked which are the best ski resorts,
I usually say that although the French resorts of Val d'Isere,Tignes and the
huge Trois Vallees region of Courchevel, Meribel, Les Menuires and Val
Thorens are probably the best in the world, my personal favourites are the
likes of Jackson Hole, Wyoming, Telluride and Aspen, Colorado and Taos, New
Mexico.
As a matter of routine necessity, in order to start business at
Thanksgiving, the traditional opening day of the season on the last Thursday
in November, American resorts use artificial snow to create a huge undercoat
for the real thing when it arrives - hopefully soon afterwards. With trails
frequently reaching 10,000, 11,000 or even 12,000 feet or more, the ski
areas are high enough and cold enough in the autumn to become a snow-making
factory.
Even in the much lower Appalachians, New England winters are sufficiently
cold for snow to be manufactured on a huge scale. Killington, which
traditionally races Keystone, more than 2,000 miles away in the Rockies, to
be the first big ski resort to open in October, is a veritable snow factory,
churning it out by the ton on at least one big run on each of its six
mountains. Thus skiing on a hard core of trails is virtually guaranteed year
in, year out.
Some small American resorts without the capital to invest in snow-making
have simply had to close. In most European resorts - even those which
invested heavily in snow-making after the barren winters of the late 1980s -
snow-making is not quite the same concept. It is still seen as a way of
keeping existing natural snow topped up and repaired. If real snow does not
arrive at the right time, many European resorts are struggling, either
because they have not installed snow cannon on enough of their pistes, or
because temperatures are not low enough to make snow.
It is sometimes claimed - usually by people who have never skied there  -
that American runs are too short and American food, though served in
generous quantities, is too bland. I have never once reached the end of a
trail and thought: 'That was disappointing. It was all over almost before it
began.' A vertical drop of 3,000 or 4,000 feet is quite sufficient for most
skiers to attempt without getting puffed out and welcoming a ride back up,
so what difference does it really make whether you ski one long run or two
or three shorter ones? As for the food, there has been a transformation in
the quality of American cuisine in most of the big American ski resorts, if
not the rest of America. A French lady of my acquaintance remarked on it
herself - unprompted - during two visits this year to the Colorado resorts
of Aspen, Crested Butte and Telluride, where an international clientele has
encouraged the proliferation of skilful European chefs.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

931113

