FT931-3982

FT  12 MAR 93 / London Stock Exchange: Heavy selling of Glaxo


   By CHRISTOPHER PRICE, JOEL KIBAZO and STEVE THOMPSON


THE STOCK market was stunned by the latest piece of bad news from Glaxo, the
drugs group whose second place in the London market's top 100 list by market
value is being seriously threatened by Shell Transport. Glaxo held the
number one spot in London for a number of months last year before being
overtaken by BT.
The resignation of Dr Ernest Mario, chief executive and deputy chairman, saw
London's marketmakers slash their dealing levels in Glaxo to head off any
huge selling pressure. The move was successful in the short term but failed
to prevent large scale selling and switching operations during the rest of
the session when the news had fully done the rounds of the big institutions.
Dr Mario's resignation comes only days after the shares were hit by
allegations that Glaxo's Zantac anti-ulcer drug has violated US drug laws.
Yesterday Glaxo shares began the session at 695p but collapsed to 652p as
the resignation news was made public. The stock rallied later in the
session, closing a net 19 off at 668p. Turnover in Glaxo expanded rapidly to
reach 24m, the highest-ever single day's business in the shares, just
topping the 23m traded in the middle of last month when the group announced
its interim figures.
Analysts were shocked by the latest news in what is viewed a series of
misfortunes that have dogged Glaxo. The shares peaked at 930p in 1992, but
rapidly lost favour with US funds. The most recent fears in the market have
been that the group may be seeking to raise cash via a mega rights issue to
fund a move into the US over-the-counter drugs market. Warner Lambert was
seen as the group's prime takeover target.
Some analysts took the view yesterday that the shares had further to fall.
'The market doesn't like intrigue and uncertainty and is taking a poor view
of recent events,' said one top drugs sector specialist. But leading
marketmakers said the recent steep fall in the share price 'provides an
outstanding buying opportunity in one of the market's top class stocks'.
Other leading drug stocks were beneficiaries of the switching out of Glaxo.
SmithKline Beecham raced up to close a net 17 higher at 491p and Wellcome
jumped 28 to 935p.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

930312

