FT932-287

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (7): Unique contribution of middle-rank
exporters - Some 3.5m smaller companies - the so-called Mittelstand - are
the backbone of the nation's industry / Germany


   By ARIANE GENNILLARD


GERMANY'S exports success is associated with its blue chip multinationals,
such as Siemens, Daimler-Benz or Mercedes. But it relies also on a uniquely
German phenomenon, the country's 3.5m smaller and medium sized businesses
known as the Mittelstand.
Businesses in this sector generally employ up to 500 workers each and have
turnovers ranging from DM50m to DM500m. Roughly half are suppliers to bigger
national companies. The rest export directly.
In the state of Baden-Wurttemberg, which boasts the largest concentration of
Mittelstand business, nearly a quarter of the output of those employing up
to 200 people is exported. In North-Rhine Westphalia, 19 per cent of such
companies' turnover is export-related.
Credit for such achievements is due partly to the high quality of these
companies' manpower. Germany has more engineers per head than any other
country and produces more patents a year per capita than Japan or America.
These skills have been fostered by organisations such as the federation of
craft industries and Mittelstand organisations.
'We are good exporters because we have good products. And our success is to
a large extent due to the fact that Germany has developed a series of
assistance programmes, from education grants to export subsidies. These
programmes are specifically geared toward helping smaller enterprises,' says
Mr Arend Oitkir, head of the Mittelstand organisation within the German
industry federation.
However, in the present economic climate such schemes are not enough to
ensure success. Like the rest of German industry, Mittelstand companies are
feeling the effects of a stronger Deutsche Mark. They are also threatened by
rising domestic production costs.
Mr Hans-Eberhard Schleyer, head of the craft industries federation, says
'these enterprises are not able to rationalise like bigger companies. They
don't have the financial resources to go to foreign regions offering tax
breaks.'
In some branches, such as machinery, the twin difficulties of a strong Mark
and high domestic costs have made German products 20 per cent dearer than
their competitors abroad, analysts say.
'It has become increasingly hard for these companies to place their products
abroad,' says Mr Gunter Kayser, a director at the Institute for the
Mittelstand in Bonn. 'Our small and medium-sized companies are becoming
decreasingly compet
itive and their exports are suffering,' he adds.
The problem of high domestic costs has also been particularly exacerbated by
the necessity to pay for German reunification. 'Small and medium sized
enterprises, once the economic backbone of the country, are made the victims
of reunification,' says Mr Peter Helmes, director of the Mittlestand Union
within Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union.
German workers have the longest holidays in Europe, the shortest working
week and bear some of the highest tax burdens, he explains. Taxes, once all
fringe benefits and social payments are included, can amount to 60 per cent
of the companies' revenues. Paying for reunification has increased the tax
burden. Additionally, starting in 1995, German companies will face an extra
7 per cent tax levied to finance public investments in the east.
The erosion of German exporters' competitiveness has thrown politicians back
to the drawing board, with proposals ranging from the introduction of more
flexible working hours to lower corporate taxes. But the effectiveness of
such measures, if adopted, will take time to reach the companies. Meanwhile,
times are rough for smaller exporters.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930629

