FT932-3247

FT  15 JUN 93 / UK Company News: BT sale discounts scaled back


   By ROLAND RUDD


THE GOVERNMENT has scaled back incentives for retail investors in the sale
of its remaining 21.9 per cent stake in BT.
The public is being offered 10p off the first and second instalments set at
150p and 140p respectively. This compares with 15p off the first two
payments in the last government sale of BT shares which were set at 120p and
105p.
SG Warburg, the government's global co-ordinator, said the incentives were
less generous to reflect the fall in interest rates since 1991.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, said one of the
aims of the offer was to 'demystify share dealing' through the use of share
shops.
More than 1.8m people have registered for the sale, taking the total,
including BT employees and existing shareholders, to more than 4m. However,
a number of the 150 share shops have expressed concern that the government
is promoting its own share information office at the expense of share shops.
Mr Dorrell said: 'Everyone tends to want to see things better than they are
. . . but the share shops have understated the scale of their own success.'
The Treasury has underlined its commitment to competition within the
institutional offer in a letter to the the top 500 institutions around the
world.
They have been told that the allocation of new BT shares will not be
affected by which global manager, including Warburg, through which they
choose to deal. The same rule applies to regional managers dealing with all
other institutions not on the top 500 list.
In previous privatisations institutions have suffered in allocations if they
did not deal through the bookmaker.
The first instalment in the international offer, which will be more than the
150p sought from retail investors, will be announced on June 29. The second
and third instalments will be the same for all investors, with the last
being determined by the price big investors tender in the international
offer.
The minimum application for retail investors will be 120 shares. The
incentives are on allocations of up to 1,000 shares or 1,500 if investors
opt for the 1-for-15 share bonus after three years.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930615

