FT934-8384

FT  16 NOV 93 / Arts: Jessye Norman - Recital


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


The Royal Festival Hall is hardly ever used for solo vocal recitals these
days. In the 1970s an attempt to put on a week of singers met with
disastrous attendances and a description of the hall as looking like a
'deserted aircraft hangar'.
It is clearly important to know one's audience. Not only was the hall packed
for Jessye Norman on Sunday afternoon, there was a queue for returns
(despite a Pounds 50 top price). Inside the atmosphere reeked of adulation.
There comes a point where it is difficult to hear the music for the clamour
of applause that greets a star singer whose fame has spread beyond the usual
boundaries of her art.
To Jessye Norman's credit, she managed to hold off the temptation to play
the celebrity until the end. She takes her song repertoire seriously and has
always wanted to be recognised in it. Unfortunately, seriousness of intent
can lay a dead hand on a singer's best efforts in the world of the German
Lied and it was a while before this programme showed much sign of life.
Dutiful enunciation of the words, careful gradation of tone, nothing
flagrantly out of style: all manner of worthy descriptions could be given to
the the first half Schumann and Strauss songs, but the music simply failed
to come alive. Norman is not good at keeping the momentum going at slow
speeds and pensive songs tended to drift without purpose. Strauss's
'Cacilie', fast, loud, exuberant, sparkled like a firework after the gloom.
For the second half, the programme turned to Messiaen and Schoenberg - a
daring choice, amply rewarded. The music of Messiaen's Poemes pour Mi
inhabits a post-Wagnerian hot-house of opulent harmonies, which support
grand and sensuous vocal outpourings of a kind that Jessye Norman can not
just handle, but positively enjoy. The whole recital lifted and that was not
least thanks to Geoffrey Parsons's effortlessly stylish support at the
piano.
The Messiaen had unlocked the singer's personality; the Schoenberg (his
Brettl Lieder, recently recorded together with Erwartung) allowed it to
blazen forth for her admirers. Jessye Norman made sure that the songs had an
impact at the back of the top tier. The date for her 1994 recital has
already been set and so have the prices (the same again). Clearly she has an
optimistic view of inflationary trends in the UK over the next 12 months.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931116

