FT932-169

FT  30 JUN 93 / Jobs: The company that rose from the pit - Real-life
survivor tells how organisations' political problems can be tackled and
tamed


   By MICHAEL DIXON


GIVEN the vogue for performance reviews nowadays, even readers who don't
regularly carry out appraisals will be used to having same thrust upon them.
But how many of you, I wonder, have had a managerial colleague spontaneously
approach you and say: 'I'm most interested in hearing from you about things
which you think I could improve my performance by changing. Also, any things
that you believe are important, yet you believe that I do not see.'
The Jobs column's guess is that it hasn't happened to very many of you,
although no doubt the odd case occurs. Even when it has done, however, I'd
take bets that the colleague wasn't the chief executive of your company.
The sole recorded instance I know of is in the outfit I wrote about four
weeks ago. As enduring readers may remember, it was set up by seven
high-fliers who'd decided they could no longer bear the organisational
politics in the separate management consultancies where they had worked
before. Their avowed aim in establishing their own consultancy was that its
internal dealings would be open and straightforward.
Alas, it nevertheless soon turned into a political snake-pit at least as bad
as any they had left. The worst of the slithery manoeuvring, moreover, was
being perpetrated by the seven founder-directors themselves. Fortunately,
unlike the numerous top managements that turn a blind eye to such
counter-productive problems, they elected to tackle them and called in
Harvard University professor Chris Argyris to help to set matters to rights.
In his book* on the remedial project, the professor tells how the one of the
seven who'd been made chief executive decided that, as he appraised the work
of his six fellow-founders, they should be given a chance to appraise his.
He therefore called them all to a board meeting, and began with the words I
quoted early on.
My own impression that such events are unusual is confirmed by Chris
Argyris, who says: 'Rarely does a chief executive officer bring his or her
group together in order to review the CEO's performance. A few CEOs might
hold a private review with a close colleague. Few would consider doing it
with their entire group, and even fewer would actually implement it.'
That set me wishing - along with well over a dozen other people who have
inquired these past weeks - that I knew the consultancy's name. After all,
such an unusual chief executive would *Knowledge for Action. Jossey-Bass,
San Francisco (ISBN 1-55542-519-4). Dollars 29.85.
surely have interesting things to say. But since the professor scrupulously
refrains from identifying the outfit, I'd settled for disappointment . . .
until the fax suddenly reeled out a message from the rare specimen himself.
He is 39-year-old Mark Fuller, and his consultancy is the Monitor Company
based in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He tells me it started in 1983, and over
the next three years grew to employ nearly 100 people. Meanwhile, however,
the distrustful politicking was blocking useful action to the extent that
the business was in danger of breaking apart.
Then came the decision to call in Chris Argyris and start the remedial
programme. And what is the result?
Today, Monitor has over 460 on its payroll, including 350 consultants. It
has three United States branches and others in Toronto, Tokyo, Seoul, Milan,
Munich, Madrid and London besides the European headquarters in Amsterdam.
The chief executive says US clients include 17 of the top 35 companies
listed by Fortune, and comparably substantial organisations in other lands.
'So getting to grips with our political difficulties looks to have paid
off,' he adds.
Since the task must have sharpened his consultant's eye for similar
snake-pits elsewhere, does he think that the problems which bedevil
organisations are more often political than of the financial or other
technical kinds?
'In most cases I see, not only are the majority of the problems political,
but the proportion is growing. Companies have greater technical resources
than they had in 1983 - spreadsheets, for one example. But that kind of
expertise can't help if there are taboos on sharing or even collecting
certain information, or when the truth dare not be told.'
Does he agree with Chris Argyris that the prime cause of such troubles is,
not anything anyone does badly, but a polished skill virtually all of us
begin acquiring before we can walk?
(The professor thinks the root is the defensive tactic of countering
personal threats by first bypassing the problem, then covering up the
by-pass, covering up the cover-up and so on. Hence the law of organisational
stupidity named after him, Argyris's Archetype, which states: The more
threatening a problem to those responsible for solving it, the deeper it
will become ingrained under ramifying layers of camouflage.)
'For the most part, yes,' Mark Fuller says. 'The root is defensive
manoeuvres by individuals, although the trouble doesn't always start in the
top ranks as it did with us. But when it does, it sure as hell cascades
downwards, spreading and intertwining as it goes.'
When Monitor's consultants see a client concern is stricken by politicking,
how safe do they feel in saying as much to its chiefs? After all, the top
bosses may well owe their own positions to playing the power game better
than more technically capable people below.
'Well, that might be so - and the only reason they're offering us an
assignment could be that they want a report that helps their play. But in
that case, it would soon be clear to both them and us that we wouldn't get
along. If we're going to be able to help clients, we must be free to tell
the truth.'
There are, however, more and less useful ways of telling it, he adds. One of
the lessons Monitor has learned from Chris Argyris is that people's
self-protective manoeuvring can only be made worse by talking to them in a
way that makes them feel more threatened than they were in the first place.
Discussions must be 'crafted' to avoid triggering defensive reflexes.
'So long as that's done,' Mr Fuller says, 'we find clients are more and more
ready to face up to what's really stopping them from being effective. For
one thing, they'll usually have tried out technical prescriptions like total
quality and so on, and found they don't work. For another, these days there
are fewer safe havens where businesses snarled up by power games can
survive.
'Of course, that doesn't apply in the not-for-profit sector, where they're
still flourishing - and I don't simply mean government organisations.
Universities, for example, are as bad as any.'
Nor would he except the schools of management. Although he has lost the
close knowledge of them he had as a student and tutor at Harvard Business
School, they strike him as paying scant heed to political problems as
opposed to the technical sort.
'Mind you, universities aren't geared to teaching the lessons we've had to
learn. The only way is by concentrated experience which is evilly
frustrating because, try as you might to get rid of them, the defensive
routines keep reasserting themselves. There's so much deep habit to be
unlearned before you can start learning to act differently. Even though it's
seven years since we called in Chris Argyris, we're still short of a clean
bill of health.
'But there's one thing I can assure you. Nobody who had changed to the new
way of working would ever want to go back to the old one.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930630

