FT933-12796

FT  22 JUL 93 / Lonrho to get Pounds 109m from sale to Krupp


   By ANDREW BOLGER


LONRHO, the international trading group, will receive DM282.5m (Pounds
109.4m) for its 50 per cent stake in the trading company which it owns
jointly with Krupp-Hoesch, the recently merged German steel and engineering
group.
The German group has agreed to buy out the stake which Lonrho acquired from
Krupp in 1988 for DM200m. Shares in Lonrho rose 1 1/2 p to close at 130 1/2
p after it announced the deal, which will cut the UK group's gearing from 35
to 27 per cent.
Mr Dieter Bock, Lonrho's joint chief executive, said no more significant
disposals were planned. The group has reduced its debt from more than Pounds
1bn a year ago to about Pounds 480m by selling property in Germany and its
newspapers and Volkswagen/Audi sales operation in the UK.
Lonrho had been approached by Krupp-Hoesch, formed last year by the merger
of Germany's second and third-largest steel producers. Mr Bock said the
enlarged group wanted to expand the trading arm, which would have required a
big injection of capital from Lonrho to maintain its stake - 'basically, it
was worth more to them than to us'.
Although Mr Bock would like to focus Lonrho on three main business areas -
mining, hotels and agriculture - he said the group would continue to be
involved in trading activities such as motors - particularly in Africa,
where there was scope for joint ventures.
Lonrho's shares fell to a low of 59p last year after the group announced the
controversial sale of a stake in its Metropole Hotels group to the Libyan
government.
Mr Bock acquired 18.8 per cent of the company after paying Mr Tiny Roland,
Lonrho's chief executive and driving force, a premium 115p per share for
half of his 15 per cent stake in December, and then supporting a rights
issue. Mr Bock, a property developer and hotel owner, was confident he would
be able to announce the appointment of two or three non-executive directors
by the end of the year.
Asked about the source of his money, he said simply: 'My businesses.' He
controls private companies registered in Germany and the Netherlands, and
said he was well known to Deutsche Bank, the German parent of Morgan
Grenfell, the London merchant bank.
He is working almost full-time on Lonrho business, but has not yet been
paid. The new non-executives would decide his salary. 'I can't work forever
without a salary, but I am receiving dividends and I can wait.'

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930722

