FT932-230

FT  30 JUN 93 / Preparing China for life without Deng: Moves to preserve the
legacy and the past of the ageing 'emperor'


   By TONY WALKER


IT WAS inadvertent, but it was a reminder nevertheless of one man's
mortality and the great efforts to preserve his legacy as the moment of
reckoning approaches. The official China Daily newspaper, in an article
hailing the 'historic' contributions to the revolution made by Mr Deng
Xiaoping, referred to the ageing and ailing supreme leader in the past
tense.
Thus, Mr Deng 'was an outstanding representative and brilliant model of
safeguarding, adhering to and developing Marxism, Leninism and Mao Zedong
thought'.
It is unlikely that China Daily's grammatical faux pas would have been
brought to Mr Deng's attention; but as the old man's 89th birthday in August
approaches, so do efforts intensify to tidy up the historical record in the
certain knowledge that challenges lie ahead.
In the process of glorifying Mr Deng's theories - Mr Deng has 'theories'
while Mao had 'thoughts' - Chinese propagandists have excelled themselves,
using language reminiscent of another era. Thus, the official Shanghai
newspaper Wen Hui Bao told its readers the other day that 'practice had
shown that Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory is the most precious, spiritual
wealth of our party and country'.
It described Mr Deng as a 'glorious paragon', and said that he had 'made a
great, historical contribution to the establishment of the theory of
socialism with Chinese characteristics'.
Ever since Mr Deng's clever phrase designed to avoid conflict with socialist
orthodoxy was woven into the Communist party's constitution at its 14th
Congress last October, efforts have been accelerating to try to ensure that
the Deng legacy will endure and his heirs afforded some protection in a
difficult phase.
The Communist party itself faces enormous challenges, and perhaps a threat
to its very existence, in managing China's transition to a market economy.
In the process central control is being loosened in almost every way.
In the past few weeks efforts to promote Mr Deng's theories have built up to
something of a climax with a heavyweight symposium in Shanghai, accompanied
by blanket media coverage. Final editing is also well advanced of the
Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping 1983'92. The earlier selected works 1975-82
was published in 1983.
All this suggests that not only are Mr Deng and his supporters anxious to
impress their version of history on the party and the country while the old
man retains his faculties, it may also indicate that his health is indeed
deteriorating more quickly than has been admitted; although Chinese leaders
have long defied predictions of their imminent demise.
Mr Deng has been variously reported to be suffering from throat cancer,
which would explain his inability to utter more than a few and virtually
unintelligible hoarse sentences in public; from Parkinson's disease, hence
his unsteady hands; from the effects of a stroke which caused a bad fall
when he was visiting Shanghai in January; or simply from debilitating old
age complicated by heavy smoking.
Whatever the truth, it is clear he is not all that far from an appointment
with Karl Marx - his favourite euphemism for death - and has therefore
become more than usually preoccupied with how others might view his record.
Indeed, Mr Deng is said to have paid close attention to the editing of his
selected works and to have intervened to ensure that no mention was made of
his role in decisions which led to the 1989 massacre of students in
Tiananmen Square and other unfortunate episodes from the past.
Mr Deng is not about to arm revisionist historians with incriminating
material that might facilitate negative judgment of his record. The official
version of his theories, enshrined in numerous weighty volumes, including a
six-volume, 1.8m-word Almanac on Deng Xiaoping's Works, Thoughts and Life
published recently, guards against expected assaults on his reputation and
record.
But for the moment Mr Deng cannot complain. No hint of criticism has
appeared anywhere. A small publishing industry has been constructed to
ensure that volumes of his ideas fill libraries throughout the country with
titles such as Creativity and Timeliness of Deng Xiaoping's Theories; never
mind that the pragmatic Mr Deng has been a man of action rather than words.
Perhaps no other event in Mr Deng's recent past has received quite so much
attention as his nanxun, or 'imperial tour', of the south in January 1992 in
which he urged quicker economic reform with the phrase 'do it faster'. This
earthy instruction galvanised a nation and helped produce the astonishing
rates of economic growth witnessed in the past year. The nanxun may well
come to be regarded as his crowning achievement.
Mr Deng has said or written little publicly in the past few years, but when
he does speak, or has views attributed to him, it underlines his immense
preoccupation with the post-Deng era, and the danger of old controversies
and feuds resurfacing which might cause his legacy to unravel.
According to the Chinese-affiliated journal The Mirror, published in Hong
Kong, Mr Deng has urged his colleagues to avoid ideological conflict and to
concentrate their efforts on promoting economic reform.
'Whoever sows seeds of dissension over ideological matters will be shoved
aside,' he was quoted as saying. The problem for Mr Deng and his heir is
that this 'shoving aside' will prove infinitely more difficult to effect
from the grave.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930630

