FT934-11443

FT  01 NOV 93 / Banking for the people down Mexico way: Democracy in the
planned Nafta bank


   By NANCY DUNNE


PROPOSALS for a North American Development Bank, endorsed last week by the
Clinton Administration, will create an institution with 'the most
transparent and democratic structure in the history of development banking,'
according to Mr Raul Hinojosa, who helped draft the plan.
The bank, intended to ease US-Mexican problems stemming from the North
American Free Trade Agreement, seeks to 'avoid all the problems of the
marble palaces' which house other development banks by sharing building
space with the Inter-American Development Bank. To curb any expansive new
bureaucracy, it will also get technical aid from the IADB.
Nadbank will not only finance environmental and infrastructure projects but
also fund enterprises in communities hit hard by Nafta. The Clinton
Administration can argue that without Nafta, there will be no lending
institution to aid towns whose factories have moved to Mexico.
The blueprint for Nadbank gives labour, environmentalists, and church and
civic groups an unprecedented voice in the institution's affairs. Along with
business and government representatives, they will be appointed to serve on
the bank's advisory and review committee 'to provide input and guidelines at
all stages of the loan granting process.'
The US and Mexican governments each will appoint three representatives to
the bank's board. But they will also have to deal with an ombudsman,
appointed by the advisory committee, to provide independent inspection of
Nadbank's operations. Conservatives are likely to view with distaste adding
'another level of bureaucracy' to involve the bank's clients. Mr Hinojosa
acknowledges that democratisation may slow operations but 'it will be well
worth it, if it means providing more effective proposals from grassroots up
rather than top down.'
A visiting scholar this year at the IADB, Mr Hinojosa has worked on the
Nadbank blueprint for two years with two economics professors from the
University of California at Berkeley, Mr Sherman Robinson, now on the
Council of Economic Advisers, and Mr Albert Fishlow. All three toiled in the
Clinton campaign and transition team, determined to promote 'an alternative
vision of what Nafta should be about,' said Mr Hinojosa.
Like other development banks, Nadbank will undertake a leveraging of its
resources far beyond its paid-in capital - Dollars 225m each for Mexico and
the US. Callable capital - that which each country promises to provide on
demand - will be Dollars 2.55bn.
Up to Dollars 6.5bn in funding will also come from other US government
programmes such as the Small Business Administration and Farmers Home
Administration. Other funds will come from the World Bank (Dollars 1.8bn),
the Mexican government (Dollars 2.2bn) and the Inter-American Development
Bank (Dollars 200m). More will come from issuing bonds on the capital
market, so that total project financing with private leveraging is expected
to be Dollars 20bn or more.
The bank's initial priority will be financing environmental and development
projects along the border. But two other facilities will provide up to
Dollars 200m each to non-border communities in Mexico and the US.
Announcement of Nadbank was applauded by pro-Nafta environmental groups. Mr
Peter Berle, president of the National Audubon Society, said it would be
'more flexible and its mission broader in scope' than a border clean-up
fund, originally proposed by the Administration.
'With Nadbank not only will water infrastructure projects be funded but
important issues such as housing, displacement of agricultural workers and
general readjustment funding will now be addressed,' he said.
The Administration's endorsement of Nadbank was particularly a triumph for
California Congressman Esteban Torres, but it was a painful victory. He and
other Hispanic leaders had been pushing the concept for months as part of
the price for their support of Nafta. When the deal was done, he received a
visit from a large group of old friends in the labour movement, who
beseeched him not to endorse Nafta.
But Mr Torres also felt the pull of his Hispanic-based constituency, which
is torn over Nafta between job loss worries and a pride that Americans and
Mexicans have sat down to the bargaining table and cut a deal as equals.
'This new-found respect has got to help improve the image and prestige of
Hispanic Americans,' said Mr Raul Yzaguirre, president of the national
council of La Raza, the nation's largest Hispanic organisation and one of
the three Hispanic groups to endorse Nafta last week.
Mr Yzaguirre spoke of the pact's potential for turning his community's
liabilities into assets. 'For perhaps the first time in my lifetime, being
bilingual in Spanish and English will be an advantage, rather than a
disadvantage in the labour market and in the corporate boardroom.'
Nadbank was expected to bring a number of the 18-member Hispanic caucus to
the Nafta side in the House, but last week it was Mr Torres alone who
announced his support. The others could be holding out for more
Administration favours, as Nafta supporters say, or they may find that even
their dream development bank is not worth the risk of losing their union
friends.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931101

