FT934-10108

FT  06 NOV 93 / Arts: Listen to Dance Umbrella - Sophie Constanti finds out
all you want to know about bondage, S&M and high camp


   By SOPHIE CONSTANTI


'THERE ARE,' confesses Nigel Charnock, in Original Sin, 'very few things
I'll go down on my knees for - and organised religion is not one of them.'
Original Sin, a 90 minute double-act for Charnock and the equally candid,
verbose, and thrustful Liz Brailsford, is about men, women and eternal
misunderstanding between the sexes: 'You asked for new men. We're making
them,' barks Charnock. But most of all it is about sex. And like at least
half a dozen shows in this year's Dance Umbrella festival (which ends
tomorrow), it is, in parts, all talk.
Charnock is blond (but no bombshell), skinny (but frighteningly strong) and
since his last solo show Resurrection, has taken to playing the same manic
screwball character in every production. His hyper active model of neurosis
is reminiscent of Leonard Rossiter's Rigsby, all indignant hands-on hips
posturing and nonstop jabbering; a man who nods and winks at his own
perversity and lewdness and he finds the perfect outlet for his pent-up
frustrations in a brand of dance theatre which is largely based on personal
revelation ('I'm not firm enough, or infirm enough,') and obscene requests
('I want to know you in the Biblical sense').
As a solo mover, Charnock is an incurable masochist - a trait which has
coloured his dancing since his earliest performances with DV8 together with
Physical Theatre. In Original Sin he repeatedly crashes to the ground and
hoists himself up again, he hobbles forward on the bare knuckles of his toes
and, at the end of the work, writhes naked and spent on a wet floor. Given a
partner he veers towards choreographed exercises in S&M; basic bondage (and
gagging), prolonged physical and emotional abuse. Together - and apart - he
and Brailsford sustain the violent intensity of pace and punch, and
encourage an uneasy voyeurism in their audience. We end up climbing into bed
with the fatally mismatched couple in order to monitor a comically
disastrous sex therapy session in which the endless catalogue of fantasies,
hang-ups, needs and feelings of guilt has the effect of paralysing rather
than facilitating both verbal and sexual communication.
Original Sin has some blissfully funny moments and is all the more
entertaining for its knowing and merciless stabs at political correctness.
But while both Brailsford and Charnock - who can act and sing as well as he
moves - have a flamboyant, commanding stage presence, you are, ultimately,
left with the feeling that this show is little more than a collection of
witty one-liners, 'Bisexuals have the best of both worlds and still complain
about the choice,' tinged with a cynical, throwaway agitprop of the 1990s.
The work of David Rousseve, an African-American dancer and choreographer, is
also dominated by personalised texts. But unlike Charnock, who does not so
much tell stories as assault you with his dirty sexual laundry, Rousseve is
a beguiling raconteur. In Colored Children Flyin' By, an autobiographical
jigsaw which has evolved over the last four or five years, Rousseve delivers
a series of amusing, poignant and richly detailed monologues. These tell
mainly of the hardship and poverty suffered by his Creole, cotton picking
grandmother and of his own experiences on the first day of term at an
integrated school where, blowing gently against the head of the boy seated
in front of him, he discovered that white people's hair moves.
Rousseve's choreography for his Afro American company (four women, one man)
is the weakest link. As if straining to find an organic connection between
spoken material and movement, he seems afraid to let the dance possess its
own voice. Duets composed, give and take gestures, flat, one dimensional
rhythmic movement for the larger group; the lazinesss of Rousseve's
choreographic voice sits in stark contrast to the invention, rigour and
luminosity of his storytelling. And only gospel singer BJ Crosby, who dons
butterfly spectacles, wig and dressing gown to play the role of Rousseve's
weary old grandmother, exudes the same joyous generosity of spirit as
Rousseve himself as she sheds her costume for a show stopping rendition of
Amazing Grace.
Like Nigel Charnock, Matthew Hawkins first appears on the independent dance
scene during the early 1980s. However, Hawkins - a tall, strikingly
androgynous figure - occupies a stage world in which there is no room for
the uncontrolled neurosis and self destructive physicality of Charnock's
domain. 'There's no such thing as love - there's only obsession,' says
Charnock in Original Sin. But Hawkins proves otherwise, Marking the
centenary of Tchaikovsky's death, he goes down on his knees for the composer
and pays homage to music which, he states, is full of love. In Fresh Dances
For the Late Tchaikovsky, Hawkins and his troupe of four dancers are joined
by Rose English (majestic and tentative by turns) and Fenella Fielding (all
husky voice and heaving bosom as she recites poetry which Tchaikovsky set to
music). No one in this production - save the members of the Endymion
Ensemble - would have looked out of place on top of a Christmas tree.
Magnificent 'wearable art' costumes, luxurious swathes of fabric and
exquisite washes of light ravish the eye. But within this sumptuous setting,
Hawkins' choreography registers as cold, detached and directionless. As
Tchaikovsky's Souvenir de Florence permeates and transforms the Hackney
Empire, the performers are followed rather than transported by their
glorious visual and aural environment. Only Hawkins' refined sense of high
camp (as a dancer) and his predilection for skewed asymmetry and speed (as a
choreographer) prevent these so-called Fresh Dances from looking like a set
of pedantic, recidivist classroom sequences executed in front of a mirror.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931106

