FT933-9884

FT  06 AUG 93 / London Stock Exchange: Logica bid denied


   By PETER JOHN, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and ZHANG TINGTING


Strong rumours that Cray Electronics was about to launch a hostile bid for
Logica brought a swift denial from Cray's chairman, who des-cribed the talk
as 'rubbish'. Electronics specialists said they believed the two groups may
have been involved in preliminary merger discussions earlier this year which
were subsequently broken off - prompting speculation that Cray may return as
a predator.
Cray recently reported a jump in profits from Pounds 2.35m to Pounds 29m.
Logica was also in the news after two of its directors sold a total of
200,000 shares in the company last weekend. Cray shares slipped 3 1/2 to 149
1/2 p. Logica rose 5 to 246p.
Conglomerate Hanson was strong as heavy traded options buying sparked
renewed rumours that the board might be preparing asset disposals. Seasoned
Hanson analysts downplayed the talk. The shares gained 4 at 242p with 8.9m
traded, and a further 4m equivalent in the options market.
BAT Industries, the tobacco and insurance conglomerate, declined 8 to 441p
after rival tobacco group Philip Morris backed off from a planned price
increase on its discount brand cigarettes. Dealers said an overnight trade
of 2m shares at below 440p a share also contributed to the fall.
Merchant banks performed well after strong results from Kleinwort Benson,
which reported first-half profits nearly doubled at Pounds 42.2m. Kleinwort
climbed 25 to 485p while SG Warburg moved ahead 10 to 774p and Schroders 43
to 1078p.
Better than expected interim results from Reed Elsevier pushed Reed
International forward 15 to a high for the day of 679p. But the share price
subsequently tumbled to close a net 4 off at 660p on market worries over the
group's current trading conditions and disappointment at the lack of advance
purchases of Official Airline Guides.
Hoare Govett said the market overreacted to the group's caution on trading
conditions and believed sentiment towards the group would improve when its
main markets in the US and UK picked up by the end of the year.
News International appreciated 6 to 244p on its newly acquired stake in Star
TV.
Printing group Hunterprint, which yesterday confirmed its contract with
Associated Newspapers to print 66 per cent of a new weekly supplement for
the Mail on Sunday from October, saw its shares climb a further 4 to 49p.
The two-way pull in the leisure sector showed no signs of abating as
investors tussled between the leading hoteliers, Forte and Ladbroke.
Turnover was down from the recent high levels, although the respective 2.3m
and 3.3m shares traded were still above average. Yesterday, dealers said UBS
was recommending Forte and SG Warburg was backing Ladbroke. Forte edged up a
penny to 217p and the latter closed 2 firmer at 200p.
Among drinks stocks, Invergordon Distillers remained the centre of attention
as the vague bid talk continued. With results due shortly, market talk is
focusing on the 41.2 per cent stake still held by its former suitor, Whyte &
Mackay, and whether it will rebid. The shares ended 6 higher at 285p.
Price war worries overhung the food retailers in the wake of the launch this
week of Tesco's latest promotion. Credit Lyonnais Laing took the opportunity
to issue a 'buy' note on the supermarket group, arguing that the launch of
the new 'Value' range is another example of Tesco management attempting to
improve its competitiveness.
Mr Neil Currie at Credit Lyonnais said: 'Tesco is refocusing on the
mass-market proportion of its customer base. We believe there is little
downside risk to the shares but plenty of potential upside.' The shares
nudged a half-penny forward to 209p.
Food manufacturing shares made further gains as worries over brand values
faded and investors looked to buy following the sector's recent
underperformance. Among those catching up, Associated British Foods improved
3 to 486p, Cadbury-Schweppes 2 to 476p and Unigate 10 to 382p. Among second
liners, Dalepak rose 9 to 188p, Dalgety 3 to 464p and Associated Fisheries 5
to 129p.
Stores were in demand, with Boots responding again to Wednesday's 'buy' note
from SG Warburg and adding 4 at 478p. A squeeze in Dixons left the stock 4
ahead at 227p. Next was buoyed by further talk of a link with GUS and other
gossip that sales were up around 13 per cent. The shares put on 4 at 197 1/2
p, their level of nearly four years ago.
Motor components group GKN survived a number of negative broker notes
yesterday and the shares hardened a penny to 490p. NatWest Securities and
Nikko both pointed out that the group's trading was threatened by its
geographical spread, which leaves it vulnerable to the economic downturn in
Europe.
Good traffic figures from British Airways, published on Wednesday, helped
the stock pick up 2 to 341p. The shares had fallen on worries over the
decline in the load factor, but yesterday Panmure Gordon and NatWest were
both pointing to the growth in the premium traffic.
Other statistics, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930806

