FT931-4106

FT  12 MAR 93 / Arts: Composers in Cambridge - Concerts


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


This week the BBC Philharmonic has forsaken its home on Manchester to take
up residence in Cambridgeshire. With assistance from the Eastern Orchestral
Board and Cambridgeshire County Council, the orchestra is visiting schools
and hospitals throughout the county to give workshops and informal concerts,
as well as presenting a series of public concerts in Cambridge itself. The
first of those on Tuesday in the Concert Hall of the University Music School
had a local flavour; Matthias Bamert conducted a programme of works by four
university composers - the professor of music, Alexander Goehr, his
departmental colleagues Hugh Wood and Robin Holloway, and the 21-year-old
Thomas Ades, who was an undergraduate at King's College until last June.
Such a concert would have been highly unlikely two decades ago; prospective
composers who sought a university education in the late 1960s were much more
likely to opt for Birmingham, York or Sussex rather than Oxbridge, where
contemporary music was a clandestine activity, to be indulged outside the
academic curriculum. But since Goehr's appointment to the Cambridge chair in
1976, the whole outlook of the department has changed radically; by
attracting composers of the calibre of Wood and Holloway to lecture there,
the position of the university in British musical life has been immeasurably
enhanced. Which need not imply that Goehr has gone out to create a
'Cambridge school' after his own image, following strict doctrinaire lines,
far from it; as this concert demonstrated, he and Wood may remain good
Schoenbergians at heart, but Holloway as always is very much his own
infuriatingly unclassifiable man, while the sample of Ades's music suggested
another lively and eclectic spirit.
Ades's 12-minute Chamber Symphony, written two years ago, was certainly hard
to pin down. It compresses four movements into one following the Schoenberg
model, but then the parallels fail; the work propels itself on a series of
jazz rhythms and riffs, with quickfire changes of perspective, tempo and
tone colour. The piano used is a prepared one, an accordion insinuates
itself towards the end; there are fugitive quotations (including Beethoven's
Lebewohl motif) hinting at an undisclosed programme. Not everything cohered,
but Bamert's performance seemed rather strait-laced and a conductor more
willing to go with the rhythms and loosen up the phrasing might well bring
it into sharper focus.
*****
The remainder of the programme was more or less familiar. Tasmin Little was
the marvellously eloquent soloist in Wood's very fine Violin Concerto from
1972, while Goehr's Deux Etudes, sumptuous explorations of orchestral
sonority and texture from 1981 remained to my ears at least as baffling and
uncommunicative as ever. Holloway's Diptych, a pair of detachable movements
from his famously garrulous 1974 symphonic poem Domination of Black ended
the concert in a splendidly larger-than-life way, producing a density of
sound (reinforced with Wagner tubas) that was overwhelming in such a
relatively confined space.
On Wednesday in the Festival Hall Peter Maxwell Davies conducted the Royal
Philharmonic Orchestra in his own Worldes Blis, the massive orchestral study
from 1969 which created a minor furore at its premiere at the Proms that
year, and which now may be seen as the climax of the first phase of Davies's
development. It is still a daunting challenge for the orchestra as much as
audience, but wears wonderfully well; not a note is wasted in its 40-minute
span, and the ineffably slow tread of much of its development is compelling
to follow.
If the orchestration now seems rather utilitarian, especially against the
luminous colours of Davies's later Orkney-inspired scores, the musical
argument, so taut and uncompromising (and in the light of his subsequent
development so discriminating) remains thrilling. The recording that Davies
and the RPO are about make for Collins Classics is eagerly awaited.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930312

