FT934-8604

FT  15 NOV 93 / Japan details reprocessing commitment


   By DAVID LASCELLES and KENNETH GOODING


JAPAN WILL receive about 85 tonnes of plutonium from reprocessed nuclear
fuel by the year 2010, the official responsible for the country's plutonium
recycling policy says.
Mr Yasutaka Moriguchi, the director of the nuclear fuel division of Japan's
atomic energy bureau, says, however, that plans have been made to consume
all this quantity, including shipments from Thorp, the UK reprocessing
facility which has long-term contracts to handle Japan's waste nuclear fuel.
In a letter to the FT Mr Moriguchi says today that 10-20 tonnes will be used
for research and development of fast-breeder reactors, and about 10 tonnes
for research and development for advanced thermal reactors. A further 50
tonnes will be used to make fuel for light-water reactors.
Mr Moriguchi says Japan's plans for plutonium have slipped because of delays
in the schedule to build its own reprocessing plant and develop fast-breeder
reactors. This has also reduced both the demand and supply of plutonium.
But, he says, 'the prospect that Japan will have no surplus of plutonium
including that from Thorp is strictly maintained'.
Japan has two options to deal with the plutonium that is produced as part of
the spent fuel from its existing reactors, Mr Moriguchi says. It can either
use it to make more fuel, or dispose of it. Japan believes that the
environmental impact of reprocessing it will be smaller, which is why it has
a policy of using plutonium as a fuel for nuclear reactors.
Mr Moriguchi is one of a number of senior Japanese officials who have
responded to a call by a group of Japanese MPs for a renegotiation of
Japan's reprocessing contracts with British Nuclear Fuels, the owner of
Thorp.
Their interventions come as the UK government is conducting a consultation
on whether to give the go-ahead for the start-up of Thorp, which cost Pounds
2.8bn to build and has a number of long-term contracts with foreign nuclear
utilities. Japan would be the largest foreign customer of Thorp if it came
into operation.
The two biggest domestic customers of Thorp had serious doubts about the
project in the 1980s and argued against reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel
in favour of storage, according to a report by BBC Television's Panorama to
be shown tonight.
The programme also reveals that British Nuclear Fuels has been dismantling
fuel since the late 1980s and suggests this might mean there is no
alternative but to make Thorp operational. BNF so far has dismantled 90 per
cent of the 1,800 tonnes of British spent fuel, removing its outer casing
and storing it in water, Panorama adds. It claims that the Central
Electricity Generating Board, Thorp's biggest customer, and Scottish
Nuclear, its second-biggest, both believed that storage was a better
solution than reprocessing spent fuel but could not withdraw support from
Thorp for 'political reasons'.
Letters, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931115

