FT932-13290

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (6): Contracting
out? There are new rules, and still more to come - To encourage employees to
stay out of Serps, the government plans to switch from the present flat-rate
rebate to an age-related system / Pensions


   By ERIC SHORT


NEW TERMS for contracting out of the State Earnings-related Pension Scheme
(Serps) came into effect earlier this month.
People who are contracted out, and also their employers, receive a rebate in
their National Insurance contributions, either in the form of a lower
contribution payment if the individual is a member of an occupational
final-salary scheme, or payment of an amount equal to the combined rebate
into an Appropriate Personal Pension (APP) or a Company Money Purchase
Pension (Comp) scheme.
Under the new terms, the combined rebate has been reduced from 5.8 per cent
to 4.8 per cent of a person's earnings between Pounds 56 and Pounds 420 a
week (Pounds 2,912 and Pounds 21,840 a year).
In addition, an incentive payment of 1 per cent of this earnings band will
be made to everyone aged 30 or over who has contracted out of Serps through
an APP, but not to people who have contracted out through a Comp scheme. The
previous incentive payment of 2 per cent of earnings applied to both APPs
and Comps.
Employees who contracted out of Serps in 1988 or later, on what were then
very favourable terms, now need to consider whether to continue to contract
out under less favourable terms or to rejoin Serps.
Indeed, those with APPs should, by now, have been contacted either by the
intermediary who arranged the contract or by the life company which issued
the contract, acting on behalf of the intermediary, to remind them of the
position and, if required, to arrange a review.
Lautro and Fimbra, the self-regulatory organisations, have issued guidance
notes to their members on how to advise clients about contracting out. They
require their members (company representatives and independent financial
advisers respectively) first to review the situation of each member, and
then to take account of certain factors in addition to age and sex.
In 1988, under the old terms, it was relatively straightforward for
intermediaries to advise clients on contracting out. If they were below the
pivotal age (then, around 47 for men and 42 for women) it was financially
advantageous to contract out; otherwise it was preferable to remain in
Serps.
Under the new terms, it is not so simple. Factors listed by Lautro and
Fimbra include:
Earnings. It is not generally advisable to contract out employees on low
earnings.
Career Prospects. Employees with good prospects may be better off out of
Serps, while those with limited prospects should stay in.
Existing pension provision, or opportunities for a company pension. Use
these facilities.
Employee's tax position. The basic tax credit on the employee's rebate is
invested in the personal pension, while higher-rate tax can be reclaimed.
There is no tax credit or relief on NI contributions paid by the employee.
Loss of rights to Serps benefits. Serps provides a guaranteed pension in
terms of an employee's earnings, plus spouse's benefits. There are no such
guarantees with a personal pension.
However, the most important factor is the proposed change from the present
flat-rate rebate to an age-related system. Miss Ann Widdecombe, junior
pensions minister, has confirmed that this will happen in 1996, and a White
Paper is imminent.
The NI rebate for a particular year represents the cost of providing, on a
personal accumulation basis, the Serps benefit for an employee for that year
on certain earnings growth, investment and annuity assumptions. Since the
Serps benefit is fixed in terms of the employee's earnings for the year, the
cost of providing that benefit increases as the employee nears state pension
age.
Thus the rebates on an age-related system start at a low rate for young
employees and increase steadily with their age. The table shows the age-
(and sex-) related rebate scale published by the Government Actuary that
would currently apply - though the new system will be based solely on the
period to state pension age, with no separate scales for men and women.
Until now, the rebate has been an average figure based on all employees. As
such, younger employees qualified for a higher rebate than was required to
provide the Serps benefit, while older employees received less - hence, it
was financially favourable for younger employees to contract out of Serps
and for older employees to rejoin or stay in.
If the assumptions used in obtaining an age-related rebate are financially
neutral, then it should be immaterial whether an employee, of whatever age,
stays in or opts out of Serps.
If employees consider that the life company can achieve a higher investment
return than assumed in the rebate calculations, they will be better off
contracting out. On the other hand, if they prefer their pension to be
guaranteed, they would be better off in Serps.
It is difficult to see how intermediaries can give best advice to clients
this year on contracting out without taking 1996 into account. Best advice
now may not be best advice then.
It would certainly not be in the client's interest, having contracted out in
1988, to go back into Serps in 1993 only to come out again in 1996 - if only
because of the charges incurred each time.
It would appear that the way out of this impasse is for intermediaries to
explain the overall situation; then, for clients, if they prefer personal
pensions to Serps, for whatever reason, to remain contracted out.
Indeed, Miss Widdecombe is quite frank about the reason for switching to an
age-related rebate system - to keep employees contracted out.
However, from 1996 onwards it could well be that intermediaries will
concentrate on older employees, with a higher rebate applied to higher
earnings, and ignore younger employees where the rebate will be small - a
reversal of the present situation.
 --------------------------------------------------
         Age-related rate (%) 1993-96
 --------------------------------------------------
Age       Men    Women
 --------------------------------------------------
16-19     1.9      2.7
20-24     2.1      2.9
25-29     2.3      3.2
30-34     2.5      3.5
35-39     3.0      4.3
40-44     3.7      5.3
50-54     5.8      9.0
55-59     7.7     11.9
60-64    10.2        -
 --------------------------------------------------
Source: Government Actuary
 --------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930423

