FT932-3380

FT  15 JUN 93 / Slow in hitting justice jackpot: The US president still
seems indecisive and politically irresolute


   By JUREK MARTIN


IT took President Bill Clinton three pulls at the lever before hitting the
attorney-general jackpot with Ms Janet Reno. Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg may
turn out to be a splendid new Supreme Court justice, but the process by
which she was selected has done nothing for the president's - and the White
House staff's - reputation for being indecisive and politically irresolute.
This indictment against both the president and his people is already the
talk of Washington, and explains Mr Clinton's anger with the press.
The salient charges include:
Vacillation. It took the administration three months to find a replacement
for Justice Byron White, who had announced in March he would retire at the
end of the court term this summer so that a replacement could be confirmed
by the Senate before the recess and installed on the bench by September.
This timetable is now in doubt.
By contrast, presidents Reagan and Bush took less than a week to announce
nominations to court vacancies and did not demand - as Mr Clinton does,
almost to obsession - personal knowledge of candidates. Even when both
Republican presidents lost nominees - Mr Robert Bork and Mr Douglas Ginsburg
 -replacements were put forward within days.
Poor staff work: Judge Stephen Breyer of Massachusetts, the favourite until
Sunday, is reported to have told Mr Bernard Nussbaum, White House legal
counsel, five weeks ago he had a problem with social security payments for a
domestic employee. Yet this only surfaced over the weekend after the judge,
a White House lunch guest last Friday, had been asked to stay in Washington,
presumably to await announcement of his nomination.
Even then, he was dropped after several prominent senators - including Mr
Robert Dole, Republican leader, and Senator Joseph Biden, chairman of the
judiciary committee - had said he should be confirmed, not least because new
ground rules, worked out by the committee and the White House, allowed for
'unintentional oversight', which seems the worst he was guilty of.
Even some leading advocates of women's rights, distressed over the
circumstances that undid Ms Zoe Baird and Judge Kimba Wood as prospective
attorneys-general, pointed to qualitative differences between his domestic
affairs and those of the two women.
Callousness. If Judge Breyer was led up the garden path of expectation, so
was Mr Bruce Babbitt, interior secretary, rated favourite a week ago. He had
to endure the re-emergence of old - never substantiated - claims that he had
connections to organised crime.
Political resolution: It baffled even some of Mr Clinton's friends when Mr
Babbitt's name was so freely mentioned, as he is widely considered a tower
of strength in the cabinet, particularly admired by liberals and
environmentalists. A confirmation battle to replace him at the interior
department seemed needless.
The president's desire to know his most important nominees personally may be
understandable. But he deserted an old friend, Ms Lani Guinier, when her
nomination to the civil rights section at the Justice Department came under
fire and, in dropping Mr Babbitt and Judge Breyer, Mr Clinton has again left
the impression that he bends before critical winds. This also makes him
enemies: Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, a sponsor of Judge Breyer,
is not pleased.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930615

