FT932-6544

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (10): Delays on mining deals - Problems in
exploiting Russia's vast resources


   By LEYLA BOULTON


IT HAS been a turbulent year for trying to mine Russia's huge wealth of
precious metals, stones, and non-ferrous metals.
For foreign companies, which have been told their investment is crucial to
help Russia switch to a market economy, it has been a time of mouth-watering
opportunity and frustration.
Despite an abundance of possibilities, virtually no western company can yet
claim to have struck a deal because of the state's slow progress in
establishing a clear framework for foreign investment in this rich sector.
This is not to say there has been no progress. But the authorities are still
coming to grips with new legislation that provides for the tendering of all
new deposits and a western-style licensing system.
Meanwhile, fledgling Russian entrepreneurs have successfully lobbied for
support against foreign competition in developing the country's natural
resources.
One of these entrepreneurs is Mr Andrei Chuguevsky, who has deftly - some
would say deviously - combined economic nationalism with an acknowledged
need for western capital and expertise.
In January, he won Russia's first international mining tender - to develop
the giant Udokan copper deposit in eastern Siberia - in alliance with a Hong
Kong businessman called Mr Eddie Wong, and using advice from Fluor Daniel,
the San Francisco-based mining consultancy.
'We need technical experience and management skills from the west. We cannot
invent a business culture by ourselves in Russia,' says Mr Chuguyevsky, a
34-year-old rouble billionaire, who has so far made his money from the
get-rich-quick trading and export operations of most Russian entrepreneurs.
He claims the only reason the tender was won by the Udokan Mining Company,
in which he holds 35 per cent, was because he had studied the project for
three years compared to the six months available to western giants like
Australia's BHP and Britain's RTZ - 'otherwise I cannot compete with (a
company such as) BHP,' he says.
Another trump-card in enlisting sympathy from the authorities was his
alliance with a dozen industrial plants, which have traditionally depended
on defence orders that have now dried up, as suppliers of machinery for the
Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) project. The government has been unable to provide
much financial assistance to companies such as Uralmash, the engineering
giant being privatised, so was naturally attracted to the idea of helping
them help themselves.
But since his project was approved by the tender committee, Mr Chuguyevsky
has begun negotiating changes that would give him and Russian partners sole
control by buying out Mr Wong's 45 per cent stake. Mr Chuguyevsky also wants
to cancel a plan, devised by Mr Wong to help finance the deposit's
development by selling much of the copper concentrate to China for smelting
there. Under pressure from the Russian government, he now says that the
copper concentrate should be smelted in Russia, rather than be at the mercy
of a Chinese buyer.
Finally, it is far from clear that he will appoint Fluor Daniel project
manager as initially expected. He has approached BHP, as a potential
candidate for that role. Dismissing Mr Wong's arrangements for Allen & Co, a
private US investment bank, to raise some of the finance, Mr Chuguyevsky
wants to involve other banks and multilateral organisations like the World
Bank's International Finance Corporation which have been hard-pressed to
find viable projects in Russia's difficult environment climate.
ANOTHER problem in opening the door to Russia's mining wealth has been
innate Russian reluctance to let go of rich resources to foreigners and a
tendency to move the goal posts in the name of reform.
A pioneer in trying to establish a foreign foothold in Russia's previously
closed gold industry has been a small Australian company called Star
Technology System. But Star has become caught in a time warp, allying itself
with a local Siberian gold producer to develop the country's biggest hard
rock gold deposit known as Sukhoi Log (Dry Gulch) before the new mining
legislation appeared, and now having to adapt to its requirements. While it
is supported by the State Property Committee, whose main role is privatising
state-owned enterprises, the project has run into opposition from other
parts of the administration. Not surprisingly, Sukhoi Log is being eyed
hungrily by the likes of Mr Chuguyevsky (pictured below), who may try to use
the same sort of formula which brought him Udokan: a plea on behalf of
Russian entrepreneurship and Russian industry, and later, maybe enlisting a
big foreign company to help him.
The country's diamond mining industry has been somewhat insulated from the
fray, although Ashton Mining of Australia has signed a preliminary agreement
to mine diamonds in the western Russian region of Karelia.
But the bulk of Russia's present diamond mining and marketing activities are
run by a new joint stock company called Almazy Rossli-Sakha (ARS), with
shares and management split between federal authorities and Yakutia, the
eastern region which mines 99 per cent of Russian diamonds.
Spawned by the old state monopoly combining diamonds and gold,
state-controlled ARS is closed to outside investors, with shareholders
including the fantastically fortunate staff with 23 per cent, and 5 per cent
held by the Russian army's pension fund. ARS is also responsible for
managing a five-year Soviet-era agreement expiring in 1995 to channel 95 per
cent of rough diamond exports through De Beers' Central Selling
Organisation.
But despite its closed and monopolistic nature, ARS has been promoting
market-orientated changes of its own. These involve dispensing with the
State Committee for Precious Stones and Metals' wasteful system of
distributing diamonds to Russia's diamond-cutting factories.
ARS is also considering overhauling the methods used to check the prices
paid by De Beers for Russian diamonds under an agreement which has been
contested by some economic nationalists as contrary to Russian interests.
But rather than pushing for the right to sell more than five per cent
independently - as advocated by the State Committee - ARS favours putting
all diamond exports through the CSO and then monitoring those directly. With
time, it would also like to get rid of the State Committee, an organisation
with an unclear role to play in emerging market conditions.
In the meantime, ARS has provided one sort of solution to the chronic
conflict between federal and local authorities over how to share Russia's
mineral wealth. This involves, quite simply, buying off both local
authorities and workers with a huge piece of the cake.

The Financial Times


London Page X

930527

