FT933-10137

FT  05 AUG 93 / International Capital Markets: Philippine institutions set
to issue more debt


   By JOSE GALANG


   MANILA


PHILIPPINE state institutions are increasingly turning to the international
bond markets as the government continues to struggle with serious fiscal
shortages.
There are fears that the queue may lead to a bunching of maturities that
could again result in payments difficulties for the country, which is just
recovering from a 1983 moratorium on foreign debt repayments caused by a
severe financial crisis.
Following the national government's successful Eurobond offer of Dollars
150m last February, the Philippines' first since the 1983 crisis, several
state-owned corporations have lined up to issue Eurobonds.
However, early this year, Mr Christopher Brown, the IMF resident
representative in Manila, pointed out to Philippine officials the dangers of
acquiring too much new debt too soon after the government had announced
plans to finance infrastructure projects with its Eurobond proceeds.
Philippine officials say the IMF is taking a critical view of these
relatively short-term borrowings particularly because they are intended for
lengthy programmes.
National Power Corporation (Napocor), plans to use the proceeds of its bond
for a capital increase. The Development Bank of the Philippines, however,
will use its borrowings for loan programmes for the private sector.
The IMF's criticism could also affect the Philippines' lengthy negotiations
with the fund for an economic recovery programme.
The Philippines is seeking an Dollars 800m three-year financing under the
IMF's extended fund facility, but the negotiations have dragged on due to
doubts over the government's ability to raise sufficient revenue.
The talks are planned to resume in September, but newly-released government
data do not appear reassuring. Government revenue collections in the first
half of the year were 10 per cent of the target.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930805

