FT933-10024

FT  06 AUG 93 / Cuts in higher NHS management considered


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


MINISTERS ARE considering radical options for streamlining the higher levels
of National Health Service management.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, has received the report of the
Functions and Manpower Review - a committee set up to examine management
structure following the 1991 NHS reforms - and will consider it over the
summer.
The reforms have created an internal market in which hospitals provide
services which district health authorities purchase. Many hospital and
health authority managers believe, however, that the market is inhibited by
excessive bureaucracy in the Department of Health, its management executive
and regional health authorities.
The review committee, chaired by Ms Kate Jenkins, a former head of the
Downing Street efficiency unit and one of the originators of the Next Steps
programme for executive agencies, received evidence from NHS organisations
calling for more devolution to local managers.
It is understood that the committee's report presents a range of options.
This means the government will be left to decide the extent to which it is
prepared to reduce central control over the NHS market.
The issue is one that threatens to divide ministers. Some believe the
politically sensitive nature of health means the government must retain
strong day-to-day influence, while others fear heavy central control will
stifle potential efficiency gains of the internal market.
The BBC yesterday reported that options in the review include abolishing the
14 English regional health authorities.
Mr David Hinchliffe, Labour health spokesman, said reported options 'seem
not to have addressed the core problem with the changes the government has
introduced - lack of accountability and the corruption and mismanagement
that has produced'.
The options considered ranged from making the management executive, which
has daily responsibility for running the NHS, more independent of ministers,
to absorbing it in the Department of Health.
Mrs Bottomley is known to believe that an intermediate tier of management
between Whitehall and the hospitals and districts is needed. At a time of
public spending pressures, however, thinning the management structure could
be a more attractive option than seeking savings from clinical services.
Recent evidence of managerial and financial irregularities in the Wessex and
West Midlands regional health authorities may increase ministers' reluctance
to reduce central control. The Commons health committee is to examine the
NHS drugs budget in the autumn. MPs will consider whether steps to control
the budget are leading to more appropriate and cost-effective use of drugs.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930806

