FT932-6638

FT  27 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Flextech in Family Channel venture


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


FLEXTECH, the oil services company that transferred itself into a cable and
satellite television operation, yesterday announced a joint venture to
launch The Family Channel in the UK.
International Family Entertainment, which owns The Family Channel available
in more than 60 per cent of US homes, paid more than Dollars 90m (Pounds
58m) for TVS Entertainment, the south of England ITV company that lost its
franchise.
Flextech, the USM-quoted company which controls The Children's Channel, has
now agreed to take a 39 per cent stake in The Family Channel (UK).
The two groups will share a satellite channel with the children's programmes
during the day followed by the Family Channel in the evening.
Mr Roger Luard, of Flextech, said yesterday: 'This is a very exciting
development.'
The package of family entertainment will be launched in September as part of
the new subscription scheme being launched by British Sky Broadcasting in
the autumn.
At least 10 channels will be launched as a new subscription package priced
initially at around Pounds 3.99 a month.
Mr Tim Robertson, president of IFE, said yesterday that he saw the joint
venture with Flextech as a way into other international markets including
Asia. From the beginning The Family Channel plans to make original
programmes such as quizzes at its UK headquarters - the old TVS studios at
Maidstone.
Meanwhile, Flextech yesterday returned pre tax losses of Pounds 1.57m for
the period February 18 to December 31 1992.
Because of the sale of its oil services activities it said no meaningful
comparatives were possible.
A dividend of 0.5p is recommended. Future dividends will be determined in
the light of trading results and prospects.
The Children's Channel saw revenues increase in the final quarter of 1992 by
37 per cent.
The channel has recently signed a contract with BSkyB (in which Pearson,
owners of the Financial Times, has a significant stake) which 'will have a
positive impact on the future revenue prospects of TCC', the group said.
Furthermore, Flextech said yesterday that TCC had entered into a joint
venture with Quantum International, a subsidiary of National Media
Corporation of the US, to broadcast a home shopping 'informercial' service
on its surplus hours on Astra 1A.
The board believes the joint venture will benefit from the forecast increase
in cable subscribers and dish owners throughout Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930527

