FT932-6863

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(3): High-cost Japanese lose out - Foreign competitors are gaining ground


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


JAPAN'S computer manufacturers - from the giants Fujitsu, NEC and Toshiba to
their smaller cousins such as Seiko Epson - have suffered from a dramatic
fall in demand over the past year.
The value of sales fell 12 per cent from the year before, according to
estimates by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, as Japanese
companies moved to cut capital spending and consumers held back from buying
new machines.
Corporations, faced with a pressing need to cut costs amid the economic
slowdown, targeted spending on information and communications equipment,
areas in which they had invested heavily in the past.
Consumers stopped making new purchases, particularly towards the end of the
year as low-priced machines, newly available from foreign companies, raised
expectations that prices would fall further and that Japanese manufacturers
would also be forced to cut prices.
Manufacturers have found the market situation so difficult that the computer
industry association has applied to be included on the Ministry of Labour's
list of industries qualified to receive employment subsidies to help tide
companies over bad times.
The fall in demand would have been bad enough for Japan's computer industry.
But in the midst of the worst economic slump in recent history, the industry
has been confronted with a hitherto unknown entity in its home market:
foreign competition.
Last year, Apple Computer jumped to third place in the market share league
table and some believe it could rise to second place this year.
IBM, Compaq and Dell are other US companies that have created a stir with
low-priced models. They have yet to make much impact in terms of sales, but
their presence symbolises a changed market environment for Japanese
manufacturers.
Like their foreign competitors before them, Japan's computer manufacturers
are having to face up to the fact that computers are becoming commodity
items.
Until now, Japanese manufacturers were able to charge high prices for their
computers and obtain high margins as a result of a relative lack of
competition in their home market.
The difficulty of processing the Japanese language kept the domestic market
in effect closed to many potential outside competitors.
However, developments in software have made it possible to overcome this
hurdle, removing a barrier to competition in the home market.
The result is that unlike in the past, computer manufacturers in Japan will
increasingly have to compete on price as well as on the merits of their
products.
The situation has exposed a weakness among Japanese manufacturers. When it
comes to computers, they are not particularly cost competitive.
Those that depend on high-cost manufacturing in Japan are unable to compete
on price. Moreover, unlike IBM, which uses standardised parts throughout the
world, Japanese companies use proprietary systems which are more costly to
produce.
As a result, Japanese manufacturers looking to offer cheaper computers are
likely to turn increasingly to IBM-compatible machines, rather than their
own proprietary systems, to complete the lower end of their product range.
Recent moves by a number of computer manufacturers to turn to OEM suppliers
for some of their products illustrates the trend.
Earlier this year, Hitachi indicated that it would obtain some of its
computer products through an OEM arrangement with IBM. Meanwhile, Fujitsu
says it may take OEM supplies of low-priced IBM-compatible machines from
Acer of Taiwan.
In addition, the Japanese are facing the consequences of an increasing move
towards downsizing and open systems.
These developments pose the biggest threat for the two computer giants
Fujitsu and NEC.
Fujitsu, Japan's largest computer manufacturer which depends for 70 per cent
of revenues on computers - of which about 30 per cent comes from large
mainframes - will have to shift its revenue base from hardware to software,
says Mr Koichiro Chiwata, industry analyst at Salomon Brothers, the US
securities house.
Meanwhile, the advantages that NEC, the country's largest PC manufacturer
with over 50 per cent of the market, has enjoyed with its proprietary system
will be eroded, Mr Chiwata believes.
Last year, NEC saw its PC shipments fall 5 per cent; the company's debt
rating has been downgraded by Moody's, the debt rating agency, which expects
competition to intensify.
Fujitsu and others have already started to place greater emphasis on
software and systems to counter the fall of profits from hardware resulting
from lower consumption and weak prices.
Fujitsu has come up with a list of charges on 20 different software and
after-sale services such as maintenance and repairs. Both Hitachi and IBM
Japan have similar price lists.
But it will not be easy for them to convince their Japanese customers to
agree on service charges as these have until now been regarded as part of
the price of buying a machine.
On the brighter side, in spite of a lingering mood of low consumption,
Japan's computer market is expected to recover this year. Dataquest, the
high technology consultancy, forecasts growth of 6.6 per cent in 1993. The
range of low-cost machines currently available, the launch of Windows and
the purchasing cycle will all contribute to the rise in demand, it believes.
As the market recovers, it is likely to become an even more heated
battleground between domestic manufacturers struggling to protect their
proprietary systems and their margins against the cost advantages and the
open systems offered by their US competitors.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930526

