FT934-11081

FT  02 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Pakistan's cotton crop may be
15% below target


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


   ISLAMABAD


PAKISTAN'S cotton output may be as much as 10 to 15 per cent lower than this
year's target of 12m bales because of pest attacks in central Punjab, senior
government officials say in their latest assessments.
The new estimates may be a setback to Islamabad's efforts in recovering from
last year's large-scale damage due to severe floods and a subsequent virus
attack. Output fell then to 9m bales from the expected 12m bales.
Mr Zahoor Ahmed, head of Pakistan's leading cotton research station, in
Multan, said yesterday: 'The cotton crop could be 10m bales.'
Recent pest attacks in the Faisalabad division of central Punjab may have
damaged as much as 50 per cent of the crop in that area, he added. The final
estimates for this year's crop are expected to be made available in the next
couple of weeks.
Meanwhile, legislators elected from Pakistan's cotton belt in Southern
Punjab are expected to ask the government for special relief if the crop
damage is spread over an area which is larger than current estimates.
One member of the newly elected National Assembly - the lower house of
parliament - said: 'What I have seen out in the fields is certainly no
indication of the bumper crop that we hoped to have. It's a sad story of
last year's calamity of floods being followed by this year's viral
infection.'
Stock prices on Pakistan's largest stock market, the Karachi stock exchange,
have risen in recent weeks, partly because of expectations of a large cotton
crop and so a cheaper raw material, which would be likely to increase the
profitability of textile factories.
But with the latest damage assessments, which may raise cotton prices in the
local market, it is not yet clear if the forward movement on textile shares
will continue.
However, an official of the Pakistan Central Cotton Committee said the
rumours of pest attacks could be intended to boost prices, which have
dropped in recent weeks on reports of a good crop this year. 'It is too
early yet to discuss the damage, if any, to the crop,' he said.
Prices for fresh crop cotton have fallen sharply to 950 rupees a maund
(37.32 kg), from about 1,100 rupees a month ago.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

931102

