FT933-5166

FT  04 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: Financial effects of divorce


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU and BETHAN HUTTON


DIVORCE is bound to affect both individuals' tax positions, and tax
considerations may also affect the division of assets in any settlement.
Some tax aspects should be borne in mind in the early parts of the divorce
process, as once certain key stages have passed, tax advantages may be lost.
This particularly applies to capital gains tax.
Paul Knox, a senior tax manager at accountancy firm Ernst and Young, says
you should plan for CGT in the tax year of separation. Transfers of assets
between spouses living together can be made on a no gain/no loss basis, so
no tax charge is incurred. This relief is lost at the end of the tax year in
which separation took place.
Between separation and the decree absolute, husband and wife are still
classified as 'connected parties' for CGT purposes. This can cause
difficulty if there is any transfer of assets between spouses during this
period which would give rise to a capital loss. In these circumstances, the
donor can only offset losses from disposals made to the separated spouse
against other disposals to the same person, which can mean, in practice,
that the losses are wasted.
The matrimonial home is the focus for other tax considerations. Transfer of
ownership from one spouse to another should not cause any capital gains tax
problems, even after separation, because of the principal private residence
exemption, available for up to 36 months after the person making the
transfer has stopped living there. Even after 36 months there are some
concessions.
Liability for stamp duty is limited to 50p for transfers made in connection
with divorce.
Knox says one type of arrangement for the former husband and wife's home is
best avoided. This is where the divorced couple continues to own the
property in agreed shares, with one spouse and the children being allowed to
live there long-term, often until the youngest child reaches the age of 18.
When the property is eventually disposed of, the non-resident partner will
be faced with a CGT liability for the gain arising while he was not
occupying the property.
If one spouse carries on living in the home after divorce, but the other is
paying the mortgage, he will also lose his entitlement to mortgage interest
relief, which is only available on one's main residence. John Battersby,
personal tax partner at KPMG Peat Marwick, says that one more tax-efficient
way around this is for the mortgage to be taken over by the person living in
the house, who could then claim mortgage interest relief; maintenance
payments from the non-resident spouse could be increased to cover the
mortgage payments.
If the divorcing couple are older, potential inheritance tax liabilities may
become a concern. There is an exemption for transfers made between husband
and wife up to the date of the decree absolute. Restrictions may apply when
the spouse transferring the asset is not resident in the UK. Transfers made
after the divorce because of a court order are not seen as voluntary gifts,
and are exempt from inheritance tax, but transfers under voluntary
agreements are not.
Maintenance payments used to attract generous income tax relief for the
payer, but since the 1988 budget this has ceased to be the case. The bulk of
the maintenance has to be paid out of net income. However, the recipient of
maintenance payments, made under most orders or agreements since March 1988,
does not pay tax on them.
The spouse looking after the children is entitled to the single parent's
allowance of Pounds 1,720 in addition to the personal allowance. If the
children spend time with each parent in turn, they can split the additional
allowance. If each parent looks after at least one child of the marriage,
both will be entitled to the full allowance.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930904

