FT932-13368

FT  23 APR 93 / UK Company News: Sprait seeking new strategy


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


SAVE & PROSPER Return of Assets Investment Trust is asking shareholders for
approval to alter its investment strategy and change its name to the Fleming
Geared Income & Assets Investment Trust.
Sprait was founded in 1984 to invest in fixed proportions of three unit
trusts, also managed by Save & Prosper. It has a split capital structure,
with ordinary and participating preferred shares, and warrants.
The preferred shares initially paid a 7 per cent dividend, which will
increase by 0.7p per year until 1995. When the trust is wound up, sometime
between 2008 and 2010, the preferred shares will receive 100p, plus 10 per
cent of the growth in assets.
The nature of the preferred shares means that the return to ordinary
shareholders is highly geared to assets and dividend growth.
Things went well during the 1980s when assets and dividends achieved strong
growth. But in the 1990s recession, many companies have cut their dividends
and this has led the unit trusts in which Sprait invests to plan cuts in
their distributions.
The result will be a substantial cut in the earnings attributable to the
ordinary shares, with the managers estimating that earnings per share will
fall from 6.3p in the year to end May 1993 to 0.5p the following year.
However, the trust is unable to take any action to mitigate this problem
because of the fixed nature of the investment policy.
Accordingly, the board proposes that the trust should cease to invest in
unit trusts and should invest directly in equities. The board believes that
this change will give the trust flexibility, enhance prospects for capital
and dividend growth and reduce the expected fall in earnings per share.
The directors expect to maintain the total dividend on the ordinary shares
at 7.6p this year and, if the proposals are implemented, expect to pay a
dividend of 2p next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930423

