FT934-8653

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Tax returns by telephone - Andrew
Jack investigates a new service that could be the shape of things to come


   By ANDREW JACK


IT MIGHT be on a very modest scale so far, but the service advertised in a
bright yellow leaflet circulating last week heralded what could well be the
shape of things to come for taxpayers.
As the Inland Revenue increasingly shifts the onus on companies and
individuals to assess their own tax, so a new market is likely to open up in
cheap advisory services.
At the start of this month, Direct Line Tax Service began to operate a
telephone tax service, with calls charged at local rates around the country.
Its co-ordinator says that if demand goes as planned, he plans to open a
series of tax shops in high streets, starting with one in London next
spring.
Similar services are offered already by H& R. Block in the United States,
and in Australia.
The initiative has been spurred by the move towards self-assessment of tax.
From 1996, individual taxpayers will be expected to calculate their
liability and either send in a cheque or claim a refund. A similar 'pay and
file' system has just been put in place for companies.
This puts an increasing burden on taxpayers, although it is being
accompanied by considerable efforts to improve communication and clarity in
Revenue forms and information leaflets.
In spite of the ambitious nation-wide aims, Direct Line Tax Service is based
in Fryer & Co., a small accountancy practice at Luton.
It has no connection with Direct Line, the telephone insurance service owned
by the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Ganesh Aiyer, a partner with the firm, says his service has just four staff
answering the 'phones so far but plans to expand up to 20. He believes they
can handle about 200 returns a month each, with an average of 30 minutes for
each call. Each conversation leads to a computer-generated tax return, which
the firm will send to the customer or directly to the Revenue.
His ultimate target would be to deal with the affairs of 200,000 taxpayers.
So far, the service has processed a little over 100 tax returns.
Aiyer stresses: 'We are not selling peanuts, we are selling professional
services.' But others raise questions about the need - although perhaps not
the demand - for his service.
Taxpayers with complex requirements cannot be handled by it and those with
simpler demands ought to be able to do their own returns. Indeed, even if
using the new service, they will still have to ferret out the necessary pay
slips and documents.
Nonetheless, several tax practitioners say they have been expecting
developments of this kind to begin spreading in the UK alongside
self-assessment. As one put it: 'It is amazing how extraordinarily
intelligent people seem to have difficulty with their tax returns.
'This is purely a processing exercise. It is not particularly helpful. I
don't believe it is a threat to the tax profession.'
Aiyer replies: 'We are not offering counselling or consulting. Not everybody
needs professional advice.
'But a lot of people, by sheer inertia, will be inclined to rely on someone
else to do their returns. Some do not feel they want to be doing their own
thing when, for a small price, someone else can.'

The Financial Times


London Page IX

931113

