FT933-5275

FT  04 SEP 93 / Rutskoi backed by parliament


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


THE RUSSIAN parliament yesterday rejected President Boris Yeltsin's decree
suspending Vice-President Alexander Rutskoi from his functions and referred
the move to the constitutional court, writes Leyla Boulton in Moscow.
If found to be unconstitutional, the controversial presidential decree could
open the way for the Congress of People's Deputies, or full parliament, to
impeach Mr Yeltsin under a 'poison pill' amendment which is supposed to be
triggered by any presidential act violating the constitution.
The parliament's response, an inevitable and predictable escalation of the
political struggle in Moscow, must have been expected by the president when
he issued his decree on Wednesday.
Although Mr Yeltsin insisted yesterday that he had done nothing to violate
the constitution, it is probable that the president is past caring as he
struggles to deal a final blow to parliament and to his vice-president. Mr
Rutskoi, who has been the standard-bearer of the opposition, said yesterday
he was starting a 'pre-campaign' for presidential elections.
Mr Oleg Lobov, a first deputy prime minister who is particularly close to
the president, said that Mr Yeltsin plans to use a new Federation Council to
bypass parliament in order to obtain a new constitution and new elections.
He proposes to abolish the vice-presidential post by making no provision for
it in the new constitution.
The Council, for which the legal documents were now being drawn up, would
act as a 'weighty state organ to approve major legislation on the way Russia
is run,' he told a news conference yesterday.
Also predictably, the parliament left intact that part of the presidential
decree which suspended Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, the first deputy prime minister
who like the vice-president has been accused of profiting from state imports
of baby food. Mr Yeltsin said he was suspending both men temporarily until
the allegations were sorted out.
But the growing breach within the Russian cabinet over economic reform was
amply illustrated by Mr Lobov's public demand for big changes in the
government's mass privatisation programme. He said Russia should cut the
amount of state property to be given away for privatisation vouchers and
sell more for cash to raise budget revenues and provide more state funds for
industrial investment. Under amendments it passed yesterday in defiance of a
presidential veto, the Russian parliament gave itself and local parliaments
the right to supervise media programmes.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930904

