FT932-6872

FT  26 MAY 93 / London Stock Exchange: BT in demand


   By CHRISTOPHER PRICE, STEVE THOMPSON and PETER JOHN


News that the organisers of the flotation of the third tranche of BT shares,
labelled BT III, will positively encourage the big institutions to increase
their share stakes in BT before BT III is launched saw BT shares surge ahead
yesterday.
Significantly, turnover in BT stock traded in the market picked up strongly
yesterday, with 15m shares changing hands. 'The BT marketing effort is now
in full swing, and there is a widespread feeling around the market that the
move to reward pre-issue buyers of BT has got the big institutions on the
side of BT,' said one telecoms specialist.
It was pointed out that institutions who sold short of BT shares prior to BT
11 in 1991 were penalised by having their allocations of BT 11 restricted.
Some funds moved to big underweight positions in BT and therefore suffered
post theflotation, having to purchase stock in the open market to regain
weightings.
Dealers said the market is bracing itself for a number of research notes on
BT as the marketing campaign builds up. 'Coded signals in the market suggest
that there will not be many sell recommendations in BT in the next few
weeks,' was the comment of one broker not locked into the flotation process.
BT shares closed 14 1/2 higher at 427 1/2 p. The stock reached an all-time
peak of 442p on March 31 this year, before slipping back after the
resignation of previous finance director Mr Barry Romeril.
A surprise announcement from J. Sainsbury and Boots that the latter would
open pharmacies in several of the former's supermarkets intrigued the
market. Boots shares declined on the news, said by dealers to concern
worries that Boots may have trouble gaining licences. They closed 5 off at
429p.
However, analysts close to the company said they believed Boots would begin
non-prescription drug operations in the event of not getting licences. It
was also suggested that the two groups had already advanced plans to extend
the experiment to a majority of Sainsbury's stores. Sainsbury shares were up
a penny at 469p.
Safeway supermarket owner Argyll Group produced full year profits at the top
end of market expectations, although profit-taking cut short any advance in
the shares. They closed 3 lighter at 314p after turnover of 8.6m. Baring
Securities lifted its forecast to Pounds 460m for next year.
Publicity given to Friday's purchases of Burmah Castrol shares by two of the
company's directors was said to have encouraged persistent support for
Burmah shares, which ran up 8 more to 699p.
Cable and Wireless extended Monday's strong performance, finishing 25 higher
at 749p. The stock was boosted by the impressive performance of shares in
the near 60 per cent-owned Hong Kong Telecom on the Hong Kong market
overnight, and a feeling among stock market chartists that the shares are
now a strong chart buy.
HK Telecom is scheduled to announce its preliminary results tomorrow, with
NatWest Securities forecasting a 14 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to
HKDollars 7.38bn. NatWest emphasised 'the flow of positive news out of C and
W and its good earnings and dividend prospects for 1993/94', and reiterated
its long-term positive stance on the shares.
C and W's preliminary figures are due on June 22, with NatWest predicting
pre-tax profits of Pounds 800m, compared with Pounds 644m last time, and a
near 15 per cent increase in the dividend total to 15.2p.
The electronics sector provided a host of strong performers, notably
Tunstall Group, the emergency communications equipment manufacturer, whose
shares raced up 24 to 437p following much better than expected interim
results. Group profits of Pounds 3.2m compared with most market estimates in
the region of Pounds 2.7m.
Quality Software, which peaked at 538p on its market debut last month,
returned to prominence, closing 17 firmer at 496p.
The blow to Speyhawk, whose shares were suspended yesterday at 14p after
calling in the receivers, prompted fresh fears in the sector of a second
wave of receiverships. Mr Graham Stanley at NatWest Securities said such a
move could jeopardise the recovery in investment yields, and he recommended
stocks with strong cash flow rather than those relying solely on an
improvement in property yields.
The Speyhawk move dented the recovery in the property shares seen in recent
sessions, although a spurt in late trading left most of the leaders
positive.
Pharmaceuticals company Medeva rose 3 to 218p after announcing that phase
three clinical trials had begun on a wart treatment that it is developing
with US group Matrix Pharmaceuticals.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

930526

