FT933-12795

FT  22 JUL 93 / STC costs Northern Telecom Dollars 500m


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


NORTHERN Telecom, of Canada, has outlined a big restructuring plan,
including a Dollars 500m write-down on its investment in STC, the UK
telecommunications group which it bought two years ago.
The action is aimed at correcting deep-seated problems in its global
telecoms equipment business.
Announcing a second-quarter loss of more than Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m), the
Toronto-based company said it was selling its submarine systems division to
Alcatel of France; cutting its workforce by 9 per cent; and launching a
drive to improve its digital-switching software. The STC write-down amounts
to almost a third of the Dollars 1.8bn of goodwill established at the time
of its acquisition in March 1991.
Mr Jean Monty, who became Northern's chief executive earlier this year, said
that the investment in STC 'has not lived up to expectations in the
short-term'.
Of the total restructuring package, Mr Monty said: 'It's good to bring it
all at the same time and make sure that we have nothing to hide. We're
tackling the issues head-on.'
Weak economic growth in Europe has hit sales and earnings of the STC
businesses, which are now integrated into Northern's own operations. But Mr
Monty said that the writedown and the sale of the submarine business 'does
not detract from our determination to penetrate the European market'.
The company has set aside Dollars 158m for a project to improve the software
used in its central-office switches, the computers which route telephone
calls. A compartmentalised team of more than 1,000 people has been set up to
produce a platform for new software features. The new products are due out
in 1995.
The extent of Northern's problems is evident in its financial performance.
It suffered a second-quarter loss even before the Dollars 940m after-tax
special charges, and has raised the possibility of another loss in the third
quarter. The loss before the extraordinary items was Dollars 88m, or 36
cents a share, compared with earnings of Dollars 72.3m, or 28 cents, a year
earlier. After special charges, the loss was Dollars 1.03bn, or 28 cents.
Revenues dropped 4 per cent to Dollars 1.87bn. Gross margins slumped to 30.8
per cent of revenues from 39 per cent last year.
The biggest drop in revenues and margins was in central-office switches.
Price competition is intense, especially in North America and Europe. Sales
of switching software also fell.
Mr Monty described the second-quarter operating results as 'extremely
disappointing and unacceptable'.
Investors shared his opinion, driving Northern's share price down by Dollars
1 5/8 to close at Dollars 22 7/8 in New York.
Lex, Page 20
Alcatel-Alsthom deal, Page 27

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930722

