FT933-9964

FT  06 AUG 93 / Pakistan seeks IMF loan to bolster depleted reserves


   By FARHAN BOKHARI and ALEXANDER NICOLL


   ISLAMABAD, LONDON


PAKISTAN is negotiating a short-term loan from the International Monetary
Fund after suffering a sharp fall in foreign exchange reserves, believed to
have left it with the equivalent of about two weeks' import payments, senior
officials in Islamabad said yesterday.
The reserves sank amid the turmoil of the political power struggle which
ended with the resignations on July 18 of President Ghulam Ishaq Khan and Mr
Nawaz Sharif, prime minister.
Official figures are not available, but commercial bankers in Karachi
estimate that reserves have risen from their lowest level - which has not
been disclosed - since the appointment of an interim government. They now
stand at about Dollars 350m (Pounds 234.8m), compared with Dollars 1bn a
year ago.
An IMF mission is in Islamabad to discuss new credits with the government of
Mr Moeen Qureshi, the prime minister and former senior World Bank official,
who is due to hold office until elections in two months.
Mr Qureshi is preparing a comprehensive package of economic reforms intended
to reduce government spending, increase revenues and boost exports.
The government wants the economic programme to be supported by the IMF,
which would initially arrange short-term financing of about Dollars 200m to
meet immediate balance of payments needs.
This would later be replaced and supplemented by a Dollars 1.2bn IMF loan
over three years. Final agreement on the larger credit would have to await
discussions with the incoming government.
Mr Qureshi, who has a relatively free hand because his long absence from
Pakistan as an international financial official has left him free of
domestic political ties, is acting rapidly to deal with economic
difficulties.
Mr Babar Ali, a leading industrialist appointed finance minister, said: 'Our
interim government has the unique opportunity of demonstrating to them
(politicians) how things could be done, because we have no legislature to go
back to, we have no lobby to satisfy.'
The government has sought to boost exports with a 9 per cent devaluation of
the rupee. Mr Qureshi has also set up a committee of senior officials to
make recommendations for cuts in public spending.
Testing time for Pakistan's caretaker PM, Page 5

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930806

