FT931-4059

FT  12 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Insider move favourite at BTR


   By ANDREW BOLGER


THE ANNOUNCEMENT that Sir Owen Green, 68, is to step down as chairman of BTR
in May has not ended speculation over the ultimate succession at the
industrial conglomerate which he helped to build into one of Britain's most
successful companies.
Sir Owen will be replaced by Mr Norman Ireland, 65, who has spent 24 years
on the board of BTR - only four years fewer than the retiring chairman.
BTR's rules mean that Mr Ireland can serve a maximum of three years as
chairman, from when he takes over at the group's AGM.
Some observers see Mr Ireland's elevation as a disappointment for Mr Alan
Jackson, the 56-year-old Australian who is chief executive. Mr Jackson was
tipped as a possible successor to Sir Owen when he was brought over to the
UK in 1991, after having built up BTR Nylex, the group's immensely
profitable Australian business.
Since Mr Jackson arrived, BTR has outshone the market and competitors such
as Hanson, the UK's other large, acquisitive conglomerate. BTR's progress
has been helped by its successful integration of Hawker Siddeley, the
stricken aerospace group which it snapped up for Pounds 1.55bn at the end of
1991.
A shy and sometimes prickly individual, Mr Jackson has not always shown the
ease in dealing with the City which would be expected of the chairman of
Britain's 12th biggest company. On first arriving in Britain, he made what
he later described as the blunder of telling the press that he would be
going for a big acquisition. 'I've lived with that for nine bloody months,'
he said when finally launching the Hawker bid.
However, Mr Ireland's appointment may give Mr Jackson an opportunity to get
to know shareholders better and add to his already formidable reputation as
a manager of businesses and assets.
Mr Bob Faircloth, the 56-year-old Canadian who was made BTR's chief
operating officer in 1991, could be being groomed for the role of next chief
executive. He masterminded the Hawker integration process and seems to be
taking a higher profile in dealings with the City.
Meanwhile BTR's immediate focus is on control of operations - and Mr
Jackson, Mr Faircloth and Ms Kathleen O'Donovan, the 35-year-old appointed
finance director in 1991 - comprise a strong and relatively fresh team.
Observers looking to the next generation of internal management talent point
to Mr Roberto Quarta, the 44-year-old chief executive of BTR's sealing and
controls group, who joined the board last month. His promotion came less
than three months after the appointment of Mr Graeme Pearson, the
53-year-old managing director of BTR Nylex.
Their appointments reinforced the international character of of BTR's
executive team. Out of seven executive directors, two are Australian, two
are American and Mr Faircloth is a Canadian who has taken US citizenship.
BTR could, of course, go outside the group when Mr Ireland retires. Sir
David Nicholson did the job of chairman for 15 years until 1984. But the
internal culture is strong - the group's seven executive directors have been
with the group for an average of 18 years. When the time comes for Mr
Ireland to step down, do not be surprised if a BTR insider fills his shoes.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930312

