FT934-11076

FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of Corporate Treasury Management (1):  Purse strings
are tightened - Volatility in European currency markets and fear of foreign
exchange dealing losses have forced companies to strengthen controls and
re-assess their approach to hedging.  Institutional investors are also
demanding greater disclosure.


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


WHILE THE advantages of a strong treasury function have become much more
widely appreciated by companies in recent years, so too have the potential
risks associated with a poorly managed treasury operation.
The loss of Pounds 150m in foreign exchange dealings by the treasury
department of Allied-Lyons, the UK foods group, in 1991 triggered a wave of
concern about internal management procedures.
Since then, as well as tightening up controls, many companies have also
started to pay more attention to broader policy issues. In particular, the
unexpected volatility of European currencies over the past year has forced a
number of companies to reassess their approach to hedging.
For example, many UK companies had stopped hedging their exposure to
European currencies, because they thought that they were protected by the
exchange rate mechanism. When some currencies fell outside the system, they
were taken by surprise.
'Many boards have been requiring the treasurer to be much more rigorous in
deciding the hedging programme,' said Mr Derek Ross, a partner at Touche
Ross who advises companies on treasury management.
There is a growing tendency to take shorter-term decisions on currency
hedging; for example, hedging two to three months ahead, rather than 18
months, so that if the market turns, the company is not locked in at a
disadvantageous rate for a long period.
Company board members are less likely these days to dismiss treasury
officials as bureaucrats, and more likely to have an idea of what actually
goes on in their company's treasury operation.
The other issue which has brought corporate treasury into the limelight has
been a growing chorus of demands by institutional investors for greater
disclosure of corporate treasury policies in companies' accounts.
The Association of Corporate Treasurers (ACT), a grouping of UK company
treasurers, has produced an exposure draft of guidelines for disclosure. In
the current climate, in which companies are being bombarded with new
disclosure requirements, some companies are rather unenthusiastic, while
others take the view that the guidelines should go further.
Again, currency volatility has highlighted this issue. Analysts or investors
looking at, for example, a UK company which has a large US operation could
expect that company's results to improve as a result of a stronger dollar.
However, if that exposure to dollar earnings has been hedged, this will not
be the case. Analysts would like to know not only whether the exposure is
hedged, but also what rate the company has locked in.
Only a few UK companies, including RTZ and Courtaulds, describe their
treasury activities, including interest-rate and currency exposure
management policies, in any detail.
Among companies themselves, there has been a renewed focus on cash
management. 'If you can manage Dollars 10m of liquidity better, that is
fundamental to the business,' points out one treasury adviser. The stronger
emphasis on performance management, as well as tough times at many
companies, has focused attention on an area that was often ignored in the
1980s.
But the emphasis on internal controls remains strong. The Allied-Lyons loss
was incurred by the writing of currency options, creating huge positions
which were concealed from senior management.
In the wake of that loss, the ACT issued a set of guidelines urging tighter
internal controls, regular audits and full disclosure of risk management
strategies.
However, companies have continued to report losses stemming from treasury
operations. Most have been on a much smaller scale, though a few have been
substantial.
Most recently, Showa Shell Sekiyu, the Royal Dutch/Shell group's Japanese
affiliate, revealed in February that traders in its treasury department had
run up some Dollars 1bn in unrealised foreign exchange losses.
A Dollars 6.44bn forward exposure to the dollar at the end of last year was
incurred in secret by a group in Showa Shell's treasury, which had
erroneously believed the US currency would rise against the yen. Announcing
its first-half results in August, Showa Shell described progress in
unravelling the exposure as encouraging, but said there was a 'longish
tunnel' of two to three years before it would emerge from the episode.
This latest loss points to a particular area of danger for large
multi-national companies, which lies in the difficulty in keeping tabs on
all areas of business. Most large multi-national companies now have
centralised dealing operations, rather than treasury functions attached to
each offshoot.
'Generally, there has been quite a big improvement in the amount of
attention that top management has given to internal control,' said Mr Ross,
who is also chairman-elect of ACT. 'But for many groups that is primarily
exercised in head office. Quite often, problems arise in some far-flung
branch or associated company.'
For companies concerned about the efficacy of their internal controls, there
are a number of important checks to be implemented, such as making sure that
the company's board agrees with policy, that there is complete segregation
of duties between dealing, confirmation settlement and reporting functions,
and that all transactions are marked to market value. These procedures
should also, of course, apply to financial institutions.
For example, Sumitomo Finance International incurred a Dollars 2-3m loss on
its interest-rate options book last autumn, after a desk manager had
concealed his real trading position from senior management.
The manager of the interest-rate options desk had to record the value of his
positions in management reports submitted to his chief executive, but he
gave falsely inflated values in order to hide his true position. He then
persuaded an employee with another firm, which he knew was used by
Sumitomo's accounts department to check those valuations, to quote inflated
prices that corresponded with those in his own internal management reports.
'In my experience, there are a lot of banks where a trader, believed to be
of exceptional quality, reports direct to the top,' said Mr Ross, who
advises banks and securities firms in this area. 'It's easy to develop a
culture which allows the trading-room to develop without controls.'
Since the Allied-Lyons losses were reported, there has also been a general
move to upgrade computer systems, as technology has advanced and costs have
fallen. Sophisticated systems are particularly important in certain areas of
risk containment; for example, in marking to market. 'But the key features
of internal controls are not systems issues,' Mr Ross said.
While a collusive fraud may still be hard to detect, controls involving a
range of different functions in the trading, settlement and reporting
process at least reduce the opportunities for positions to be hidden.
'You can't stop somebody doing an unauthorised trade,' admits Mr Ross. 'But
you can make sure it can be closed out the following day.'
While there is still a strong emphasis on keeping controls in place in the
treasury department, the emphasis on managing financial risk is also
spreading away from the treasury function, according to some management
consultants.
Consultants at Coopers & Lybrand point out that many of the notorious losses
at companies in recent years stem from inadequate management of financial
risks in other areas of the business - production quality failure in the
case of Perrier, marketing failure in the case of Hoover, for example.
What these losses have in common, according to Coopers, is that, like
Allied-Lyons' Dollars 150m hit, they were not expected by top management and
they could have been avoided by proper financial risk management.
'Financial risk is being redefined,' says Mr Howard Lovell, a partner of
C&L. 'Should companies have a risk management function, over and above the
Treasury department?' For example, a finance director could be given the
task of managing the risks facing the company in a broader context.
For all the importance of interest-rate management, interest-rate risk is
relatively small, compared with other risks to the company which could wipe
them out, he argues, adding that some companies have already taken this
point on board.
Mr Lovell takes his argument a step further. 'Is treasury going to be called
treasury in five years time? Or will it be called risk management?'

The Financial Times


London Page 35

931102

