FT933-5255

FT  04 SEP 93 / New car sales soar above highest estimates


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


NEW CAR SALES in August have exceeded the most optimistic motor industry
forecasts and are expected to reach around 440,000, the third highest-ever
August sales total.
The figures, which will be released today, are expected to show an increase
of close to 18 per cent from the 373,804 achieved in August last year, when
the industry was still struggling to emerge from three years of recession.
The industry had previously forecast an increase of around 11 per cent.
August is the most hectic period of the year for the retail motor industry
with sales stimulated by the change of the registration letter.
The month is a key test of the state of demand and has accounted for 23 per
cent of annual new car sales in each of the last two years.
New car sales were showing an increase of around 12 per cent after the first
20 days of August, but the industry has been surprised by a late surge in
registrations - in particular by Ford and the PSA Peugeot-Citroen group.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said the industry had handled
'unprecedented sales over the last few days of the month'.
The highest level of new car sales in one month was achieved in August 1989
at 500,112.
For the full year Vauxhall yesterday forecast a rise in new car
registrations of around 9 per cent to 1.73m-1.74m from the 1.59m achieved
last year, which would still leave the industry well below the peak sales
year of 1989 at 2.3m.
The UK is presently the only car market in west Europe which is showing any
growth.
Sales across Europe fell by close to 18 per cent in the first seven months
of the year, and this steep decline is forcing some UK manufacturers to cut
production as export orders fall.
Mr Ian McAllister, chairman of Ford of Britain, said that a high level of
visits to dealer showrooms had been sustained throughout the month of
August. 'Maybe customers are using their savings to buy cars now, because
interest rates have come down so far on their savings.'
He said that sales to company fleets had been particularly strong which
suggested that companies were beginning to lift earlier constraints on car
replacements. August was a record month for fleet sales.
Land Rover announced yesterday that it is to introduce a night shift at its
Solihull assembly plant in order to increase output of its successful
Discovery four-wheel drive vehicle.
It has recruited an additional 300 workers during the summer raising its
workforce to 8,400 in order to increase production from 700 to 900 a week.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930904

