FT934-11317

FT  02 NOV 93 / Volvo defers shareholders meeting on Renault merger


   By HUGH CARNEGY and CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   STOCKHOLM


VOLVO has bowed to domestic criticism of its proposals to merge with Renault
by postponing a planned shareholders' meeting called to approve the
agreement. The Swedish carmaker said it was seeking 'further clarification'
of French plans to privatise the state-owned automotive group.
The two companies, which have operated a strategic alliance for the past
three years, announced their intention on September 6 to create one of the
world's largest vehicle makers.
But opposition to the deal in Sweden has escalated over the past month as
critics said it amounted to a takeover of Volvo's car and truck operations
by the French state, raising doubts that it would win shareholder support at
a meeting planned for November 9.
Volvo's Swedish institutional shareholders expressed concern that there were
no guarantees that Renault would be privatised by 1995 as promised, and that
Volvo's proposed 35 per cent stake in the new company could be compromised
by the provisions of a 'golden share' the French state plans to hold after
privatisation.
'We have been influenced by the intensive debate that has been conducted
recently and we have been taking the criticism that has been advanced with
the greatest seriousness,' said Mr Soren Gyll, Volvo's chief executive,
after the board's decision to postpone the shareholders' meeting to December
7. '(The delay) will give us the possibility to see if there is information
which would change the situation.'
Volvo said it would take up the issue of privatisation and the golden share
with the French government. But it was not clear whether Paris would be
prepared to give further assurances on its timetable for the sale of
Renault, or on its determination to hold the right of veto over any
shareholding in Renault-Volvo above 20 per cent through the golden share.
Volvo had until yesterday insisted that the merger deal could not be
renegotiated, and had rejected suggestions that the merger be postponed
until after Renault had been privatised.
The decision to postpone the shareholders' meeting was a stinging blow to Mr
Pehr Gyllenhammar, the Volvo chairman, who has said the future of Volvo's
car and truck making in Sweden depends upon the deal.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931102

