FT933-10239

FT  05 AUG 93 / Technology: Digital assistant is of limited help - Apple's
MessagePad is a revolutionary computer but could struggle to find a useful
role


   By LOUISE KEHOE


Apple Computer's Newton MessagePad 'personal digital assistant' finally made
its official debut this week, more than a year after John Sculley, the
company's chairman, began promoting the device as the focal point for the
convergence of computer, communications and consumer electronics technology.
'We believe that Newton will be seen as the defining technology of the
digital age,' Sculley said at the launch of the computer in Boston. He
predicted a technology revolution in the 1990s that would overshadow the
personal computer revolution of the 1980s.
With such a build-up it is perhaps inevitable that the Newton MessagePad
will fall short of expectations, even though it is an innovative device that
brings a whole new meaning to the term personal computing.
A 1lb-tablet, about the size of a video cassette, the MessagePad is operated
with a pen stylus, which can be used to jot notes on a three-inch by
four-inch screen or to point to icons representing specific functions.
What sets the Newton apart from other hand-held or even desktop personal
computers is its ability to learn a user's work habits. From the style of
their handwriting to the format they like to use for business letters, their
favourite lunch spot and most frequently called clients or colleagues, the
MessagePad learns, over time, to adapt to its user's preferences.
Where the computer disappoints, however, is in its communications
capabilities. Originally billed as a wireless personal communicator, the
basic model of the MessagePad lacks even a built-in modem. Wireless
communications capabilities are limited to short-range transmissions using
infra-red beams. Pointed towards another MessagePad up to about three feet
away, the device can send or receive messages. A suitably equipped Apple
Macintosh or other PC can also exchange data with a Newton.
Apple executives suggest that such transmissions may be a good way to swap
business card information with other Newton users electronically, or
silently exchange thoughts with a business colleague during a meeting.
Yet this seems to be a technology that is searching for a useful
application.
Wireless paging and messaging services will be available for US users of the
MessagePad soon, Apple promises. With the addition of a plug-in device
offered by Motorola, the MessagePad will act as a pocket pager, albeit a
more bulky one than the matchbox-sized devices that many business people
wear on their belts.
With the addition of another plug-in module, the MessagePad can send - but
not receive - facsimile messages when plugged into a telephone line. Newton
will also have its own international electronic mail system, at 'a later
date'. NewtonMail will be a subscriber-based, 'cost-effective' service,
Apple says.
Eventually, the service will be expanded to offer information services such
as news, weather and financial data, although it is hard to imagine that
such data could be displayed to advantage on the MessagePad's tiny screen.
The MessagePad will be available throughout the US over the next few weeks
and from next month in the UK. Non-English versions will follow next year,
Apple says. Prices have not been fixed but Apple expects it to sell in the
US for Dollars 699-Dollars 949 (Pounds 469-Pounds 636) depending on
configuration.
As with any new computer, the availability of applications software will be
critical to the value of the MessagePad. Despite widespread activity among
independent software developers the must-have application for the Newton has
yet to emerge. Programs announced this week range from specialised systems
for estate agents to titles for sports enthusiasts.
Apple has announced six of its own software titles for Newton, including
interactive maps of US cities, a reference guide to the Fortune 500, the
business magazine's league table of the largest US companies, and games.
Most would be better suited to larger-screen laptop computers.
Who will buy the Newton MessagePad? Apple is initially targeting technology
enthusiasts as well as corporate buyers who could use the device as part of
their information technology systems. Coca-Cola, Monsanto and American
Express are among early customers, Apple says. However, market analysts do
not expect the MessagePad to be a big seller. Sales projections range from
Dollars 50m to Dollars 300m over the next 12 months.
Whether or not the Newton is a hit, it has defined a new product category in
the personal computing field. Already Apple is hinting at improvements to
come in later versions. And, in a break with its usual practice, the company
is licensing its Newton technology to other companies. Current licensees
include Sharp and Matsushita Electric of Japan, and Motorola of the US.
Sharp, which is manufacturing the MessagePad for Apple, also introduced its
own very similar 'Expert Pad' this week. Rolm, a US telecommunications
equipment subsidiary of Siemens, will be incorporating Newton technology
into a new product called the NotePhone.
Eventually, Newton technology may indeed 'change the world' as Apple
predicts, but it is unlikely to be an immediate success.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930805

