FT934-11253

FT  02 NOV 93 / Farming budget set for heavy cut


   By ALISON MAITLAND


NEXT YEAR'S agriculture budget is likely to suffer significant cuts as a
result of the public spending round, with new measures for environmentally
sensitive farming and support for hill farmers both under threat.
Most of the Ministry of Agriculture's Pounds 2.77bn budget for next year
will go on Common Agricultural Policy spending and cannot be touched. But
the Treasury is expected to examine the domestic part of the budget, due to
reach Pounds 826m.
Conservationists and farmers are concerned that the start of the so-called
agri-environment programme, announced only three months ago, may be put off
for a year.
A delay would be embarrassing for Mrs Gillian Shephard, agriculture
minister, who has committed herself to ensuring more widespread adoption of
'green' policies in farming.
The programme, costing Pounds 30m over three years, is part of the reform of
the Common Agricultural Policy agreed by the European Community last year.
'This is a bad thing for two reasons,' said Ms Melinda Appleby, agriculture
policy officer for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, which was
closely consulted by the government on the package. 'The introduction of
these schemes is the minimum the government need to do anyway, and there's a
fear when schemes like these are put off that it weakens the confidence the
farming industry will have in them.'
Hill farmers are worried about further sharp cuts in government support
after a reduction of Pounds 20m last year. Payments, which amount to about
Pounds 130m this year, go to 66,000 farmers in difficult upland areas,
particularly in Scotland and Wales. But the farmers have seen their incomes
soar this year by 40 per cent to 50 per cent on average as a result of
increased support from Brussels, falling interest rates and the devaluation
of the pound, which pushed up the Ecu-based prices they receive.
Mr Michael Jack, fisheries minister, yesterday said the government was
planning changes to the new rules to restrict from January the number of
days that fishermen can spend at sea. He said an announcement would be made
after a High Court application, which began yesterday, by the National
Federation of Fishermen's Organisations for a judicial review on the rules.
The federation rejected the changes. It said the government was suggesting
only minor alterations and not abandoning the policy.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931102

