FT932-6742

FT  27 MAY 93 / Science to focus on picking the winners: The white paper is
the first significant government statement on science since 1972.  It will
enable developments in all areas of scientific activity to be reviewed by
one body, involve industry in decisions and change the balance of research
and teaching in unversities


   By CLIVE COOKSON, Science Editor


'TECHNOLOGY foresight' can now take its place alongside tarot cards and
crystal balls as tools for would-be clair-voyants.
It is what the government's white paper on science and technology strategy
says will help make sure British scientists and companies back the right
technologies.
What it means is quite different from 'technology forecasting' - the fashion
of the 1960s and 1970s when academics painted detailed pictures of the
application of yet-to-be-discovered technologies.
Foresight is a much more systematic exercise in influencing the future. The
aim is to pick winners - not in the form of specific projects but as
strategic areas that could produce the greatest economic and social benefit.
The paper proposes a new structure to control research. A new Council for
Science and Technology, with representatives from industry and universities,
will report to Mr William Waldegrave, science minister. The bodies that
award grants for science will be restructured, and their advisory councils
absorbed into the Office of Science and Technology, an existing government
body. A director-general of all research councils will be appointed.
The LINK steering group that organises collaborative efforts between
academics and industry will be strengthened.
The government's new Technology Foresight Programme will be overseen by
Professor William Stewart, the chief scientific adviser. He will set up
panels of experts from industry, universities, finance, consumer research
and government. They will evaluate the fit between what the paper describes,
in yet more jargon, as 'science-push' and 'demand-pull'.
Science-push happens when trends in science match the availability of strong
UK research groups to work in the most promising areas.
Demand-pull occurs when companies in the UK have the ability and desire to
apply the research and market the results.
Where both come together Prof Stewart will foresee an opportunity. All
government decisions on research funding will be assessed in this way, and
Prof Stewart hopes industry will use them for its R&D planning. An indirect
benefit, the paper says, is that 'the networking generated by the exercise
will greatly increase interchange between private, academic and public
sectors'.
There are already a few examples of companies and public bodies engaged in
foresight in the UK, says Mr Ben Martin of the Science Policy Research Unit
at the University of Sussex, who wrote a background report on the subject as
part of the government's preparation for the white paper.
But in other countries foresight is more widespread. 'In Japan and now
Germany and the US, foresight exercises take place within companies, within
industrial associations, within individual government departments or funding
agencies, and spanning all research,' Mr Martin says.
Mr Waldegrave says he is aware of how Japan does things: 'Whenever I go to a
laboratory I see row after row of Japanese names in the visitors' book. They
make a systematic effort to find out what's going on elsewhere in the
world.' He says the recent sharp increase in Japanese government funding of
life sciences research is a direct result of such activity.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930527

