FT932-7071

FT  26 MAY 93 / World Trade News: High hopes for Aden seaport's return to
glory


   By ERIC WATKINS


   SANA


ADEN, formerly one of the world's busiest seaports, saw a sharp decline in
its fortunes in the two decades following the takeover in 1967 of a Marxist
government in South Yemen. That situation may soon be reversed with new
legislation and detailed plans for the creation of a free trade zone in
Aden.
'Location (on the south-western tip of the Arabian peninsula) is without a
doubt Aden's strongest asset and will enable it to compete with other zones
in the area,' says Mr Gerald Tunnel, of the US Raytheon Corporation and
project manager for the recently completed masterplan for the proposed free
trade zone.
Mr Tunnel concedes that Aden at the moment lacks the facilities to compete
with nearby Jebel Ali in the Gulf. But he insists Aden has 'reasonably good'
facilities and that its location represents better value for shippers in
terms of time and money.
'Shippers can save two and a half days' shipping time by sailing to Aden
instead of to Jebel Ali,' he says.
'In financial terms that represents Dollars 100,000 (Pounds 65,000) per
journey and about Dollars 1.5m a year.'
Raytheon's masterplan proposes a four-phase programme of development over a
25-year period and calling for total investment of Dollars 5.8bn to develop
the port's infrastructure.
As an inducement to investors, the Yemeni government in April passed
legislation offering a variety of incentives, including exemptions from
import and export duties, from taxes on industrial and commercial profits,
and from income tax for 15 years.
Plans at the moment propose activities including industry, light
manufacturing, assembly, and tourism. But the focus will be on developing
Aden's potential as a trans-shipment centre for world trade.
Toward that end the masterplan calls on Yemeni administrators to introduce
competitive methods to their respective sectors as quickly as possible by
privatising all facilities and services connected with the free zone,
especially Aden's airport and harbour facilities.
Promoters of the free zone admit to difficulties. Aden has long had an
unfavourable reputation for union militancy and low discharge rates.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930526

