FT934-10303

FT  05 NOV 93 / Gloom as Japanese stock market falls 2.2%


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


GLOOM over the Japanese economy deepened yesterday as the Tokyo stock market
plunged 2.2 per cent, closing below 19,000 for the first time in eight
months.
The fall is another blow to Japan's financial system, which is already
staggering from the failure this week of Muramoto Construction, the biggest
postwar corporate collapse.
Last week's partial listing of East Japan Railway, the semi-privatised
railway group, is being blamed for the weakness. The Tokyo market has
declined in six out of seven trading days since the flotation, losing 1,300
points, or 6.7 per cent.
Officials and brokers had hoped JR East would restore the confidence of
investors. Instead, they were discouraged by the halt in trading of its
shares last week, as selling orders for the stock jammed the computer system
at the Tokyo stock exchange.
Since hitting Y600,000 at its initial trading price, JR East has fallen 18
per cent. The declines have dragged down the Nikkei, which retreated 431.45
to 18,949.79 yesterday.
Brokers also blamed the market's fall on the absence of stock purchases by
public pension funds, which have actively supported share prices since last
March, only to disappear after the listing of JR East.
Meanwhile leading blue chip companies have started to announce large-scale
staff cuts.
The recent spate of corporate interim results has indicated further
deterioration in profits, as many companies have revised down earnings
estimates for the year to March. 'This loss of confidence among business
managers is really frightening,' said a fund manager at Nippon Life, the
leading life assurer.
However, with ministry of finance officials wishing to offload other
state-owned companies, including Japan Tobacco and the remaining regional
railway companies, the stock market may see another round of public pension
fund support.
Bonus cuts, Page 5 World Stocks, Page 38 Government bonds, Page 24

The Financial Times


International Page 18

931105

