FT933-5351

FT  03 SEP 93 / International Company News: SBC stages strong recovery in
first half


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


SWISS Bank Corporation, Switzerland's third largest banking group, staged a
strong recovery in the first half from deeply depressed profits in the same
period of last year.
Net income from ordinary operations doubled to SFr719m (Dollars 492.8m),
enabling the group to achieve a 10.7 per cent return on equity, slightly
above its 10 per cent target.
Mr Georges Blum, new SBC chief executive, said that the good result was
achieved in exceptional circumstances. Profits from trading in securities,
foreign exchange and futures and options markets soared 128 per cent to
SFr1.55bn, due to bubbling stock markets and often chaotic currency markets.
Also, return on equity in the first half was still rather less than the 13
per cent and 15 per cent figures already reported by its Swiss rivals, Union
Bank of Switzerland and CS Holding.
SBC, which has been hurt by a number of spectacular lending misadventures in
recent years, again boosted its loan loss provisions in the first half by 66
per cent to SFr1.24bn.
But Mr Blum said this move mainly reflected worries about the impact of the
recession on the bank's broad base of industrial customers rather than the
discovery of new headline cases. 'There are no more skeletons in the
closet,' he said.
Net interest income was flat at SFr1.5bn in the first half and net
commissions rose 20 per cent to SFr1.2bn, reflecting, in part, the group's
leading position in the Swiss investment fund sector. Assets under
management in funds reached SFr40bn at the end of June, 18 per cent higher
than at the end of last year.
Costs were up only 8.2 per cent, and administrative costs actually fell
SFr41m to SFr714m, partly due to the completion of restructuring at
subsidiary Banca della Svizzera Italiana.
Profit before tax and provisions jumped 75.3 per cent to SFr2.18bn, but the
result was still below the SFr2.76bn and SFr2.4bn earned by UBS and Credit
Suisse respectively at this level.
Mr Blum said SBC could not expect profit to grow as strongly in the second
half, but forecast that net income would exceed last year's 'by a
significant margin'.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930903

