FT931-4198

FT  12 MAR 93 / Swedish economy may force poll


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   STOCKHOLM


SWEDEN faces the prospect of an early general election after the minority
government yesterday decided to seek a vote of confidence in its economic
policies next Wednesday.
The crisis was triggered by the opposition New Democracy party, which
unexpectedly voted against two government bills on Wednesday, throwing into
question the government's ability to implement its economic policies
Although there were indications late yesterday of a compromise, it was still
unclear whether the government would secure New Democracy backing in the
vote. Failure to do so would trigger a general election in May or June. This
would be the first time for 35 years that an election had been called early,
and would be well before the government's current three-year mandate expires
in September 1994.
The populist New Democracy denies trying to force an early election, but
says it wants to be more broadly consulted on economic policy. In return for
its support, it wants the government to stimulate Sweden's
recession-stricken economy, by lowering value added tax or petrol taxes.
This is a difficult demand for the government to concede at a time when the
budget deficit is SKr200bn (Pounds 18.2bn). New Democracy might, however,
support the government in the vote in exchange for greater consultation over
the contents of next month's supplementarybudget.
Mr Carl Bildt, the prime minister, has not disguised his exasperation at
what he considers a last-minute change of tactics by New Democracy, which
the government says casts doubt over the party's reliability.
The government felt it had secured the party's support both for its general
economic policy and a specific motion relating to pensions, before they were
rejected.
Mr Lars Christiansson, chief spokesman for Mr Bildt, said: 'The crisis is
not over and it is impossible to see how next Wednesday's vote will go.' He
added that no direct talks between the government and New Democracy were
currently scheduled.
However, the latest opinion polls suggest an election would bring the Social
Democrats back to power. 'The logical and natural decision if the government
cannot govern is to call an election and let the people have their say,'
said Mr Ingvar Carlsson, Social Democrats leader.
The political uncertainty led to a sharp fall in the krona and higher money
market interest rates yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930312

