FT932-13455

FT  23 APR 93 / Little elation over unemployment's latest fall: Lisa Wood,
Emma Tucker and Andrew Taylor find reasons for the drop and the guarded
response to it


   By LISA WOOD, EMMA TUCKER and ANDREW TAYLOR


   NOT A FLUKE


but nothing to get too excited about. That was the guarded response
yesterday of City economists and Whitehall officials to the second
consecutive monthly fall in unemployment.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, the employment secretary, set the tone. While she
warmly welcomed the March figure, which saw seasonally adjusted unemployment
fall by 26,000 to 2,940,800, she said that not too much should be read into
one month's figures.
But she said fewer people were now joining the unemployment count, every
region saw falls in the jobless figures and vacancies were the highest for
two years.
A number of reasons for the fall were put forward by her officials, the
Confederation of British Industry and economists, though most said it was
too early to say whether the unemployment peak had been reached.
Reasons given for the fall included:
A more flexible labour market: a number of economists said labour market
reforms in the 1980s - in particular trade union reform and stricter rules
for claiming benefits - had made the labour market more flexible. 'I think
that people in the labour market are making Herculean efforts to find jobs,'
said Professor Patrick Minford of Liverpool University, who believes that
unemployment will have dropped to 2m by 1996. 'The unions realise that there
are lots of people out there who want jobs and the scene is one of people
pricing themselves back into work, particularly professionals.'
More part-time work is another feature of an increasingly flexible labour
market. Stateside Foods, of Rossingdale Valley, Lancashire, cut its
workforce early last year from 84 to 34 but then built it back to 75, with
the new recruits mostly being part-time women workers. Mr Leonard Haysom,
operations director, said: 'We have found it (part-time working) extremely
beneficial - we have been able to meet better our commitment to supermarkets
which are now opening seven days a week.'
Over-sacking: economists said a number of companies had been caught out by
the strength of demand, particularly domestic demand, and had shed too much
labour at the end of last year.
'I think the story behind these figures is that the UK corporate sector has
been caught off-guard by the strength of demand in the first three months of
this year,' said Mr James Barty, UK economist at Morgan Grenfell.
Big redundancy programmes are ending: the construction industry has forecast
that the sector is likely to lose a further 50,000 jobs this year. But the
rate at which jobs are being shed is expected to decline as the year
progresses, according to Ms Joanne Cutler, economist at the Building
Employers Confederation, the industry's largest trade association.
Much job shedding by national contractors and building material suppliers is
thought to have been completed as companies have reduced overheads and
reorganised their businesses in the recession.
Government programmes: there has been a steady increase in the number of
jobless people going on to government training and work experience
programmes. This takes them off the claimant count. In January there were
129,000 people on Employment Training, the main training programme for the
long-term jobless, compared with 135,000 in March.
In addition, the Unemployment Unit, a research and lobbying organisation,
said it believed the Employment Service had been making great efforts in the
last two months of its financial year to get the unemployed into jobs and
achieve its placement targets.
Demographic factors: the Department of Employment said these could make a
difference to the rate at which unemployment drops as the economy emerges
from recession.
At the beginning of the last decade the number of people entering the labour
market was much higher than it is now, a factor which contributed towards
the rise in unemployment long after the recession was over.
In 1981 the population of working age increased by 177,000 compared with the
previous year, and by about 250,000 in both 1983 and 1984. By contrast, the
working population increased by only 42,000 last year, compared with 1991,
and is projected to increase by 47,000 this year.
At the same time, more young people are staying on in full-time education
than was the case at the beginning of the last decade.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930423

