FT934-11515

FT  30 OCT 93 / Books: The meteor's tragic arc


   By STEPHEN AMIDON


TENNESSEE WILLIAMS: EVERYONE ELSE IS AN AUDIENCE
by Ronald Hayman
Yale University Press, 268 pages Pounds 19.95
THE TRAJECTORY of literary fame in 20th century America often seems as fixed
as a meteor's. A sudden burst of talent and light from an unexpected region
is quickly followed by a long, spectacularly visible fall. Hemingway,
Fitzgerald, Faulkner, Capote - the American pantheon is full of writers who
suffered the dubious distinction of being celebrities long after their
talent had flared out.
Perhaps the most pathetic and poignant of these big league burn-outs is
Tennessee Williams. Born the second child of a seedy middle class Southern
family in 1911, by the age of 36 Thomas Lanier Williams had changed both his
name and his future, becoming the most famous playwright of his age with the
classic dramas The Glass Menagerie and A Streetcar Named Desire.
Nothing, it would seem, could stop him. But by the time of his death in
1983, the great dramatist had become a stumbling, lisping, doped-up parody
of himself, raging and remonstrating like some countess in exile, working
feverishly in an amphetamine trance yet unable to come up with anything
worth staging.
Ronald Hayman's short, sharp biography provides a telling portrait of how
this disintegration occurred. Unlike Hemingway and Fitzgerald, who simply
drank too damned much, Williams's self-destructiveness was tied up with his
art from the very beginning. After all, how many 13-year-olds complain of
writer's block? Young Tom's family proved an incubator for both his
homosexuality and artistic drive. The Williamses were dysfunctional long
before the phrase became popular, with a distant and drunken father who
worried about his 'sissy' son, an overbearing mother, and a sister whose
brittle sensitivity was to lead to institutionalisation and a lobotomy.
Williams's response to this stifling environment was to write and travel
obsessively. By his 30th birthday he had consigned an awesome number of
words to the page, rivalled only by the miles he had racked up in the
wanderlust that was to grip him until his death. But if wealth and fame
allowed him to escape from his family, his imagination was tied to it for
the remainder of his life. His domineering mother, a preacher's daughter who
had married 'beneath herself', was to appear in various guises throughout
Williams's oeuvre, most notably as Amanda Wingfield, the mother in Menagerie
who claims to have once received 17 gentleman callers in a single day.
Echoes of her can also be found in Streetcar's Blanche DuBois, another faded
belle with delusions of grandeur.
Williams's sister, Rose, also informed his art. He was away when it was
decided to give her a lobotomy, and he felt guilty for the rest of his life
that he had not be present to prevent an operation which turned out badly.
The model for the crippled Laura in Menagerie, her condition undoubtedly
contributed to the morbidity and images of mutilation that were to mar much
of the playwright's later work.
Ironically, Williams's father, a blustering and abusive shoe salesman, was
confined to the wings of his son's imagination - most of the domestic
arrangements in the playwright's major works are devoid of fathers. Although
this may have seemed like contempt at the time, one can only conclude that
Cornelius Williams fared better than his wife and daughter.
Hayman's biography is at its best in showing how Williams's ability as a
young writer to mine his own life for dramatic ore left him gutted as an
older man. There was no catharsis involved in putting his guilt and sexual
tensions on paper. Writing seemed only to amplify these feelings. Williams
was a compulsive reworker of material. Most of his plays began as short
stories, grew into one act dramas, then blossomed into their final five-act
form. While this diligence at first was the mark of admirable craftsmanship,
it later took on the air of morbid obsession. Williams's hopelessly
overblown later work rehashed the themes of emotional cannibalism and sexual
confusion that were so potent in his great plays.
After critics and audiences shunned his work, Williams sought refuge in
chemicals and pointless travel. His final years are as boringly melodramatic
as his later work, a countless succession of male companions, tempests of
hypochondria, and brief residencies in posh hotels. With the cruel irony
America likes to reserve for its ruined artists, Williams's last years were
his most famous, allowing him to play the grandmaster of the stage at
countless revivals and lifetime achievement ceremonies even as he was coming
creatively unglued.
While Hayman's book is skilled in showing the tragic arc of Williams's
career, it is perhaps too perfunctory to satisfy readers wanting to get the
full picture of this sad life. While I am no fan of door-stopping
biographies, 240 pages of amply illustrated text does seem a bit meagre.
That said, this remains a useful guide to the workings of Williams's
troubled imagination, as well as a sad testament to the way a literary
career can go so terribly wrong.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931030

