FT934-8445

FT  16 NOV 93 / Corporate bankruptcies increase as demand sinks


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


CORPORATE bankruptcies in Japan are rising steadily, as consumer and
industrial demand continues to sink, the latest economic statistics say.
The number and size of corporate casualties rose from September to October,
but are still well down on the same period last year, according to two
credit research agencies yesterday.
Bankrupt companies' unpaid debts rose 12.2 per cent to Y485.8bn (Pounds 3bn)
from September to October, according to Tokyo Commerce and Industry. But the
total, up for the third month running, was 39 per cent less than October
last year.
Teikoku Databank, another credit researcher, recorded a 6.2 per cent rise to
1,258 in the number of bankruptcies, the second highest since the turn of
the year.
Both agencies believe business collapses will worsen in the next few months
because the recession shows no signs of abating. Neither survey includes the
collapse two weeks ago of Muramoto Construction, the largest post-war
financial failure, with debts put by Teikoku at Y590bn.
Another sign of the economy's weakness came yesterday with a 4.5 per cent
year-on-year fall in domestic orders for industrial machinery in the six
months to September.
Orders overall, at home and overseas, were stagnant, up 0.2 per cent to
Y3,238bn. But that was entirely because of a rise in contracts to build oil
and chemicals plants in the Middle East and sales of power generation
equipment in south-east Asia, said Japan Society of Industrial Machinery
Manufacturers.
Consumer spending continues to slide, according to the Japan Department
Stores Association. Department store sales in Tokyo, a bellwether of
national consumer sentiment, fell for the 20th month running in October.
Sales declined by 10.4 per cent last month from October last year, said the
association. The decline took place in all departments, though association
officials said consumers were still attracted by cheaper goods.
Cool summer hits Japanese store, Page 32

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931116

