FT931-3991

FT  12 MAR 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Russian crisis shakes D-Mark


   By GILLIAN TETT


FEARS THAT the political situation in Russia could be deteriorating caused
the D-Mark to slip on the currency markets, writes Gillian Tett.
As news of the uncertainty trickled through yesterday morning, the dollar
bounced sharply higher against both the D-Mark and the yen, reaching a high
of DM1.6703.
However, a mixed set of US economic figures eventually calmed the dollar's
rise, and by the end of the day it had fallen back to DM1.6610, down
slightly on the previous day's close of DM1.6645.
The US February retail figures had been slightly better than expected,
showing a 0.3 per cent rise against flat market forecasts. However, these
were offset by the announcement of a rise in weekly unemployment claims
which caused some uncertainty about the strength of the US recovery.
Nevertheless, many dealers expect the dollar to continue its upward trend
against the D-Mark, which is perceived to be the currency most closely tied
to the fortunes of the former Soviet Union.
'Generally speaking the dollar has been fairly strong all round. The events
in the former Soviet Union have just been a catalyst,' said Mr Gerard Lyons
of DKB International. He said that the key question for the dollar in the
weeks ahead was whether it could break through the DM1.6800 level.
In early US trading, the dollar drifted lower with dealers in New York
disappointed by the poor jobless figures and with worries about the crisis
in Russia insufficient to sustain an upward drive.
Concern about the D-Mark also boosted the Swiss franc, which has been
steadily rising against the German currency all week. By the end of the day
it closed at DM0.917.
'The Swiss franc has been a clear winner this week,' commented Mr Jim
O'Neill of Swiss Bank, who calculates that it has risen by 1 per cent in
value against the D-Mark since Monday.
Trading in sterling remained fairly quiet, with the London markets in limbo
ahead of the UK budget.
'Its not exactly a day for sterling,' said Mr Lyons, who said that he
expected the currency to remain largely steady until the Budget on Tuesday.
An early rise in the pound against the D-Mark was stalled after the release
of the Confederation of British Industry's distributive trade survey got a
mixed response from the markets. In the afternoon, sterling dipped to close
unchanged on the day at DM2.3850.
Meanwhile the lira continued to slide. It closed at L966.0 against the
D-mark, from a previous close of L961.50.
With the G7 meeting scheduled for today, and the British Budget due next
week, dealers warned that the markets could move rapidly in the coming
weeks.
'Everyone is waiting for the big events next week,' explained Mr O'Neill.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930312

