FT934-11176

FT  02 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Airbus Ltd


TO THE Anglo-Saxon eye, the structure of Airbus Industrie is an oddity. The
four-nation aircraft group is not an ordinary limited company with its own
balance sheet and profit-and-loss account but a marketing consortium, whose
shareholders own the group's assets and share out the lion's share of the
manufacturing contracts. To outside observers, its accounts are opaque and
its manufacturing decisions often seem excessively influenced by political
considerations.
Airbus's shareholders - especially France's state-owned Aerospatiale - have
in the past argued that this structure was essential in the group's start-up
phase. They say it enabled the company to operate on a trans-European basis
and establish itself as a competitor to Boeing, the world's largest aircraft
group. But now some insiders have again begun to question the structure.
British Aerospace and Deutsche Aerospace - two of Airbus's shareholders -
argue it should convert to a more conventional company structure which owns
its assets and awards contracts on a commercial basis. Last week, Mr Jean
Pierson, the group's managing director, who is on secondment from
Aerospatiale, gave his backing to speedy reform.
Whatever the pros and cons of Airbus's consortium structure in its infancy,
the arguments in favour of reform are compelling now that it has matured
into the world's second largest civil aircraft supplier. One reason is that
an ordinary corporate structure would provide greater transparency in its
accounts. This should enable Airbus's ultimate owners to judge whether
further investment provides value for money. It should also reduce the
threat of a trade war with the US, which is able to argue that foggy
accounting practices act as a channel for subsidies.
A second, equally important reason for converting to a limited company is
that it would help improve efficiency and so enhance Airbus's chances of
competing successfully in world markets. If Airbus owned its assets, it
would find it easier to control costs. It would also have greater freedom to
follow commercial considerations in awarding contracts to suppliers.
At a time of deep recession in the airline market, the need to compete
aggressively for orders is particularly strong. Boeing has already embarked
on a far-reaching efficiency drive. Airbus's partners are doing the same,
but not uniformly or with the same vigour. One worrying sign is that Airbus
has suffered a fall in net orders so far this year, while Boeing's order
book is still rising.
Although Mr Pierson has now been persuaded of the case for speedy reform,
this does not mean that the political battle has been won. The French
government, in particular, will be reluctant to lose influence over Airbus's
operations. But if greater freedom is necessary to secure Airbus's future,
that is a price worth paying.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931102

