FT932-6650

FT  27 MAY 93 / Courtaulds and Hoechst to merge viscose operations


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


HOECHST, the German chemicals giant, and Courtaulds, the UK group, yesterday
announced they had reached an agreement to merge their European viscose and
acrylic fibres operations.
The joint venture, to be majority owned by Courtaulds, would have had a
turnover last year of Pounds 369m, of which the UK company's share would
have been Pounds 238m.
Mr Sipko Huismans, chief executive declined to say what proportion will be
owned by the British company, but said it was substantially more than 50 per
cent, and that in effect the deal was a takeover. The business would be
consolidated in Courtaulds' accounts, he added.
The merger is subject to the agreement of competition authorities. The joint
venture would be Europe's largest manufacturer of viscose, which is used for
cotton substitutes and disposable bedding. The operations would have a
capacity of about 135,000 tonnes a year, larger than those of Lanzing of
Austria, which has capacity of about 130,000 tonnes a year.
In acrylic fibres - used as a wool substitute - the merged business would be
Europe's number two, with capacity of between 195,000 and 215,000 tonnes a
year.
European capacity is about 830,000 tonnes a year, according to Mr Simon
Garmston, senior partner at PCI-Fibres and Raw Materials, the specialist
consultants.
The deal, which is scheduled to be completed this autumn, gives Courtaulds
greater access to the European textiles sector, said Mr Huismans. The
company has recently started producing a new textile product in the US
called Tencel, but its strength in European viscose is manufacturing
non-textile unwoven products.
Hoechst has been hit by the decline of the European textiles industry.
'Prices are horrible,' said Mr Jean-Louis Juvet, director general of the
Brussels-based International Committee of Rayon and Synthetic Filament. 'All
but Courtaulds are losing money,' he said.
The European acrylic fibre market has been more stable, but has been
affected by a slowdown in demand from China, the world's largest importer.
Hoechst does not have sufficient volumes to make money in present
circumstances, said Mr Juvet.
Lex, Page 24;
Courtaulds results, Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930527

