FT934-11295

FT  02 NOV 93 / Israeli poll is test for peace drive


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


ISRAELIS go to the polls today to vote for new municipal authorities in the
first test of nationwide public political sentiment since the signing of the
historic Israeli-Palestinian peace accord.
Although the 3.3m registered voters will be influenced by a range of issues
from education to rubbish collection, political analysts say the poll will
also indicate national feeling about the unfolding peace process. Mr Yitzhak
Rabin, prime minister, has said he views the elections as a vote of
confidence by the public in his peace drive.
The two greatest electoral battles, and the ones which are most likely to
provide a political weather vane, are in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv.
In Jerusalem Mayor Teddy Kollek, an 83-year-old veteran of Mr Rabin's Labour
party, has been fighting a tough race to keep control of the Holy City
against competition from Mr Ehud Olmert, a member of parliament from the
right-wing Likud party.
Opinion polls show the two neck and neck after a campaign marked by personal
attacks and questions about whether Mr Kollek is fit enough to stand another
term of office.
Jerusalemites, who live on the fault-line of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, are deeply concerned about security issues particularly for the
massive Jewish settlements nearby and the future status of the city.
Both candidates in Jerusalem agree on the unity of the Jewish West with the
Arab East of the city and both back Jewish development of East Jerusalem.
But Mr Olmert favours a much more aggressive settlement policy, with Jews
moving into neighbourhoods reserved under Mr Kollek's administration for
Arabs.
Palestinians say a victory by Mr Olmert would exacerbate Arab-Jewish
tensions in the city and make a compromise on its final status - such as
joint or international administration - much more difficult. However, the
80,000 registered Palestinians living in occupied East Jerusalem are divided
about whether to vote in the poll, even if to do so would ensure victory for
Mr Kollek.
In Tel Aviv, usually a more liberal and secular city than Jerusalem, Mr
Ronni Milo, a former Likud police minister, is fighting Mr Avigdor Kahalani,
a war hero from the Labour party, to succeed Mr Shlomo 'Chich' Lahat, the
long-time mayor.
Defeat for Labour in both cities could be a serious setback to the peace
process and bolster the right-wing opposition, which has seemed increasingly
divided and marginalised by Mr Rabin's initiatives.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931102

