FT932-150

FT  30 JUN 93 / People: Edelman fills gap at Storehouse


Keith Edelman (right) is a devotee of bananas and is all in favour of
informality. Unlike his predecessor, however, he intends neither to eat the
fruit in meetings nor wear cycling shorts to the office.
The managing director of Carlton Communications, who has been headhunted to
replace David Dworkin as chief executive of Storehouse, is 'a very normal,
straightforward, calm and collected individual with his feet planted firmly
on the ground', according to chairman Ian Hay Davison.
Dworkin, who had succeeded in turning around BHS and took over as chief
executive of the group last May, resigned abruptly in February to run US
department store Cater Hawley Hale. His departure greatly angered
Storehouse.
With bonuses for his BHS performance, he collected a total of Pounds 3.3m in
his last year. Edelman's pay, by contrast, will be 'in accordance with
English market norms; we will not be making headlines on that front',
according to Hay Davison. He will be on 24 months' notice, 12 on his side.
The company employed headhunters to search both sides of the Atlantic,
quickly discovering that it was not looking directly in the women's wear
retailing sector because 'too few candidates had in-depth management skills'
in Hay Davison's view.
Meanwhile Edelman is keen to stress his departure is quite unconnected with
any friction at Carlton or any falling out with chairman Michael Green.
'Michael and I get on very well; I am afraid there is no story there.'
However, he had been managing director for just two years.
Edelman, who is only 42, says he enjoys retailing more than anything else he
has done because of the pace - referring to his spell as chairman of Texas
Homecare which had just been acquired by Ladbroke when he took charge.
Describing himself as 'financially oriented' but not an accountant, previous
jobs included a spell as financial controller of the UK, Irish and Nordic
businesses of Bank of America. He then went to Grand Met, where he was
finance director of Express Dairies before moving to Ladbroke.
While the onerous task of righting BHS, of which Edelman will also be chief
executive, is largely complete and the turnaround at Mothercare, where Ann
Iverson is in charge, is in train, the new boss, who arrives in August, will
not be short of things to do. 'The management is thin, tightly stretched and
badly in need of pulling together,' says the chairman, referring to the gap
at the top left by Dworkin's hasty exit.
And as to the inevitable question as to whether he is related to Asher
Edelman, the US arbitrageur who stalked Storehouse during 1989, he replies:
'Not that I know of but I have always wanted to meet him.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930630

