FT932-97

FT  30 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Pounds 60m tag on Business Post - Shares
placed with institutions at 120p


   By ANDREW BOLGER


SHARES IN Business Post Group have been placed with institutions at 120p per
share, giving the UK's biggest independent parcel and express mail company a
market value of Pounds 60m.
The placing will raise Pounds 15m, of which Pounds 12m will go to the the
group and the rest to its owners, Mr Peter Kane, chairman, and his brother,
Michael, managing director.
The price of the placing, organised by Barings and UBS, puts the shares on a
historic earnings multiple of 17 and gives a notional dividend yield of 3
per cent and cover of 2.4 times.
Founded in 1971 Business Post has - in spite of recession - increased
turnover over the past three years at a compound annual rate of 41 per cent.
In the year to March, it made pre-tax profits of Pounds 4.2m on sales of
Pounds 33.7m.
Mr Peter Kane said: 'We have grown rapidly in size and profitability in the
last three years. We believe that we only have a market share of 4 per cent
in the UK and are confident that we can continue to expand our overnight
parcel and express mail business.'
He said some Pounds 6.4m of the flotation proceeds would be spent in the
expansion of the group's national hub in Birmingham, the development of new
regional hubs in Leeds, Manchester and Bristol, and - subject to finding
suitable sites - the purchase and development of new regional hubs in
Reading and central London.
An increase in operating margin to 14 per cent in the 12 months to March
this year was attributed to further economies achieved by the opening of the
Birmingham hub in 1992, and tight cost controls.
COMMENT
Business Post has flourished impressively, not least by targeting smaller
businesses which send a limited number of packages every day. It also
eschews advertising, instead getting salesmen from the group and its
franchisees to 'knock on doors' of prospective customers. The placing was
comfortably oversubscribed, and the shares are likely go to a comfortable
premium when trading begins on Monday. However, liquidity will be limited by
the vendors' decision to hold on to 75 per cent of the equity. The group
seems confident of maintaining its rapid growth record but that is likely to
be reflected in the rating - even after any stags exit.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930630

