FT933-12496

FT  23 JUL 93 / International Company News: IRI unveils reorganisation plan


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


IRI, the Italian state holding company which controls the Ilva steel group,
yesterday unveiled the outline of a restructuring plan designed to improve
the performance of its biggest loss-maker and overcome European Commission
objections to an earlier reorganisation project.
The proposal involves creating two new companies specialising in flat
products and stainless steels respectively.
The plan echoes some of the main elements of its predecessor, unveiled in
April, notably the retention of a core steel-making business based on Ilva's
big Taranto integrated steelworks and the Novi Ligure coated products plant.
The two units would form the basis for the new flat products company. The
second company would make stainless steels, which are produced at Ilva's big
Terni works in central Italy.
Significantly, the new plan makes no mention of Ilva's debts of L7,583bn
(Dollars 4.74bn).
The previous project entailed transferring much of the debt, along with some
steel-making facilities, to IRI, triggering a furious row from other
European steelmakers and the Commission.
IRI, which has itself appeared to change track since the appointment last
month of Mr Romano Prodi as chairman, hopes the new plan will overcome
Commission objections by stressing that all Ilva's activities are now for
sale.
Barclays, the UK banking group, has already been given a mandate to advise
on the disposal of Dalmine, the quoted tubes group, in which Ilva has a
majority stake.
Informal negotiations, predominantly with Italian private-sector
steelmakers, are also under way on selling stakes in both the flat products
and stainless steels companies. Any remaining Ilva businesses would be
either closed down or sold, said an IRI official.
Mr Prodi yesterday said IRI had already received expressions of interest for
some of its activities from both Italian and foreign steel groups.
This week, Mr Paolo Savona, the Italian industry minister, told a
parliamentary committee that details of the restructuring, based on the
outlines revealed yesterday, would be presented to the Commission by early
October.
Unlike the former proposal, it is likely that the new plan will be fleshed
out in collaboration with the Commission to prevent another clash over
financial aspects of the need for production cuts.
Alumix, the aluminium subsidiary of the state-owned Efim group, now in
voluntary liquidation, announced a reduced loss of L584bn last year against
L743bn in 1991.
It is unclear to what extent the improvement derived from
specially-subsidised electricity tariffs granted to much of the company's
smelting activities.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930723

