FT933-9933

FT  06 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Jones Intercable raises Pounds 153m for
Leeds project


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


JONES Intercable of the US has raised Pounds 152.5m of equity and debt
finance to pay for the construction of a cable network in Leeds covering
290,000 homes and 19,000 businesses.
The deal, arranged by NatWest Markets, the corporate and investment banking
arm of National Westminster, is the first of its kind in the UK cable
industry involving both equity and non-recourse debt.
It comes two weeks after TeleWest, the UK's largest cable operator, raised a
Pounds 190m loan facility to fund its network construction.
Mr Garry Stephen, head of media and telecommunications at NatWest Markets,
said the financing underlined a new level of confidence in the cable
industry in the City.
'In the 1980s there was bad news about the industry. Now there is a flow of
good news about cable and people are being attracted to the industry,' he
said.
Equity investors, which will subscribe Pounds 77.5m of equity, include Jones
Intercable, which has 57 cable franchises in the US; Cable and Wireless;
PaineWebber; Chemical Venture Partners; Capital Cities/ABC; NatWest Ventures
and VEBA Immobilien, the German housing company.
Four UK institutions are also investing but declined to make their names
public.
The Pounds 75m syndicated loan has been underwritten by National Westminster
Bank, ABN Amro Bank and the Bank of Novia Scotia, which was also involved in
the TeleWest financing.
Mr Alan Bates, managing director of Jones Cable Group, said construction
would begin in February with the first customer expected to sign on in June
1994.
Both cable television services and telephony, through Mercury
Communications, will be offered.
Telephony is the fastest growing part of the cable business and it is the
dual stream of revenues from television and telephone services that is
attracting new investor interest.
Jones also plans to bring one of its US cable television channels, The
Computer Network, which teaches computing, to the UK.
Following the financing Jones, which holds franchises covering about 1m
homes in the UK, is likely to try to buy additional UK franchises.
By the beginning of June there 465,000 cable subscribers in the UK and 2.5m
homes were passed by cable networks giving a penetration rate, or ratio of
subscribers to those who could subscribe, of 21 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930806

