FT933-12494

FT  23 JUL 93 / International Company News: Brokerage lifts Salomon to
record second quarter


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


SALOMON, the US securities house and energy trading group, yesterday
reported record second-quarter profits of Dollars 433m following a strong
performance from its Wall Street brokerage unit.
Salomon's impressive second-quarter profits, which smashed the previous
three-month record of Dollars 273m set in the first quarter of 1991,
represented a rebound from the Dollars 102m net loss incurred in the first
quarter.
Earnings were up sharply from the same period a year ago, when the group
posted profits of Dollars 211m. That figure, however, was affected by a
Dollars 185m charge to cover costs related to the 1991 Treasury auction
scandal.
Yesterday's results underlined the capricious nature of Salomon's earnings,
which swing wildly from quarter to quarter because of the brokerage unit's
reliance on trading its own capital in the financial markets, and because of
the volatility of the energy divisions' earnings.
The second-quarter results would have looked even better but for two
separate charges Salomon took in the quarter, one of Dollars 45m to cover a
reduction in leased office space in New York and Tokyo, and another of
Dollars 20m for a write-down of the group's investment in White Knights, the
troubled oil production joint venture in Siberia.
The biggest contribution to Salomon's record quarter came from Salomon
Brothers, the Wall Street brokerage operation, which posted the strongest
earnings by a publicly-traded securities house.
Salomon Brothers' client-driven business, an area which includes stock, bond
and currency sales and trading, investment banking, asset management,
emerging markets and private client investment services, was particularly
productive.
Together, these businesses brought in Dollars 913m, more than double the
Dollars 462m earned a year earlier. The firm attributed the improvement to
favourable market conditions, internal changes, cost controls, and a
recovery of business that was lost following the Treasury auction scandal.
Revenues from the unit's other main business - the trading of financial
assets using the firm's own capital - totalled Dollars 523m, down from an
exceptional second quarter of 1992 but a healthy recovery from losses
incurred in the first three months of this year.
The strong performance from Salomon Brothers helped offset a poor quarter
from Phibro Energy, the group's oil products and commodities trading
operation, and Phibro USA, its oil refining operation, which reported
pre-tax earnings of Dollars 3m and Dollars 2m, respectively.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930723

