FT932-3406

FT  15 JUN 93 / Thatcher steps in with conditional support for Major: PM
tries to end cabinet dispute over deficit


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN Major's premiership last night won unexpected but conditional
support from Lady Thatcher as the right wing of the Conservative party
sought to set the terms for Mr Kenneth Clarke's chancellorship.
Lady Thatcher's intervention coincided with an effort by the prime
minister's office to put an end to the disarray in the cabinet over tax and
spending policies. Senior officials insisted the government could reduce
public borrowing without breaking its election pledges.
Downing Street's stance reinforced the impression that Mr Major wants Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the new chancellor, to avoid both increases in income tax
and draconian cuts in welfare spending in the November Budget.
Lady Thatcher described speculation about an early challenge to the prime
minister as 'ill-timed and ill-judged', while the right-wing 92 group of
Tory MPs signalled that they were ready to back Mr Major if he eschewed
increases in direct taxation.
The less-than-wholehearted endorsement of the prime minister by his
predecessor and her acolytes in the House of Commons was seen at Westminster
as a deliberate attempt to weaken Mr Clarke.
The new chancellor, still deeply distrusted by many on the Tory right, has
emerged as the clear favourite to replace Mr Major if the crisis in the
Conservative party threatens the prime minister's leadership.
Senior Whitehall officials stressed that nothing has been ruled out ahead of
the Budget. But Mr Major appears determined to stress the priority of
sustaining the economic recovery and maintaining tight spending controls,
thus downplaying the possibility of further tax increases.
The prime minister said last week that about 70 per cent of the Pounds
50bn-a-year deficit could be attributed to the impact on spending and
revenues of the recession.
His insistence yesterday on sticking to the manifesto followed conflicting
ministerial statements on how the government might square the apparent
circle between pledges to hold down taxes, increase spending and reduce
borrowing.
In an apparent left-right split in the cabinet, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade
and industry secretary, suggested at the weekend that pre-election
commitments could no longer be regarded as sacrosanct. But Mr Peter Lilley,
social services secretary, and Mr John Redwood, Welsh secretary, both
rejected the idea that the government could renege on its income tax
pledges.
Mr Clarke will underline his determination to curb the borrowing requirement
in his first keynote speech to a City audience at the Mansion House this
evening. On Thursday the cabinet is expected to endorse public spending
ceilings for the next two years at least as tough as the Pounds 253.6bn and
Pounds 263.3bn cash totals agreed for 1994-95 and 1995-96, if not tougher.
Senior officials said the prime minister's reaffirmation of manifesto
commitments did not foreshadow any relaxation of the prospective squeeze on
spending. Mr Major will this morning meet Mr Michael Portillo, chief
secretary to the Treasury, and Mr Lilley, to press forward with plans to
curb the Pounds 6bn-a-year budget for invalidity benefit.
Right dents PM's plan, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930615

