FT934-8352

FT  16 NOV 93 / Tiphook may sell container division


   By ANDREW BOLGER


TIPHOOK, the debt-laden UK container and transport leasing group, has
obtained further facilities from its bankers and is talking to an
unidentified third party about the possible sale of its container division.
The group, which has been struggling to restructure its overstretched
balance sheet, also warned that the costs of refinancing meant it was likely
to incur a loss in the second half of this financial year and confirmed it
did not expect to pay a dividend.
Tiphook has an estimated 17 per cent of the world's container rental fleet,
making it the second largest rental company in the world after Genstar, a
division of General Electric Capital Corporation of the US. The container
division, which accounted for more than half of Tiphook's turnover last
year, could fetch a substantial sum, although trading is at a low point.
Tiphook also said it was at an early stage of discussions about alternatives
with other parties. This, combined with the container division talks,
suggests the group's bankers might be considering an orderly disposal of all
assets. Tiphook recently obtained shareholder approval to allow debts to
increase to Pounds 1.3bn, giving gearing of 600 per cent.
An obstacle to speedy disposals could come from disgruntled US bondholders,
who have lent Tiphook Dollars 700m (Pounds 463m) in the past year.
Tiphook said the group and some directors were the subject of four
shareholder class actions in the US, which they intended to defend, but
declined to give details. In view of the preliminary stage of these
proceedings, the company said it was unable to determine the impact, if any,
which these actions might have.
Tiphook said it had obtained facilities of Pounds 32.3m from its principal
banks. It had also obtained a further amount to meet immediate working
capital requirements, including finance payments.
However, the group was in breach of some banking covenants and required the
further support of these banks to enable it to meet its commitments through
to April 30, and discussions were continuing.
Tiphook's announcement came as the London market closed, but in New York -
where the majority of the stock is held - Tiphook ADRs fell Dollars  5/8 to
Dollars 3 7/8 .

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931116

