FT931-4153

FT  12 MAR 93 / Government delays proposal to widen M25


   By BRONWEN MADDOX, Environment Correspondent


THE GOVERNMENT'S plan to construct link roads on either side of the M25
motorway between its junctions with the M3 and M4 has been delayed until
after the county council elections in May.
In its consultation paper on the M25 last summer, the Department of
Transport proposed constructing three-lane link roads to carry local traffic
and help unclog Britain's busiest stretch of motorway. More than half the
traffic joining the M25 from the M3 and the M4 leaves within a couple of
junctions.
One Tory MP who asked not to be named, said: 'It is understandable
(ministers) don't want to get (the scheme) mixed up with the council
elections as so many people are against it.'
The publication of draft plans for the widening, possibly leading to a
public inquiry, was originally expected this spring but is now not
anticipated for months. The scheme is expected to cost Pounds 144m - with a
tenth of that earmarked for environmental protection - and to be completed
in 1998. The Department of Transport denied that the plans had been delayed
but said: 'As a general rule we do not make announcements in the run-up to
local elections because it takes away attention from the candidates.'
Twenty-three local authorities that have grouped together to fight the
scheme have called on Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, to look at
ways of improving public transport instead. Mr Ted Massey, secretary of the
Local Authority M25 Consortium, said yesterday: 'We are concerned that the
link roads between junctions 12 and 15 could set a precedent for widening
the M25 throughout.'
Surrey MPs have also formed an action group to press the government to
reconsider. Sir Michael Grylls, Tory MP for Surrey North West, said that
charging motorists for the use of roads to reduce traffic levels would be a
better policy.
It is becoming clear that the long-awaited statement from the Department of
the Environment on the proposed East Thames Corridor development is likely
to be much diluted from the original proposals to develop the region put
forward in 1991 by Mr Michael Heseltine when environment secretary.
Building construction consultants who advised the environment department at
the outset had a conception of the area - from Tower Bridge in London to
Southend, Essex, and Sheerness, Kent - as 'a huge linear city on both sides
of the Thames'. Since then, however, development pressure on the green belt,
one of the motives for the scheme, has eased.
While the department's statement on the corridor is expected to preserve
much of the rhetoric, few commitments on the necessary infrastructure for
the region are anticipated.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930312

