FT934-8724

FT  13 NOV 93 / Travel: Fantasy Island in a sea of violence - Michael
Thompson-Noel visits a palace of opulence in South Africa


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


FLY TO South Africa and you are aware, instantly and unmistakeably, that you
have arrived in one of the world's most violent countries.
'Three killed, nine injured in botched robbery,' said a headline in the
Johannesburg Star the day I arrived.
The story described how seven gunmen had fumbled an attempt to rob a
shopping centre. The same day, on the East Rand, three commuters had been
killed and five wounded by a gunman. And in Inanda, near Durban, five people
waiting for a bus had been shot dead.
Not surprisingly, the people who are trying to sell South African tourism
are more than a little schizophrenic. An example is John Smith, senior
manager in Europe for SAA, the South African airline.
He says that South Africa ought to be the perfect holiday destination. Yet
the legacy of apartheid - 'the one Afrikaans word which ended up in the
vocabulary of virtually every language in the world' - has meant that the
natural development of its tourism has been severly restricted.
At present South Africa receives about 350,000 European tourists a year  - a
figure, says Hill, which would be closer to 1.35m if development of its
tourism had not been so inhibited.
Inhibited or not, South African tourism is far more advanced than you might
expect. And some of what it has to offer is eerily futuristic, providing a
glimpse of the future South Africa may enjoy if only it can get there.
I was not heading for Johannesburg. I am not completely stupid. My
destination was the homeland of Bophuthatswana, two-and-a-half hours by car
from Johannesburg, where I wanted to see the Palace Hotel and Lost City
which hotelier Sol Kerzner, who has done much to transform southern Africa's
tourism, has built next to the established resort complex of Sun City.
Visionary is not too grand a word for Kerzner, 58, given the panache and
energy which mark his career. The son of Russian immigrants to South Africa,
he was born in a poor Johannesburg suburb. As a child he helped in the
family cafe. He graduated as a chartered accountant, then became a hotelier,
founding southern Africa's two key hotel groups, Southern Sun Hotels and Sun
International.
Kerzner has been the mainspring of the casino-resort industry in sub-Saharan
Africa, and also greatly boosted tourism in Mauritius and The Comores.
Sun International's Bophuthatswana subsidiary now describes itself as the
third biggest casino-resort group in the world in terms of market
capitalisation. Measured against all hotel groups (with or without gaming
facilities), it says it is 185th in terms of room numbers; 10th by net
income.
Kerzner's latest project, the Pounds 173m Lost City, is an African fantasy
theme resort. It opened a year ago and is viewed as the most ambitious
resort built in Africa. At its heart is the Palace Hotel: 338 rooms,
luxurious, different.
Gerald Allison, of US architects Wimberly, Allison, Tong & Goo
International, a world leader in hotel and resort planning, says that the
first thing to understand about the Palace Hotel is its opulence. 'I know of
no other hotel in the world, past or present, that has the space and
grandeur of the Palace,' he says. 'The Palace is not a hotel masquerading as
a palace; it is a palace.'
That is over the top. Yet the Palace is indeed a remarkable creation.
Next to the hotel is the Lost City complex: the Valley of Waves (hi-tech
waterpark); an entertainment centre; special features such as the Bridge of
Time; and a fantasy jungle-garden that uses more than 1.6m plants, trees and
shrubs of 3,200 species.
The hotel has its own Gary Player-designed, par-72 golf course (impressive
desert layout, including live crocodiles in the water hazard at the 13th
hole); and there are game drives and safaris available in Pilanesberg
national park.
For South Africa, Sol Kerzner's Lost City is futuristic in the literal
sense: a projection of the good things that lie ahead. Or perhaps it is just
a chimera: a fantasy from a future that will never come true.
Travel and accommodation details: Sun International, Badgemore House, Gravel
Hill, Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire RG9 4NR, tel: 0491-411222.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

931113

