FT934-8383

FT  16 NOV 93 / Arts: 'Cenerentola' finds a star - Opera in Geneva


   By ANDREW CLARK


No sooner has Marilyn Horne made her European farewells as queen of
Rossinian bel canto than another American picks up the crown. Jennifer
Larmore is no stranger to this side of the Atlantic: her Handel recordings
have announced a voice of exceptional beauty, and her initial stage
appearances showed promise. But it is only recently that her talents have
come into focus, confirmed by her Angelina in the new production of La
Cenerentola at Geneva's Grand Theatre.
She has a perfectly-formed figure, a natural smile and a gracious manner:
this Cinderella is Princess Charming from her first appearance, no matter
what her dowdy servant-clothes might say. The sincere stage persona helps
win the heart not just of her prince, but of the audience  - a major advance
on her Dorabella in Cos fan tutte two seasons ago.
Rossini's demure damsels seem Larmore's natural territory, with Teresa
Berganza her model rather than Horne. The timbre is aristocratic - plush
velvety and even throughout the range. She may lack Horne's exciting top and
stentorian chest register, but she is no mechanical note-spinner: the
musical syllables fall naturally within the framework of unbroken lyrical
melody. All she needs now is a more pronounced theatrical personality.
Larmore will be lucky to find a production as good-humoured as Jerome
Savary's in Geneva: it is one of the best things he has done. Using Ezio
Toffolutti's unostentatious painted sets, Savary goes unashamedly for
laughs, without overshadowing the musical quality. Unlike some of his recent
Offenbach productions, he never runs out of ideas, even if the scampering
crescendos gather a farcical momentum more in keeping with French operetta
than Rossini's melodramma giocoso. That the result is so satisfying owes
much to the alert accompaniments provided by Jesus Lopez Cobos and the
Lausanne Chamber Orchestra.
Carlos Chausson's Don Magnifico is a crusty old devil with split-second
comic timing. As the sisters, Jeannette Fischer and Claire Larcher make a
virtue out of vulgarity. Kristinn Sigmundsson is a benevolent, bear-like
Alidoro, Alessandro Corbelli the diminutive Dandini. Rockwell Blake's reedy
timbre may be a matter of taste, but he is a suave stylist and looks the
part of the handsome prince. Cenerentola is an opera of ensembles - and
Geneva has assembled as good an ensemble as you will find.
Performances tonight, Friday, Sunday

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931116

