FT933-12710

FT  22 JUL 93 / Russian truck maker plans modernisation


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


KAMAZ, Russia's main supplier of trucks, has embarked on a modernisation
programme to boost its competitiveness in the world truck market, according
to Mr Nikolai Bekh, the company's general director.
The programme will include the purchase of up to 100,000 truck engines from
foreign companies to make up for a shortfall following a fire at the
company's main engine plant in April. The 230,000 engine-a-year capacity
plant, in the city of Naberezhnie Chelnyin in the Russian republic of
Tatarstan, was destroyed, with damage estimated up to Dollars 1bn.
Mr Bekh said the fire, which wrecked not just the plant but also Kamaz's
plan to increase production by 25 per cent, did allow the management to
start from scratch in developing a new strategy for the truck business.
A new plant is now being built at a cost of Dollars 150m plus Rbs20bn; it
will produce 100,000 engines a year and should be completed by the end of
1993. However, up to 100,000 engines must be imported to produce the new
trucks for which there is now an enormous pent-up demand.
Mr Bekh denied a story in a Moscow newspaper yesterday that a deal was about
to be signed with Mercedes for the supply of 25,000 engines at a cost of
Dollars 300m. 'It's only a proposal,' he said.
Mr Bekh said the average cost of a truck engine made in the west was too
high and made the outright purchase of such a large number impossible for
the company. However, he has proposed three possibilities for solving the
problems.
First, the government would itself buy 25,000 engines abroad, which Kamaz
would then put into the trucks which have been made but await engines.
Second, the government could sell oil to Kamaz at domestic prices, and let
the company sell it abroad at world prices, using the difference to buy
engines.
Third, the government could sell hard currency to Kamaz at one tenth of the
present market rate - just over Rbs1,000 to the dollar.
Mr Bekh, one of the most prominent of Russia's younger industrialists, said
the new strategy now being pushed through at his enterprises would result in
the production of trucks 'of a world class'. In collaboration with a group
of foreign companies, including the long-time associates Cummins Engines and
Rockwell International, the company is revamping the chassis, braking
systems and cab design of the ageing models still being produced.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

930722

