FT934-11394

FT  01 NOV 93 / Arts: Damnation of Faust - Concert


   By RODERIC DUNNETT


Berlioz's The Damnation of Faust was premiered in Paris on a freezing
November afternoon in 1846, to a half-empty Opera-Comique. The concert was a
financial disaster. No such misfortune attended the admirable performance at
the weekend which concluded the fortnight-long Canterbury Festival.
To hear a revival of this luxuriant, semi-erotic French masterpiece in an
English cathedral seems as remarkable as it is welcome. The festival's theme
has focused on Faust this season to mark the quatercentenary of Christopher
Marlowe's death. As a climax, Berlioz's 'Dramatic Legend' could not have
been a better choice.
The widely-admired staging at the Royal Opera conducted by Sir Colin Davis
recently revived debate about the work's stage viability. Berlioz conceived
it as a series of audial tableaux, incorporating material dating back two
decades.
This was a performance to remember, in an acoustic distinctly favourable to
Berlioz's rich orchestral resonances. Much was owed to the direction of
Richard Cooke, former conductor of the LPO Chorus, well on top of the work's
large scale architecture and broad sweep: the pacing intelligent (if not
always quite thrusting enough), with attention to chorus leads, although
somewhat neglecting his soloists.
Key to the success was the splendidly disciplined Canterbury Philharmonic
Orchestra. One was constantly reminded that here was the home of the
distinctive Kent Opera. Rich-toned strings, meticulous tuning, with strong
legato and alertness to Berlioz's arching melodic lines; warm brass and
(apart from the odd passage) impeccable woodwind; plus two graceful,
sensitive solos on viola and cor anglais.
All four vocal soloists rose to the occasion. As Faust, Martyn Hill,
replacing the indisposed Neil Archer, surprised by the range of his
interpretation - a bit introverted at the start, uncertain of the odd top
note, yet growing into a difficult characterisation. As Faust's idealised
Gretchen (Margareta), Eleanor Bennett launched shakily, but warmed in the
duet and won hearts with her ensuing romance.
The cement to this performance was the singing of Mephistopheles by Brian
Bannatyne-Scott, a jovial demon whose malicious energies inspired some of
Berlioz's most witty and original vocal writing. This was a fine reading:
flexible and assured, with clear words and just the right amount of
controlled gesture. He was well supported by an attentive men's chorus,
largely abreast of the trickier passages. Upper voices were disappointing -
less honed and secure, and at worst, almost inaudible. But the freshness and
invention of Berlioz's kaleidoscopic score were amply displayed.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931101

