FT934-10063

FT  08 NOV 93 / US and Pakistan discuss nuclear dispute


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


   ISLAMABAD


AN SENIOR American official yesterday began talks with Pakistani leaders,
amid speculation that the two countries were making fresh efforts to resolve
their differences over the nuclear issue.
Ms Robin Raphael, assistant secretary of state for south Asia, arrived in
Islamabad over the weekend for talks with the government of Ms Benazir
Bhutto, the prime minister. She is the most senior US official to have
visited the country since last month's elections.
The visit comes after a recent call from Mr Wasim Sajjad, Pakistan's acting
president, for improved relations with Washington. The US cut off all
military and economic aid to Pakistan three years ago over concerns that
Islamabad had a covert programme to develop nuclear weapons.
However, Pakistan denies the charge, and claims its nuclear programme is
only for peaceful purposes. Islamabad has been reluctant unilaterally to
ratify the NPT or any other treaty preventing nuclear proliferation unless
New Delhi agrees to do the same.
In the latest diplomatic controversy between the two countries, the US
imposed sanctions on China and Pakistan this summer after allegations that
Beijing had supplied the M-11 missile to Islamabad. However, during her
recent election campaign, Ms Bhutto said repeatedly that she wanted to 'end
Pakistan's international isolation', widely interpreted as a commitment to
seek improved ties with the US.
Ms Raphael is also expected to discuss recent events in India-controlled
Kashmir, which have created fresh tensions between India and Pakistan, and
narcotics trafficking.
A diplomatic row erupted between India and the US last month when Ms Raphael
described Kashmir as 'a disputed territory'. New Delhi claims the area is an
integral part of India. Pakistani officials have welcomed the US position.
'Robin Raphael's visit will primarily focus on the nuclear issue but Kashmir
and narcotics trafficking will also not rpt not be too far down the agenda,'
said a senior Pakistani official yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931108

