FT932-148

FT  30 JUN 93 / Business and the Environment: Utilities' chance to clean up
 -Laurie Morse describes a US plan that allows companies to turn cuts in
sulphur dioxide emissions into dollars


   By LAURIE MORSE


Protecting the environment with legislation is notoriously difficult. Even
when the measures to be taken find general agreement, government regulations
often result in high costs - either to industry or to taxpayers.
But the group of environmental radicals who crafted the US 1990 Clean Air
Act may have turned this situation around. Having achieved a political
mandate to clean up the air, they set up a rare market solution for
achieving the goal. To date, the programme, which encourages trading in
pollution allowances, is getting rave reviews from environmentalists,
electric utility customers and from the industry it is assigned to modify.
The Clean Air Act requires that by 2000, US sulphur dioxide emissions be
reduced to half their 1980 level of 19m tons. This should remove the acid
rain that is killing many north-eastern watersheds.
Rather than force the nation's electric utilities - the largest sulphur
dioxide polluters - to adopt uniform technology for pollution abatement, the
Environmental Protection Agency defined emissions standards, issued permits
for the allowable level of pollution, and then told the utilities to design
their own emissions clean-up programmes. If they reduce emissions more than
required, they can sell their surplus pollution permits.
'This turns the regulatory system on its head,' says Daniel Dudek, senior
economist for the Environmental Defence Fund, a Washington-based advocacy
group. 'Rather than providing a ceiling for compliance, the regulations
provide a floor. It motivates companies to clean up beyond legal
requirements and turn that into dollars. It also inspires innovation in
technology and clean-up strategies.'
The programme gives utilities unusual flexibility in meeting emissions
requirements, and allows them to seek the lowest-cost compliance
alternative.
The market-based compliance process is welcomed by the US electric power
industry, which faces financial pressures from deregulation. Federal energy
rulings are gradually curbing the utilities' monopoly control over their
transmission lines, opening the door to cut-rate producers and allowing big
customers to haggle over the prices they pay for power. In many cases,
electric companies are finding it difficult to recover capital construction
expenditures, including those for pollution control equipment, by raising
utility rates.
The allowance programme is being implemented in two stages. In the first
phase, 110 of the nation's dirtiest power plants, most of them in the
mid-west, have until 1995 to cut their sulphur dioxide output by 25 per
cent; by 2000 they must reduce emissions by a further 25 per cent.
They will then be joined by hundreds more utilities in phase two of the
clean-up, which extends to 2010. By then, US sulphur dioxide emissions will
have dropped to 8.95m tons (8.12m metric tonnes). From 2010 onward, there
will be only 8.95m tons of pollution allowances available. The EPA will
strictly enforce the emissions levels, levying fines of Dollars 2,000
(Pounds 1,333) for each stray ton of sulphur dioxide output.
Most of the utilities, which usually burn low-cost regional coal to fuel
their generators, will comply by installing expensive smokestack
'scrubbers', or switch to low-sulphur fuels. However, some, like Carolina
Power and Light, will buy additional pollution allowances as the lowest-cost
compliance alternative.
CP and L uses clean-burning low-sulphur coal and already meets the 1995
emissions standards. To meet the more stringent standards for 2000, it would
have had to install millions of dollars in air-cleaning equipment for only
marginal improvement in air quality. Instead, it has purchased 85,103
pollution permits, each allowing one ton of sulphur dioxide emissions for
one year in the second phase of the programme. It paid Dollars 11.5m, or
about Dollars 135 each, at an EPA allowance auction held in Chicago in
March. The utility expects to buy additional allowances directly from other
utilities.
James Davis, CP and L's senior vice-president for fossil generation,
estimates the price at about one-third the cost of installing and operating
scrubbers. 'Purchasing these and other allowances will enable us to delay
the need to install scrubbers until 2005 at the earliest,' he says. 'This
translates into direct cost savings for our customers, since they ultimately
pay for environmental regulation.'
For a relatively clean plant like Davis's, scrubber installation and
maintenance costs can be as high as Dollars 800 per ton of emission
reduction.
Overall, the EPA estimates electric utility customers would have had to pay
30-60 per cent more for the benefits of the Clean Air Act if it were not for
the allowance programme. 'There will be an increase in electric rates, but
it will be far lower than under the old command-and-control system,' says
Renee Rico, an EPA administrator of the acid rain programme (which is
implementing the Clean Air Act). She points out that under the allowance
scheme the biggest polluters will make the biggest emissions reductions.
American Electric Power, the US's largest coal-burning utility, has 50 power
plants distributed across seven mid-western states. Twenty-one of its sites
must meet the 1995 compliance deadlines. Henry Fayne, AEP's controller, says
the allowance programme enables his company to over-comply by building a
scrubber on one site, and distributing the resulting surplus permits to
other plants in the system. 'If we over-comply in one place, we don't have
to comply in others,' he says.
AEP is building a Dollars 815m scrubber at its Gavin plant in Gallipolis,
Ohio. When it begins operation in 1995, it will cut Gavin's sulphur dioxide
output to 30,000 tons a year from the current 388,000 tons. That reduction,
and fuel switching at other sites, will bring all 50 of AEP's power plants
into compliance.
Pollution permits, like scrubbers, allow utilities to continue to burn local
high-sulphur coal. The Clean Air Act has significantly reduced demand for
that coal, depressing prices and putting thousands of mid-western miners out
of work.
For some utilities, coal mines, and miners, are important customers.
Illinois Power, a utility in southern Illinois, used the clean air standards
to negotiate lower coal prices in contracts with its suppliers, Arch
Minerals and Peabody Coal. With the contract concessions and a portfolio of
pollution permits, it will continue to burn about 5m tons of local coal a
year, preserving mining jobs and satisfying the sulphur dioxide emissions
requirements.
Illinois Power will purchase between 75,000 and 125,000 pollution allowances
a year until 1999. After that, it will install scrubbers. Delaying the
technology decision will allow new research on scrubbers to be completed,
Illinois Power chief executive officer Larry Haab said, in a statement
announcing the agreements.
Environmental groups have accepted permits as a low-cost and direct means of
reducing pollution. By removing each allowance they buy from the market,
they reduce national sulphur dioxide output by one ton for a year. In a
notable gesture, North East Utilities, a Hartford, Connecticut-based power
company, donated 10,000 allowances to the American Lung Association in
support of cleaner air.
One aspect of the allowance programme that is still lagging is a low-cost
means for utilities to trade the permits. The EPA is developing a
computerised system to track allowances and record ownership changes. But
that system is behind schedule, and until it is operational the Chicago
Board of Trade will delay holding a second allowance auction, originally
scheduled for this month.
Utilities continue to arrange private contracts for permit swaps, with most
focusing on allowances for the second phase of the programme.
'All this planning takes tremendous lead time,' says Andrew Weissman, a
principal in Clear Air Capital Markets, which specialises in allowance
trades. 'Most companies have finished their phase one planning, and are just
starting on phase two.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930630

