FT933-5267

FT  04 SEP 93 / US funds descend on China


   By TONY WALKER, TRACY CORRIGAN and MARTIN DICKSON


   BEIJING, LONDON, NEW YORK


REPRESENTATIVES of American pension funds with portfolios worth Dollars
500bn will converge on the Chinese capital Beijing next week in search of
new investment opportunities in what is regarded as one of the world's more
challenging 'emerging markets.'
Mr Philip Schaefer, organiser of the conference, said yesterday that now
American pension funds were permitted to invest 10 per cent of their
portfolios internationally there was growing demand for fresh investment
possibilities in countries like China.
The vogue for foreign investment in China has outstripped the growth of the
market. Far from lacking an inflow of foreign capital, China's nascent
markets are finding it hard to accommodate demand.
Some 100 representatives of pension funds, whose portfolios amount to about
an eighth of all pension fund money in the US, will discuss such issues as
China's regulatory environment, and development strategies with senior
Chinese officials from state banks and from key policy agencies.
As in other emerging markets, a raft of specialist country funds were set
up, following the creation of B shares for foreign investors 18 months ago.
Because of the complexities of the market, most institutional fund managers
prefer to use specialist country-fund managers.
'Six months ago, the total market value of funds available to invest in B
shares was twice the market capitalisation of B shares,' said Mr Kenneth
King, head of international investment at Kleinwort Investment Management in
London. This means that few funds are fully invested in China, with many
using Hong Kong shares as proxies.
In addition, some investors have been deterred by the volatility of the
market in B shares which has 'doubled and halved twice in less than two
years of life,' he said.
There has also been growing interest in investing in Chinese debt. The
People's Republic of China is preparing to return to the Eurobond market
with a Y30bn (Pounds 188m) offering via Nomura.
Some US major institutions remain wary. Mr De Witt Bowman, chief investment
officer of the California Public Employees Retirement System, the largest
public pension fund in the US, said it was not investing in China 'because
we don't feel the public markets are well enough developed, and the private
markets are very much insiders' markets' for those with the contacts.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930904

