FT934-8473

FT  16 NOV 93 / Frozen silence lingers over the wasteland of Chernobyl:
Bronwen Maddox visits the site of nuclear disaster


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


IN the town of Chernobyl, the silence is so complete it is hard to break it
by talking. You breathe more shallowly, partly because it is 15 degrees
below zero, and partly for fear of the radioactive dust, although the
scientists who are the town's only inhabitants say there is no danger if you
do not stay long.
Seven years after the world's worst nuclear disaster at the power plant 20
kilometres to the north, Chernobyl is a ghost town. China figurines are
visible through the curtained windows of the two-storey green and white
houses, but the grass has grown over the garden paths and the frozen roads
are unmarked by tyres. Radiation meters show readings five to 10 times above
natural background levels - in some spots the readings leap to 5,000 times
higher than normal.
When the Ukrainian plant's fourth reactor exploded in the early hours of
April 26, 1986, it sent clouds of radioactive plutonium, iodine, strontium
and caesium drifting over Europe. The plant's isolation helps explain how
none of its operators challenged their orders to carry out ill-judged tests
on the reactor. Surrounded by frozen rivers curling in crazy oxbows, its
white concrete sheds gleam for miles across marshes and pine forests.
A team of officials and scientists from the European Commission and the
European Parliament is now working urgently with the republics of Belarus,
Ukraine and Russia, the three most affected by the explosion, to try to
limit the consequences for health and the environment.
Last week the team, which has given Ecu14.2m (Dollars 16.6m) for joint
research programmes, warned that water supplies could become contaminated
within a decade. Lack of adequate health data is handicapping efforts to
measure the effect of radiation on people's health, they say; unless
monitoring begins soon, it may be impossible ever to judge how many people
have suffered.
Mr Gordon Adam, Euro MP for Northumbria, said: 'We have to have priorities,
and thyroid cancer in children is one of them.' A Commission report prepared
by scientists in the group has confirmed 186 cases of thyroid cancer in
Belarus children between 1986 and mid-1993 - normally, the disease is
extremely rare.
But the scale of the task in combating the radiation, which has made a
wasteland of some of the most fertile land in the central European plain, is
daunting. For 30km around the plant, the land is so contaminated that all
normal human life has been driven out.
A six strand barbed wire fence bars almost everyone but for the eight-man
shifts who tend the plant's two remaining reactors, and the scientists
studying mutations in plants and animals. The Ukrainian government has
allowed a handful of people to return to their homes, but only because they
are too old for radiation-induced cancer - which takes years to develop - to
shorten their lives.
It is from the air that the true extent of the desolation becomes clear. The
fairground wheel in Pripyat, the model town built to house Chernobyl's
staff, is lashed down and the seats covered with yellow wraps. The furrows
in the abandoned corn fields are blurring as the scrub takes over.
Then there is the debris, contaminated beyond recovery. More than 100 ships
of all sizes lie anchored and abandoned along the banks of the Pripyat
river. One large field looks like a drawer of children's toys tipped over: a
heap of brightly coloured tractors, police cars, buses, fire engines and
cranes with rust marks just starting to show. In the next field, the huge
grey helicopters which dropped sand on the reactor's blazing core are parked
forever, blades drooping nearly to the ground.
The most contaminated waste is buried in more than 600 dump sites dug
hurriedly after the disaster. At the bottom of the pits are trees from the
'red' forest, named for its ferocious level of radioactivity. The 10-foot
high mounds over the waste, arranged in neat rows inside high earthen
ramparts, look from the air like the burial places of an ancient
civilisation.
Meanwhile, facing acute power shortages, the cash-strapped Ukrainian
government last month reversed its earlier decision to close Chernobyl's
remaining reactors.
Fall out among friends, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931116

