FT933-5288

FT  04 SEP 93 / Murdoch in talks to sell HK news group


   By SIMON DAVIES and RAYMOND SNODDY


   HONG KONG, LONDON


MR Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation is negotiating to sell its 50 per cent
stake in Hong Kong's leading newspaper group, the South China Morning Post,
for a price believed to be about Dollars 500m (Pounds 331m).
The move comes at the end of a hectic week for the company, during which it
unveiled wide-scale expansion plans, including a German television deal, an
'open university' in Asia and the launch of a multi-channel satellite TV
package in the UK. It also launched a broadsheet newspaper price war in the
UK by cutting the price of its flagship, The Times, by a third.
The stake in the Hong Kong paper carries a stock market value of HKDollars
4bn (Pounds 344m). Based on the current share price, Mr Murdoch should reap
a total profit of more than HKDollars 5bn, or more than 200 per cent, on his
six-year investment in the newspaper, including previous disposals.
The talks are taking place six weeks after Mr Murdoch launched his push into
pan-Asian satellite broadcasting through the purchase of 64 per cent of Hong
Kong-based Star TV.
The buyer of the South China Morning Post is believed to be a consortium led
by Malaysian tycoon Mr Robert Kuok, one of south east Asia's most powerful
businessmen. Mr Kuok owns interests in the Shangri-La hotel group and a 33
per cent stake in Hong Kong's most profitable television broadcaster TVB.
Although there has been speculation that the newspaper sale is connected
with Mr Murdoch's satellite ambitions, it is believed that he has simply
decided he does not want to face the possible political difficulties of
running a newspaper in Hong Kong when the Chinese take over in 1997.
Mr Murdoch's experience with the SCMP has been short, but extremely sweet.
He purchased the entire company in early 1987 for HKDollars 2.4bn and
subsequently stripped out a number of its publishing investments. It was
already one of the world's most profitable newspapers, but earnings have
soared since the purchase and Mr Murdoch has received around HKDollars 1.3bn
in dividend income. He raised a further HKDollars 2.3bn from the company's
flotation in 1990.
In recent months, Mr Murdoch has voiced his aim to expand into media in the
world's largest consumer market, China.
It was expected that SCMP would be the vehicle for this expansion, and the
group made an initial push into Chinese language media through the purchase
of the loss-making newspaper Wah Kiu Yat Pao. The latest announcement
therefore came as a surprise. However, it may enable him to improve his
links with the mainland by cementing a business relationship with Mr Kuok.
SCMP shares were suspended yesterday, but will resume trading on Monday. The
company advised investors to 'exercise extreme caution when dealing in
(SCMP) shares'.
OFT urged to probe Times cut, Page 4
Media mogul, Page 6
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930904

