FT932-13481

FT  23 APR 93 / Andries Treurnicht dies of heart failure


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


ANDRIES Treurnicht, leader of South Africa's Conservative party who died
after heart failure yesterday aged 72, was one of the last survivors of a
generation of deeply conservative politicians, devout churchmen and learned
academics who embraced apartheid with ruthless, near-religious fervour.
His death comes at a critical time for the country's main right-wing
opposition party which seeks an independent state for whites. After
initially refusing to participate, the CP decided to take part in the
constitutional negotiations due to resume soon. But fears that it may resort
to violence have been raised by the detention of two of its leading members
in connection with the murder of Communist party leader Chris Hani 12 days
ago.
Mr Ferdi Hartzenberg, Treurnicht's deputy, was expected to be the party's
new leader and could take the Conservatives on a more militant path.
The party was formed when Mr Treurnicht left P W Botha's National party
cabinet in 1982, opposing extension of the franchise to Coloureds and
Indians. Sombre suited and studiously courteous, he seemed more at home in
the Dutch Reformed Church, which he served as a minister in the 1940s, than
on the hustings.
But his quiet manner belied his record. 'The Afrikaner is not prepared to be
regarded as ephemeral in the history of nations,' he said after his election
to head the secret Afrikaner Broederbond in 1972.
As a cabinet minister in the 1970s he won the nickname Dr No, bitterly
resisting measures to ease apartheid. Black South Africans recall with anger
his role as minister of black education in 1976 when black schoolchildren
rebelled against having to study in Afrikaans. Over 600 children were to
die; thousands of others joined the guerrilla wing of the African National
Congress.
He sustained to the end his belief in the apartheid vision of his mentor,
Hendrik Verwoerd, South Africa's prime minister from 1958 to 1966. But
Andries Treurnicht never recovered from the defeat in March last year when
whites voted overwhelmingly in a referendum to support President F W de
Klerk's reforms. The defeat, a psychological as well as political blow, left
him a spent force and the CP without an effective leader.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930423

