FT932-3257

FT  15 JUN 93 / GE Capital secures lower price on GPA


   By ROLAND RUDD


GE CAPITAL will be able to exercise its option to take control of GPA Group
for less than Dollars 200m (Pounds 130m), according to a draft prospectus
circulated to shareholders.
The option price is Dollars 100m less than lenders to the Irish aircraft
leasing group were expecting when the prospective deal between the two
companies was signed last month.
It reflects the tough negotiating stance of GE Capital, the financial
services arm of General Electric of the US, which under the terms of the
deal can choose to exercise its option as late as March 31, 1997. The US
group has also agreed in principle to buy Dollars 1.35bn of GPA's aircraft.
GPA advisers believe there has been no real deterioration in its trading
position over the last month.
GE Capital's option price is for 65 per cent of the group. It could rise to
80 per cent if key GPA shareholders fail to underwrite an additional loan of
up to Dollars 150m, which is partially convertible into equity. However, GPA
remains confident some shareholders will join in the deal.
GPA has already started to seek irrevocable commitments from its core
shareholders to vote in favour of the agreement with GE Capital before its
extraordinary general meeting in August. The group needs the support of
holders of 75 per cent of its shares.
Directors of GPA, meeting at their Shannon headquarters in the Republic of
Ireland, yesterday approved the repayment of Dollars 122m of medium-term
notes due on Wednesday after deciding that the group's working capital
requirements were satisfactory.
GPA's 138 lenders have been asked to extend their waivers of breaches on its
banking covenants to the end of July. The request comes in a document from
the group which also contains the final draft bank implementation agreements
on the restructuring of GPA's Dollars 5.2bn borrowings.
The key lenders hope to finalise the bank agreement by early August. GPA
hopes to have its results for the year to March 31 in a final form by the
end of June.
The accounts are expected to contain hundreds of millions of dollars of
provisions to cover the cost of restructuring, lost deposits and falling
aircraft values.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930615

