FT933-5167

FT  04 SEP 93 / Markets: When August ended, so did the market's summer
holiday - London


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


In the first three days of September, the stock market gave up a good
proportion of the gains it had made in recent weeks. On Tuesday, the last
day of the month, the FT-SE 100 index reached a new intra-day peak of
3115.1. Then the retreat set in: the index closed that afternoon at 3100.0
and had dropped by Friday to 3057.3.
It was as if investors had become aware that the market's performance in the
past month had led them perilously close to complacency.
There was a lot to be complacent about. During August, the total return  -
capital appreciation plus dividends - on the FT-SE 100 was 6 1/2 per cent.
In one month, investors had earned half as much again in equities as their
money would have earned in a year in an ordinary building society account.
That comparison was one of the self-reinforcing factors behind the market's
rise. Individual investors started to realise, says Paul Walton of James
Capel, that the years of high interest rates are over, making equities much
more attractive. This explained the Pounds 1bn a month inflow into unit
trusts.
Such investors were not the only people to whom UK equities have looked
attractive. Traders continue to report strong buying interest from abroad,
particularly from the US. Indeed, the day-by-day fluctuations of demand from
US investors had a marked influence this week.
On Wednesday, for example, weak transatlantic demand was one of the factors
pushing share prices down. On Thursday, US purchases of shares in the big UK
pharmaceutical companies, based on growing optimism that drug price controls
would not be part of Hillary Clinton's health-care package, helped slow the
market's slide.
Another important factor at work has been the summer's striking fall in
long-term interest rates. The yield on ten year gilts dropped again this
week, ending Friday at 6.81 per cent, down a fraction on last week and just
over half a point lower than at the end of July.
Even very long-term gilts are down to exceptionally low yields: they are now
just over 7 per cent, a level not seen since the Summer of Love in 1967. If
the real interest rate is 3 per cent or so (the level indicated by the
index-linked gilt market), investors are expecting long-run inflation of
about 4 per cent.
Is that a realistic expectation? The government would say it is too
pessimistic: 4 per cent is the upper end of its short-term target band for
inflation, and the medium-term ceiling is 2 per cent. Once the markets come
to terms with the 2 per cent figure, there is scope, on this argument, for a
further 2 percentage-point fall in long-term interest rates.
If gilts continue to yield twice as much income as ordinary shares, that
implies a one percentage point fall in the dividend yield on equities. Since
shares are currently yielding 3 1/2 per cent, such a move would require a
further 25 per cent rise in the equity market, giving scope for the FT-SE
100 to come close to 3,900.
Not surprisingly, not even the optimists among equity strategists are
mentioning such a number. After all, even 4 per cent inflation has rarely
been achieved since the 1960s; and few people still active in the City can
remember a sustained period when prices rose by 2 per cent price a year or
less.
Still, the working of this arithmetic explains why, despite this week's
setbacks, most analysts remain confident. The counter-argument, of course,
is that measured in terms of earnings the stock market looks expensive. Only
a handful of All-Share sectors have price/earnings ratios below 20. For
smaller companies, which have been the most spectacular beneficiaries of the
past year's rally, the ratio is well over 30.
Not surprisingly, these stretched earnings valuations make the market jumpy
whenever it looks as though profits are not making the recovery necessary to
justify such numbers. As Maggie Urry explains below, just such a frisson
occurred on Wednesday, the day of a profits warning from Tate & Lyle, a loss
at Simon Engineering, and lower profits at Courtaulds Textiles. Those
analysts who believe the market ran ahead of itself this summer - like SG
Warburg's George Hodgson - are afraid that more bad news from companies
reporting interim results this autumn will push share prices down further.
Particularly vulnerable, say the Warburg analysts, are sectors such as the
banks, insurers, and cyclical industrial companies where underlying economic
trends do not appear to justify the expectations of profits recovery
currently priced into their shares.
Such unpleasantnesses aside, the next few months are likely to be dominated
by the party conferences and the Budget, events which until this year have
been kept apart by the cordon sanitaire of the Christmas holidays.
Now that they come in disconcertingly close proximity, investors are likely
to worry about the government's ability to contain its internal disputes;
and about the way those rows will affect the difficult decisions that must
be made about curbing public-sector borrowing. Kenneth Clarke is, after all,
the most political chancellor of the exchequer in recent memory.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930904

