FT933-5121

FT  04 SEP 93 / Arts: Strange soiree - Edinburgh Festival / Fringe Event,
Alastair Macaulay follows a mysterious trail and is rewarded


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


EVERYTHING about this story is true, and all of it is quintessentially
Fringe.
You go to a lunchtime show on Monday at the Assembly Rooms. It turns out not
to be happening that day, because its cast has the day off on Monday. So you
squat on some steps and use the time to work out your itinerary. Two eager
guys from Alaska stop and ask your advice about what to see. A fatigued
Scottish journalist comes up and urges you to see a show which is closing
tomorrow. He does not know if he likes it or not, but he thinks it is kind
of interesting, and he wants to know what you think. It is called Soiree, it
is at the Demarco Gallery (where you have never been), he tells you that the
'phone number listed in the official brochure is wrong.
You ring the number he gives you. it is wrong, you use directory enquiries,
you get the right number, the Demarco people tell you when the show is on.
You rearrange your itinerary some more, you ring the Demarco, you ask for a
seat for the lunchtime show tomorrow. Mr Demarco himself (for it is he)
tells you that he will endeavour to squeeze you in.
The next day, you arrive at the Demarco three minutes late, because you have
been held up by an overlong morning concert. The guy at the box office tells
you that you might just be in time. This actually means that everything is
running 15 minutes late and you have to wait 10 minutes in a chilly
corridor. People pass the time by talking about Susan Sontag choosing to
direct Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo. The woman who joins the queue after
you looks radiant and cries 'This place must have the best food in
Edinburgh]' You do not have time for food. No-one near you knows anything
about Soiree. By the time you get in there are no programmes, if there ever
were any.
Soiree turns out to be one of those sick-soul-of-Europe studies in
decadence, but it is also an unusual piece of wordless dance / movement
theatre. It lasts just over an hour, it has three performers, and what makes
it amazing is the first woman to appear. Strange, attractive, and kooky, she
enters, with her back to us, sideways, slowly (like the Dying Swan). Dressed
in an 18th-century gown, barefoot, she shuffles along in a series of varied
tiny steps, a kind of baroque boogie that sends ripples upwards through her
thighs and her crinoline.
When she turns round, it is as if the little sister from Chandler's The Big
Sleep had wandered into Les Liaisons Dangereuses. She has long fair hair,
bee-stung cherry lips, and smoky blue eyes (with heavily charcoaled lashes)
that look tear-laden and seldom focus on anything you can identify. Her neck
droops, her spine droops in a swan-like S-bend, she might be sleepwalking,
or drugged, or a nymphomaniac, and everything she does is utterly riveting.
Soiree seems really to be about the horrid, voluptuous masochism of decadent
petty souls. The three performers waste time elegantly and pointlessly, they
indulge themselves idly, they build up obsessions and tensions over no good
cause. It is the fair-haired girl who makes all this important. Towards the
end of the work, she advances towards the male performer she plants an
extended foot on his neck and then, calmly, she falls slowly backwards on to
the floor; where she opens her legs, and then starts to pound his chest with
her feet. Soiree is slightly longer than it needs to be, its taped score
(made up of repetitious mini-cycles of sound) is faintly maddening, nothing
about its choreography is radically original, but its best features are
haunting.
Afterwards, a dozen of you ask for programmes. You are asked to wait five
minutes. Mr Demarco leads you all into his office. He tells you all that
Soiree is the best thing at the '93 festival, that he only presents truly
original work, that he would not present Mark Morris doing the same old
thing, that Soiree should have won a Fringe First (here you agree), and that
he wants to present it in Sarajevo. Impressed though you were by Soiree, you
think that Sarajevo needs it even less than it needs Sontag. You ask Mr
Demarco just what he thinks Morris's 'same old thing' is. He does not reply.
He says he is also presenting Medea at 9 pm in the open air that night.
When he is not talking, you find some information that says Soiree was
presented by the Yvette Bosnik Company from Hungary. You wonder if Bosnik
was the fair one. At this point, the fair one and the other female performer
enter Demarco's office. There are five men in their dressing room, they say,
who will not leave; they will not change until the five men are evicted.
Demarco hastens to sort out this crisis, and you beat it before they call
the police.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

930904

