FT934-8408

FT  16 NOV 93 / Singapore group plans 300 high-tech jobs


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


THE FIRST Singapore-based company to set up a manufacturing plant in Britain
has chosen a site in East Kilbride near Glasgow for its European
manufacturing and research and development headquarters.
PCI, which claims to be one of the largest contract electronics
manufacturers in the world, will initially employ about 100 people and hopes
to employ 300.
The company designs and makes telecommunications equipment, handheld
terminals, office automation equipment and automotive electronic equipment.
It employs about 3,000 people in Singapore, the Philippines and Indonesia.
Customers include AT&T, Motorola, Nokia and Rank Xerox.
Mr Jiun Jeng Parng, chief executive, said PCI intended to use its East
Kilbride plant to attract customers and demonstrate its abilities in design
and manufacturing.
He was attracted to Scotland because of its large number of good electronics
engineers, he said. Between a third and half of the first 100 staff would be
executives.
Mr Parng said PCI, after establishing its European headquarters in East
Kilbride, was likely to set up a large manufacturing facility in a low-cost
European country such as Hungary, the Czech republic or Portugal.
'The UK is OK cost-wise if you're employing hundreds of people, but if
you're employing thousands you need to go somewhere cheaper,' Mr Parng said.
PCI has an annual turnover of about Dollars 100m (Pounds 66.2m) and claims
to be among the top 20 contract electronics manufacturers in the world, the
biggest being SCI of the US.
Mr Parng said it concentrated on 'stable growth products such as
telecommunications equipment rather than personal computers, disk drives or
toys'.
Hoskyns, the UK computer services company which provides outsourced
information technology services, is to set up a business process outsourcing
centre at Forres, in Grampian.
The centre expects to employ 200 people within two years. It will cost
Pounds 3.2m, of which Pounds 1.5m is coming from Highlands and Islands
Enterprise, the development body.
The centre will be linked to clients via the Highlands' advanced
telecommunications network. It will carry out some council tax
administration for Grampian Regional Council and and Moray District Council,
and is hoping to attract work from other local authorities, insurance
companies and businesses with a big administrative load.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931116

