FT934-10254

FT  06 NOV 93 / Rebels anger standards chief


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


MR VIVIAN THOMAS, chairman of the British Standards Institution, yesterday
reacted angrily to the rejection at its annual meeting of the board's plans
to improve executive decision-making.
He said the dissenters were 'impugning the integrity of the staff of this
organisation. We are being judged guilty of changing things, and nobody
likes change.'
But Mr Gordon Gaddes, director-general of the Federation of British
Electrical and Allied Manufacturers' Associations, said the protest against
the leadership was widespread. He had taken 63 proxies into Thursday's
meeting, including the British Compressed Air Association, the Engineering
Industries Association, the Gauge and Toolmakers Association and companies
as diverse as BICC, Weir Pumps and subsidiaries of GEC Alsthom, Philips and
Rolls-Royce.
'What we are concerned (about) is the stage by stage transformation of BSI
from a members' organisation to one with a corporate board,' he said.
The BSI supervises the creation of thousands of standards for British
industry. Its problems started in June when Mr Michael Sanderson, the chief
executive, left abruptly after 'a deep disagreement on important matters of
policy and management'.
The rumpus was followed by the announcement of a government review of BSI's
affairs.
Dissent at the annual meeting centred on the board's proposals to vote
itself stronger executive powers and to bring directors' fees more closely
into line with market norms.
Mr Thomas says the changes had two objectives. The first was to tidy up
loose ends from 1991's more radical reorganisation into a smaller, more
dynamic body.
The second was to fill gaps in the board's executive powers exposed by the
sudden departure of Mr Sanderson.
But the BSI members who attended the annual meeting voted by 44 to 2 to
delay a decision.
Mr Ram Mylvaganam, BSI marketing director, says its aim is to convince the
29,400-plus members who did not attend the meeting that the changes are in
the best interests of BSI, its members and British industry.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931106

