FT932-3161

FT  15 JUN 93 / Survey of Retail Chain Management (5): Food stores keep
their cool / Profile of Lo-Cost


   By PHILIP HASTINGS


LOW-COST distribution of chilled and other temperature-controlled products
has become an increasingly important feature of retail chain logistics.
A series of food safety scares during the late 1980s and the subsequent UK
Food Safety Act of 1991 helped to highlight the importance of establishing
and adhering to strict operational standards for the distribution and
storage of temperature-sensitive food.
Faced with those pressures and the ever-present need to achieve greater
efficiency and cost-savings, retailers have increasingly turned to third
party specialists to run their so-called 'cool chains'. One such agreement
is the award of a five-year contract by the Argyll Group's Lo-Cost retail
chain to Wincanton Distribution.
The agreement covers the warehousing and distribution of 300-400 different
ranges of chilled foods - typically cheese, butter, other dairy products and
meat - and fresh produce to 300 stores throughout the UK. A purpose-designed
156,000 square foot dedicated warehouse at Solihull, West Midlands, was
acquired by Wincanton specifically to service the Lo-Cost contract. Around
one-third of the warehouse is being used for chilled storage and those
facilities now handle all Lo-Cost's centralised distribution of chilled
products.
Supporting the centralised distribution centre are three outbase centres in
the south-west, south-east and north-west of England, a fleet of 16
vehicles, and a workforce of around 100 people. Before the agreement,
Lo-Cost had primarily relied on chilled product manufacturers to deliver
directly to its branches around the UK. It also used one small contracted
operation.
Now, most manufacturers deliver goods into the Solihull centralised
distribution centre, although some products are collected from the
manufacturers by Wincanton using vehicles returning from delivery runs to
the Lo-Cost stores.
'That backhaul operation is still fairly limited but it is growing. The
advantage is it enables us to maximise the use of the distribution fleet,'
says Mr Mike Burbage, managing director of Wincanton Distribution.
Communication between Lo-Cost, its suppliers and Wincanton is now
increasingly an EDI (electronic data interchange) function. Individual
stores relay their orders to the Solihull distribution centre via handheld
terminals.
Goods held at the centre are called up from stock while details of goods not
held at the distribution centre are passed on to the relevant manufacturers
who deliver to Solihull. Wincanton then consolidates the products into
individual store orders and organises the distribution of consignments.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930615

