FT932-3165

FT  15 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Close call as discontent grows - Voting
time nears on Heron's debt plan


   By MAGGIE URRY


CREDITORS of Heron, Mr Gerald Ronson's property group, have little time left
to consider the proposals for restructuring its Pounds 1.4bn of debt.
On the face of it, they have a simple choice. Vote in favour of a plan to
repay creditors out of asset disposals over several years or see the company
go into liquidation. The latter alternative, the 220-page document from the
company says, would give creditors significantly less and at a later date.
Yet as the deadline approaches - meetings start in London on June 28 but
some proxies and claims had to be in by yesterday - there seems to be a
rising tide of discontent among some creditors.
Yesterday First Eastern Developments, a Bermudan based property consulting
company, gave details of its concerns, first revealed in an advertisement in
the Financial Times last Friday which called on creditors to join together
to consider opposing the scheme.
FED is a private group headed by Mr Simon Shane. He ran a UK property group
called Equitable Debenture and Assets Corporation, which was sold to British
Land in 1985 for Pounds 20m. FED claims to be owed Dollars 1.7m by Heron,
and is an affiliate of Stratagem Development Corporation which is suing
Heron in New York.
Mr Shane asserts that creditors do not have enough information to make an
informed decision and suggests more information would be forthcoming if the
schemes were rejected. He would like to see an up-to-date property
valuation, trading results for the year to March 1993, and detailed cashflow
projections.
He suspects that there have been intra-group transactions since the last
published accounts, for the year to end March 1992, which might have given
banks an edge over other creditors.
Even creditors intending to vote in favour of the proposals complain of a
lack of information, such as trading results and property valuations, but as
one put it, 'to some extent you have to believe what Heron and its advisers
tell you because it is so complex'.
Mr Shane's criticisms follow those of Mr Gary Klesch, a bond dealer who
claims to speak for 10 per cent of the bondholders and has also called for
rejection of the proposals.
Much has also been made of letters written in mid-May to bondholders by the
lead managers to the Swiss franc bond issues. They sent bondholders the
Heron document with a covering letter in mid-May. The letter - which put
forward the main pros and cons of the deal - drew letters from Mr Ronson to
the chairmen of the banks who felt that the banks had been less than fair.
SG Warburg Securities, one of the lead managers, said yesterday that the
letters were neutral. 'We are in a situation where we should not give
advice, submitting an offer on behalf of Heron. It always remains to the
investor to make the decision.'
However, others note that a letter from Deutsche Bank, which lead a D-Mark
bond issue, to its bondholders was 'more neutral'.
Heron's advisers say that rejection of the schemes would almost inevitably
lead swiftly to bankruptcy proceedings. Mr Shane and Mr Klesch think this
could be as good, or even better, for creditors. Mr Shane says 'insolvency
proceedings would ensure administration directed at maximising value for all
creditors with freedom from conflicts of interest'.
But Heron's advisers say that liquidation would be an extremely complex
affair, likely to ignite a volcano of litigation as different classes of
creditors fight for their rights.
The problem lies in Heron's complex structure. While the head office
division has debt, including all the bonds, of Pounds 524m it has assets of
only Pounds 8m. The UK property division, by contrast, has assets of Pounds
465m and debts of Pounds 298m. The Spanish part has debt of Pounds 90m and
assets of Pounds 223m.
Liquidation, judging by other recent large cases such as BCCI, could also be
a costly process, on top of the Pounds 50m Heron has already sunk in
restructuring fees.
The schemes need to be approved by 75 per cent of votes cast by value, and
by 50 per cent by number of voters. It is looking a closer call than can be
comfortable for Heron.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930615

