FT934-8704

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (12):
The pistes of 42nd Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


ONE OF THE many joys of skiing in the US is sharing chair-lifts with
strangers. A leisurely ride up a slow-moving quad provides an opportunity to
swap stories, tell jokes, compare experiences, pass on useful skiing tips .
. . and score some drugs.
Score some drugs? I'm not talking about Vail or Breckenridge here. This is
Hunter Mountain, a couple of hours' drive north from Manhattan, and New
York's favourite ski resort. At Hunter, when someone raves about the white
powder, they may not be talking about last night's snowfall . . .
It was at Hunter, one freezing January morning, when a friend was offered
some drugs on the chair lift by a couple of affable Cubans, just up from the
city for the day in their wrap-around shades and expensive ski duds.
There was nothing threatening about the invitation, they just wanted to cut
a little profit while making their way up the mountain. My friend declined
politely. The Cubans were clearly unperturbed by her refusal, because they
went ahead and enjoyed a quick smoke while they ascended. As the two skied
past us at the top of the lift, grinning cheerfully, they left behind a
pungent, sweet, instantly recognisible aroma.
Hunter Mountain is to skiing what the South Bronx is to urban living: it's
rough and tough and far from perfect, but for many people it's all they have
got. And it can be a lot of fun - if you are in the right mood, that is.
Where else in the known world would they name ski runs after city streets?
At Hunter you can ski down 42nd Street, Broadway, and Madison Avenue. And
where else would a resort name a run after something as hideous as the Belt
Parkway, a traffic-snarled dual carriageway which snakes its way around the
ugly underbelly of Brooklyn?
Brash, noisy, chaotic and not a little mad, Hunter is New York on skis. And
like New York, it is sometimes a dangerous place to be.
Don't get me wrong. It is not dangerous in the sense that you might get
mugged in the lift queue by someone toting a gun (although you never know).
No, it can be dangerous because the slopes are very crowded at weekends, and
New York's skiers take on downhill runs in much the same way as New York's
cab-drivers take on Fifth Avenue in the middle of rush-hour: at breakneck
speed and with little regard for safety, either their own or anyone else's.
The men are the worst. They ski with an extravagant abandon, eager to
impress their pals and gals with daring, dashing moves, even if it means
ending in a crumpled heap at the bottom of a green run. Hungry for attention
wherever they go, they love to talk - or rather, shout - while on the move.
In Wengen you might hear yodelling, in Val D'Isere, 'bonjour'. In Hunter,
it's 'Yo, Vinny]'
The woman can be just as terrifying. They hurtle past you trailing expensive
perfume and huge hair, jewellery glinting in the sun, cherry-red lips
mouthing a silent scream and brightly-painted eyes wide with fear and
excitement. Beware anyone in their way.
And at Hunter, you end the day like you would any normal, frantic, crazy,
New York day - jammed into a packed bar, downing cold beers and slinging
back vodka shots alongside your new friend, Vinny.
Klosters, it ain't . . .

The Financial Times


Survey SKI Page 18

931113

