FT933-12819

FT  22 JUL 93 / Economic Viewpoint: Clues to rising unemployment


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


By any standards the unemployment rate in western industrial countries is
alarming. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development expects
the total in its 24-member countries to reach nearly 36m in 1994 - some 19m
in the EC. On top of these are an estimated 3.7m people who have been
'discouraged' and 9.3m part-time workers who say they would prefer to work
full time.
The unemployment estimates are equivalent to an unemployment rate of 8 1/2
per cent for the whole of the OECD, but 11 1/2 -12 per cent for the EC. For
all President Bill Clinton's grumbling, the US has an unemployment rate of 7
per cent, expected to drop to 6 1/2 per cent with economic recovery; and in
sharp contrast to Europe's economy, unemployment has not been on a rising
long-term trend.
On equivalent definitions, the worst-hit countries are Spain and Ireland
with unemployment rates in excess of 20 per cent. Among the larger European
countries, both France and unified Germany are in the course of overtaking
the UK in the unemployment stakes: all three have rates not very far from
10-12 per cent. Sweden, once presented as a labour market model, now has an
unemployment rate of nearly 7 1/2 per cent. There is much the same effective
rate in Japan if allowance is made for the exceptionally high number of
Japanese discouraged workers and unrecorded jobless. The best performers are
still found in the Alpine states of Switzerland and Austria, with
unemployment rates of 4 1/2 -5 per cent - though still higher than a decade
ago.
Faced with this challenge, OECD economists say, in the italicised
introduction to a so-called editorial chapter of the July Employment
Outlook: 'To respond effectively, policy needs to exploit the
complementarity between sound macroeconomic policies, aimed at creating the
right environment for economic agents to take long-term decisions about
saving and investing, and structural policies aimed at making labour and
product markets more adaptable.'
Politicians of different countries and persuasions, both supporters and
opponents of the Social Chapter, seem happy to sign declarations embodying
this mind-numbing OECD-speak. But the unanimity is achieved at too high a
price.
The British chancellor, Kenneth Clarke, put it better in Frankfurt on
Monday, when he said that Europe's labour markets are 'over-rigid,
over-regulated and over-priced'. Regulations and high overheads to pay for
social security are just as much a cost to employers as excessive wages and
have a similar effect on jobs.
To say that economic growth will not cure hard-core unemployment is itself a
half truth. Clarke suggests that a European growth rate averaging 2-3 per
cent a year is required simply to halt - eventually - the rising
unemployment tide. In that case a higher growth rate is still required to
reduce unemployment - unless it is seriously thought that extra workers
would make a negative contribution.
There are still only two respectable diagnoses of high unemployment:
inadequate demand and pricing out of work. Almost for the first time since
the second world war, inadequate demand growth is an important force.
Whether because of the legacy of past tight monetary policies, or because of
the debt overhang, total cash spending - measured by Nominal gross national
product - in the Group of Seven countries has risen by only 3 1/2 per cent
in the past 12 months, compared to the 5 1/2 -6 per cent which would be
required to secure reasonably non-inflationary growth. Budget-balancing
exercises should be put on ice until demand growth is clearly recovering (as
it is in the UK).
The word 'structural' - or better hard-core - can legitimately be used for
that part of unemployment which would not be permanently reduced by demand
expansion. It is this element which has been rising, from one business cycle
to the next, and which is especially bad in Europe.
The proximate explanation for this hard core is pricing people out of work:
that is pay and other labour costs which make workers unprofitable to
employ. This is clearly related to the radical-right emphasis on dole rates
which discourage people from accepting low-paid employment. The two come
together in the probability that without the dole, pay rates would drop, as
people would have to price themselves into work to survive. I prefer the
pricing-out formulation because it leaves space for institutional and
psychological forces which - quite apart from the dole - stop pay shifting
to market-clearing levels.
Although mention of pricing out of work always leads to protests, hardly any
of the indignant responses put their finger on the real weaknesses of the
thesis, which is its timelessness. Why should pricing out of work have got
worse from the 1960s to the 1970s, from the 1970s to the 1980s, and the
1980s to the 1990s?
The OECD almost unwittingly provides a clue in a chapter dealing with
widening pay differentials among those who remain in work. These
differentials are measured in the chart by the ratio of the pay of those 10
per cent down from the top in the earnings distribution to those in the
middle ('the median'). It is also measured by the ratio of those in the
middle to those who are 90 per cent of the way down.
Almost every country has shown an increase in the ratio of top to median
earnings, especially among males. The estimates are of pay before tax and
social security contributions. In some countries, such as the US and UK, the
rise started in the late 1970s, but everywhere it became more acute in the
1980s. Michael Prowse explained on the facing page in yesterday's FT that in
the US there has been an absolute fall of more than 10 per cent in the
earnings of those at the bottom. In the UK there was also a widening of the
gap between the bottom 10 per cent and the median. The main exception to
these trends is Germany, which may explain some of the present difficulties
in the German labour market. Although this cannot yet be shown statistically
differentials have become not only larger but more unstable, especially in
the executive groups.
According to the OECD, very little of the increased earnings dispersion is
due to structural shifts such as the move from industry to services. For the
rise in dispersion has been very similar within each business sector. The
Employment Outlook does state, however, that technological change has raised
the productivity of highly skilled workers more than unskilled ones; and the
1980s saw a rise in the 'education differential'.
But even within groups of similar education and work experience, pay
differentials grew. In a daring dive into common sense the OECD writers
suggest 'an increased importance for skills not measured by educational
qualifications, such as the ability to work with other people' and also
payments more closely geared to performance.
The moral for unemployment suggests itself. If pay differentials had to
widen so much even with an ever-growing departure from full employment, how
much more would they have to widen to price all workers into jobs? It is not
just a question of all pay or average pay being too high, but of some pay
relative to others. The causal forces have come from changes in market
relativities.
As there are obvious resistances to relative pay moving to market-clearing
levels, both from the operation of the benefit floor and from other
frictions, the tensions showed themselves in higher unemployment. In the US,
and perhaps now in the UK too, tensions are showing themselves in bigger pay
differences and less secure jobs.
Unemployment, less stable employment and greater differentials are three
ways in which a more diversified and volatile labour market is making itself
felt. The third may be the least bad of the three choices.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930722

