FT932-109

FT  30 JUN 93 / UK Company News: 10p discount for BT investors


   By ANDREW ADONIS


UK PRIVATE investors will receive a 10p discount in the first instalment of
the Pounds 5bn sale of the government's remaining tranche of shares in
British Telecommunications.
The first instalment for investors in the international offer is to be 160p;
the overall price, which will determine the sum payable in the third
instalment, is to be determined after the international offer has closed on
July 16.
The closing date for registration with share shops of the share information
service is this Friday. Registration gives preferential treatment in
allocations for the UK public offer, which closes on July 14.
Dealing in the partly-paid shares starts on July 19.
Launching the prospectus yesterday, Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor of the
exchequer, said the offer was shaped to 'help achieve one of our more
cherished long-term ambitions of wider share ownership.'
The shares will be allocated equally between the UK public offer and the
international offer, but the government is reserving the right to increase
the proportion available to UK investors to 67 per cent 'in the light of
demand.'
Mr Clarke said that 4.7m registrations had been made to date, 1.4m with
share shops and 1.3m with the share information service. At the close of the
registration period for the last government sale of BT shares, 5.3m had
registered.
The details of the offer were as expected by the City, although the discount
is 5p less than that on offer at the sale of the last tranche of government
BT shares in November 1991.
Two dividends will be declared on the partly-paid shares within six months.
The first will be a net 9.45p paid in September. An interim dividend will
also be payable before the second instalment is due next March.
Some 2.4m existing shareholders and employees are automatically registered
for shares. In the allocation, BT shareholders get preferential treatment,
with allocations 50 per cent higher than non-shareholders.
Employees are guaranteed about 2,000 shares.
The minimum application for retail investors in the UK public offer is 120
shares. Larger investors and institutions must enter the retail tender -
which is part of the international offer - where the minimum application is
2,000 shares, except for Pep applicants who can apply for a minimum of
1,000.
Bookbuilding for the international offer will start on July 8.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930630

