FT934-11545

FT  30 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: Controversy over fee


   By PHILIP COGGAN


FOSTER & Braithwaite is launching a unit trust which, when held in a Pep,
will offer investors a tax-free income of 7 per cent. The trust has already
provoked controversy since it will deduct the annual charge from capital
rather than income - a practice which the Securities and Investments Board,
the UK's chief financial services regulator, hopes to ban.
If F&B had deducted the 1.25 per cent annual charge from income, the yield
on the fund would be 5.75 per cent. So, it would be wrong to assume the F&B
unit trust is better than a rival fund (which takes the annual charge from
income) offering, say, 6 per cent. But John Vintcent, chairman of F&B,
points out that investment trusts are allowed to take their charges out of
capital, so why not unit trusts?
Furthermore, whether the charge comes out of income or capital should make
no difference to the total return to the investor. As yet, there is no
standardised basis for calculating unit trust yields; some trusts use the
distributions they have paid already while others use the yield they expect
to pay.
SIB is consulting on proposals to prevent funds from levying charges on
capital but the industry's trade body, AUTIF, is against such a ban. If SIB
does go ahead, F&B will have to change its practice.
The F&B fund's investments will be high yielding investment trust shares, UK
equities and, on occasion, fixed interest securities. F&B is known best for
its expertise in investment trusts; it has the top unit trust in the IT
sector over three years. The initial charge on the fund will be 5.5 per cent
(although there is a 1 per cent discount until November 22). Minimum
investment in the Pep is Pounds 3,000.
Guinness Flight is offering a 1 per cent discount off its three UK equity
unit trusts - Recovery, High Income and Temple Bar Emerging Companies -
until November 19. The normal initial charge on them is 5.25 per cent.
The funds chosen show good short term performance, but two have rather less
impressive long term records. The Recovery fund is top of the UK Equity
Growth sector over the year to October 1 (although 105th out of 118 funds
over five years). High Income is 19th out of 107 UK income funds over one
year, but 67th over five years. Temple Bar Emerging Companies has done well
over both the short and long term; it is 11th out of 66 smaller company
funds over one year, and seventh out of 49 funds over five years.
The funds are actually even cheaper to buy through a Pep since the initial
charge is just 2 per cent. (The discount does not apply to the Pep).
Prolific Unit Trust Managers is also offering a discount off some of its
funds. In its case, the 1 per cent break is in the form of additional units
if investors buy into one of four funds - Recovery, Technology, European
Growth and American Opportunities - before November 26. All four have good
records, with top quartile (25 per cent) performance in their sectors over
one year. American Opportunities was the best US fund over the year to
October 1. The charges are 5.25 per cent initial and 1.25 per cent annual.

The Financial Times


London Page V

931030

