FT932-117

FT  30 JUN 93 / Express publisher seeks Pounds 190m


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


UNITED Newspapers, publisher of the Daily and Sunday Express, yesterday
announced a one-for-five rights to raise Pounds 190m.
The publishing group, with interests ranging from regional newspapers and
business magazines to exhibitions, said the aim of the rights issue was to
reduce debt, running at an estimated Pounds 300m, and to provide scope for
expansion.
'A number of opportunities for expanding existing publishing and exhibition
interests are being actively pursued in the US and Far East,' the company
said.
The price of the new shares was set at 480p and the issue was fully
underwritten by Samuel Montague.
Mr David Foster, media analyst at stockbrokers Smith New Court, said that
the reaction of institutions to the rights issue had been 'somewhat
grudging' mainly because there was no obvious sign of imminent takeover
deals.
The deal would involve a 10 per cent dilution of earnings next year and
further uncertainty could be caused in the autumn if the government again
considered the possibility of imposing VAT on newspapers and magazines.
The rights issue follows a 28 per cent increase in pre-tax profits in 1992
from Pounds 77.6m to Pounds 99.5m, excluding exceptional items. Earnings per
share rose from 10.9p to 40.1p.
United's directors forecast that pre-tax profits for the first six months of
this year will exceed the Pounds 46.5m achieved in the first half of 1992.
Mr Graham Wilson, finance director, said that the company needed to
strengthen its capital base. It was more honest to raise the money in one go
rather than in a series of small rights issues associated with acquisitions.
In the past five years United said it had invested more than Pounds 700m in
capital expenditure and in rationalising the business.
It is also clear that United is likely to raise more cash through the sale
of Extel, its financial information company.
Although United emphasised that a sale was not under active consideration,
Extel is seen as a non-core business that would probably be sold if the
right offer came along.
The company's share price closed at 574p last night, down 11p.
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930630

