FT931-4194

FT  12 MAR 93 / Assembell Nationale (Elections '93): French parties called
to arms on conscription - President Mitterrand and a future right-wing
government face an early skirmish over the military


   By DAVID BUCHAN


ONE OF THE first clashes between France's likely new conservative government
and its incumbent Socialist president could be over conscription. President
Francois Mitterrand sees no reason to change compulsory military service,
introduced 200 years ago to fight off the French Revolution's foreign
enemies.
He claims 'nothing can replace the collective effort, without which national
defence loses its true sense' - a view endorsed two weeks ago at what was
probably one of the last cabinet meetings chaired by Mr Pierre Beregovoy as
prime minister.
Opposition pressure for a professional army is growing, although it is found
less among the centre-right UDF than among the RPR Gaullists, who true to
their founder are more concerned with matters military. And within the RPR
conscription still has its champions. But Mr Jacques Chirac, the RPR
president, has tipped his hand by calling for units, if not the whole army,
which are 'purely professional'. The practical problem with the present
system lies with the army, composed 60 per cent of conscripts (compared with
39 per cent for the air force and 30 per cent for the navy). Two years ago,
France encountered difficulty and delay in disentangling conscripts from
regular forces to field 12,000 purely professional troops in the Gulf war.
Since then it has allowed conscripts to volunteer for United Nations service
in ex-Yugoslavia, Cambodia and Somalia. But with Bosnia proving more
dangerous than the Gulf, there is always the possibility that this practice
might have to be reversed.
But there are more serious political objections to conscription. Far from
being universal, fewer than half France's male 18-year-olds end up in
uniform, compared with 70 per cent 15 years ago. Many undertake alternative
duties in local public services or even in companies, and a humanitarian
service in developing countries has been created.
But there are also dodges. If a young man fails his military medical, he
also gets out of any civilian service. Two thirds of those who pass their
medical get some sort of deferment, which also often ends in total
exemption. Inevitably, it is middle-class youth which makes most use of any
such ruses.
While sticking to the conscription principle, Mr Pierre Joxe, the defence
minister, has promised to reverse the pattern of recent years which has
actually seen a slight decline in the ratio of regular to conscript
soldiers. The Joxe plan is to reduce the army from 260,000 now to 225,000 by
1997, with the number of conscripts then (115,000) only barely above the
number of volunteer professionals (110,000).
Set against this is a plan by Mr Francois Fillon, the young RPR deputy who
heads the national assembly's defence committee, to have a wholly
professional army of 185,000 within five years and to reduce conscription
from 10 months to a nominal three months for service within France.
This is too radical a change to be welcomed by the French high command,
which - only partly at Mr Joxe's urging - detailed its objections last week.
First, said General Yves Crene, deputy chief-of-staff, the Fillon plan would
take seven years to implement. Second, most of those currently enlisting as
regular soldiers are conscripts who know what they are letting themselves in
for. So, concluded Gen Crene, 'the best way of recruiting professionals is
to recruit conscripts'.
Finally - and probably most important in view of budget deficits - is the
extra cost of going professional. General Crene put this at FFr4bn (Pounds
500m) to FFr5bn a year. This stems not only from higher pay (a conscript's
basic pay is only FFr500 a month) for enlisted men, but also from the need
to provide pensions and discharge payments. The general claimed Britain's
professional army of around 130,000 costs 20 per cent more to run than
France's current force and was 'no better equipped'.
Some independent French experts applaud Mr Fillon's call for more
professionalism but doubt whether France, even in an era of high
unemployment, can attract enough volunteers.
Mr Francois Heisbourg, a former director of the International Institute for
Strategic Studies in London, notes the difficulty Britain has had in filling
its army's ranks, and cautions that 'France is remarkably similar to Britain
in demographic and sociological terms'.
If France's military goals remain unchanged, Mr Heisbourg says, it needs at
least 20,000 to 30,000 more troops than Britain to carry out old commitments
in Africa and new commitments to the UN.
One way of settling the fate of conscription would be to put it to a
referendum. Mr Chirac has hinted he would like this. But since both
president and prime minister would have to be agree, such a tactic may not
be possible for Mr Mitterrand's two remaining years in the Elysee Palace.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930312

