FT933-5287

FT  04 SEP 93 / You've bought the knife, now ride the mountain bike


   By IAN RODGER


   COURFAIVRE, SWITZERLAND


THE 'Swiss Army' which immortalised the pen knife may be about to do the
same for the mountain bike.
A small business in the Jura mountains hopes to capitalise on the same
cachet with a new weapon-carrying, heavy duty bicycle it is beginning to
supply to the Swiss army.
The 'Swiss Army Bike' includes fittings for heavy machine guns, bazookas and
60mm mortar launchers, and a body paint which is invisible to someone using
infrared binoculars.
Like most things Swiss, it does not come cheap. At SFr3,280 (Pounds 1,490),
only the most devoted cyclists will want to buy one. Its weight  - 25kg -
may also count against it, as may the choice of just seven gears.
Top of the range mountain bikes weigh less than 15kg, have at least 21 gears
and cost around Pounds 1,250 - with the luxury of suspension.
The Swiss army has long been famous for its bicycle corps, a group of 5,000
amazingly fit soldiers who crank up and down the Alps with something like
100kg of kit and weapons on board.
Until now, they have accomplished these feats on a machine designed in 1905
 -pure heavy clog iron, no gears, conventional handlebars. Joining this
corps is not the soft option that recruits might have imagined.
But from next week, they will start receiving a brand new model developed at
a cost of SFr500,000 in the late 1980s by a small Swiss cycle maker, Condor,
in co-operation with the Swiss defence ministry. Condor has a SFr17m
contract to produce 5,500 new bikes for the Swiss army, but it believes
there is also a civilian market.
Mr William Affolter, Condor's chief executive, says it might be useful for
professionals, such as photographers or postmen, who have to carry heavy
loads and need a durable bike. This new version bears little resemblance to
its forebear.
Even the frame has been enlarged by two centimetres to 56cm in recognition
of the growth of the average Swiss soldier over the past 90 years.
'The saddle is the only thing that has not changed,' Mr Affolter says. It is
still a sprung type, using pure Swiss cowhide. Everything in the bike is
designed to endure heavy loads and severe weather conditions.
Although the bike is not light, it is 2kg lighter than the old one. Field
tests showed a soldier could gain about three hours on a 200km course using
the new bike.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930904

