FT934-8404

FT  16 NOV 93 / Budget fears deepen gloom: Another cut in mortgage tax
relief is the industry's worst nightmare


   By ANDREW TAYLOR


Ashworth Construction, a Manchester builder which specialised in
refurbishing public houses, recently joined more than 2,000 construction
companies estimated to have failed in the first 10 months of this year.
The shutters are drawn at the company's deserted headquarters and rubbish is
already piling up outside. It collapsed in September, the victim of a
recession that has cost almost 500,000 construction jobs since 1989. Few
other sectors have been hit as hard over such a prolonged period.
It is with even greater trepidation than usual therefore, that construction
company executives and trade union leaders await the outcome of a Budget
which they fear could reverse the beginnings of a fragile recovery in the
industry.
The number of construction company failures recorded by the Department of
Industry's insolvency service is expected to fall this year, for the first
time since 1988.
Even so, liquidations are likely to exceed 3,000 for the third year running
 -almost twice the 1,590 failures recorded in 1988.
Moreover the few areas where construction orders have improved -
housebuilding and public sector contracts - are the ones most vulnerable to
cuts.
The spending decisions of Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor of the
exchequer, on housing and infrastructure, particularly road construction,
will be critical. The builders' biggest nightmare is that he might announce
further reductions - or even a complete abandonment - of mortgage tax
relief, overturning the tentative gains made in the housing market this
year.
Judging by conveyancing figures from the Inland Revenue for the first nine
months, house sales in England and Wales are expected to rise by about 5 per
cent this year. House prices, following gains over the summer, are forecast
to rise about 2 per cent, according to Halifax, the UK's largest mortgage
lender.
Mr Neville Simms, chief executive of Tarmac, one of Britain's biggest
housebuilders, said: 'I cannot believe the government would risk damaging
the housing market just as it appears to be on the point of recovery - and
hit many of their own voters.'
The rate of mortgage tax relief, available on the first Pounds 30,000 of
borrowings, is already due to fall from 25 per cent to 20 per cent next
April. This will still cost the exchequer about Pounds 3.5bn in 1993-94 and
will be worth a maximum of about Pounds 50 a month to home owners. Each
further 5 percentage point cut would save the government about Pounds 1bn.
One alternative might be to reduce the high cost of mortgage interest
payments made by the Department of Social Security.
Instead, home owners might be asked to pay for their own mortgage insurance
against becoming unemployed. This, however, would increase the cost of
buying a house just as hesitant purchasers were being tempted back into the
market.
Ministers have been examining other ways of reducing public spending on
construction. Inner-city spending plans for 1994-95 have already been cut by
Pounds 300m to Pounds 1.4m as a result of moves to unify urban spending
programmes in a single Budget. Spending on roads and social housing, two
areas of construction that improved this year, are also thought to be
vulnerable.
About 80 per cent of homes purchased by housing associations are built by
private contractors or purchased from housebuilders. Mr Simms said: 'Any cut
in associations' budgets would be damaging, for the country and the
construction industry.'
Spending targets for English and Welsh housing associations in 1994-95 were
reduced in the government's last Autumn Statement from Pounds 2.05bn to
Pounds 1.83bn. Now the industry fears that this could be cut by another
Pounds 300m, equivalent to the construction of about 9,000 new homes.
Just as damaging would be a cut in trunk-road spending, forecast at more
than Pounds 2bn for 1994-95. Central government's contribution to local
authority road spending is expected to provide a further Pounds 1bn. A 10
per cent reduction in these programmes could cost contractors Pounds 300m in
lost orders.
Mr David Cawthra, chief executive of Miller Group, one of Britain's biggest
privately-owned construction companies and former chief executive of Balfour
Beatty, construction arm of BICC, said: 'Spending cuts of this magnitude on
roads and social housing would more than wipe out the 1 per cent to 2 per
cent rise in construction output forecast for next year.'
This could rebound on building material producers, which in the past 12
months have managed to raise prices of structural steel, concrete, glass,
aggregates and plasterboard by an average of 5 per cent - after huge cuts in
manufacturing capacity during the recession.
Competition for work among contractors, by comparison, remains intense, with
many companies taking work at little better than cost or even at a loss just
to keep cash coming into the business.
Mr Howard Seymour, construction analyst with Barclays de Zoete Wedd, said
the public sector's share of new orders had fallen to about 35 per cent,
following the privatisations of water, gas, and other industries.
'The public sector, together with housing, remains a very important part of
the market at the moment as these are the only two areas to show any
growth,' said Mr Seymour.
According to the Department of the Environment the total of new construction
orders rose by 5 per cent in the first eight months of this year.
Within this total public-sector orders rose 23 per cent while private-sector
orders fell 3 per cent in spite of a 10 per cent rise in private
housebuilding.
The industry fears that the government will seek to distract attention from
cuts in public-sector budgets by launching more initiatives to encourage
private-sector investment in infrastructure projects. These are unlikely to
deliver much work for several years, however.
Meanwhile, prospects of construction starting on very large rail projects
such as the Channel tunnel link and CrossRail look further away than ever.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931116

