FT934-10079

FT  08 NOV 93 / Turkey, EC press on with customs union


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ISTANBUL


TURKEY and the European Community meet today in Brussels to agree a final
negotiating timetable to take Turkey into a customs union with the EC in
1995, marking the biggest change in economic relations between the two sides
in 30 years.
Mrs Tansu Ciller's government, despite misgivings from domestic industry, is
committed to reach the deadline, by which Turkey will lower import tariffs
to zero and adopt the Community's common external tariff for third
countries.
This will mark a substantial advance on Turkey's existing association
agreement with the Community, signed in Ankara in 1963 and refined with an
additional protocol signed in 1970.
Today's meeting of the EC-Turkey Association Council attended by Turkish
foreign minister Hikmet Cetin and his counterparts from the Twelve, will
also draft an agenda to bring Turkish trade and commercial law into closer
convergence with those of the EC. The legislation will include intellectual
property rights, state aid and competition policy.
The Community accounts for around half of Turkey's exports and two-way trade
with the EC is set to exceed Dollars 20bn (Pounds 13.2bn) in 1993. Turkey is
already the ninth most important EC export market.
However, in a customs union, Turkish industry is set to face increased
competition from imports. Last month, for the first time, Turkey used a
meeting of the Turkish EC joint parliamentary group to urge the EC to come
up with financial compensation - an issue which is set to dog the final
round of negotiations which formally gets under way today.
On the fiscal side, Ankara calculates the likely loss of tax revenues at
around Dollars 3bn a year, at a time when its budget is under strain. The
increase in imports would add Dollars 1.5-Dollars 2bn to Turkey's already
large trade deficit, the government reckons. Key industries such as autos,
white goods and processed foods may not survive the increased imports from
the EC - and from eastern European countries as Turkey adopts the common
external tariff.
Greece has hitherto used its veto to block all Community assistance to
Turkey. Currently the only EC budget assistance to Turkey is under the
Renovated Mediterranean Policy, an EC aid programme designed more to staunch
the flow of refugees from Maghreb countries than to help Turkey.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931108

