FT932-13388

FT  23 APR 93 / Compass for a safer passage: Lloyd's hopes its business plan
will help it overcome a rising tide of problems


   By RICHARD LAPPER


The chief executive of Lloyd's of London had some stark words for his staff
earlier this year. 'No British institution has ever taken the losses that
Lloyd's has and survived,' he said, underlining the need for a 25 per cent
cut in administration staff to ensure the future of the insurance market.
Mr Peter Middleton and Mr David Rowland, chairman of Lloyd's, are likely to
strike a similar note of urgency next Thursday when they announce details of
a radical new 'business plan'. The market's survival is dependent on the
success of the plan because unless Lloyd's can reduce its costs, contain a
rising tide of old asbestosis and pollution claims and negotiate a legal
settlement with thousands of aggrieved loss-making Names, it could start to
disintegrate.
Two issues have highlighted the need for radical action. First, the market's
losses in 1990 - due to be announced in June under Lloyd's three-year
accounting system - are expected to exceed 1989's record loss of Pounds
2.06bn. Second, the erosion of the market's capital base has accelerated.
Some 2,000 Names left last year; many more will follow this year. 'Many
Names are hanging on by their finger nails,' says one members' agent.
A broad strategy outlining the route forward was agreed last year when the
governing council accepted the recommendations of a task force led by Mr
Rowland. Its groundbreaking proposals included modifying the principle of
unlimited liability - whereby Names are liable for all insurance losses
underwritten on their behalf - and the invitation to corporate investors to
commit capital to the market.
Behind the report's recommendations lay the realisation by senior Lloyd's
figures that the market was losing ground to competitors in Europe and North
America - such as Zurich Insurance and the American International group -
which have made inroads into specialised areas of commercial insurance and
reinsurance once dominated by Lloyd's. The London market decided to respond
with a swingeing cost-cutting and rationalisation programme which would
produce fewer - but more efficient - bigger and better-capitalised
businesses. Some progress has been made. In the past three years, for
instance, the number of syndicates (which underwrite business) has fallen
from 401 to about 230.
The business plan aims to develop the cost-cutting and consolidation
strategy to restore profitability and attract fresh capital. Lloyd's
insiders say in some senses it is a 'pathfinder prospectus' - a document
similar to that issued by a company seeking to raise cash.
However, the prescriptive nature of many of the proposals will mark a sharp
break with the past, when Lloyd's governing council stood back from the
management and direction of the market, confining its role to regulation and
the provision of back-up services. 'The council is effectively saying, 'You
will do the following.' If you just wait for all the businesses in the
market to do things you will travel as slowly as the last in the convoy. If
one man keeps a quill pen the benefits of computerisation are lost,' says Mr
Robert Hiscox, deputy chairman. One result could be that syndicates could be
compelled to adopt common computer systems.
In future, Lloyd's regulators, who are responsible to the council, are
likely to be focus on a wider range of issues, in areas such as standards of
professionalism and competence. Lloyd's has traditionally maintained a
hands-off attitude to these matters but allegations of incompetence and
negligence at some agencies and syndicates during the 1980s have prompted a
sense of urgency about monitoring standards. Training is being emphasised,
for instance.
In addition, Lloyd's will encourage the centralisation of a range of
activities - from the way the affairs of Names are handled, to the
processing of claims. Many activities are currently conducted at Lloyd's in
a highly fragmented way. Earlier this year, Mr Middleton said Lloyd's had
managed to make a very simple system 'terribly complicated'. He said that 'a
flow-chart of the claims payments system resembles a combination of the New
York subway, the London Underground and the Paris Metro, with a map of the
European railway network superimposed.'
New systems allowing for speedier reporting of financial information are
likely to be introduced, providing would-be investors with an accurate and
up-to-date picture of the business. The cumbersome three-year accounting
system could also be scrapped.
The need for change is broadly accepted among the bigger agencies which
manage syndicates and handle the affairs of Names. 'It is widely recognised
that if we don't get it right this time, we won't get another chance,' says
Mr Edward Bloxham, chief executive of Cater Allen, which manages several
syndicates.
Opposition could arise from some quarters, however. The existence of some
smaller agencies could be threatened. In such cases the market's leaders
will press acceptance of the 'business plan' through a combination of
persuasion and threat. Mr Middleton has promised to resign if the plan is
not implemented. As one agent put it: 'Middleton is our last shot. If he
doesn't get a high level of support for the plan he walks. If he walks, we
are dead.'
The resolution of two sets of outstanding problems will dictate whether the
plan succeeds or fails: the first comprises liabilities arising from US
insurance policies; the second is the morass of litigation in which the
market is mired.
American court awards in asbestosis and pollution cases are producing a
steady flow of notifications of claims on insurance policies underwritten up
to 50 years ago. Industry observers believe that unless these old
liabilities are isolated or - to use the market's jargon - 'ring-fenced' -
they will dissuade new investors from committing capital to Lloyd's,
functioning effectively as a 'poison pill'.
Ms Julienne Jessup, of the insurance consultancy De Lisle Jessup Scott,
says: 'Lots of investors would be interested but they won't look at it as
long as there is any doubt about their liability for the back years.'
One way for Lloyd's to rid itself of 'long-tail' liabilities would be to set
up a reinsurance company, a proposal understood to be contained in the
business plan. Several billion pounds of reserves set aside to meet future
claims and held in Lloyd's 'premium trust funds' could be channelled into
the company to meet claims arising on pre-1982 policies.
While progress appears to be in train on the US front, the settlement of
outstanding actions for compensation against agents is far from assured. The
prospects of a speedy once-and-for-all settlement have been fading for some
time. Mr Middleton hinted at the intractability of these problems last month
when he said he simply did not have the power to 'impose' a deal.
Negotiations to achieve a settlement will continue, with the business plan
likely to limit itself to outlining a possible way forward.
Mr Christopher Stockwell, chairman of the Lloyd's Names Associations Working
Party - which links groups of loss-making Names - says new challenges could
be afoot, with Names turning to European Community law or even attempting to
allege 'bad faith' by the market's regulators.
A serious question-mark thus hangs over the settlement of outstanding legal
actions by Names, which, together with old US liabilities, poses the most
serious threat to the business plan's success. In any event, Messrs Rowland
and Middleton still have to sell their solutions to the market. If the
market buys them, and they work, an uphill struggle remains. Although
Lloyd's has taken steps to make up lost ground over the past two years,
younger insurance companies around the world have taken the chance to snatch
some of Lloyd's traditional specialised markets. For Lloyd's, survival is
but the first step towards recapturing its former glory. But those days may
be over forever, and it may have to learn to live with a lower profile and
diminished status.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930423

