FT934-11379

FT  01 NOV 93 / Leading Article: European union


AS OF today, the Treaty of Maastricht is legally in force. Whether they like
it or not, and whether they know it or not, all nationals of the 12 member
states of the European Community woke up this morning as something which
last night they were not, namely citizens of the European Union (EU).
That may not make them feel any different. Its only direct practical effects
are to give them the right to petition the European parliament, on matters
of EC competence which directly concern them; the right to complain of EC
maladministration to an ombudsman appointed by the parliament; and, if they
are resident in a member state other than their own, the right to vote in
European elections (starting next year) and local elections (starting in
1995).
Yet the EU is more than the EC writ large. Besides the EC itself, it
includes two other 'pillars'. One is intended to provide it with a 'common
foreign and security policy', leading in time to a common defence policy,
perhaps even a common defence. The other institutionalises co-operation
between the member states on justice and home affairs.
Within the Union, the EC itself is significantly modified by the treaty  -
though the most spectacular changes, creating an economic and monetary union
(Emu), are supposed to take full effect only in five, or at the earliest
three, years' time. Events since the treaty was signed have made it doubtful
whether either this timetable, or the procedure envisaged, are realistic.
The European Monetary Institute, which will start work on January 1, should
see itself not as the police force of the treaty but as a useful forum for
rethinking both the path to Emu and how best to manage what may prove an
extended interim period.
Taken as a whole, the treaty was drafted too soon and too quickly to be an
adequate response to the collapse of communism. That has brought into being
a Europe radically different from the one in which and for which the EC was
built. The chance to extend western Europe's zone of prosperity and security
eastwards is far too valuable and the risk of contagious instability in
central Europe if the chance is missed far too great, for the EC to be able
to ignore it. Hence the historic decision, made in Copenhagen last June,
that 'the associated countries in central and eastern Europe that so desire
shall become members of the European Union'.
Strategic issues
But to meet the needs of a new and wider Europe the EC will have to adapt in
ways different from, and more radical than, the changes that come into force
today. The principle of the sacrosanct acquis communautaire - that new
members must adapt to arrangements previously agreed between existing
members, rather than vice versa - will simply not work when what is
envisaged is an expansion that will eventually double the number of member
states, bringing in new members with very different political and economic
traditions.
It is true that that expansion will take some time. But it would be folly to
imagine that the problems can be solved by dealing with them piecemeal, in a
succession of negotiations with small groups of applicant countries. On the
contrary, that procedure would virtually ensure that the strategic issues
were not confronted and that the end product was utterly incoherent and
unworkable.
As things stand, the EC is pursuing enlargement negotiations with four Efta
countries, and is due to hold an intergovernmental conference in 1996 to
revise the union treaty as far as seems desirable in the light of
experience. It might make more sense to bring the conference forward and
combine it with the enlargement talks, so that the parliaments and
electorates of all 16 countries could consider the results simultaneously.
On the day-to-day level, the immediate task for the 12 must now be to try to
operate the institutional machinery provided by the treaty and see how it
works. But that should be combined with serious thought at the strategic
level about the union of the future - a process which cannot be confined to
12 states or even 16. All the likely future members of the union must be
involved in it, which means that some sort of skeleton institutional
structure for it should be established as soon as possible.
It is clear that a union of the size and diversity envisaged cannot be
highly centralised. It should have a single, open market, but its member
states must be free to experiment with measures to alleviate their
employment problems and to decide, within limits, their own macro-economic
policies. For unless it can achieve sustained economic growth and unless it
can reduce unemployment well below its current levels in both eastern and
western Europe, the union is doomed to fail. It faces a formidable challenge
from the new and dynamic economies of east Asia. It has no hope of meeting
that challenge if it seeks to impose on all its members the social
regulations that the most prosperous still think they can afford.
Open relationships
Full economic and monetary union of such a large area could only come about
over several decades, if at all. Even then the national identities of the
member states and the desire of their peoples to retain control of their own
destinies, would have to be carefully entrenched and protected. They would
not tolerate any attempt to merge them into a single state, even a federal
one.
There could and should be no question of such a union fencing itself off
from the rest of the world with tariff or non-tariff barriers. On the
contrary, Europe can remain prosperous only if it maintains open
relationships with the rest of the world, particularly in trade and
investment. Indeed, the union should play a major role in securing global
economic order.
Yet to talk of 'playing a role' implies a capacity to take decisions and to
act on them; and a union of that size will not be able to avoid
responsibilities in the area of physical as well as economic security. So
although 'widening' may rightly be seen as the enemy of 'deepening', when
the latter means a highly intrusive central power, the same is not true when
'deepening' means strengthening the ability of the union to decide and to
act within the areas agreed.
In matters essential to its functioning and survival - notably internal and
external trade, free movement of capital and labour, but also the key areas
of foreign and security policy, including immigration, asylum, the fight
against transnational crime and at least some aspects of defence -
decision-making processes will need to be streamlined and sovereignty
pooled. The union will not be effective in a crisis if its every move has to
be unanimously approved in advance by the representatives of 20 or 30
separate bureaucracies. A central question will concern the necessary
increase in the voting weights to be exercised by the large countries within
the community.
It will obviously be a long time before even all the existing members, let
alone all the future ones, are ready to make the sacrifices of sovereignty
required for an effective union in this sense. Some, moreover, will be more
interested in participating in the economic and monetary aspects, while for
others the issues of physical security will be paramount. It is therefore
inescapable that those who are ready to act together in a particular area
should move ahead and do so, using or creating whatever institutions are
necessary. That is already happening with border control (the Schengen
treaty), with defence (the Western European Union), and with the management
of exchange rates. It would happen for Emu even if Maastricht were applied
to the letter, since not all member states would be ready for stage three at
the same time. 'Variable geometry' is not something to be ashamed of. It is
in fact the only way a viable European union can be built.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931101

