FT932-3268

FT  15 JUN 93 / Timex threatens to shut plant: Union official fears '90 per
cent likelihood of closure' by year-end


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent and DAVID GOODHART


   ZURICH


MANAGEMENT last night threatened to close the strike-hit Timex Electronics
plant in Dundee by the year-end if there was no settlement on a return to
work.
Mr William Lesslie, a former AEEU engineering union deputy convener at the
plant, said after talks with management that there was a '90 per cent
likelihood of closure by Christmas'.
The talks involved Mr Mohamed Saleh, the company's head of human resources
in the US, union officials and leaders of the sacked Dundee workforce.
Earlier Timex Electronics disclosed that its president Mr Peter Hall had
resigned for personal reasons. His departure was widely seen as making a
settlement slightly easier to reach but union officials said they were not
expecting an early solution.
Mr John Kydd, divisional organiser of the AEEU, said the company had
effectively demanded the union accept virtually the same package the sacked
workforce rejected earlier this month. He said the two sides were 'poles
apart'.
'We believe there is a future for Timex at Dundee with reasonable wages and
conditions,' Mr Kydd said. 'We are prepared to compromise, the company is
not.' Talks are due to resume today with little hope of agreement being held
out.
It was the first time since February that Timex had met local union leaders,
though the company has had lengthy negotiations with the union's national
officials.
The printed circuit board assembly factory is being managed by Mr John
Dryfe, a Scot who is chairman of Timex Electronics in the US and was once
manager of the Dundee facility.
The Timex dispute is in its fifth month. The Dundee plant had 340 hourly
paid workers, 80 per cent of them women, until the entire workforce was
sacked in February. Since then the company has been bussing in replacements.
Strikers this month contemptuously rejected the peace terms negotiated by
the union, which said the terms represented a 27 per cent cut in pay and
benefits.
The strikers want to win back their jobs on conditions similar to those
under which they were working before they were sacked.
They believe pressure is mounting on Timex - partly because of the damage
being inflicted by the long-running dispute on the company's image - and
they accept that closure is a possibility.
Mr John Stewart, a member of the strike committee, said: 'Timex's attempt to
maintain production with the replacement workforce has been a dismal
failure.'
Timex has insisted production is being maintained and that it needs to
increase its workforce to meet new orders.
David Goodhart in Zurich writes: Mr Bill Jordan, president of the AEEU,
welcomed the news that Mr Hall had left Timex and said it was a 'necessary
but not sufficient condition for finding a resolution'.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930615

