FT934-10028

FT  08 NOV 93 / The Week Ahead: Results Due


THE BENEFITS of Unilever's exposure to emerging markets are expected to show
through when the Anglo-Dutch food and consumer products group reports its
third quarter results on Friday. Forecasts of pre-tax profits range from
Pounds 608m to Pounds 635m, up from Pounds 584m last time.
Growth is expected to have come almost entirely from regions such as Asia,
with a continued flat performance in the US and Europe.
The figures are also likely to be boosted by recent acquisitions, the
consolidation of subsidiaries and the impact of currency movements on the
sterling results.
National Power, the electricity generator, opens the electricity interim
results season on Wednesday with analysts as eager to hear the company's
latest market share expectations as its profits.
The results are National Power's last before the electricity regulator
decides whether to refer it and PowerGen to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission. The perception is that the lower the market share the less
likelihood there is of a reference.
Profits are fairly meaningless for the first half of the year which usually
generates only 30 to 40 per cent of the full year earnings. The figure is
likely to be around Pounds 210m to Pounds 220m, against Pounds 201m for the
first half of last year.
Analysts expect a rise of about 15 per cent in the dividend.
Associated British Foods, reporting full-year results today, will have
offset its continuing difficulties in baking against a better performance
from its British Sugar subsidiary and investment income. Pre-tax profits of
around Pounds 310m, up from Pounds 297m, are expected.
Anglian Water, the second water company to report, is expected to turn in
tomorrow an unchanged interim pre-tax of Pounds 100m.
SG Warburg, the merchant bank, is expected to report tomorrow a jump in
interim pre-tax profits to Pounds 127m from Pounds 51.2m. Hambros' interim
on Wednesday will be less impressive with pre-tax profits at about Pounds
35m (Pounds 25m).
The strong performance of the oil majors is likely to continue on Thursday
when Royal Dutch Petroleum and Shell Transport and Trading report third
quarter results. Analysts expect profits on a current cost basis, excluding
stock losses and gains, to be around Pounds 900m, although some estimates
are close to Pounds 1bn.
Recent results from the US majors, including Shell US as well as British
Petroleum in the UK, suggest weak oil prices will have been more than offset
by strong marketing margins, as consumers have so far not clamoured for
lower pump prices despite sharp falls in crude oil prices.
Royal Insurance, the composite insurer, is expected to report pre-tax
profits of between Pounds 99m and Pounds 117m, when it posts its results for
the first nine months of 1993 on Thursday.
Continuing improvement in the UK, where Royal, like its rivals has benefited
from a fall in claims and increases in premiums, is the main reason. At the
same stage last year the company reported pre-tax losses of Pounds 83m.
Commercial Union and General Accident, which report nine month figures in
the following week, will also show a strong improvement.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931108

