FT934-10134

FT  06 NOV 93 / Food & Drink: Dear Marco, some hints . . . - Marco Pierre
White and his latest move


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


WHAT HAS got into Marco Pierre White, the UK's most publicity conscious
chef? Successful as chef at Harvey's Wandsworth and partner in The Canteen,
Chelsea Harbour, White suddenly abandons his apparently profitable
independence to open The Restaurant in the Hyde Park Hotel, Knightsbridge,
London.
There, he has joined forces with Forte, the UK's largest hotelier which has
its own wine division, teams of managers, staff training and administrative
back-up and even an effective press office.
White was the youngest chef in Britain, at 27, to win two Michelin stars and
is desperately keen to climb the greasy pole of culinary stardom. Still
thick-skinned enough to be rude to fellow chefs who have tried to eat there,
White knows that in the West End - not far from such established chefs as
Nico Ladenis, Michel Roux, Pierre Koffmann and Simon Hopkinson - the
competition is at its most fierce. It is where he ought to be.
But there is a problem - The Restaurant needs a restaurateur, someone who
can pull together the different strands of the business and attack menu and
wine prices.
The Restaurant's entrance is not at all prepossessing, off a lobby that
leads to the hotel's ballroom. There are 15 widely spaced tables in the
dining room seating no more than 50. There is no view other than on to
Harvey Nichols and a busy staff exit, which I observed as I ate dinner. The
tables are uncluttered and the food served unceremoniously.
The dining room is a custard yellow and on the walls are lack-lustre
still-life paintings. My guest at its good value prix fixe lunch, was a
marketing consultant whose initial comment was that the carpets needed a
clean. He thought the decor was an effort to focus attention on the food. I
think it amateurish.
My lasting impression of the a la carte menu is that it is ambitiously long
 -too much for the kitchen to cope with. At Pounds 60 for three dinner
courses, excluding coffee and service, it is also one of London's most
expensive and rivals the dearest in Paris, Brussels or New York.
This debut menu includes three different soups: vichysoisse of oysters,
caviar chantilly, red mullet with saffron and haricots blancs with
langoustines and truffle.
Starters include a terrine of pork knuckle and foie gras and a excellent
salad of potatoes, lobster and truffle. After that come 14 main courses, six
fish and eight meat, that exude, and often deliver, complexity of flavour.
They include: roast Bresse pigeon leg en croute, braised cabbage, pomme
fondante, ravioli of ceps and a jus of thyme or a fillet of lamb with herbs,
shallots, couscous with black olives and a tian of aubergine.
I ordered a tranche of turbot with girolles mushrooms and a Sauternes sauce.
Those three ingredients were excellent but spoilt by an unannounced pile of
fresh noodles. Desserts are catholic in taste and range - a souffle of
prunes and armagnac, a delicious lemon tart and a memorably rich creme
vanille with poached fruits. The dessert menu is only spoilt by a line at
the bottom that an extra cheese course will cost a further Pounds 10.
I have seen the cheeses served and they are not ungenerous. But this line,
together with my dealings with The Restaurant's waiting staff and wine list,
made me think that nobody has been responsible for converting The
Restaurant's parts into a working model.
The waiting staff are over deferential, the maitre d' adept at taking orders
without a pad and the wine waiter surly. Delays occur - four Americans
waited two hours for their main course - but all the managers wanted to do
was smile and wave their hands. An unauthorised foray into the kitchen for
four small bowls of soup would have swept away any anxiety.
More radical surgery is needed on the wine list. It has been created by
Anthony Byrne Fine Wines, an estimable firm, but no attempt seems to have
been made to integrate the wines with the food. (White does not drink so
this is definitely a task for a strong and discerning manager). The emphasis
is on the more obvious, expensive, wine areas of France.
The wine pricing is outrageous. For a celebration dinner we drank a bottle
of Henschke's Hill of Grace Cabernet Sauvignon 1989 from Australia that cost
Pounds 50 excluding service. From the importers, Lay & Wheeler, of
Colchester, Essex, it costs Pounds 18 but, more gallingly, just across the
busy street in the Fifth Floor Restaurant of Harvey Nichols, the same wine
costs Pounds 30.
The Restaurant will succeed and deliver its promise because of White's
talent, driving ambition and gradual maturity and Forte's resources. But it
will take time to reduce some exorbitant pricing and an astute, perceptive
and assertive manager to make the whole more than the sum of its parts.
The Restaurant, Hyde Park Hotel, 66 Knightsbridge, London SW1X 7LA. Tel:
071-259-5380. Lunch Pounds 22.50, dinner Pounds 60 excluding coffee, wine
and service. Open Mon-Fri lunch, Mon-Sat dinner.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

931106

