FT934-11569

FT  30 OCT 93 / Bank cools speculation over cut in interest rates: Governor
sounds a strong warning on inflation


   By PETER MARSH and PETER JOHN


MR EDDIE GEORGE, governor of the Bank of England, yesterday damped
speculation about an imminent cut in UK interest rates by suggesting this
could jeopardise the goal of price stability.
Sounding a warning on inflationary pressures, Mr George said British
industry needed a long period of monetary stability rather than short-term
economic boosts provided by interest rate cuts.
Speaking to journalists in London, the governor said he was 'not confident'
that cutting interest rates from 6 per cent would be compatible with the
government's target of keeping underlying inflation below 4 per cent.
'As of now, I think monetary policy is appropriate for the conditions we
face,' Mr George told the Foreign Press Association.
He added that any adjustment to monetary policy was likely to be finely
balanced. Commentators calling for rate cuts of up to two percentage points
had not seriously thought through the implications for inflation of such a
large cut.
The remarks from the governor weakened short-dated gilts - which normally
track expectations about likely levels of interest rates - and boosted the
pound, which recovered from early weakness against the D-Mark to close
unchanged on the day at DM2.4975. Against the dollar, sterling closed down
just over half a cent at Dollars 1.4865.
However, Mr George's comments failed to shake the general belief in
financial markets that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, will cut base
rates by up to 1 percentage point around Budget day on November 30, possibly
to offset a fiscal tightening to curb Britain's Pounds 50bn budget deficit.
Mr George was fairly bullish about the UK's growth prospects, arguing that
even with the weakness of important export markets in the rest of Europe,
many British companies were well poised to take advantage of the general
turn upwards in UK demand.
Mr George stressed that the top priority for the Bank was 'to achieve and
maintain price stability in the medium and long run.'
Currencies, Page 11
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931030

