FT934-8891

FT  12 NOV 93 / International Company News: Foreningsbanken loss grows


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


SWEDEN'S fifth biggest bank, Foreningsbanken, yesterday announced an
operating loss of SKr1.46bn (Dollars 180m) for the first nine months, up 52
per cent from the same 1992 period.
The result was dragged down by SKr3.38bn in credit losses, a 29 per cent
increase from last year.
The bank expects a full-year loss of around SKr2bn and credit losses of more
than SKr4bn.
The results were announced as the group unveiled details of a series of
share offers, which could raise as much as SKr3.4bn in new equity as part of
its plans to remain privately-owned and obtain a stock exchange listing.
The Swedish government is providing a SKr2.5bn guarantee, which can be
utilised by the bank if its capital adequacy falls below 9 per cent over the
next three and a half years. At the end of September, the ratio was just 5.5
per cent.
A consortium centred on the LRF, the Swedish farmers co-operative, is
guaranteeing SKr2.5bn of the new issue, which will be priced at SKr15 per
share.
A further SKr400m worth of shares will be offered to Swedish and
international institutions, while SKr500m is available for
over-subscription.
The bank aims to be quoted on the Stockholm Stock Exchange from January 1.
STANDARD & Poor's, the debt rating agency, yesterday posted a negative
outlook assessment on Investor, the main holding company of Sweden's
powerful Wallenberg family, because of concerns about Saab-Scania, its 100
per cent owned vehicle and aerospace unit. A slide in profits at Saab-Scania
contributed to an 80 per cent fall in Investor's half-year profits to
SKr406m as it was hit by weak demand.
S&P said the revision of its outlook assessment from the previous status of
stable, did not necessarily imply that a downgrade in Investor's debt rating
would follow. But it reflected concern about Saab-Scania's medium-term
ability to generate surplus cash flow for its parent amid 'depressed market
conditions and capital expenditure requirements'.
The agency said this could force Investor to rely on further asset sales.

The Financial Times


International Page 18

931112

