FT932-120

FT  30 JUN 93 / London parking fines double as powers pass to councils


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


TRAFFIC LAWS that start to take effect tomorrow herald the toughest
clampdown on illegal parking in London since traffic wardens began pounding
the beat in 1960.
The Pounds 30 penalty for illegal parking will double to Pounds 60 in
central London; at least 1,000 traffic wardens will join the 1,500 already
on patrol; and computer technology will be deployed to crack down on
persistent offenders.
The new regime is being introduced under the Road Traffic Act 1991, which
gives the government powers to transfer responsibility for parking
enforcement from the police to local authorities.
It is modelled on schemes introduced over the past two years in US cities
such as Chicago which have succeeded in cutting congestion and increasing
traffic speeds.
The law permitting the London scheme comes into effect at midnight tonight,
but the transfer of responsibility will be phased in area by area over the
next 12 months.
Under the existing system, traffic wardens are employed by the Metropolitan
Police - although some local authorities engage additional wardens to patrol
parking meters and residents' parking spaces.
In future, police wardens will concentrate on patrolling the capital's main
roads, soon to be redesignated 'red routes' with stricter curbs on parking.
The rest of the capital's roads will be the responsibility of local
authorities, which will introduce at least 1,000 parking attendants - some
employed direct and others working for private sector subcontractors.
The attendants will have hand-held computers enabling them to check vehicle
registrations. They will then summon car clamping or removal squads to deal
with persistent offenders.
The Pounds 30 fixed penalty will rise to Pounds 60 in central London and
Pounds 40 in the rest of inner London, but will stay the same in outer
London. Motorists will be encouraged to pay promptly with the offer of a 50
per cent discount for penalties paid in 14 days and the threat of a 50 per
cent surcharge after two months.
Proceeds from the fines will be used to finance the local authorities'
enforcement activities. Any surpluses can be used to provide off-street
parking or to improve public transport or roads.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930630

