FT932-3262

FT  15 JUN 93 / VW to build low-cost car plant


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   HANOVER


VOLKSWAGEN has started talks with a consortium of Spanish banks and
industrial companies on plans to build a factory to make 'the cheapest car
in the world', Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the German group's
production director, said yesterday.
'We are now in a period of analysis. We should be able to have a very clear
picture by 1995,' he announced. 'I am confident that we will have this dream
plant.'
The project for a plant in his Basque homeland had been proposed to SEAT,
VW's Spanish subsidiary, by a consortium including the Banco Bilbao Vizcaya,
the Banco Central Hispano, the Mondragon industrial co-operative, and
Iberdrola, Spain's biggest electricity utility.
He shrugged off warnings from General Motors, his former employers, that
further legal action may follow if VW went ahead with the project, which
seems closely modelled on an idea he and his colleagues generated while with
the US group.
'We live in a free continent, and we are all free to develop ideas and make
goods which we consider best for markets. We will do so if we want and no
one can tell us otherwise.'
The Spanish consortium is believed to have offered to build a factory with
capacity for up to 200,000 cars a year in Amorebieta, near Bilbao, to be
operated by VW and bought from the consortium at some unspecified date.
While Mr Lopez suggested in answer to questions that this was his ideal
project, a separate written statement, attributed to Mr Lopez, said VW
wanted only a 'production laboratory' on a greenfield site to test
revolutionary assembly methods under real operating conditions.
While Mr Ferdinand Piech, group chairman, recently confirmed that the
company needed a cheap, bottom-end model in its range, Volkswagen will face
severe political problems if it opens up significant new capacity in Spain
while cutting back output in Germany.
Capital investment plans for the vehicles business have been cut to around
half the original planned level for this year - just DM6bn (Pounds 2.4bn).
One of the main victims of the squeeze has been a new, greenfield plant in
Mosel, eastern Germany.
Background, Page 27

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930615

