FT932-3303

FT  15 JUN 93 / Technology: Tape hits the cutting floor / A look at
development in the newsroom


   By GEOFFREY DAVIES


Broadcasting from tape could soon be a thing of the past as television
stations make increasing use of computers and special software to replace
traditional tape technology.
New tapeless editing equipment, developed with the help of the British
Broadcasting Corporation and Cable News Network of the US, is being launched
at this week's bi-annual TV equipment show in Montreux, Switzerland.
Called the 'NewsCutter', and produced by Avid Technology, it is a full
news-style edit suite of tape machines and monitors on an Apple computer
which is capable of broadcasting directly to air. Both the BBC and
Independent Television News, its UK rival, are evaluating the product and
Avid hopes other European broadcasters will show a strong interest.
Avid's equipment works through the compression of digital pictures, with
data squeezed into ever smaller spaces on hard disc. It then uses other
software to allow editors to call up pictures instantly from disc.
Based in the US, Avid is prominent in the tapeless editing market. It will
shortly open a European service and distribution centre outside Dublin.
Avid's move into broadcast news has been helped by a partnership with
Silicon Graphics of the US to provide equipment which allows video to be
swapped between different machines in the newsroom.
The process of editing video on disc is called 'non-linear' because it is
not done in a line, as with normal editing on tape. It is akin to moving
paragraphs within a document on a word processor.
Avid is one of several companies selling into this growing market. But
unlike competitors such as Lightworks and Eidos, both of the UK, which have
tended to stay with commercials and broadcast programming, Avid is involved
with both news and feature film production.
Stephen Crummey, vice-president of world sales and marketing, says there are
more than 1,500 Avid machines installed worldwide, 100 in Hollywood alone.
Avid adapted its Film Composer for film use from the Media Composer, which
was designed for Pal or NTSC television standards. Based on a powerful Apple
Quadra 950 computer, Film Composer transfers images from tape or film on to
hard disc, a process called 'digitising'.
Shots are labelled using the keyboard and then read by the computer as
reference numbers, usually based on the time-codes recorded during shooting.
Shots can then be laid out in the edited order to run as a sequence.
To change the sequence, the film editor simply re-orders the sequence in
which the shots are to appear. Once a shot is moved, it can be viewed
instantly in its new position. When the edit is agreed, the list of edit
numbers is taken on a floppy disc and the originally shot material is then
reassembled in the new editing order.
The Media Composer has 24 channels of compact disc quality sound which can
be dubbed and mixed while the pictures are being edited. The completed sound
track is then added to the edited pictures. The BBC's political programme,
On the Record, has been working this way for more than a year.
But the big breakthrough for the industry is the ability to obtain
broadcast-quality pictures directly from hard disc. This results from
developments in video compression and disc speed. One second of
broadcast-quality television represents 25 megabytes of data. This is
compressed nearly tenfold to about three megabytes. Taped pictures which
have been digitised can be held on removable hard drives of about 20
minutes' airtime.
One impact of the technology will come in the area of cost. Avid's
NewsCutter, costing Dollars 50,000 in the US, is half the price of an
equivalent edit suite. Also, the new equipment needs no special installation
such as wiring and air conditioning. The BBC has already stopped using
several edit suites since it first introduced non-linear editing.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930615

