FT934-11701

FT  29 OCT 93 / London Stock Exchange: Wall Street high halts London slide


   By STEVE THOMPSON


A DAY of high drama in the London stock market ended with Wall Street's
early move to another all-time peak, prompting a strong rebound in the
leading UK stocks after an early bout of weakness.
The initial market trend came after a set of poorly received preliminary
figures from Wellcome, one of the top UK drug companies, and another dismal
showing by the top British food retailers on talk of a price war.
The sudden and generally unexpected upsurge on Wall Street followed a better
than expected increase in US gross domestic product during the third
quarter, up an annualised 2.8 per cent, plus in-line unemployment figures.
The Dow Industrial Average moved smoothly through the 3,700 mark shortly
after US markets opened and was holding above that level after London
closed. Giving added impetus to the upward trend in US stocks was a batch of
good results from leading US companies such as Kodak and General Motors.
The feeling around the City's dealing rooms late yesterday was that Wall
Street's big rise - if it holds - could shake European markets out of their
recent uncertain performances. 'The GDP data is an indication that the US is
now on the verge of emerging properly from recession,' said a senior market
trader at one of the US brokers operating in London.
Others said they continued to feel comfortable with London and that there
looked to be considerable scope for various sectors, most notably the oils,
where British Petroleum was given a big boost yesterday after NatWest
Securities upgraded its earnings forecasts for the company.
The FT-SE 100 Index ended a day of big swings a net 8.7 firmer at 3,163.0,
but the FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which has outperformed the senior index
recently, stubbornly refused to participate in the late upswing, settling
4.7 off at 3,532.4, and not far short of the day's low.
The day's biggest feature was Wellcome, the drugs company, whose shares
plummeted 100p at one point before edging off the bottom, as analysts
lowered their forecasts for the current year by around 10 per cent, citing
growing fears about the group's sales prospects. A closing fall of 91p in
Wellcome was worth 4.9 points off the FT-SE 100-share index. Some top
brokers, however, said the sell-off in Wellcome had been overdone.
The same was said about the big supermarket groups, where collective
turnover accounted for approaching 10 per cent of the market's turnover of
736.6m, including a significant block trade in Asda stock.
Yesterday's overall turnover was again inflated by exceptionally heavy
business - 56m shares - in Ferranti, the defence/electronics group, where
GEC surprised no-one in the City in revealing itself as the bidder for the
group.
In sharp contrast to Wellcome, ICI shares performed well after pleasing the
market with its third-quarter results. Other outstanding performances
yesterday came from the merchant banking sector, where SG Warburg and
Hambros moved up to all-time highs, and Kleinwort Benson extended the strong
rise which has seen the shares more than double in just over 12 months.
The market's newly revived strength was reflected in another outstanding
debut performance, this time from computer games group Centregold, the
shares surging 33 per cent on the session.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

931029

