FT934-10070

FT  08 NOV 93 / Freedom ferry for Staten Island: A New York drive for
independence


   By FRANK MCGURTY


THE LARGEST garbage dump in the US lies on the western shores of Staten
Island, the smallest of New York city's five boroughs.
Every day, hundreds of lorries rumble across the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge
with tonnes of rubbish destined for the landfill, known rather ominously as
Fresh Kills.
Not surprisingly, it has become a metaphor for the borough's rocky
relationship with the rest of the city. Most Staten Islanders feel the city
treats their home turf like a dumping ground, literally and figuratively.
'They dump their trash on us. They dump their homeless here, and when they
want to build a jail, they build it here,' says Mr Jim Groffer, a resident
for 38 years.
His litany encapsulates the anger and frustration felt by many of Staten
Island's mostly white and middle class population towards New York. Last
week, Mr Groffer and like-minded Staten Islanders hit back. By a two-to-one
majority, they voted to secede from the Big Apple and establish their own
city.
With a population comparable with that of Atlanta, Miami or Minneapolis, an
independent Staten Island would shed its status of New York city's forgotten
step-child. A borough which Manhattan sophisticates either laugh at or
ignore would finally gain a measure of respect.
Independence for Staten Island still faces formidable obstacles. Last
Tuesday's referendum merely approved a proposed structure for the island's
government. The more difficult task of setting the terms of the divorce lies
ahead.
As a first step, the Staten Island Charter Commission is charged with
drafting a specific proposal on disengaging the island from the city. Within
three months, it must present its plan for approval by the state
legislature.
Before that occurs, protracted negotiations with the city and careful
political manoeuvering in Albany, the New York state capital, are expected.
The final say rests with the governor, Mr Mario Cuomo, who has veto power.
The charter commission is hoping to complete the process in a year or two,
but others estimate it could take 4-6 years.
Ironically, Fresh Kills is likely to be the most coveted asset in the
negotiations. The economic viability of independence could hinge on whether
the city or Staten Island wins title to the dump.
If the island's claim succeeds, it could charge New York city millions of
dollars in tipping fees annually, says Mr Thomas Cocola, press secretary to
the borough's president, Mr Guy Molinari. The revenue could prove critical.
An early study of the finances of secession estimated the island gets
Dollars 170m more in services from the city than it pays in taxes, raising
the prospect of a doubling or tripling in property rates if the island goes
it alone. It found that the island's residents were in effect subsidised by
revenues generated by taxing large corporations based in Manhattan.
That economic reality does not square with the perception of many Staten
Islanders, who feel short-changed. Many parts of the borough - just a
20-minute ferry ride from the skyscrapers of lower Manhattan - still have no
sewers. There are no subway lines and only one train. Residents complain
garbage collection is less frequent than in other boroughs.
Furthermore, subsequent studies, released just before the referendum,
suggest that the economic bite may not be as painful as initially thought.
In the vote for New York city mayor, Staten Islanders, concerned over crime
and other so-called 'quality of life' issues, supported the Republican, Mr
Rudolph Guiliani, a former federal prosecutor, by a four-to-one margin.
Without the borough, he would have lost to Mr David Dinkins, the city's
first black chief executive.
Given the political arithmetic, the mayor-elect is sure to work hard at
fulfilling his campaign pledge to be more sensitive to the borough's needs,
with an eye towards taking the steam out of the secessionist drive. But with
last week's overwhelming vote Staten Islanders signalled they were in no
mood to turn back.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931108

