FT933-10253

FT  05 AUG 93 / Manx timeshare plan curbs rights


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent


THE ISLE OF MAN, the legal jurisdiction for many European Community
timeshare contracts, is considering a law which would provide a
substantially shorter 'cooling-off' period than that imposed by the UK and
sought by other EC governments.
The Consumers' Association fears the proposals could leave timeshare buyers
with a low level of protection.
Government officials on the island favour a seven-day cooling-off period,
during which buyers can get their money back. This compares with 14 days
specified by UK law or the period of between 14 and 28 days suggested for EC
legislation.
Timeshare buyers purchase a specified number of weeks each year at a holiday
resort. The industry has suffered damage to its reputation because of
high-pressure sales tactics.
More timeshare contracts in Europe are subject to Isle of Man law than any
other jurisdiction, says Mr Norman Burden, chairman of the Timeshare
Council, which represents the reputable side of the UK industry, and the
vice-president of the European Timeshare Federation. He defended the
seven-day period, saying most buyers who cancelled did so within 72 hours.
The Consumers' Association said yesterday: 'We wouldn't want to see Isle of
Man-registered companies ducking UK legislation. The cooling-off period is
absolutely essential.'
The Isle of Man completed consultation on the proposed law last weekend. The
legislation is expected to be introduced into the Manx parliament's next
session, beginning in October.
A consultative document prepared by an Isle of Man Treasury working group
and sent to industry representatives says: 'It has been suggested that if
legitimate timeshare business is to be encouraged to develop here, a shorter
cancellation period than exists in the UK would do much to impart a
marketing advantage to the Isle of Man.'
The document says the island's Board of Consumer Affairs would have liked to
offer the same level of consumer protection as exists in the UK.
The UK law, which came into effect last October, was regarded as providing
little protection to buyers because it did not apply where contracts were
concluded abroad. The Timeshare Council estimates that 75 per cent of UK
buyers enter into contracts abroad.
Proposed EC legislation suggested a 14-day cooling-off for contracts entered
into in the buyer's country of residence and 28 days for agreements signed
elsewhere in the EC. The European Parliament has recommended 21 days in both
cases.
The Isle of Man is exempt from much EC law and will not be subject to the
directive.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930805

