FT931-4235

FT  11 MAR 93 / UK treaty ratification faces further obstacles


   By IVO DAWNAY and RALPH ATKINS


   LONDON


THE UK GOVERNMENT faces a further setback in its attempt to push ahead with
ratification of the Maastricht treaty, a senior Conservative cabinet
minister conceded yesterday.
The opposition Labour party believes it could gain enough support from the
Liberal Democratic party and Tory rebels to win five further amendments to
the bill, each aimed at enhancing democratic accountability and controls
over the EC. Although none of the amendments would halt British ratification
of the treaty, they would undoubtedly serve to undermine further the
government's authority and sap morale among loyalist pro-Maastricht MPs.
In an attempt to talk down the significance of Monday's defeat in the House
of Commons, when Labour, Liberal Democrat and Conservative party rebels
scored a 22-vote victory over the government, the minister said: 'The ship
can take on some water. So long as it stays on course, that is what
matters.'
Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, is also understood to have taken a
strategic decision not to antagonise Tory Euro-rebels, believing many are
fighting over what they see as genuine points of principle.
With the committee stage set to resume today, possibly continuing into the
weekend, Mr Major is anxious to maintain Conservative unity in the long
term, not least in nine months time when the Maastricht legislation should
be passed.
In practice, recent surveys of Conservative constituency association
chairmen - showing many supportive of the rebels - reveal there is little he
can do to contain the revolt.
Ministers appear ready to leave the arm-twisting to loyalist backbench
colleagues who are expected to resume their criticisms of the rebels today.
But leaders of the Euro-sceptics were unbowed yesterday, saying they could
support at least some of Labour's amendments. Although there is evidence of
some splits among the rebels, tactics are also being kept secret.
The government's vulnerability has, meanwhile, markedly raised morale on the
Labour benches following its 22-vote victory on Monday. But Mr John Smith,
the Labour party leader, yesterday made clear that the opposition will do
nothing to prevent eventual ratification of the accord.
He spoke against an amendment proposed yesterday, at a meeting of the
parliamentary Labour party, that he warned could wreck the treaty.
Mr Davies's motion, that attempts to reject the treaty's provisions on
member states' budget deficits, was rejected by the overwhelming margin of
94 votes to 35 - solidly confirming support for Mr Smith's stance among his
backbenchers.

The Financial Times


International Page 16

930311

