FT932-13256

FT  23 APR 93 / Ukraine alters key nuclear clause


   By OLEG MAMAYEV and JOHN LLOYD


   KIEV, MOSCOW


UKRAINE'S parliament yesterday revived fears of a resurgence of nuclear
tension in eastern Europe when it put into question the country's commitment
to become a non-nuclear state.
In a closed session, the deputies in the Kiev parliament changed a key
clause in a draft on military doctrine which read that Ukraine would in
future become a non-nuclear state to read that nuclear weapons would stay on
its territory for a 'transitional period', according to deputies after the
session last night.
Ukraine has 176 strategic nuclear missiles in its possession and under its
control - in spite of repeated demands by Russia that it allow these
missiles, part of the forward Soviet nuclear force, to remain under complete
Russian control.
The country has also so far refused to sign either the Start 1 or Start 2
treaties - a refusal which is jeopardising Russia's ratification of Start 2.
The ultimate decision and technical means to fire the missiles remain in
Moscow. However, Russian security analysts said this week that Ukraine was
capable of developing its own command and control system rapidly in a short
period.
Despite the change, the draft doctrine fell some 37 votes short of being
adopted when put to a vote of the deputies. According to Mr Stepan Khmara, a
nationalist deputy, the draft was turned down because of continued
dissatisfaction that it was 'too mild'.
Earlier, Mr Leonid Kravchuk, the Ukrainian president, had told a noisy
chamber that the country must sign Start 1 and claim non-nuclear status.
At the same time, Mr Kravchuk said that Ukraine had the right to expect
greater compensation from the west for destroying the weapons. A senior
official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that 'if the US had given
money for this before, we wouldn't be having such debates today'.
Ukraine has asked for Dollars 2bn to help liquidate its nuclear weapon
stock.
Parliament is due to return to the issue of the military doctrine next
month. However, even liberal deputies were last night forecasting that the
likely trend in the parliament was towards retention of nuclear force for
the foreseeable future.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

930423

