FT934-11187

FT  02 NOV 93 / Arts: Down but not out - Sponsorship


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


After years of steady growth, expenditure on arts sponsorship came to a halt
in 1992-93. Against the odds it had risen by an impressive 14 per cent in
1991-92, to Pounds 64.4m, encouraging the belief that somehow sponsorship
was recession proof. But when the Association for Business Sponsorship of
the Arts announces the most recent figures later this week they will show a
fall, not a mammoth fall, but enough to force the sponsorship industry to
reassess its approach.
The smaller, regional, first-time sponsors are still joining up with
enthusiasm, but the large commitments from the major traditional sponsors
are harder to find.
                        *        *        *
On cue, two of the great British arts sponsorships, the Royal Insurance
support for the Royal Shakespeare Company, and the Digital Dance Awards come
to an end next month.
Royal Insurance pumped Pounds 3.5m into the RSC over six years and both
sides gained tremendously from the link. The RSC is now seeking a similar
big backer. In the meantime it is having some success finding sponsors for
individual new productions. Unilever subsidiaries, Lever Bros and Van den
Bergh's, will put their brand names behind the new Macbeth opening in
December, and there is a first-time sponsor, JBA International, a
Stratford-based computer company, for the new Moby Dick. This has attracted
a top-up grant from the Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme administered
by ABSA.
The RSC still has one long-term admirer in English Estates, which has given
Pounds 200,000 towards the small venue tour of Julius Caesar, currently on
the road. But next year English Estates disappears into the Urban
Regeneration Agency and no one knows whether it will continue its
imaginative approach of bringing the arts to culturally starved areas of the
country.
The RSC has one big attraction for sponsors. It has an enthusiastic chairman
in the Prince of Wales. On Thursday night its main sponsors and some
prospective friends were invited to Buckingham Palace for a Shakespearean
soiree.
Although dropping the Digital Dance Awards, Digital Equipment Corporation,
the computer company, is sticking with sponsorship, and with dance. In six
years it invested Pounds 700,000 in 70 new dance works. It now feels that
dance, and dancers, are better able to stand on their own feet. However, it
is keeping the Pounds 30,000 Premier Award for an individual, the biggest
cash sum in the field, and is spending a further Pounds 180,000 in 1994 on
training and the development of dance projects for larger venues. So the
investment in dance has actually increased.
At the international level, Digital is reorganising. Its long-term support
for the European Community Youth Orchestra has come to an end, but a future
global sponsorship will not be decided upon for a year or so, by which time
Digital's financial position should have improved.
                        *        *        *
Next week, Lloyds Bank will announce a Pounds 500,000-a-year sponsorship in
the film area. The bank, which in 1994 will spend over Pounds 2m in
sponsorship, believes that film is an under-exploited art form. It already
backs the Lloyds Challenge for young scriptwriters and directors.
If fashion counts as art then Lloyds rivals BT as the leading British
sponsor of the arts. Along with its involvement in film and fashion it also
supports the Young Musician of the Year contest, which will fill BBC screens
again next spring. Apart from a bias towards youth all its links have one
thing in common: they attract television coverage. Next year, Lloyds is
expecting more than 15 hours of prime-time television to be devoted to
events it supports.
                        *        *        *
Substantial one-off sponsorships of costly new opera or ballet productions
are rare these days, but PowerGen came up with Pounds 110,000 for Sylvia,
David Bintley's new work for the Birmingham Royal Ballet, which opened last
week. But even here the sponsor is being hard-headed. If the ballet is a
success, and stays in the BRB repertoire, PowerGen will raise its support to
Pounds 150,000. Fortunately for BRB, the initial reaction was favourable.
                        *        *        *
Two unusual new sponsors are Jigsaw, the fashion retailers, and Elisabeth
the Chef. Jigsaw is sponsoring a tour of a new dance work by the Harlemation
Dance Company choreographed by Bunty Matthias. The Company will visit
regional towns where Jigsaw has shops; and the dancers' costumes were
designed by Maria Cornejo, a Jigsaw consultant.
Elisabeth the Chef is a Leamington Spa based supplier of bakery products to
supermarkets. One of its largest clients is Sainsbury, and inspired by the
sponsorship programme of its important customer, it has funded a Pounds
5,000 postgraduate art student award. The winner of the New Art Award will
be announced on Wednesday.
                        *        *        *
Beck's, the brewers, is one of a growing number of sponsors that want to be
associated with the avant-garde. (It is a myth that sponsors only support
the tried and tested: many companies think they can quickly acquire a
go-ahead image if they back the experimental.) Beck's latest commitment, a
mummified concrete house constructed by conceptualist Rachel Whiteread in
East London, was unveiled last Monday. It will stand for just a few weeks.
Working with Artangel, an organisation devoted to placing art in unorthodox
settings, Beck's will contribute Pounds 60,000 over three years to create an
annual landscaped creation, built to disappear.
                        *        *        *
Sponsorship may be faltering in the UK but there is still plenty of
potential for international connections. The Orchestra of the Age of
Enlightenment embarks in February on its first European tour, thanks to
Pounds 50,000 from Goldman Sachs, which, as a first-time sponsor, should
attract a substantial uplift from the BSIS. The American-owned bank wants to
show off its European credentials.
Conversely, Banco Santander, along with the Royal Bank of Scotland, is
generously backing the Spanish Arts Festival in London next spring. Between
them they are putting almost Pounds 300,000 into the Festival, helped by a
Pounds 35,000 BSIS grant for the Banco.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931102

