FT934-8856

FT  13 NOV 93 / Japanese bow to business on environment


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


THE JAPANESE parliament yesterday bowed to pressure from ministries
representing powerful business interests and passed a law of ambiguous ideas
rather than concrete controls to conserve the environment.
The environmental protection bill, consisting of 46 articles, failed to
include a controversial environment tax or legislation on environmental
assessment standards.
Instead, it contained clauses calling for the creation of a society which
could 'develop while maintaining a healthy environment,' and 'conserve the
global environment through international cooperation.'
The country's environmental agency had hoped to implement a tax to limit
carbon dioxide emissions and to make it obligatory for industrial projects
to have environmental assessments. Last year, an advisory group for the
agency proposed imposing a carbon tax on consumption of petroleum, natural
gas and coal, to control carbon dioxide emissions and to secure a source of
revenue to promote the use of solar energy and energy saving technology.
This was met by fierce opposition from the ministry of international trade
and industry (Miti), and the transport and construction ministries, whose
views reflected the views of many top Japanese companies. Many have publicly
embraced environmental themes with enthusiasm, but their strong opposition
to policies limiting domestic growth has hampered change and Tokyo's role in
the international debate on environmental issues.
Advisory panels to Miti last year reported that a carbon tax would do more
harm than good, triggering an 'international migration of industry.' The
construction ministry fears an environmental assessment system, would hamper
new projects.
The bill passed yesterday, contains a watered down version of the intended
measures by the environmental agency. It calls on a 'business to assess the
environmental impact of a project and take proper consideration to conserve
the environment,' and also states that the government should 'make efforts
to obtain the understanding and co-operation of the people' when it sees the
necessity of an environment tax.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931113

