FT932-13409

FT  23 APR 93 / Arts: Ample flesh to the fore - Patricia Morison reviews
Jacob Jordaens in Antwerp


   By PATRICIA MORISON


The subtitle for Jacob Jordaens, at the Royal Museum of Fine Arts in
Antwerp, could be 'The Triumph of Fat'. As Americans put it, I have a
problem with Jordaens - which is not to say anything against an engrossing
exhibition, the most ample (le mot juste) exploration of Jordaens' art for a
quarter of a century.
This exhibition marks the 400th year of the birth of Jordaens. Well
selected, with paintings which give a full idea of Jordaens' huge output,
the show makes a prestigious beginning to Antwerp's year as European Capital
of Culture. Jordaens' reputation has had its ups and downs: in the last
century he was hailed by Flemish nationalists as through and through a
Fleming - earthy, sensual, cheery and scrupulously honest; and at a time
when the fractured nature of Belgium grows more evident by the month, it
seems fitting that the focus is once again on Jordaens.
Even by 17th-century standards, Jordaens was an extraordinarily fleshy
artist, which makes it hard for anyone too set on the 20th-century ideal of
beauty to appreciate his work. His men and women swell, sag, and ooze from
their clothes - when they are wearing any. As he grew older and lost his
youthly bounce, figures which had at first boldly filled canvasses became
smaller but not leaner, leaving more room for sub-Rubens landscapes or
squirming Baroque architecture. A Jordaens nude, highly appreciated in his
day, can be a loathsome thing, as in the elephantine blonde in 'The
Daughters of Cecrops Finding the Child Erichthonius'.
Dogs, cows and horses abound in Jordaens paintings, and he had a mania for
parrots. Rubens generally had the accomplished Frans Snyders to add the
animals, but in Jordaens' equally prolific factory it seems much less clear
who did what. Assistants busily recycled figures from the huge stockpile of
drawings, plonking them on canvasses with fine disregard for relating them
either to each other or to the setting.
Quality control lapsed to a degree which had not been true of Rubens'
workshop. Whoever wielded the brushes, it is impossible to exonerate the
master for sending out paintings as awful as the late 'Mercury and Argus'
(private collection), with cows like dollops of melting lard.
While Rubens and Van Dyck were alive, young Jordaens was regarded as third
among the history painters in Antwerp. Unlike them, he never went to Italy.
After they died, he became number one painter and had some very grand
clients - including Charles I of England, who ordered, but never got, a
decorative cycle for the Queen's House in Greenwich.
The fascinating thing about this exhibition is the gulf in ability between
Jordaens and his great predecessors. A Jordaens portrait can be pretty, as
in the half-length 'Portrait of a Young Lady' from Vienna. But he has none
of Van Dyck's ability to convey refinement, intellect, nor languid
melancholy. Time and again, his bravura painting of heads is let down by
clumsy bodies.
Jordaens's Prado self portrait with his wife and child is a lovely
exception, but in many groups the figures tend to be hugger-mugger. A late
portrait from the Hermitage of a man and two women is a collapsing mountain
of satins and billowing white bosoms. The gentleman's leg sticks out in the
most inelegant manner from under the skirt of a lady whose legs have
apparently given way. One of Jordaens' regrettable cupids prods at her melon
breast with his arrow. Dignified it is not, yet the artist has created a
quite extraordinarily happy portrait.
Animal high spirits demonstrate the best of Jordaens, who has a gift for
capturing smiles and laughter. He can make us smile, too. In the 'Allegory
of Fruitfulness' from the Bass Museum in Florida, the tiger filching grapes
from a basket almost steals the scene. Subjects like 'As the Old Sang, So
the Young Pipe' (versions from Antwerp, Valenciennes, and a private
collection) and 'The King Drinks' (from Brussels), have long been the most
popular aspect of Jordaens.
Important and little-known religious paintings confirm the suspicion that
dramatic scenes of grief and suffering were not Jordaens' strong point. His
penchant for including contemporary peasants in religious scenes conformed
to Counter-Reformation piety, but because they are such coarse brutes, the
effect is a far cry from Zurbaran. 'The Holy Family with Various Persons and
Animals in a Boat' is quite as hilarious as the title suggests. The
catalogue (in two volumes and very desirable) disputes the view that
Jordaens' conversion to Calvinism had any effect on what he painted, or for
whom. He was too much the professional for points of theology to make any
odds.
The treat is the last room, a splendid finale. Here is Jordaens the tapestry
designer - something which for which he was tremendously in demand. Six
Brussels tapestries, 'The Riding School', are almost the complete set from
one bought for a Habsburg wedding and still in Vienna. They look almost as
good as new, their crimson and green hardly faded. Jordaens produced quite a
few horsey tapestries, an illustration for the fashion for applying
astrology to horse-breeding. Like people, horses had star-signs; a
Renaissance edition of The Racing Times would have printed a horoscope for
horses. These tapestries of Spanish-style dressage are magnificently
exuberant and infectiously light-hearted. Gods, men and women, horses and
peacocks, mingle on the friendliest terms. Here is the best of the world
according to Jordaens.
Sponsored by Gemeentekrediet and Sabena. Exhibition continues until June 27,
1993. Closed on Mondays; late opening Wednesdays until 9 pm

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930423

