FT934-8905

FT  12 NOV 93 / London Stock Exchange: Footsie 3,100 lost in uneasy market


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


WORRIES over global bond yields were put on hold yesterday in a London
market lacking a lead because of the Armistice Day closure of several other
leading financial centres. The disappointing trend in New York bonds on
Wednesday offset the firm performance by Wall Street.
After an attempt to move forward, UK equities were halted by Shell Transport
reporting third-quarter figures below market hopes. With Euro Disney's
trading losses still a negative factor, and some UK company results also
unfavourable yesterday, the market lost most of its early gain, and also the
3,100 mark on the FT-SE 100 Index, which closed only 1.2 up on the day at
3,099.7.
Once again, stock index futures provided much of the direction for the
equity market. The leading securities houses, having used stock index
futures as a means of repositioning themselves in a deteriorating stock
market, were struggling to balance their commitments in both derivatives and
the underlying stocks.
Some traders expressed satisfaction with the day's market. Others, however,
noting some late institutional selling, feared that a sizeable cash-raising
might be pending. It was a slack day for UK economic data and investors were
evidently content to wait for the US October retail sales figures, due
today. Next week is heavily weighted with economic news from both the UK and
the US, and will also be featured by speculation ahead of the monthly policy
meeting at the Bundesbank.
Once again, there was heavy turnover in the food retailing stocks which have
suffered severely over the past month from clear signs that a price war is
hotting up in the sector. In contrast, the international blue chips, lacking
a convincing lead from New York, stayed out of the picture.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index continued to drift lower, shedding a further 5.8 to
3,434.6. Seaq volume remained fairly good at 743.8m shares compared with
778m on Wednesday when retail or customer business was worth Pounds 1.7bn -
at the higher end of this year's daily averages.
Firmness overnight in the Hong Kong stock market brought some support for
Far Eastern issues, notably HSBC and Cable and Wireless. Zeneca provided a
firm support among pharmaceuticals, as the shares rebounded from a period of
weakness.
Domestic stocks continued to tread water ahead of the Budget due at the end
of the month from Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor of the exchequer.
Some building and construction stocks improved on underlying expectations
that a cut in base rates will not be long delayed but there was little
support for the store and retail issues after Burton Group, the high street
clothing retailer, reported higher profits but disappointing sales growth.
Bank stocks, also keen reflectors of base rate hopes in the stock market,
could make little headway and closed near to overnight levels having lost a
scattering of early gains.
Although inclined to leave the London market to its own devices until US and
European markets return to full power, UK strategists expressed concern over
the poor outcome of the US bond auctions which, they feared, may continue to
depress the US Federal bond sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

931112

