FT934-9996

FT  08 NOV 93 / Letters to the Editor: Thorp and review intensify nuclear
debate (1)


   From K KANEKO.


Sir, We refer to your article, 'Japanese MPs query Thorp deal' (October 28),
stating that some Japanese parliament members sent an open letter to British
MPs calling for a review of the reprocessing contracts between British
Nuclear Fuels (BNFL) and the Japanese utilities. On behalf of Japanese
utilities, I would like to express our comments on the news article as
follows.
It is a basic policy of the Japanese government that spent fuels generated
at nuclear power stations in Japan should be reprocessed, and that plutonium
recovered should be re-cycled only for civilian and peaceful use. All
plutonium recovered at the Thorp reprocessing facility will be utilised for
R&D activities including FBR and in our own LWR reactors as MOX fuels.
The operation of the reprocessing plant will be undertaken such as to
maintain an efficient reprocessing programme. Thus, there will be some
difference in timing between plutonium recovery and its actual use. Storage
of such recovered plutonium at BNFL will be required for some time until it
is actually used, but this does not mean that such stored plutonium would be
kept in store as surplus plutonium forever.
We believe that plutonium stored at BNFL will be strictly controlled by the
British government, Euratom, and International Atomic Energy Authority, and
that such plutonium can never be used for purposes other than for civilian
and peaceful use.
It is stipulated in Japanese law that nuclear energy should be utilised only
for peaceful use, and Japan has ratified the Non-Proliferation Treaty and
executed a Safeguards Agreement with IAEA. Nuclear material including
plutonium can never be used for purposes other than civilian and peaceful
use because the material is strictly controlled by the government and is
strictly inspected by IAEA. We assume that the Japanese parliament members'
perception that the commencement of Thorp operation increases the risk of
proliferation of nuclear materials comes from the fact that they do not
fully understand the above strict control of plutonium.
It should be noted that some Japanese parliament members' views are only
their personal views not representing the whole Japanese public opinion and
that the early commencement of Thorp operation is supported not only by the
Japanese utilities but also by the Japanese government.
K Kaneko,
general manager,
nuclear power department,
Federation of Electric
Power Companies of Japan,
Keidanren Kaikan,
1-9-4, Ote-Machi, Chi Yoda-Ku,
Tokyo, Japan

The Financial Times


London Page 16

931108

