FT934-8841

FT  13 NOV 93 / Manufacturing output increases


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


A REBOUND in car output in September caused manufacturing production to
increase slightly after a decline in August, the Central Statistical Office
said yesterday.
But manufacturing output fell fractionally in the third quarter after rising
strongly in the first half of this year and is now estimated to be growing
at an underlying rate of just 1 per cent a year.
The CSO said manufacturing production increased by a seasonally-adjusted 0.4
per cent in September after a 0.6 per cent decline in August.
Output of the production industries, which group mining, quarrying, oil and
gas extraction and the electricity, gas and water supply sectors with
manufacturing, rose 0.1 per cent in September, offsetting a decline of 0.1
per cent in the previous month.
The CSO estimates that production industry output is growing at an
underlying rate of about 2 per cent a year.
Total output of the production industries rose 1 per cent in the third
quarter compared with the three months to the end of June and was up 2.8 per
cent compared with the third quarter of last year.
By contrast, manufacturing output fell 0.1 per cent in the third quarter and
was 1.6 per cent higher than in the third quarter of last year.
Output trends varied in the different manufacturing sectors. Among consumer
goods car output rose 1.9 per cent in the third quarter, largely because of
a 9.6 per cent increase in September. Among investment goods the output of
transport goods fell 3.3 per cent in the quarter, reflecting falling
production of ships, aerospace products and commercial vehicles.
There were also wide differences in the energy sector. Coal production rose
2 per cent in the latest quarter but was 23 per cent down on the previous
year. Oil and gas extraction jumped 7.5 per cent in the latest quarter and
was up nearly 19 per cent from the third quarter of last year, reflecting
the 'dash for gas' among electric power producers.
Third-quarter output of the electricity, gas and water supply industries was
5.5 per cent up from the second quarter and last year's third quarter,
reflecting increased demand during the cool summer.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931113

