FT932-6625

FT  27 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Swiss eyes on UK engineers / A look at the
fund-raising proposals of Emesco


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT


EUROPEAN Industrial Equity Company, the Luxembourg investment arm of Emesco,
the Swiss management services group, is completing a SFr50m (Pounds 22m)
fund-raising in London and other European centres.
The move will lead to takeovers of medium-sized UK engineering companies
over the next year. Half of the fund-raising is via a rights issue which has
already been taken up. Apart from Emesco, which in addition to managing EIEC
holds 30 per cent of the equity, shareholders include insurance groups like
Equitable Life and National Provident.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities, handling the fund-raising in London,
expects to complete the other half, a share placing, by the end of this
month. EIEC units, comprising one ordinary share and one redeemable
preference share, each with a par value of SFr100, are being sold at SFr228
each.
Under present plans the units, currently quoted in Luxembourg, will be
quoted in London or Zurich by 1998.
Emesco, which has set up a London office, is seeking to invest EIEC funds in
engineering companies with a turnover of between Pounds 10m and Pounds 50m.
Its previous investments in continental Europe have been in the unquoted
sector, often 'family businesses going through a change of generation,' said
Mr Richard Butler, chairman of EIEC and an Emesco director. But in the UK,
he added, 'I think we will be dealing with listed companies.' Its search for
investment is largely outside London.
Emesco's technique is to identify companies which need restructuring and are
usually loss-making, buy them through EIEC, put in place its own executives
as a management team and once the company is making profits either to float
it or sell it to a third party. It aims to complete the process within five
years.
'We look at the product rather than the financials. What does the company
make? Is it in a special market where there are opportunities? If we're
excited about the product, then we go ahead,' said Mr Butler.
'Emesco is not a rescue merchant, called in by the banks at the last moment.
We're more interested in companies which have lost their way, but which have
good products and need restructuring,' he said.
Emesco then is different both from a management consultant, providing an
existing management with solutions to specific problems, and a venture
capitalist, providing equity funds but no management.
EIEC started in 1986 and reorganised its share capital in 1991. Its
portfolio of companies, bought in 1991-92, comprises Atlantic Zeiser, a
numbering machine company in Germany; Caracte(grave)res Werding, a Swiss
company which once made metallic characters for typewriters but now
manufactures aerosol spray systems; Convac, based in Germany and
manufacturing equipment for the computer industry; and Etheco, an Italian
company making thermostats.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930527

