FT933-10218

FT  05 AUG 93 / Arts: 'Here' - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


Here is a sample from Here. It comes from the opening scene when a young
couple is considering renting a flat in what seems remarkably like
Cambridge.
Phil. I think we need to think about this.
Cath. We are thinking about it.
Phil. We are thinking about it?
Cath. Aren't we?
Phil. What - seriously thinking about it?
Cath. Not seriously thinking about it. Just thinking about it.
And so it goes on. The trouble with Michael Frayn's new play is that we have
been here before. This is the land of linguistics and the meaning of
meaning. Some of the exchanges are even more banal or, if you like, more
profound: for example, the endlessly repeated 'What? 'Nothing' 'You mean
 .?' 'No'. Odd how such educated people can become so inarticulate, which I
suppose is the point of the piece.
Is it funny? Yes, a bit, intermittently, for about five minutes. It is
curious how the English language allows phrases like 'as a matter of fact'
to have two meanings: one a casual remark, the other an attempted statement
of truth. The same goes for 'as it happens'.
As it happens, in fact, quite the best parts of the play come when the
linguistic cleverness is abandoned and Phil behaves like a spoiled child or
an ordinary bullying male rather than the over-trained Cambridge
post-graduate, which one assumes is what he is. There is rather a touching
scene where he and Cath wear the same sweater and try to behave as one
person; another where Cath shows her prowess at wrestling.
The best part of the lot, however, belongs neither to Iain Glen's Phil nor
to Teresa Banham's Cath, but to Brenda Bruce as the landlady. Ms Bruce talks
as if she has never heard of Wittgenstein, and is all the better for it. Her
comic role is to enter whenever the couple is about to make love. Yet later
on she has a long speech of her own about her late husband Eric. She shows
that she knows all about the concept of space and which side of the bed is
whose from her own marriage: there is no need to philosophise about it in
pretentious terms. Ms Bruce has a wonderfully graphic line about Eric
'putting on a special holy look like Jesus picking up the cross' when he had
to get out the tool box to mend the door handle only to find there were no
screws in the tin. When Frayn writes like this, he is a very effective
playwright.
There is another oddity about Here which one can only take to be deliberate.
The subject of finance is never mentioned, not even when the couple are
thinking about moving into the flat and at the end of the play move on to
another with an extra room. No source of income is ever divulged. One knew
that Cambridge was abstract, but to omit money altogether is surely to miss
a trick or two in the writing. There might at least have been a theory about
it.
Towards the end, there is an attempted moment of drama when Phil suddenly
breaks down and says 'Oh Cath, I'm so miserable'. No matter; he is quickly
back in the old linguistic routine. The theme must be his intellectual
boredom, but the problem with intellectual boredom is that it is quite
difficult to portray on stage without being - well, you know what I mean.
Michael Blakemore directs.
Donmar Warehouse. (071) 867 1150

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930805

