FT934-11263

FT  02 NOV 93 / Top civil servants seek new ethics code


   By JIMMY BURNS


CIVIL SERVANTS are to press Lord Justice Scott to consider proposals for a
new code of ethics for Whitehall in the light of evidence emerging in the
arms-for-Iraq inquiry.
The Association of First Division Civil Servants, which represents middle
and high-ranking civil servants, is submitting a report to the judge
underlining the need for greater 'clarity and openness' in the relationship
between officials and ministers.
Ms Elizabeth Symons, the union's general secretary, said last night that the
submission had been prepared at the request of 'a lot of our members' who
were concerned about issues of accountability and responsibility that have
emerged in the Scott inquiry.
Yesterday Mr Alan Barrett, a senior Ministry of Defence official, told the
inquiry that he had no choice but to go along with a decision by ministers
not to announce to parliament a relaxation to the curbs on arms sales to
Iraq.
'We may have been playing with words, but once ministers had decided what we
were going to publish or not publish we had no choice,' he said.
Other Whitehall officials have told how they prepared advice for their
ministers which glossed over the extent to which the export of dual-use
equipment contravened declared policy.
A wide-ranging inquiry into the role of the civil service is to be published
early next year by the Commons Treasury and civil service committee.
It is hoped that the judge will focus on the role of policymakers in
Whitehall and on the responsibility of ministers to parliament.
The association has advanced the case for a code of ethics which would in
effect supersede the notes of guidance, drawn up in 1985 by Sir Robert
Armstrong, then head of the civil service. The notes state that civil
servants owe their first duty to the government. The association, however,
argues that its members have a wider duty towards the democratic system.
Yesterday Mr Barrett said MoD officials had been forced on the defensive
regarding policy towards Iraq in the face of the opposition to the
government guidelines pursued by Mr Alan Clark, defence minister from 1989
to last year.
The hearing continues today.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931102

