FT934-11297

FT  02 NOV 93 / Turkmenistan leads new rouble refugees: The launch of a new
currency


   By STEVE LEVINE, GILLIAN TETT and JOHN LLOYD


THE CENTRAL Asian republic of Turkmenistan yesterday introduced its own
currency, the manat, launching it at a value of 50 US cents and 500 Russian
roubles.
Turkmenistan is the fifth of the 15 former Soviet republics to introduce a
fully independent currency - and it does so as other republics prepare to
leave the rouble zone, many of them complaining that the conditions set by
Russia for remaining in the zone are too strict.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, the three Baltic republics, each has its own
currency, while the smallest central Asian state, Kyrgyzstan, introduced its
unit, the som, in May. Three other republics - Azerbaijan, Georgia and
Ukraine - use coupons, all of which are highly inflationary.
Turkmenistan, with between 10,000bn and 15,000bn cubic metres of natural gas
and oil reserves estimated by the government at 6.3bn tonnes, has eschewed
backing - though not advice - from the International Monetary Fund, relying
on its own reserves of more than Dollars 300m held in foreign banks to
support the manat.
Foreign observers in the capital, Ashgabad, expect the manat to fall to
between 5 and 7 manat to the dollar when currency trading begins on
Saturday. However, Mr Valery Otchersov, the deputy prime minister in charge
of the economy, says that 'it is simply a matter of time before the currency
is accepted at other currency exchanges and traded internationally'.
Turkmenistan, whose regime under President Sapurmerat Niyazov has retained
tight control built round a growing presidential personality cult, is
presenting itself as a stable location for foreign investment. Prices for
the largely state-controlled staples are to be raised and a privatisation
programme - which will exclude the oil and gas sector - is also due to be
launched.
In spite, or because, of Mr Niyazov's gestures - such as erecting statues
and portraits of himself all around the capital and his receipt last week of
a bust from Turkmen businessmen containing 1.6kg of gold - most foreign
diplomats and observers expect the Turkmenistan economy to prosper.
'Russia and Turkmenistan are the only two former Soviet republics which can
stand on their own,' said Mr Vadim Cherepov, the Russian ambassador. A US
diplomat said that 'if it follows the IMF recommendations it will have the
most successful currency introduction of the former Soviet states'.
Dissatisfaction with the rouble zone may force other republics to follow.
Last week, President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan was granted powers
by his parliament to introduce a national currency after a demand by Russia
that the roubles issued to Kazakhstan must be backed by its reserves of gold
and hard currency reserves.
'We made all possible concessions (to Russia), but now Moscow has asked us
to do the impossible - hand over billions of dollars,' Mr Nazarbayev was
quoted by the Interfax news agency as saying at the parliamentary session
last Thursday.
An agreement signed in September between Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan committed these six republics to remain in
the rouble zone under the control of the Russian central bank, in spite of
the publicly expressed scepticism of many in the Russian cabinet. However,
no new Russian roubles have yet been delivered to the other states, forcing
them to use pre-1993 notes which the Russian central bank has withdrawn from
circulation in Russia itself.
The Moldovan government has said it is to introduce its new currency, the
leu, this month - rumoured to be on November 20.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931102

