FT931-3967

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (13): Focus on Budapest - There
are shortages of certain types and sizes of accommodation / Hungary


   By ANNE STEADMAN


Of all the former Eastern bloc countries, Hungary is perceived to have made
the most progress towards a western-style economy and life-style. Its
property market, which has evolved from the chaotic embryonic state of a few
years ago to the point where there are a few identifiable markets and market
trends, reflects this.
But it still has some way to go before it matures to the level of western
markets.
Greatest attention is focused on Budapest - the so-called 'Paris of the
east.' The city has been the subject of a considerable amount of commercial
property development in recent times. Mr Michael Hodges of Jones Lang
Wootton estimates that 130,000 sq m of new office accommodation came onto
the Budapest market last year alone.
To put this into perspective, Mr Hodges points out that this represents more
than double the comparable amount in Barcelona - where the Olympic Games
generated unprecedented activity.
Of all this new space, Jones Lang Wootton calculates that some 84 per cent
was either let or sold - and that there is a further 100,000 sq m of mainly
international standard offices under construction.
The severe shortage of good offices which saw prospective tenants scrambling
to sign up for pre-lets at Skanska's 17,300 sq m East West Business Centre,
the first private development of any size in the city, at up to DM60 a sq m
a month, is clearly a relic of the past.
Mr Phil Hudson of East 8, the specialist eastern European real estate
consultancy which has just published the third REDEE (Real Estate
Development in Eastern Europe) Report, notes that there is now good quality,
new office space standing empty in Budapest - unthinkable in 1991.
The froth has also come off the top of rents - or at least they have
'stabilised'. Top office rents in the central area are now about DM50 a sq m
a month, with good buildings outside the central core going for 30-40 per
cent less. There is a general consensus, however, that there is no real
oversupply - there are even shortages of certain types and sizes of
accommodation.
There is a tendency towards shorter leases - some for as little as a year.
This gives landlords the opportunity to adjust for inflation - currently
running at about 30 per cent - on a frequent basis. Rents are still
denominated in hard currency but are payable, since last April, in Hungarian
forints. Rents may also be linked to the rate of exchange between the forint
and a hard currency or indexed to a hard currency.
Demand is still predominantly from western companies and has fallen back a
little, according to Mr Anthony Sutcliffe of Richard Ellis. He considers
that the worldwide recession has made organisations more realistic about the
scale of their operations - and their likely rates of future expansion.
Despite the relatively advanced state of the Budapest property market there
is still no sign of an emerging investment market. There were some initial
indications of interest from a few Austrian and German investors. But
despite the recent flurry of development there are still too few buildings
of the required quality available to provide an adequate choice.
There are still problems with clarification of ownership and, added to this,
high interest rates and high inflation play havoc with investment appraisal
calculations.
The few buildings that are sold invariably go to owner-occupiers.
The serviced office concept, new to Budapest, is proving very popular. It
offers the opportunity to walk in and set up in business straight away.
There have been several developments of this nature in the past year or so.
More are planned.
Budapest is increasingly seen as an important location for international
retailers. Prime pitch is the pedestrianised Vaci Utca where space is scarce
and rental levels are, according to Healey & Baker, as much as DM200-DM300 a
sq m a month.
Demand is strong from fashion and household goods retailers. Even so,
operators are mainly taking small units initially, to test the market. For
example Marks and Spencer last year opened a very small outlet selling only
womens' fashions on Vaci Utca. It reputedly reached its first year's sales
target in the first four months of trading.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

930312

