FT931-4104

FT  12 MAR 93 / Arts: Corea at the keyboards


   By GARRY BOOTH


There is something disingenuous about the way Chick Corea makes a point of
mentioning the make of the piano. Sure, it is a very nice piano, and with
Corea at the controls it plays just about everything skilfully from a rhumba
to a prelude, via Monk and Ellington.
The acoustic soloist is but one of Corea's powerful personae. In addition to
his fierce Elektric fusion band which features Nasa style technology among
the virtuosi, Corea leads acoustic ensembles and performs classical
concertos. He is a complete pianist and alone at the grand on this tour he
takes the opportunity to show he really can do it all, no problem.
As an improvisor Corea is perfectly centred and he tackles his base
material. Limbering up with 'Armando's Rhumba' at the Festival Hall on
Monday, the American quickly kneaded the keyboard into a latin workout
before moving on to 'Sophisticated Lady' and the uneasy listening of a
tightly phrased 'With A Song In My Heart'. 'Blue Monk' was condensed into a
pleasantly wobbling boogie woogie while Bud Powell's favourite tune 'How
Deep Is The Ocean' sparkled appealingly. Monk reared his head again as Corea
worked up a lavishly embroidered ''Round Midnight'.
It is ironic that Corea should cite Monk and Powell in his solo work. For
all his technical brilliance and skill as a writer, Corea remains at the
opposite end of the intensity scale to these two. Indeed, it is more
stimulating to hear Corea tinkering under the lid of the piano which travels
everywhere with him; it gives him the air of a rather eccentric and yet
emotionally detached performer.
Perhaps with the break up of the Elektric and Akoustic bands Corea is left
wondering what to tackle next. Whichever, the 'messing around with a
prelude' and the snippets of 'Children's Songs' which closed the short set
were no more than engaging. It could be time for Corea to get a new piano.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930312

