FT932-253

FT  30 JUN 93 / BT may face Oftel order to limit future special offers


   By ANDREW ADONIS


BRITISH TELECOM may be forced by Oftel, the telecommunications regulator, to
modify or withdraw future special offers to customers. It also faces a
possible Monopolies and Mergers Commission inquiry into its profitable
Yellow Pages business.
The threats, which have significant implications for BT's competitive
position and profitability, were disclosed in the prospectus issued
yesterday for the sale of the remaining tranche of government shares in the
company.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor, said the international offer for the sale
will be priced at 160p a share for the first instalment, with 10p off for
investors in the UK public offer. The final price and allocations will be
determined after the close of the international offer on July 16.
According to the prospectus, Oftel is 'minded' to issue an instruction to BT
limiting future special offers unless BT can demonstrate that it has not
shown 'undue preference' to itself, as against competitors, in pricing for
the use of its network. Special offers are a key part of BT's strategy for
fighting competition in its UK market.
Oftel's action follows complaints from Mercury and the cable TV companies,
which say BT is abusing its dominant position and may be charging
special-offer prices below the cost of delivering the calls.
Two of BT's recent special offers are in dispute: this month's 'double
summertime' offer giving local callers double the time for the usual price
for calls lasting more than four minutes; and its 'Sunday special' offer
last November-December, under which all UK calls made after 3pm on Sundays
were charged at the local rate.
The prospectus also says that the Office of Fair Trading is 'seriously
considering making a monopoly reference of printed telephone directories,
including Yellow Pages, to the MMC'.
The OFT's statement follows a 19-month inquiry by it into directory
services, and repeated complaints from Thomson Directories, the main
competitor to Yellow Pages, about BT's control of its numbering information
system database.
City analysts estimate that BT's Yellow Pages division made pre-tax profits
of about Pounds 130m last year. One analyst said: 'It's not just the
profits: if BT loses control of its numbering database, a range of marketing
ventures is jeopardised.'
Thomson said yesterday it wanted 'equal access to this national asset on
terms which are fair and reasonable'. It also wants BT customers to be
charged separately for directories, instead of their cost being buried in
the line rental charge.
The OFT investigated Yellow Pages in 1984 and at that time it gave it a
clean bill of health. But the attitude of Oftel, which has advised the OFT
on the MMC reference, has hardened since then on the question of the
'ownership' of phone numbers.
Lex Page 24
Private investors in BT to get 10p discount Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930630

