FT933-5177

FT  04 SEP 93 / The censors who are fighting a losing battle: Sex has paled
into relative insignificance besides violence in the public view. Either
way, the tide could be unstoppable


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


WHATEVER else 1993 has been, in the cinema it has been the Year of Violence.
It began with shock horror: Reservoir Dogs and Man Bites Dog leading a pack
of films that startled audiences with new levels of brutality. It moved on
to news reports of video game atrocities and sadistic computer pornography.
It took in a telethon on the future of censorship. And now the British
censor's annual report lies before us - large, exhaustive, and all but
bleeding into the carpet.
Do we live in a new media climate? Or is it just the old one, dressed up
anew? Thirty years ago, we had the Lady Chatterley trial; 10 years ago, the
video nasties. Today it is the violence of the real (helped by a horror year
of newspaper stories) side by side with porn from outer space.
Ever since the first fig tree was raided to cover our sense of shame, humans
have rushed to protect themselves from real or imaginary moral evils. In
1912, British cinema planted its own fig tree and named it the British Board
of Film Classification. Today that board no longer watches over movies
alone. It sits in the heart of London - Soho Square, the un-sunny side -
monitoring videos and video games and designing new fig leaves for things
once unimaginable: from down-the-telephone-to-your-computer erotica to
satellite delivery movies of sex or sensation.
Even sex, though, long the great bete noire of British fuddy-duddyism, has
paled this year before the blood and thunder debate. In a recent survey, the
British viewing public put sex (along with nudity and blasphemy) way below
violence (along with drug use and bad language) as a cause for concern. And
the Red Hot Dutch satellite porn furore now seems like a side-show in that
carnival of carnage many perceive as being 1993.
James Ferman is Britain's censor, and I sought him out after reading his new
report. Forty pages of measured prose in the face of the immeasurable, it
resembles King Canute's Report on British Tidal Erosion. But is there really
more screen violence than before? Is it bad for us? If so, can it - should
it - be stopped?
To the first question, Ferman says yes and no. He dismisses the handful of
movies that gave us that blood-dimmed New Year: quasi-underground oddities,
he says, including an Australian low-budgeter (Romper Stomper) and a student
film from Belgium (Man Bites Dog). He is more concerned about rising tides
of violence in two other kinds of film: those that everyone watches,
mainstream Hollywood fare like Cliffhanger (brutal kicking scene scissored
to secure a '15' certificate) or Jurassic Park (passed for parental guidance
after much thought); and those that young offenders most seem to watch:
movies where violence is ritualised.
'Kids who are violent are violent because they want power and control, if
only for that moment in which they commit their crimes, and kung fu and
martial arts film are ideal for copy-catting, for teaching a repertoire of
violence,' says Ferman. He tells of a convicted murderer he met at this
year's televised forum on censorship who said he had seen Enter The Dragon
28 times.
'He'd made all the weapons, all the flails, and he and his gang went out and
practised everything Bruce Lee did.' Not surprisingly, Ferman and the BBFC
have set up a Home Office-sanctioned enquiry, the first such in 25 years,
into the viewing habits of young offenders.
Ferman agrees there is still no decisive proof that films cause violence:
'Social science is an inexact discipline and human behaviour is too
multi-factorial. It's nature, nurture; it's what happened to us this
morning; it's how much we've had to drink.'
He claims, however, that there is evidence that films and television shape
violence. Example: the rash of incidents in which young victims were taken
to hospital with damaged eardrums after children had copied the seemingly
harmless 'double ear-clap' shown on a television soft drink commercial
(later withdrawn). Ferman himself insisted that such an ear-clap be cut when
it appeared in a mainstream Hollywood film seeking a '15' certificate, Kevin
Costner's The Bodyguard.
Decisions like that may seem the simple ones for a censor. You do not hand a
lighted match to a pyromaniac; ergo, you do not wave lessons in heedless
violence at young children. But do all of us need to be protected? Isn't the
clamour about children's vulnerability - deafening since the video nasties
furore of the early 1980s - sometimes used merely to shore up the censorship
system for everyone?
Britain itself is more censorship-prone than almost any other western
democracy. The BBFC's own report admits that the board is 'one of the few
classification bodies anywhere in the world that continues to cut violent
material for adult audiences.' Ferman is ready to defend this case by case.
To the objection that Japan is soft on screen violence, yet has a violent
crime rate roughly one-tenth of Britain's: 'Japan has a totally different
means of control. They use shame, not criminal law. In Japan, people don't
break the rules because it lets the side down.' And shame, he argues, is a
factor in the low rate of reported sex crime in France, renowned for its
laissez faire attitude to screen sex and violence. 'French women don't
report rape because rape is a shameful thing. Women in France are supposed
to be able to cope with sex and be mature in handling it.'
The US, by contrast, could be seen as God's gift to the censorship
lobbyists: they need only point at America's crime figures (astronomical)
and, in the same gesture, at America's appetite for screen violence (ditto).
Early this year, US film critic Michael Medved rode through London
publicising his book, Hollywood vs America, in which film and TV are blamed
for their influence on everything from drugs to delinquency, blasphemy to
bad parenting.
To enter this argument is to step into the jungle of words like 'deprave'
and 'corrupt' and 'desensitise.' On Medved's side, Ferman tells of a Chicago
professor he met at a conference shortly after the murder in Liverpool
earlier this year of three-year-old Jamie Bulger. When Ferman told him of
the headline-hogging furore there had been in Britain, the American said:
'You people should hold on to that reaction. It means you care. Here, there
are children killed every day and it never makes the newspapers.'
Urban America, we know, is a violent, de-sensitised place. But is it so
because of too many Arnold Schwarzenegger films? And how much less violent
was the US, rural or urban, in the pre-movie days of Wyatt Earp and Billy
the Kid and the Indian wars?
Some US commentators believe that graphic screen violence, far from numbing
or brutalising, can actually sensitise: that it sensitised the entire
American nation, for example, to the Vietnam war and brought it to an end.
Film-maker Wes Craven, creator of the gory Nightmare On Elm Street series,
claims that screen violence can be a way of understanding real violence and
of working it through psychologically.
'We're living in a world that's becoming increasingly visual and
revelationary,' he says. 'From the 1960s on, through the media, I was
witness to increasing amounts of explicit violence. In Vietnam, we were
brought pictures of things that had happened just 10 hours before: pictures
from My Lai, pictures from a napalmed village. Later, there were pictures
from the car bomb in Beirut, pictures of Bobby Kennedy lying on the
Ambassador Hotel floor, blood streaming from his head. We were deluged with
violent reality.
'The audience for horror films and films of violence is often young and
filled with all sorts of questions about what it's going to be like to be
adult, to be accountable in this mad world they're exposed to. They have a
need and a right to have that violence processed in a way that is formed and
entertaining and, to the extent that it's fiction, is 'safe'.'
But what of the potential criminal or psychotic for whom movies are not a
cure but a catalyst? 'There are people out there who will respond to
anything. They might react to a horror film or they might react to a woman
taking off her shoes in a bus. They might react to the smell of a McDonald's
hamburger. For the unstable person who's ready to go over the edge, the mere
breath of anything will do it and the responsibility lies with that
individual, however demented, or with the little sub-culture that created
him: his family, his community.'
Craven pinpoints here another area of the censorship debate. Why do we allow
censors and media authorities to sit in judgment on cultural consumption
habits that should be the responsibility of parents, if we are young, or of
ourselves, if we are adult? 'The children we're protecting,' responds
Ferman, 'are the very ones who don't have good parenting or a strong
community around them. It is the root of their problem.'
To the outsider, though, the solution looks just as suspect. Why look to
censors as substitute parents? These are people who, if we believe their
arguments about depravity and corruption, have been exposed to more
vitiating material than anyone else in the country. Are they morally
armour-plated?
Ferman: 'If one has critical viewing skills, one has a layer of defence
already. We at the board watch films armed with comparables from other films
we've seen; we take notes throughout the viewings. We don't watch coldly
like technicians because you can't: one of the things we're assessing is how
a film or video acts on the viewer, not just intellectually but viscerally.
But we also assess our own viewing experience in the light of the age group
for whom the film is intended.'
This sounds like an attempt to make a pseudo-science seem a science. It
leads to the question: what are the laboratory criteria for judging if a
film is harmful? Wilf Stevenson, head of the British Film Institute, another
body that watches over our screen culture (albeit more liberally), says BBFC
is almost alone among media watchdogs in the UK in having no published code
of practice.
'In broadcasting, you can't get out of the door these days for the volumes
of codes and criteria about what is or isn't acceptable. The board has
nothing of this kind. It says it wants to be free to respond to changing
climates of opinion. But if a decision-making body doesn't have
clearly-delineated criteria, it's impossible to discuss the issues with
them.'
From another viewpoint, as Stevenson himself adds, such discussions may be
obsolete, anyway, in a year or two. The technology of media delivery  - by
satellite to your TV, by telephone to your computer - is leaping so far
ahead of the resources of media monitoring that the BBFC might well be
readying itself now to hang up its scissors and red pencils.
Ferman nods in stoical recognition of the reality. 'What do we do if Death
Wish 2 or Henry: Portrait Of A Serial Killer is pumped in uncut from
somewhere over the Atlantic? Do we prosecute BT for carrying the signal down
its cable wires?'
If the BBFC is, finally, defeated by technology, are there resources left
elsewhere to fight corruption? Ferman joins Stevenson in championing the
role of media studies as a way of building critical defence mechanisms into
the viewer himself. 'I think it's the only hope,' Ferman says. 'You have to
create a society in which our schoolchildren can survive in a
media-saturated world, where there's less and less chance for intervention.'
For Stevenson: 'It's the key to a lot of worries. The more you understand
the mechanisms and the way people create movie images, the more you can
regard them as just another communication system.'
The danger with media studies, of course, is that the power to censor
changes to the power to censure, and that power is put in the hands of
another unpredictable bunch of opinion-formers: school teachers. Some
sceptics about censorship think today's real threat to screen freedom and
artistic self-responsibility comes not from the sex and violence arena but
from the storm-troopers of political correctness.
Says Paul Schrader, whose movies as writer or director have been lightning
rods for controversy, from Taxi Driver to The Last Temptation Of Christ: 'We
live in an age when people tend to whine and take a grievance and blame
somebody else for their problems. We have this heightened sensitivity that
people's 'rights' are being violated and you've got to be fair to every
party or minority. It's as if everyone has shed their thick skins as some
kind of evolutionary stage. The old censorship war was sex and violence
versus moral authoritarianism. Today, I think more and more, it's individual
freedom versus group dogma.'
New times, new scares. The only certain thing about censorship is that deep
down many people, including liberals, would hate it to go away. For what is
self-expression without the battle to self-express? Schrader again:
'Free-spirited people are always in the minority. That's the way it should
be. I'd hate to live in a world where they were in the majority. What gives
freedom its value is the fight to gain and to define that freedom.'

The Financial Times


London Page I

930904

