FT932-7197

FT  25 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Sharply reduced provisions help NHL cut
deficit to Pounds 24m


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


NATIONAL Home Loans, one of the UK's largest mortgage lenders, reduced its
interim losses after a sharp fall in the level of provisions.
Improvements in the arrears position and lower costs also contributed to a
reduced Pounds 23.9m (Pounds 85.9m) pre-tax loss in the six months to
end-March. Interest receivable fell from Pounds 110.9m to Pounds 80.6m.
Provisions were more than halved from Pounds 79.4m to Pounds 36.8m because
house prices stabilised and the number of accounts in arrears fell.
Some 4,500 of NHL's 52,000 accounts are now in arrears compared with about
6,000 a year ago, according to Mr Jonathan Perry, chairman.
Following the loss in this period, NHL has negative shareholders funds of
Pounds 14.5m.
The group will not be paying a dividend on its 7.5 per cent convertible
preference shares. A total of Pounds 12.9m of preference dividend is now in
arrears.
Following a year of debt restructuring, NHL had now stabilised its finances
and was looking at how to rebuild its business, Mr Perry said.
NHL's house lending business was decimated in the fall-out from the late
1980s housing boom. Rapid growth meant its portfolio was not strong enough
to survive the subsequent collapse.
Mr Perry said NHL had facilities which made it one of the country's best
collectors of arrears. The intention was to put more volume through this
system and NHL was considering purchasing a portfolio of home loans from
companies withdrawing from the market or managing the portfolios of others.
Mr Perry repeated his view that NHL 'had the prospect of reporting a
significantly reduced loss for the current financial year and of returning
to profitability in the future.'
The National Mortgage Bank, the banking subsidiary, continued to be run
down.
Mr Perry said that Pounds 1.7bn of assets under management were off balance
sheet in special purpose securitised companies which were expected to be a
significant contributor to the future performance of the group. The group
managed Pounds 2.4bn of mortgage assets at the end of March, down 3 per cent
over the last 12 months.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930525

