FT934-11505

FT  30 OCT 93 / Arts: Caught by the artist's snapshot - An intimate showing
of Francis Bacon works


   By WILLIAM PACKER


INTIMATE is hardly the word most would use to describe Francis Bacon's art.
Yet he was in some ways the most intimate of painters. The remarkable
exhibition now at the Marlborough in London, which includes many loans from
private collections, brings out two aspects of his work often overlooked.
First, it shows that for all the larger scale and formulaic presentation
that Bacon came to adopt in his later work, his first and lasting
reputation, in all its strength and expressionist authority, was founded on
images of moderate size. Some of the strongest works are, in comparative
terms, almost shockingly small. No matter how generalised the final
resolution of the figure might seem to be, it was always based directly upon
his response to a particular human presence. The physical immediacy and
conviction of the result was never compromised by fact that he often used
secondary and photographic sources as working references.
The show is of small studies for portraits of the sort he made consistently
through the last 30 years of his life, the earliest dating from 1961. He had
painted heads before, notably the screaming Popes after Velazquez, and the
death-mask images of William Blake, but it was only then that this
particular format was set. He had always responded to the visual stimulus of
the image caught on the wing, the film-still, the snap-shot and newspaper
photograph, and now was clearly fascinated by the serial image of the
photo-booth and mug-shot, with its curious compound of arbitrary directness,
informality and self-consciousness.
The head is cropped, constricted, close up, the subject a specimen beneath
the microscope or victim strapped into the dentist's chair. Here is nothing
of the quality we find in the work of Lucian Freud, for example, or, in its
different way, of Frank Auerbach - of the artist confronting and
scrutinising the model over an extended period, sharing a common space and
temporal experience. Rather it is a matter of the moment, of the fleeting
expression, the half smile, the fatuous grin, the turn of the head, the
trick of the mouth.
The development of the image, too, is a serial affair, coming less from the
particular and objective scrutiny even of the photographic image over a
given and limited period, than from an extended familiarity with the subject
in personal terms. For Bacon worked from few sitters, but tended to return
to them repeatedly - Muriel Belcher, the formidable patronne of the Colony
Room; Isabel Rawsthorne; Henrietta Moraes; Lucian Freud; George Dyer, his
long-time companion; John Edwards, his heir. But, more than any of them, he
painted himself, and while as single spies the self-portraits are no secret,
thus brought together, it is not just their number but their insistent,
cumulative quality that comes as a considerable surprise.
Many of the images are single shots, but the diptych and triptych follow
naturally from the photo-strip, and suddenly we remember that it was by
virtue of that first triptych, the studies for figures at the foot of a
Crucifixion of 1944, that Bacon woke up Byron-like to find himself famous.
He continued to use the device in his larger, more public work throughout
his career. Yet here again, with these small, intimate and private
paintings, we are brought up short, for among them we find particular twos
and threes brought together to make up some of the most powerful and
properly monumental works of the entire oeuvre.
One in particular, a triptych of 1977, of one self-portrait set with two
still-life panels, makes one wish only that there might be a body of
similarly intimate still-lifes to match the portraits. And, curiously, these
characteristically pulled, twisted, distorted, truly manhandled heads and
faces come together as a cumulative whole in celebration, not of some bleak
and dreadful vision of a depraved humanity, but of something altogether more
cheerful. The images are vital and alive, the paint laid on with a sensual
and positive enjoyment, the drawing vigorous and positive. The likeness lies
with a presence not closely described but known and sensed, as it blinked
and, shifted, alive in every broad sweep of the brush across the surface of
the canvas. Oh dear, we say, as we press the shutter, you must have moved.
Francis Bacon - small portrait studies: Marlborough Fine Art, 6 Arlbemarle
Street, London W1, until December 3.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931030

