FT933-12468

FT  23 JUL 93 / International Capital Markets: Banks, brokers criticise
Japanese futures controls


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


A GROUP of international and domestic financial institutions has criticised
Japan's financial watchdogs for their heavy regulation of stock market
futures, which were widely blamed in Japan for the 1991 stock market crash.
Leading brokers and banks in Tokyo, including SG Warburg Securities, Salomon
Brothers and Long Term Credit Bank, claim the implementation of restrictions
on stock futures trading had reduced liquidity in the futures market and
increased volatility on the cash market.
Their forum, the Committee to Make Tokyo Financial Markets More Transparent
and International (CTTI), says in a report tight regulations are responsible
for undermining Tokyo's credibility as an international financial centre.
It says regulation has led to an increasing number of investors shifting
stock futures trades to overseas markets, including the Singapore
International Monetary Exchange (Simex).
Nikkei 225 index futures trading, along with arbitrage trading against the
underlying cash stock market, has been blamed for violent price movements in
the cash market, driving ordinary investors away. To reduce trading volume
on the futures market, the financial authorities raised margin requirements
and commission over the past two years.
The Bank of Japan has also challenged the notion that the weakness of the
cash market was triggered by futures transactions. In a report released
earlier this year, the Bank of Japan noted the lack of evidence that futures
price movements exaggerated price fluctuations on the cash market.
The ministry of finance and the Tokyo and Osaka stock exchanges are now
working on a new capitalisation-weighted index to replace the Nikkei 225.
The Nikkei, as a simple price average of 225 stocks, is seen as easily
manipulated.
The new index, expected to be introduced in October, is likely to represent
350 stocks rather than the current 225. Some traders speculate that the
index may be weighted by trading volume or the level of free-floating
shares, rather than according to full market capitalisation. This is because
a bulk of the shares are held in cross shareholdings.
While the forum agreed the new index may alleviate some problems - such as
the impact of arbitrage trading on the prices of specific low-liquidity
stocks - it could not see it instantly resolving other difficulties, such as
continued low turnover on the cash market or the fall in share prices.
For the cash stock market to regain its health, the committee urged that
rather than regulating the futures market, authorities should further
deregulate high-fixed commissions on stock transactions, cut the stock
transfer tax, and replace the illiquid index.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930723

