FT933-10214

FT  05 AUG 93 / Arts: Dance Workshop Europe - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


During the performance of a Cherubini opera, Berlioz was driven by its
Saharan tedium to shout out: 'Twenty francs for an idea]' Given the state of
the money market, I would have given a good deal more for the glimpse of a
step, let alone an idea, as Tuesday night's offering of Euro-dance dragged
on at the Place. 'Dance Workshop Europe' is designed to give a collection of
Common Market choreographers the chance to create during a period of five
weeks, then show the fruit of their lucubrations in Munich, London, Antwerp,
Ghent, Angers.
The creators are, of course, exponents of what we must call modern dance. It
is, linguistically, 'modern', in that it happens now, but the pieces on view
stretch the idea of 'dance' to the outer limits of the glum and the
pretentious. It was an evening as desperate in its fatuities as any I have
sat through at The Place during twenty years before its choreographic mast.
Modern Dance, of course, was the growth industry of the 1980s. Politically
correct, Yoof-orientated, it made such inroads into the educational system
that barely-trained (or untrained) young people were able to attend schools
and colleges and emerge at the end of their studies as 'dancers' and
'choreographers'. The fruit of this preposterous situation was the
mushrooming of inept dance during the decade.
Now the Arts Council announces that Contemporary Dance will benefit from
increased funding. Can this is an attempt to do something about the dreadful
standards of certain of our groups? Does it merely show a sense of duty to a
minority art? (Attendance and performance figures for some of the groups
whom the Arts Council favours might be intriguingly compared with those of
the popular and deserving London City Ballet whom the Council resolutely
refused to assist, and effectively killed off). Any fostering of new
contemporary dance might well consider its chance of survival, as well as
its artistic credentials. We have significantly good ensembles, quite apart
from LCDT or Rambert Dance: Lloyd Newson's DV8; Phoenix Dance; Kim
Brandstrup's Arc Dance (with no subsidy), Laurie Booth and Russell
Maliphant, Yolande Snaith, all produce fine work. Other enterprises merely
debase the dance currency.
I could discern no merit in Claire Russ's Heirs and Graces, which was
Britain's contribution to Tuesday's workshop. The given theme for the
productions was 'Removals'. Miss Russ and her two companions offered a study
in family life notable for its thin dance ideas and its reliance upon
costume rather than action. Like so much of the new choreography (a word I
use with reluctance on occasions like this) Miss Russ proposed something
nearer to amateur dramatics than dance. So did France's Christine Marneffe,
whose J'aimerais tant rester looked like a film noir in serious trouble.
Minimal steps; good lighting; two couples and dislocated activities were the
ingredients. A bunch of carrots was lowered from the light-boom at one
moment: very puzzling, since we had not ordered vegetables.
Incomprehensible, and tiresome.
From Belgium came Veerle Bakelants with an exercise for three girls. They
wore little green coveralls, and rushed about while Glenn Gould's piano
arrangement of Richard Strauss's early violin sonata was played. That the
dance ideas (debased ballet steps and a lot of falls) were exhausted after a
few minutes meant that one could concentrate on Gould's pianism. Germany's
Urs Dietrich emerged with some credit from the evening. His duet with Thomas
Stich was a summer incident, set to bird-song, in which the two men indulged
in games - ah, the joys of mime] - and, I expect, were supposed to be
courting. Ho hum. But both chaps are fine dancers.
This Dance Workshop has support from the European Community. How much better
were it if the Commission made possible an exchange of major troupes around
Europe. It might, perish the thought, encourage audiences (and
choreographers) to understand dance as an enriching experience rather than
as therapy for the inadequate and the inexpert.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930805

