FT934-11333

FT  01 NOV 93 / Pandora's box swings open


   By IAN DAVIDSON


There was not much triumphalism at Friday's European Summit marking the
entry into force of the Maastricht Treaty. True, the British government gave
a strangled squawk of self-congratulation at the wonderful results of its
brilliance in having been ejected from the Exchange Rate Mechanism a year
ago. But most leaders adopted a more modest tone.
For the Community and the treaty are both seriously short of political
credibility. Maastricht was supposed to launch Europe on the road to
Economic and Monetary Union; but to the average voter, the EMU programme
must look not just irrelevant but perversely damaging in the worst recession
in recent memory. Worse, the Community, which has been sold primarily as a
source of economic prosperity, has appeared to offer no policy response to
this recession.
Unless growth returns and unemployment falls, governments are still
vulnerable to the tide of nationalism and anti-Europeanism which surged in
opposition to Maastricht. Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Francois
Mitterrand both remain fully committed to Maastricht. But German voters do
not care for the idea of a common European currency and a large proportion
of the Gaullists in the French governing majority are in reality hostile to
the treaty.
It is under pressure from these anti-European Gaullists that Mr Pierre de
Boissieu is being squeezed out of his job as Economic Director at the Quai
d'Orsay, essentially because he is identified as the man who made
Maastricht.
In short, governments are anxious to stay right away from the kind of
ideologically charged controversy about Europe which made the ratification
of Maastricht such a misery. They desperately need recovery and hope, growth
and jobs; they are waiting anxiously for Mr Jacques Delors' White Paper on
growth and competitiveness, the plat de resistance at the full summit in
December; and they would much rather avoid another upsetting debate about
federalism, supranationalism and the future shape of Europe.
Such a debate is inevitable however, because the Community is facing the
prospect of admitting a large number of new member states. Four west
European countries from EFTA are already negotiating and hope to join by the
end of next year; and a raft of other countries from central and eastern
Europe are anxious to join as soon as the Community will have them.
Expansion on such a scale cannot fail, in the most general terms, to change
the character of the enterprise: a Community of 25 member states, with their
divergences of character and interests, is obviously going to be radically
different from the existing Community of 12. Poland is more different, in
almost every way, from Holland or Belgium than they are from each other, and
these differences of history and geography are deep and permanent.
The central problem of such a large Community is constitutional. There ought
to be more majority voting, in order to keep open the possibility of
effective decision-making; but in that case more individual member states
could be outvoted. In a large Community, whole groups of states with similar
interests may be outvoted: the south, or the north, or the poor. In short,
the unavoidable question raised by such a large Community is the old
unsettled problem of federalism, or whatever you call it.
The debate now starting is not overtly between the nationalists and the
federalists, but between the big countries and the small. At present the big
countries have a smaller voting weight, in relation to population or GNP,
than the small. This gesture of political solidarity was part of the
original bargain between the six; but since all the EFTA candidates are
small and most of the eastern European candidates are also small, it is now
being challenged, more or less openly, by most of the big countries.
Unexpectedly, the first to make the challenge explicit has been Britain.
Last week Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, argued the number of votes
required to block a majority decision should be the same after enlargement
as before: the equivalent of two big countries plus one small. In theory,
such a move could make majority voting more difficult by raising the
proportion of votes required for a decision. But Mr Hurd's result could also
be achieved by leaving the decision-making threshold unchanged, but
increasing the voting weight of the large countries.
The German government appears divided on the issue, and thus paralysed. But
France and Spain want a revision of voting weights. Since such a revision
will anger their smaller partners and members of EFTA, they will be grateful
to Britain for opening the Pandora's Box.
The small countries thought they had won a reprieve on the voting weight
issue, at least until after the negotiations with the EFTA countries. But in
the big countries the penny has at last dropped: once the EFTA countries get
in on favourable terms, they will certainly not agree to sacrifice their
voting privilege; even if they did, their electorates would certainly vote
down such a treaty change in the inevitable referenda. A change in the
voting system must be now, or it will be never.
The voting issue is also being driven by talk about reforming the
Commission. There are now 17 Commissioners, which many think is too many;
most agree that 21 after enlargement would be far too many; yet no country
wants to give up its Commissioners. The reason is that the Commission takes
more and more of its decisions by simple majority vote; and most
Commissioners tend to vote by nationality, even though the Treaty forbids
it.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

931101

