FT932-38

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (12): Art becomes more visible - The Uffizi
gallery bombing has focused minds on culture


   By JENNIFER GREGO


ON June 20, the Uffizi Gallery re-opened its doors, a mere 24 days after a
car bomb had severely damaged the western wing of the world's oldest museum.
Five people were killed in the explosion. Inevitably, the public imagination
was caught by what might have happened if the new form of terrorism had
destroyed this priceless collection.
Just as happened after the floods of November l966, when many of Florence's
treasured artworks and books were damaged, volunteers flocked to help.
Indeed, efforts to deal with the aftermath were impressive, including not
only the dedication of the Uffizi team (l50 in all) - with the help of
restorers from the famous Florentine laboratory, the Opificio delle Pietre
Dure - but also the determination of the Mr Alberto Ronchey, the minister of
culture. He insisted the museum be opened, at least in part, at the earliest
possible moment.
The ministry of culture is the poorest of all the ministries, receiving a
mere 0.02 per cent of the state budget - roughly L1,620bn a year. This is
equivalent to the amount spent by the French government on 60 new rooms of
the Louvre - FFr6bn. The Louvre also has five times as many paying visitors
a year as the Uffizi.
Mr Ronchey has proved one of the most successful appointments of the
government formed by Giuliano Amato last June (re-confirmed when Mr Ciampi
took over as Prime Minister in April). He has no party affiliations and is
not an art expert. In fact he started his career as professor of sociology
and economics at Venice University, followed by a long stint in journalism.
As cabinet heads have rolled amid revelations in the long-running bribes
scandal, Mr Ronchey's power has increased. The culture ministry has not been
immune, however. The last but one incumbent is under investigation over the
disappearance of L4bn for 'ghost' restoration works.
Tourism is now part of Mr Ronchey's field, the ministry for tourism and
sport having been demoted to a department of the prime minister's office
after a referendum in April.
The minister has realised the need for public support in his series of
struggles with entrenched Italian bureaucracy. But some of his battles seem
almost irrelevant in the general state of Italy's art - the attempt to
dislodge the Teatro dell'Opera's summer season from the Baths of Caracalla
(it is questionable whether people visit the monument or simply go to view
the elephants and horses of Aida) and banning rock concerts from the Arena
in Verona.
One stroke of genius, however, was his declaration of war on the vast army
of museum custodians by demanding that museums and galleries be open to the
public seven days a week from 9am to 7pm.
This battle was won at the outset in the Italian press, with the public and
tourists. He was mobbed like a pop-star outside the Uffizi on Easter Sunday,
as guides pointed him out to their tour groups as 'the man who opened up the
museums - even on holidays]'
Museum custodians account for 54 per cent of his ministry payroll - the EC
average is 28 per cent - and are high on the list of the most hated
professional groups in Italy. Loathed and feared by museum directors and the
public, they are said to derive pleasure from slamming museum doors in the
faces of tourists on once-in-a-lifetime trips.
Last year there were 21.5m visitors to Italy's museums, *something in here
(HP) *
down by 1m on 1991. The museums which lost out were mainly free entry, which
despite being splendid, such as the Villa Farnesina in Rome, have impossible
opening hours. The number of paying visitors to museums increased by
500.000.
The figures are not lost on Mr Ronchey. He plans to make under-l8s and
over-60s, who get free museum admission, pay something. He is also
determined Italian museums begin to offer services which are standard
throughout western Europe, such as restaurants, coffee-shops and bookshops.
And he has plans to open the door to private companies to run these
services.
Mr Ronchey's main objective is for the didactic material to be available on
video discs and video casettes, to enable visitors to get a restorer's-eye
view of the newly cleaned frescoes in the Sistine Chapel, or the Piero della
Francesca in San Francesco at Arezzo.
The proceeds of such projects will help the finances of the larger museums,
which are now freer of state controls. Earnings from the smaller museums
will go into a central regional fund, to be re-distributed according to
need. Enterprising competitors for the tenders, such as Ovidio Jacorossi of
Artemesia, are offering package deals to include air-conditioning, security
and restaurant services. The latter have already been provided for Rome's
newest and most comfortable exhibition space - the huge neo-classical
Palazzo Degli Esposizioni.
Mr Ronchey's latest battle is the fiercest, most important and maybe the one
most in danger of being lost. The military has refused to dislodge their
Officer's club from Palazzo Barberini, designated by the Italian government
in l949 as the Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Antica (to hold 12th to l8th
century Italian art). The officers have used this now slightly decaying
billet in central Rome since l934, giving over part of a single floor to one
of the finest art collections in the world.
The gallery is composed of donations from the grand old Italian families,
such as the Corsinis and the Odescalchis, and includes Raphael's 'La
Fornarina', and several Caravaggios, Lorenzo Lottos and Filippo Lippis. Only
300 pieces of the l,500-strong collection can be displayed at any one time,
which the majority languishing in store-rooms.
Mr Ronchey, in his attempts to encourage the military to move out of the
Palazzo Barberini, issued a decree on April 21 to enable a pre-emptive
purchase of the handsome, turn-of-the-century villa on the Nomentana (just
outside the city walls), which was being sold by the state. L28bn was
rapidly raised from the finance ministry, and the defence ministry agreed to
pay restoration costs.
Mr Ronchey had hoped to save this architectural treasure from speculators
and free Palazzo Barberini for the National Gallery. Too simple. The decree,
guaranteeing that the finance ministry put up the money for the villa,
lapsed in mid-June, and although there is a 60-day prorogue the outcome is
in doubt - unless, as Mr Ronchey hopes, now, there is a public outcry. A
second decree has been issued, giving Mr Ronchey until August 21 to persuade
the military to accept his offer.
Some of Italy's long-hidden treasures will, however, be reappearing shortly.
On July 2 the newly-restored Palazzo Massimo opens to the public and Roman
statues and reliefs long hidden in the cellars at the Museum of Roman Art at
the Baths of Diocletion will at last be visible. The third section of the
Museum of Roman Art, based at Palazzo Altemps near Piazza Navona, will open
next summer.
It will house the fine groups of classical statues collected by the Roman
aristocrats in the l6th and l7th centuries, such as the magnificent 97-piece
Ludovisi collection.
Such efforts to make art more visible and the recent cleaning and
restoration work on a cluster of Rome's finest baroque churches, should make
the city a pleasure to visit.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

930630

