FT932-13497

FT  23 APR 93 / Russian Referendum: Cold comfort in rebellious Saransk -
Support from the Mordovian republic seems unlikely to be strong


   By GILLIAN TETT


   SARANSK, MORDOVIA


IN the cold central square of Saransk, the shabby capital of Mordovia, the
republic's embattled president is housed in a large, grey building. Locals
mischievously call it the 'white house,' - a reference to the Russian
presidential 'white house' 500km to the west in Moscow.
In a virtual mirror image of the struggle being played out nationally, a
political drama is unfolding in Mordovia which could call into question the
very future of Russia as a federal state.
Earlier this month the Mordovian parliament, dominated by former Communist
apparatchiks, moved to oust Mr Vasily Guslyannikov, the Mordovian president,
who, like Mr Yeltsin, came to power through popular elections.
Mr Yeltsin issued a decree declaring the move illegal and ordered it to
reinstate Mr Guslyannikov. This week Mordovia's parliament stepped up its
challenge, establishing a parallel government and constitutional court.
Mr Guslyannikov, who still sits in the 'white house' insists that according
to the Russian constitution he is still president, supported by Mr Yeltsin
and the local militia.
The drama unfolding in Mordovia reflects a battle occurring in many regions
between reformist governments and conservative parliaments. 'What is
happening here is a drive by the communists to regain power. The same thing
is happening across Russia and in Moscow,' says Mr Guslyannikov, a former
engineer.
Across the square in the sugar pink building of the Mordovian parliament,
deputies insist the newly written Mordovian constitution makes the president
powerless. 'The president can say what he wants, but no one obeys his
orders,' says Mr Nikolai Biryukov, chairman of the parliament, and a long
time Communist.
Mr Guslyannikov became president in the same year that Mordovians voted
overwhelmingly for Mr Yeltsin in Russian presidential elections. In two
years he has freed prices, started land reform, and attempted to hold new
elections for the republic's parliament. These moves have met with stiff
opposition from parliament, which, like the Russian parliament, was elected
under the old system. The parliament argues that Mr Guslyannikov's
government is too inexperienced to rule, and that the pace of reform has
been too fast.
'I favour a regulated market, not the chaotic bazaar that we have now,' says
Mr Biryukov, who believes land should remain collectively owned, that food
prices should be regulated and that single candidate 'elections' are
perfectly valid.
Beyond the struggle over reform, there is also a second issue at stake: the
status of Russia as a federal state.
The Mordovian parliament insists it wants to remain part of Russia, not
least because the republic is heavily dependent on Moscow' subsidies - the
largely agricultural republic is one of the poorest in Russia.
But parliament's refusal to recognise Mr Yeltsin's decrees illustrates the
confusion that surrounds the status of the Russian constitution and the
degree to which Russia's regions are successfully challenging Moscow's
control.
The local militia and most of the weary 1m-strong population of Mordovia, a
mixture of Russians and Finno-Ughric groups, remain aloof from the conflict,
for the moment. Mr Biryukov has little outright popularity, but Mr
Guslyannikov's support has been crumbling fast as living standards have
fallen and prices risen - only two people turned out to picket parliament
this week.
But as the republic prepares for Sunday's referendum, this disenchantment
seems likely to rub off on Mr Yeltsin too.
At a nursing college in Saransk, which is acting as a polling station, Mrs
Larissa Vitalievna, an administrator, predicts that support for Mr Yeltsin
will be weak. 'Two years ago we believed so much and hoped so much. . . 'But
the prices have gone up so much, and we see stupid people become
millionaires and highly qualified people become poor'.
In the countryside, a small band of new, private farmers remain solidly
behind him.
However, most state enterprises are trying to ignore the power struggle,
relying instead on Moscow for their trading licences. 'What we want is
stability,' sighs Mr Gennady Uktukhin, head of Mordovia's only commodity
exchange. 'How can we ever hope to run or reform an economy, when we have
two separate governments, sitting in two separate buildings, to deal with?'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930423

