FT934-10288

FT  06 NOV 93 / Ukraine nuclear 'tragedy' warning: Deteriorating warheads
pose threat of disaster 'worse than Chernobyl', visiting Russian minister
claims


   By JOHN LLOYD and JILL BARSHAY


   MOSCOW, KIEV


UKRAINE'S nuclear warheads have deteriorated to the point where 'a tragedy
worse than Chernobyl' could result, according to Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the
Russian foreign minister.
Mr Kozyrev, on a visit to Ukraine, told the official Russian news agency
Tass that he had been given 'extremely alarming information about the
technical state of a number of rockets' by Ukrainian officials soon after
arriving in Kiev yesterday.
He gave no details of the information but Russia has complained about the
130 ageing SS-19 strategic missiles and 46 more modern SS-24 missiles in
Ukraine, suggesting they are being kept in unsafe conditions.
The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry confirmed last week that 20 of its older
generation SS-19 strategic missiles should be destroyed immediately.
'We know ourselves that 20 missiles are now reaching the end of their
operational life. The question has already arisen of how to destroy them and
where the money is to come from to do so.'
Ukraine, concerned about political instability in Russia, is now dragging
its heels about transferring the weapons and says it wants more compensation
and firm security guarantees.
The issue of destroying the missiles is involved a struggle between Ukraine
and the US government, which has agreed to put up the money needed for
dismantling but only in stages while Ukraine carries it out. Ukraine argues
that it should know the total financial package before it embarks on the
project.
Agreements were made between the Kiev government and Mr Warren Christopher,
the US secretary of state, at the end of last month during the latter's
visit to Kiev - but none has been put into practice.
Ukraine has promised to become a non-nuclear power, to sign the
non-proliferation treaty and the Start 1 and 2 agreements but has yet to do
so.
President Leonid Kravchuk, who has often shown impatience with the refusal
of his parliament to sign the necessary agreements, is under pressure from
nationalist politicians not to get rid of the 176 missiles but to retain
them as a deterrent to other powers, especially Russia.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931106

