FT932-299

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (2): New block to growth in world trade -
Political moves to improve international market share may disrupt activity /
Economic Overview


   by JAMES BLITZ


AFTER two years of very slow growth, the recovery for the world economy
seems to be underway. But exporters continue to operate in some of the most
difficult trading conditions seen in the post-war period.
Developed economies are either on the verge of recession or are only just
emerging from it, making it difficult for exporters to gain buyers for their
goods. Only China, and surrounding countries in east and south-east Asia,
show signs of robust health.
The tough economic environment has in turn spawned a series of trade
disputes over issues like tariff barriers, dumping and subsidies which might
yet turn into an all-out trade war between the three main trading blocks.
Above all, as nations seek to make their goods more competitive, they have
allowed their currencies to devalue as a means of fostering export growth.
But acute exchange rate volatility has made it harder for traders to predict
the value of their export earnings, however good their sales performance.
The problems should not, however, be exaggerated. The economic environment
is not as threatening as it was in the recession of the early 1980s. Then,
world import of goods contracted in volume terms. By contrast, figures from
IBJ (Industrial Bank of Japan) International show that the volume of world
imports continued to grow last year by 4 per cent year on year.
But there has been a qualitative deterioration in trading conditions. And
exporters are asking whether changes in the world economy and politics are
about to make those conditions worse.
The prospects for economic recovery in the developed world are patchy. The
brightest hopes lie with the US, Japan and the UK, which have pursued
policies of sustained low interest rates to stimulate credit expansion.
These economies will enjoy positive growth this year, but on what scale is
uncertain. Despite an annualised growth rate of more than 4 per cent in the
last three months of 1992, the US recovery stalled in the early part of this
year, restrained by a low savings rate and poor consumer confidence.
The UK faces similar problems, as households try to restructure their debts
following the fall in house prices in the last three years. Japan's economy
has been boosted by successive cash injections, which should boost growth to
1 1/4 per cent this year.
But here, too, the decline in asset prices - particularly property prices -
has been big enough to lower profits and weaken confidence.
But the plight of these economies is not as bad as that facing Europe and,
in particular, Germany.
The cost of German reunification continues to take its toll: German GDP is
expected to contract by 2 per cent this year, with some economists seeing no
signs of recovery before 1995. And as long as France and the Benelux
countries tie their economies to Germany, their prospects look almost as
bleak.
If the weakness of the real world economy has made it difficult for
exporters to find new markets, government policies may exacerbate matters.
The recession has coincided with attempts by governments to reduce the huge
budget deficits incurred in the 1980s. But such policies could threaten the
speed of recovery.
In the US, UK and some European countries, consolidation programmes are
slowly being implemented, keeping taxation high and reducing public
spending. In Germany, the budget overhang extends beyond the Finance
Ministry's earlier predictions, with the latest projection put at DM70bn
this year.
As governments tighten domestic spending, they hope that export-led growth
will help them to emerge from recession. That is why they have indulged in
currency devaluations which aim to make each country's goods more
competitive, but which will make price-setting for individual traders very
difficult.
Exchange rate manipulation will remain in vogue. The UK government is
believed to have kept a lid on sterling at DM2.50 to the D-Mark, by selling
the currency, as a means of increasing the competitiveness of British goods.
The Clinton administration has also committed itself to reducing Japan's
large merchandise trade surplus by subtly advocating a devaluation of the
dollar/yen exchange rate. Sweden and Finland have also carefully avoided
re-pegging their currencies to the Ecu, because the devaluation of their
currencies has helped boost the competitiveness of their wood and paper
industries.
One unanswered question, however, is whether France, Denmark and the Benelux
countries will continue to peg their currencies to an over-valued D-Mark,
pricing their traders out of many markets.
Amid the economic gloom in Germany, the Bundesbank has gradually reduced its
short-term interest rates. But the central bank remains concerned at the
threat of imported inflation and the depreciation of its currency. If German
monetary policy is not eased aggressively in the second half of this year,
exchange rate mechanism tensions could re-emerge.
In the longer term, the greatest threat to the trading environment comes
from government attempts to establish trading blocs as a means of securing
their share of international markets.
Central to this issue is the US - the driving force behind the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade - which appears increasingly to favour a more
protectionist stance on trade issues.
The Clinton administration has taken an aggressive attitude towards Japan's
visible trade surplus. The recent signature of the North America free trade
agreement with Latin American states also underlines Washington's commitment
to regionalised trading.
All-out war between the three blocs - the EC, Nafta and the south-east Asian
bloc - can still be avoided. But the US and Japan appear determined not to
engage in negotiations on the reduction of the Japanese surplus.
US and European exporters are concerned that the creation of trading blocs
will reduce their access to the economies of south-east Asia and the Pacific
Rim, which are growing at a far stronger pace than more developed countries.
The comparison between these economies and the rest of the world is
startling. While Europe moves into recession, Chinese GDP is set to grow
this year by 12 per cent. The comparable figure for Thailand is 8 per cent
and South Korea 6 per cent.
However, Japan is the main beneficiary of the transfer of technology and
capital goods to its own region. In 1992, the Japanese trade surplus to
south-east Asia was Dollars 47bn, up from Dollars 37.4bn the previous year.
This trend indicates that the formation of large trading blocs is set to
continue. But, in the long term, such blocs lead to trade diversion not
trade creation, bringing an overall decline in economic growth. The trading
environment will move into structural decline if protectionism makes a full
return to nations' agendas.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930629

