FT934-11532

FT  30 OCT 93 / Why costs don't count: Every parent's fear


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, FT Political Editor


THIS IS a good story about the National Health Service; about NHS doctors,
nurses and administrators delivering unrivalled standards of care and
efficiency. Sadly it may turn out to have an unhappy ending.
It starts with a personal experience: the only sort that counts in an age in
which we too often judge the worth of our public services in terms of
financial bottom lines and cost-benefit analyses.
My three-year-old daughter Jessica has a heart complaint. It was spotted two
years ago by a diligent GP treating her for a particularly nasty cold. Since
then she has been an out-patient at Guy's hospital.
Until this summer regular checks at the hospital's department of paediatric
cardiology had shown the condition - a narrowing of the aortal valve - was
stable. At some stage she would need an operation - and eventually a heart
valve transplant - but the longer it could be left the better the prognosis.
Two months ago came the bad news. The latest check had revealed a sharp
deterioration in the pressures inside the valve. Jessica would need at the
minimum an exploratory operation and perhaps direct intervention to widen
the valve.
That, as every parent will know, is when the panic started. But in our case
it was also when the NHS showed its worth.
Jessica was summoned back within days so the consultant in charge of her
case could conduct the tests again personally. The results were the same. We
were told she would have to be admitted.
Giving us all the time we needed, the consultant explained the diagnosis
would be rechecked under general anaesthetic and, if necessary, the valve
stretched by the catheter 'balloon' technique pioneered at Guy's during the
1980s and now used to treat even unborn babies.
Then came the bad news. Jessica's case was serious but not an emergency. She
would have to go on the waiting list. Her consultant was not quite sure how
long that would be. But obviously the sooner the operation was done the
better. The risk of damage elsewhere in the heart meant it should not be
left longer than a few months. Instantly, images flooded our minds of
Jessica suffering heart failure while waiting for an NHS bed.
It was at this point that our preconceptions crumbled. Fearful of delay we
explored the option of having the operation done privately. Like many cynics
I had always assumed that consultants - especially in high-tech specialisms
 -would never pass up the chance to switch patients from NHS to private
lists. And such is the standing of paediatric cardiology at Guy's it already
attracts private patients from around the world. I do not have private
medical insurance but what's a few thousand pounds or so in such
circumstances?
I was wrong. The doctors caring for Jessica advised us to wait. Why not see
if an NHS bed came up. And if we wanted a second opinion, no problem. All
Jessica's notes would be faxed to whatever consultant we chose.
So we contacted the senior paediatric cardiologist at the Hospital for Sick
Children in Great Ormond Street. Since we wanted to see him within days we
were quite willing to pay. No need. He would fit us in outside his normal
clinic - but on the NHS. His advice - delivered without regard for what must
be pretty valuable time - was to stick with Guy's. We should not worry about
waiting up to three months. Beyond that we could re-explore the options.
From here on in the story gets still better. Guy's came back with an early
date - the waiting list was not as bad as feared. Jessica had her catheter
examination and the valve turned out to be in better shape than expected.
With luck, major surgery will not be needed until she is much older. By then
the technology will have advanced still further.
During a few days as an in-patient her treatment - from doctors, nurses,
technicians and everyone else - was exemplary. We saw for ourselves what the
combination of sophisticated equipment and a caring medical team can
produce. In many other places the only option would have been open heart
surgery, with all its attendant risks.
So what moral should be drawn? It is not, I am afraid, that the government's
reforms have transformed the health service. Guy's may or may not have
become a bit more efficient since it became a joint hospital trust with St
Thomas'. But it worked for Jessica because of the dedication of staff and
availability of expensive but invaluable equipment. People and resources,
not structures, were the key.
It is here that we come to our fears of an unhappy ending. In spite of its
envied reputation, there are strong rumours that a number of Guy's high-tech
specialisms, including paediatric cardiology, will all but disappear through
the merger with St Thomas's. All London hospitals must save money.
Individual units may be a national asset at the leading edge of medical
research. But things like that tend not to show up on the cost-benefit
analyses of trust hospitals. Nor, it seems, is there any strategic authority
ready to make the wider judgment. Next time Jessica needs an operation, I
fear it will be an altogether different story.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

931030

