FT933-9956

FT  06 AUG 93 / Shell hit by chemicals and currency: Oil groups restructure
their way out of big losses, tight margins and low prices


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


ROYAL Dutch/Shell shook the market yesterday by disclosing a Pounds 183m
charge for restructuring, much of it relating to its loss-making chemical
business.
Shares in Shell, the UK arm of the Anglo-Dutch oil group, fell 9 1/2 p to
633p.
The charge was included in the company's half-yearly results, which showed
that other parts of the group performed strongly, producing a 20 per cent
rise in profits in the second quarter in spite of a weak oil price and tight
margins.
Shell said the cause for the charges had already been announced, though
there might have been uncertainty about the timing. Most of them - Pounds
112m - related to chemicals. Of this, Pounds 13m was to cover redundancy
costs, and Pounds 99m was for asset sales and write-downs, including the
crop protection business which is being sold.
The rest of the charge covered restructuring in the downstream business
where Shell is trying to cut costs. Deutsche Shell, the German affiliate,
announced yesterday that it was laying off 20 per cent of its staff.
The group's chemical business made a loss of Pounds 151m in the second
quarter, bringing its total losses for the year so far to Pounds 173m.
'Petrochemical market conditions remain depressed with only limited signs of
recovery,' the group said. The only bright spot was the US, where Shell's
chemical operations made a small Pounds 16m profit in the second quarter.
A further factor hurting profits was a Pounds 141m currency loss caused by
the strengthening of sterling against continental currencies during late
spring and early summer. Large currency swings are a recurring feature of
Shell's results.
The overall result showed a second quarter profit of Pounds 619m, excluding
gains and losses from oil holdings. This brought profits for the first half
to Pounds 1.6bn, an increase of 15 per cent on the Pounds 1.4bn earned in
the same period last year.
Shell's oil exploration and production activities boosted their profits by
Pounds 60m to Pounds 408m. There was also a strong 25 per cent gain in
downstream and transport activities where quarterly earnings reached Pounds
463m.
Analysts said the market was taken aback by the size of the charge, even
though the underlying result was quite strong. 'If you strip out the
restructuring costs and the currency losses, this was a good set of
figures,' one analyst said last night.
However, Shell was cautious about the outlook. It said that oil prices had
weakened over the quarter because of Opec's inability to agree on quotas,
and the prospect of a resumption of supplies from Iraq.
'Although a modest recovery of prices might be expected as demand increases
in the second half of the year,' it said, 'the market is likely to remain
volatile.'
Lex, Page 14; Details, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930806

