FT932-3228

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Company News: Italian insurer's fate seems
sealed - Fondiaria's L1,058bn rights issue may be too late


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


LAST night's surprise announcement of a L1,058bn (Dollars 715m) rights issue
by Fondiaria, the big Florentine insurer controlled by the troubled Ferruzzi
group, looks unlikely to satisfy analysts who are forecasting that the sale
of the company is inevitable.
The fresh cash, via a two-for-one rights issue at L6,500 for each new share,
will help restore Fondiaria's finances. The group lost L578bn lost year and
reported borrowings of L2,368bn.
However the depth of the crisis facing the Ferruzzi family and the listed
Ferruzzi Finanziaria (Ferfin) holding company, which posted record losses of
L1,519bn and total borrowings of about L31,000bn, suggests big changes are
inevitable now that Ferfin's fate is in the hands of its bankers. For many
observers, Mr Arrigo Bianchi di Lavagna, Fondiaria's new managing director,
is preparing it for the block.
Even if disposal is not a foregone conclusion, Fondiaria must be turned
around. With Ferruzzi struggling for survival, Fondiaria must start paying
dividends again.
Much of the borrowing came under Mr Alfonso Scarpa, Fondiaria's former
managing director, who oversaw an ambitious but ill-fated expansion into
insurance abroad and diversification at home. Fondiaria invested about
DM1.21bn (Dollars 744m) in Aachener und Munchener Beteiligungs, Germany's
second-largest insurer, in which it had a 21 per cent stake. It also had a
holding in the linked Volksfursorge (Vofu) life group as part of an
ambitious expansion plan.
Last month Fondiaria sold its shares in AMB and the subsidiary controlling
Vofu. The disposal will net about DM1.18bn, less than the original
investment and a hefty loss when interest payments on the money borrowed to
buy the shares are taken into account.
Untangling the German commitment means Mr Bianchi di Lavagna can turn to
some of the domestic loss-making ventures into which Fondiaria diversified.
These included clinics and hotels. In both cases, Fondiaria not only bought
the properties but also took management responsibility. Moreover, much of
the diversification was financed by borrowing. The clinics and hotels are
now for sale,
Stripped of the loss-makers, the priority will be to improve earnings at the
core insurance business. The Fondiaria group made underwriting losses of
about L473bn last year. Losses were heaviest in third-party motor policies,
where Italian insurers have taken a battering as state-regulated tariffs
have failed to keep up with the cost and quantity of claims.
Mr Bianchi di Lavagna has two strategies to deal with the motor side. First,
tariffs must rise to cover losses - which will be possible after
liberalisation in July 1994. Second, Fondiaria must reduce the share of
third-party motor insurance in its portfolio. It now has about 13.5 per cent
of the Italian market for third-party motor cover - more than double the
share of its nearest competitor.
Third-party cover generates about L8.4bn in daily premiums for Fondiaria.
But competition is likely to keep profits under pressure, forcing Fondiaria
to broaden its product base.
Many observers have already discounted Mr Bianchi di Lavagna's success in
turning the group round. The focus has shifted to the group's fate after his
medicine starts working.
Finding a single buyer for the group would probably maximise the return for
Ferruzzi and the family of Mr Camillio De Benedetti, the Italian financier
who died earlier this year. They jointly control Fondiaria through the
quoted Gaic holding company.
But Fondiaria will not come cheap. With aggregate premiums of L6,102bn last
year, the group would give a foreign insurer an enviable position in the
Italian market, widely believed to have the highest growth potential in
Europe.
Failing that, a break-up is the obvious solution. Ironically, that has been
made easier due to the 1990-91 restructuring by Mr Scarpa, who reorganised
the group into a holding company with three main subsidiaries.
The biggest, La Fondiaria Assicurazioni, had premiums of L1,859bn last year.
Milano Assicurazioni had L1,402bn, while La Previdente had L1,289bn. Each
could be an attractive buy in its own right.
Two of the three have big individual investors, which look like obvious
bidders. Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino, Italy's largest bank, owns
about 27 per cent of Milano, while GroupAMA, the big French mutual insurer,
has 20 per cent of La Fondiaria Assicurazioni. San Paolo is already working
closely with Milano on a range of insurance and banking products; it is also
one of Ferruzzi's biggest bank creditors. GroupAMA could also be tempted by
Fondiaria.
Many observers expect Generali, Italy's largest insurer, to buy at least
part of Fondiaria. Mediobanca, the merchant bank leading the five-bank
committee of Ferruzzi's biggest creditors, is also a leading shareholder in
Generali. RAS, Italy's second-largest insurer, which is owned by Germany's
Allianz, could also be a suitor.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930615

