FT934-10236

FT  06 NOV 93 / Letters to the Editor: Uneducated comparison


   From Mr JOHN WILKINS


Sir, The FT 1000 Guide to Secondary Education (October 30/31), together with
commentary in the Weekend FT, provided some fascinating insights into the
examination achievement of many of the country's secondary schools. However,
the Weekend FT article, which concentrated on the achievement of grammar and
secondary modern schools in the Wycombe area of Buckinghamshire, contained
one glaring inaccuracy when it drew a number of inappropriate comparisons
between the success of schools in Wycombe and those in Milton Keynes.
You claimed that the results of one Wycombe secondary modern school at GCSE
level (34 per cent of pupils with 5+ A-C grades) were 'much better than the
performance of Milton Keynes's comprehensives', which achieved 'only 23 per
cent'. This latter figure is incorrect; the Milton Keynes' schools' average
was 32 per cent. I am sure that the true figure would have led your
correspondent to reach different conclusions from those prompted by the
erroneous 23 per cent. The 5+ A-C percentage here at Stantonbury Campus was
37.5 per cent.
There are, though, some more striking comparisons. Stantonbury Campus is the
largest provider of secondary education in England and Wales. This year, 110
of our students have entered higher education. Our average points score for
A-level results, attained in a large open entry sixth form, was 15.6 points/
pupil. This figure is far in excess of that achieved by three of the
Buckinghamshire independent schools listed in the FT 1000, and is also
better than the points score of the Royal Latin Grammar School at Buckingham
and equal to that of Sir Henry Floyd Grammar School at Aylesbury. Our points
score is also very close to that of such institutions with a reputation for
academic success as Aylesbury Grammar School (17.1 points/pupil) and a
number of other grammar schools in the more favoured parts of
Buckinghamshire.
John Wilkins,
co-director,
Stantonbury Campus,
Milton Keynes MK14 6BN

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931106

