FT934-10062

FT  08 NOV 93 / FAO sows the seed of a new harvest: Deborah Hargreaves on
election today of a successor in the top job


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


ONE OF the top jobs in world agriculture will be handed out today when the
169 member countries of the Food and Agriculture Organisation choose between
eight candidates for a new leader.
The vote ends 18 years of close control at one of the United Nations'
biggest agencies by the current incumbent, Mr Edouard Saouma, who is not
standing for re-election. The FAO has become identified with the personal
style of Mr Saouma, who manipulated the rules to get himself re-elected for
three consecutive terms amid mounting criticism of his leadership.
The winner of today's vote will have to move swiftly to re-establish the
organisation's credibility with its primary backers as well as articulate a
vision for its role into the next century.
'It's important that the next director-general has the intellectual
leadership to set the agenda for world agriculture,' says Mr Geoffrey
Miller, Australia's candidate and one of the three front-runners.
Mr Miller could prove a controversial choice with some member states if he
wins the vote, since Australia has shown strong support for free
agricultural trade in the current Uruguay round of multilateral trade
negotiations.
'We've got to change the way countries look at the FAO: developed countries
must see their contributions as an investment with the dividend being an
increase in world trade as the developing world becomes better off,' Mr
Miller says. But he runs the risk of identifying himself too closely with
contributing countries in an organisation where north-south divides are
rife.
The other two leading candidates are both FAO insiders: India's Mr Maharaj
Muthoo, director of FAO forestry operations, and the Chilean assistant
director-general, Mr Rafael Moreno.
European support is expected to be split between three candidates: Mr Gerrit
Braks, a former agriculture minister from the Netherlands, Germany's Mr
Christian Bonte-Friedheim and Mr Patrick Cunningham from Ireland. Other
runners are Mr Salahuddin Ahmed of Bangladesh and Mr Jacques Diouf from
Senegal.
The FAO was set up 48 years ago with the grand aim of 'ensuring humanity's
freedom from hunger', by improving agricultural production and distribution
of food. But today world hunger is as big a problem as ever with around 780m
people daily facing food shortages.
The FAO was criticised for its slow response to the African drought in
recent years. Critics contend that the organisation has lost its way, with
Mr Saouma spending more time on political in-fighting than on setting its
priorities.
'The set-up has allowed the director-general to spend much of his time
cultivating governments so that he can be re-elected,' said Mr John Abbott,
a former FAO employee and author of Politics and Poverty, a critique of the
organisation.
'Projects are approved when they are not useful and are not stopped when
they are not working for fear of offending that country.'
Disaffected Scandinavian countries decided in 1988 to channel much of their
aid through other UN agencies as they were unhappy with the running of the
FAO.
At the same time, some contributors to the FAO's budget including the US and
the UK succeeded in getting the organisation to hone its overheads when they
withheld donations to its Dollars 700m administrative budget. They are now
repaying arrears, but employees still complain about excessive red
tape.
In its defence, the FAO points to a report that it commissioned four years
ago by a group of independent experts which gave it a clean bill of health
and, in particular, did not recommend pulling out of any of its projects
world wide.
The organisation has scored some notable successes in its battle against
world hunger. It played an important role in the green revolution in Asia
which achieved a 77 per cent increase in crop yields over 15 years. In
recent years it has introduced programmes to conserve plant genes and attack
agricultural pests such as locusts.
But the criticism has ensured that most candidates for the top job are
campaigning on a cautious reform ticket.
'We need austerity, cost-effectiveness and efficiency in using taxpayers'
money,' says Mr Muthoo from India. His views are echoed by Mr Miller, who
says he wants to look at all aspects of the FAO's operations over the next
two years with a view to instituting change in time for the organisation's
50th anniversary in 1995.
Mr Moreno, who has lined up most Latin American countries behind his
candidature, talks of tightening some administrative procedures and
deploying more funds in eastern Europe.
As well as its Dollars 700m administrative budget, the FAO has another
Dollars 700m to deploy in aid, but in this it often overlaps with other UN
agencies. For this reason, Mr Abbott believes the FAO should return to its
original role of gathering information and giving advice to developing
countries on how to spend their aid rather than running its own projects.
The body has an undeniable wealth of expertise on world agriculture which is
facing a raft of problems associated with intensive farming such as soil
erosion, over-grazing and lack of water. The FAO needs to get its near 3,000
experts out of their plush Rome headquarters by the baths of Caracalla and
into the field if it is to find a future role for itself in a world growing
weary of UN bureaucracies.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931108

