FT934-8609

FT  15 NOV 93 / Graduate recruitment rise forecast


   By JOHN AUTHERS


EMPLOYERS PLAN to increase graduate recruitment next year following a
20-year high in graduate unemployment this year, a report published by
Indus-trial Relations Services says today.
The sharp increase in the number of graduates caused by the recent expansion
in the number of university places means, however, that the rate of graduate
unemployment could still increase.
There is also evidence that employers are raising their entry standards to
cope with the higher number of separate applications which each student is
making.
The 190 employers surveyed by the independent pay and conditions group are
planning to expand their intakes of new graduates by 6.5 per cent next year.
The number of graduates should increase by about 12 per cent.
High levels of demand are expected to peg the average starting salary to
Pounds 13,463, a rise of only 2.4 per cent since last year.
Changes in recruitment methods - either by raising entry standards or by
restricting advertisements for vacancies - are being implemented by 42.3 per
cent of employers to handle increased demand.
Employers are also alarmed by plans mooted by university vice-chancellors to
ask graduates to pay towards the costs of their tuition after their
graduation through a higher tax.
Employers have already noted that fewer students are taking time out before
looking for a job because levels of indebtedness are rising.
They feel that a form of graduate tax will have administrative consequences
for them - and also lead to pressure for higher starting salaries as
graduates would face a cut in their net pay. Eight in 10 oppose the idea.
'New' universities, which were polytechnics or colleges of higher education
until last year, appear already to have gained broad acceptance from
employers.
Almost two-thirds of recruiters believed they offered courses which were
more relevant to industry's needs than those of existing universities, while
only 23.7 per cent felt that they produced 'lower-calibre graduates'.
Graduate recruitment survey 1993. Industrial Relations Services, 18-20
Highbury Place, London N5 1QP. Pounds 20.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931115

