FT932-3382

FT  15 JUN 93 / Clinton names moderate as Supreme Court choice


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday ended a controversial three-month search
for a new Supreme Court justice by nominating Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg to
the highest US bench.
He also reacted angrily, by cutting off a planned news conference after the
first question, when a reporter implied he had 'zig-zagged' over the
nomination. Having been moved to tears by Judge Ginsburg's effusive thanks
to those who had helped in her career, he snapped back: 'I have long since
given up the thought that I could disabuse some of you (from) turning any
substantive decision into anything but political process. How you could ask
a question like that, after the statement she just made, is beyond me.'
The invited Rose Garden audience burst into applause.
Judge Ginsburg, who is 60 and serves on the federal appeals court based in
Washington, should win confirmation by the Senate for the seat being vacated
by Justice Byron White.
She would be the second woman to serve on the highest US court, joining
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, and the first Jew since Justice Abe Fortas
resigned in 1969.
Mr Clinton, the only Democrat in a position to make a nomination to the
court in 26 years, said she was 'progressive in outlook, wise in judgment,
and balanced and fair in her opinions'.
Judge Ginsburg was chosen in preference to Judge Stephen Breyer of
Massachusetts, complimented by Mr Clinton yesterday, and Mr Bruce Babbitt,
interior secretary. Her candidacy emerged only at the weekend after Judge
Breyer was revealed not to have paid social security taxes on a part-time
cleaning woman.
Named to the federal bench by President Carter in 1980, Judge Ginsburg had
previously been general counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union. As a
judge on a circuit principally engaged with regulatory issues, she is rated
a moderate.
The judge is credited, in a 1985 ruling, with having opened the US natural
gas pipeline business to competitive forces. She was recently praised as a
potentially ideal Supreme Court member by Justice Antonin Scalia, the
court's most distinctive conservative voice. But she is also close to former
Justice William Brennan, even in retirement a powerful liberal influence.
Some women's groups attacked her last year for a speech in which she had
suggested the court's 1973 landmark ruling, Roe vs Wade, which guarantees
abortion rights, might have gone too far and 'halted a political process
that was moving in a reform direction and thereby, I believe, prolonged
divisiveness'.
But that speech has to be matched against her record as an advocate in the
1970s, when she won five out of six cases in the court, arguing that the
constitution's 14th amendment, covering citizenship rights, should serve as
a protection for women.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930615

