FT933-5257

FT  04 SEP 93 / Theory put on Aids mystery


   By CLIVE COOKSON


A NEW THEORY to explain one of the great mysteries of Aids was presented to
the British Association meeting in Keele yesterday.
Professor Robert May, a well-known mathematical biologist from Oxford
University, sought to explain why there is such a long and variable interval
 -often as long as 10 years - between first infection with HIV (the virus
that causes the disease) and the onset of life-threatening symptoms.
He based his theory on a combination of computer modelling and clinical
observations.
It suggests that HIV eventually overwhelms the immune system by its
extraordinary mutation rate, which is greater than that of any other known
virus. Over a period of years dozens of different HIV strains evolve in the
patient, and the immune cells cannot cope with such diversity.
'Each new strain requires a largely-specialised immune response. On the
other hand, any strain of HIV can kill or impair the function of any of the
immune cells,' Prof May said. 'Mathematical studies of this peculiar system
show that there can be a 'diversity threshold' beyond which the immune
system can no longer control the virus.'
The theory suggests that chance plays an important role in the time taken to
develop Aids, depending on the rate at which random mutations arise in the
stages soon after infection.
Prof May says the theory, which he developed with Dr Martin Nowak, 'puts the
virus itself centre stage'. In contrast, many others focus on different
factors for triggering the collapse of the immune system. Although much
available evidence supports the theory, more experiments will be needed to
confirm it.
If Prof May is right, sufferers should in theory take anti-HIV drugs as soon
as possible after infection to suppress replication of the virus and the
emergence of new mutants. But he says the drugs currently available, such as
AZT, have too many toxic side effects for him to give such advice with
confidence.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930904

