FT934-8306

FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Cragnotti changes tack with
Mardon sale


   By HAIG SIMONIAN and IAN RODGER


   MILAN, ZURICH


THE DECISION by Cragnotti & Partners Capital (CPC) to sell its controlling
stake in Canada's Lawson Mardon packaging group to Alusuisse Lonza, the
Swiss aluminium and chemicals group, marks a change of strategy for the
Milan-based financial company.
For Mr Cragnotti, a former executive at Italy's Ferruzzi group, the purchase
of Lawson Mardon represented the first step in an ambitious plan to turn CPC
into an international financial powerhouse combining corporate finance with
industrial management skills.
Packaging, in the form of Lawson Mardon, was the first in a trio of sectors
identified as ripe for investment and internationalisation, with foodstuffs
and detergents representing the two others.
Since then, however, matters have changed. Mr Cragnotti, a close associate
of Mr Raul Gardini, the Italian entrepreneur who committed suicide in July,
has also become involved in the corruption investigations which contributed
to Mr Gardini's death.
Mr Cragnotti has been building up food interests in Italy, and had been
tipped as one of the potential buyers of parts of the state-controlled SME
foods, catering and retailing group now being privatised.
For Alusuisse Lonza the takeover of Lawson Mardon would represent a giant
step towards completing its 10-year restructuring programme begun two years
ago.
The programme was designed to move the group decisively away from its heavy
dependence on the volatile aluminium business, which then represented two
thirds of its SFr6.3bn (Dollars 4.2bn) sales.
By the end of the decade, the group aims to have sales of SFr9bn to SFr11bn.
It wants sales to be split in three equal parts among aluminium products,
chemicals and packaging.
It is currently pulling together its various packaging operations (mainly
based on aluminium) into a coherent division and to date, excluding Lawson
Mardon, has made eight acquisitions. Packaging division sales have grown
from SFr744m in 1988 to SFr1.4bn last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

931116

