FT931-4136

FT  12 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: 'Budget for jobs' demanded


   By DAVID OWEN and RALPH ATKINS


A BUDGET for jobs next Tuesday was demanded by the two main opposition
parties yesterday - but Labour's latest proposals for finding funds by
plugging Pounds 2bn of tax loopholes were overshadowed by the Liberal
Democrats' call for an extra Pounds 4bn of borrowing.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, also called for the long-term
unemployed to be given vouchers, equivalent to an employment subsidy, to
make them more attractive to employers.
The Liberal Democrats are opposed to tax increases, but also want Pounds 4bn
of public investment in school buildings, railways and housing, funded by
borrowing.
'I doubt whether you can achieve a significant boost to recovery if you
don't have additional capital spending which requires additional borrowing,'
said Mr Alan Beith, their Treasury spokesman.
The Liberal Democrats' voucher scheme is similar to proposals put forward by
Mr Frank Field, Labour MP for Birkenhead, and Professor Dennis Snower of
Birkbeck College, London. Mr Ashdown said it would encourage an expansion in
employment and cost the government very little.
Employers would have to show that they were making a genuine addition to
their workforce - or would spend the equivalent of the voucher on training.
For Labour, Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, said ministers' claims
that action on unemployment was prevented by a lack of resources were
untenable. 'The real issue is whether the government has the political will
to tackle and conquer unemployment,' he said.
Labour has already proposed a windfall tax on utilities and the phased
release of local authority capital receipts.
Mr Brown said six tax loopholes need to be plugged:
Companies that believe they may have to pay tax on future capital gains in
effect cancel them out by buying companies which have made a capital loss.
Companies with a big Advance Corporation Tax liability paying another
company for a tax offset instead of paying the tax.
The tax structure for UK trusts - which allows trust holders to pay 35 per
cent on income in their trusts instead of the 40 per cent higher rate of
income tax.
Energy companies 'manipulating' the prices of oil cargoes given for tax
purposes to cut their Petroleum Revenue Tax bills.
Farms and businesses transferred after death that have been able to escape
both inheritance tax and capital gains tax.
Top-rate taxpayers making a risk-free return by investing in Business
Expansion Schemes companies set up to invest in repossessed properties.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930312

