FT934-8497

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Texas (8): Baby breaks with the past - Profile:
Southwestern Bell


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


THE thing about San Antonio, deep in southern Texas, is that a river runs
through it. The city has other interesting features - not least the Alamo,
the fort where 189 volunteers died fighting for an independent Texas rather
than surrender to the massed ranks of the Mexican army. But it is the river
that sets the tone of the place, winding its way through the heart of the
city a few feet below street level. Southwestern Bell's head office sits on
its banks.
Until last year, Southwestern Bell had looked as deeply rooted as ever in
its home town of St Louis, Missouri. Although the company became an
independent entity less than a decade ago with the break-up of the Bell
telephone companies into seven Baby Bells, its operations had been based in
St Louis since 1879. The company's decision to transplant its 580
headquarters staff to San Antonio was therefore as much of a shock for
Missouri as it was an economic coup for Texas.
The fact that the Baby Bells are making headlines adds another dimension to
the move. As the companies seek new opportunities outside their heavily
regulated, low growth local telephone businesses, they appear to be
competing to see which can do the biggest deal - as with last month's
multi-billion-dollar merger agreement between Bell Atlantic and
Tele-Communications Inc, the US cable television giant.
Southwestern Bell, though it has yet to match the sheer scale of the Bell
Atlantic deal with TCI, has been at least as busy as most other Baby Bells.
It has become one of the biggest US operators of cellular communications
services; it is spending Dollars 650m to buy two cable systems outside
Washington DC from Hauser Communications; it is one of the three biggest
cable television companies in the UK, and it has acquired a controlling
stake in Telefonos de Mexico, better known as Telmex, the Mexican national
telephone company.
Southwestern Bell readily acknowledges that San Antonio is an attractive
city: it would hardly have relocated there otherwise. But it says the main
reasons for the move were pragmatic, and closely related to its business
strategy.
First was the desire to get closer to the place where most of its business
is done. Southwestern Bell provides local telephone services for nearly 10m
homes and businesses in five south-western states: Texas, Arkansas, Kansas,
Missouri and Oklahoma. But according to Mr Jim Epperson, director of
corporate communications, the company's Texas business is growing much more
rapidly than the rest. Already, the state accounts for 60 per cent of total
corporate revenues, and the figure is expected to reach 70 per cent by the
year 2000.
Mr Epperson says that proximity to the company's biggest customer base is
more than a matter of convenience. 'When you're doing business in Texas, it
makes a big difference to be able to say that you're a Texas headquartered
company,' he says. 'It gives you a clear marketing edge.'
The second reason was the desire to get closer to Telmex. Southwestern
Bell's Dollars 1bn investment in this company appears to have vast
potential. In 1992, only 40 per cent of Mexican households had telephone
lines, but the proportion is growing rapidly: indeed, it is conceivable that
revenues from Southwestern Bell's stake in Telmex could overtake those from
its core business in a decade.
For a US company doing business with Mexico, probably the next best thing to
being in Mexico itself is to be in Texas - and better still, in San Antonio,
the nearest big city to the border. For although Texas is not the only state
to share a border with Mexico, it is easily Mexico's biggest trading
partner: and if, as Southwestern Bell fervently hopes, the North American
Free Trade Agreement is signed, cross-border business will boom, to the
company's great benefit.
According to Mr Michael Wagner, Southwestern Bell's director of investor
relations, the third significant factor lying behind the relocation to Texas
was a cultural one. Like all the Baby Bells, Southwestern Bell has been
trying to demonstrate that it has shaken off the sleepy, moribund management
style of its pre-1984 parent in favour of a bolder approach aimed above all
at increasing shareholder wealth.
The purpose of the move was therefore to mark the break with the past in the
most decisive way possible - by physically uprooting the business and its
employees and moving them to a new environment.
The move notwithstanding, Southwestern Bell still has difficulties to
confront. Like other Baby Bells, it is waging a campaign to shake off the
fetters of a regulatory environment that it regards as outdated in the
fast-changing and increasingly competitive world of communications: for
example, rules that govern the rate of return it is allowed to make on local
telephone services, and barriers preventing its expansion into markets for
other services such as long-distance calls.
There is also the danger that some of these big mergers and acquisitions,
like other flavour-of-the-month corporate sprees, could ultimately prove
less attractive than they appeared.
And if, on occasion, things do not turn out quite as planned, Southwestern
Bell's executives will at least be able to step outside their office block,
take a stroll down the river walk, and console themselves with the thought
that San Antonio is a very pleasant place to be.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

931115

