FT931-4001

FT  12 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: German investment plan may aid
coal deal


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BERLIN


A TWO-pronged investment programme aimed at facilitating the restructuring
of eastern Germany's brown coal fields was announced in Berlin yesterday.
The move could could also help to speed up negotiations by a consortium of
British and US companies that is aiming to buy a major share of the fields.
Mr Jurgen Stolz, chairman of Vereinigte Energiwerke, or Veag, under which
eastern Germany's energy enterprises are grouped, said that more than DM10bn
(Pounds 4.2bn) would be invested in plants, while at the same time stricter
environmental controls would be introduced in a region that was notorious
for its pollution under the former communist regime.
The announcement comes in the wake of a decision by three western German
energy suppliers to guarantee that they will continue to purchase of brown
coal from the giant lignite fields in eastern Germany. The Bavarian Baden
and EWS energy suppliers earlier this week agreed to buy up to 10m tonnes of
coal a year for the next 40 years from Mitteldeutschen Braunkohle AG,
otherwise known as Mibrag, which is the operator of eastern Germany's
troubled brown coal fields.
Mibrag, which employs more than 10,000 people, and is located in the core of
the industrial heartland between Halle and Leipzig, is held at present by
the Treuhandanstalt, Germany's agency responsible for the privatisation of
the former East German economy. Earlier this year, the Treuhand granted sole
negotiating rights to PowerGen, the UK-based utilities company, and NRG
Energy, a US energy company, which have joined forces to buy Mibrag.
A successful outcome of these negotiations would give the UK-US consortium a
good foothold in the eastern Germany energy sector, although the monopoly in
supplying energy to the five new eastern German states will be held by
western German firms under the terms of the unification treaty.
PowerGen yesterday welcomed the decision by the western German energy
companies.
'Its a very positive step for Mibrag which would help to assure its future,'
an official said.
The guaranteed market could also lessen the costs for any future buyer
towards restructuring the plant, as well as paying out large redundancy
expenses.
A spokesman for the economics ministry from the state of Saxony-Anhalt said
yesterday that 'the fields have some future and the threat of much higher
unemployment has subsided'.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930312

