FT932-13555

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (2):
Programmed to make medicines - How scientists are using computers to design
drugs


   By CLIVE COOKSON


PATIENTS in Newcastle-upon-Tyne in northern England, who started therapy
with the experimental cancer medicine AG-337 last October, are taking part
in what is believed to be the first clinical trial of a drug designed
entirely by computer, from first conception to final molecular structure.
AG-337 is being tested by the UK Cancer Research Campaign on behalf of
Agouron Pharmaceuticals, based in California - one of a small group of young
companies whose main aim is to design drugs by computer. Others include
Vertex Pharmaceuticals of Massachusetts, BioNumerik Pharmaceuticals of
Minnesota and Proteus International, based in the north of England.
All pharmaceutical groups use computers in drug discovery. The principle, in
brief, is to produce a model of a particular target - say, a receptor on a
cell surface - and then design a molecule to fit it as well as possible,
without causing side-effects by interacting with other sites elsewhere in
the body.
But the established companies use molecular modelling as an adjunct to more
traditional methods of screening and chemical synthesis. Their researchers
usually know roughly what sort of molecule they are looking for; they use
the computer to perfect its structure.
'The hardest step in molecular design is the first one: getting an initial
compound to work on,' says Mr Peter Johnson, chief executive of Agouron.
'AG-337 was designed out of the heads of chemists trying out ideas on the
computer, with no prior starting points.'
In its anti-cancer programme, Agouron is concentrating on what its
researchers knew was a viable target: an enzyme, thymidylate synthase (TS),
that is required for rapid cell proliferation. An existing cancer drug,
5-fluorouracil, works by inhibiting TS but its use is limited by toxic
side-effects.
As a prelude to molecular modelling, Agouron researchers used an expensive
and painstaking physical process called X-ray crystallography to obtain
three-dimensional images of TS. Then they began to design new molecules
capable of jamming the enzyme's activity by inserting themselves into a
crevice in its structure.
The first exercise was to re-engineer an existing TS inhibitor whose kidney
toxicity had ruled out its clinical application. After the Agouron
researchers had removed the portion of the molecule responsible for its
toxicity, the cut-down compound was 1,000 times less potent at binding TS.
But through repeated cycles of design, synthesis, analysis and redesign -
driven by crystallographic snapshots of drug candidates interacting with TS
 -the researchers succeeded in restoring the original drug's binding power,
without its toxicity. This compound (AG-85) is in clinical trials in
California.
Then the Agouron team took the more radical step of designing from first
principles two TS inhibitors with no chemical precedents. Through a series
of design cycles, the scientists were again able to improve the potency of
the initial prototypes a thousandfold. Both drugs (AG-337 and AG-331) are
now beginning clinical trials.
Agouron's 16-strong protein crystallography group plays a crucial role in
the molecular design process. 'It's not a static system; both the drug
molecule and the protein undergo conformational changes,' says Mr Johnson.
'You have to re-solve the structure every time with a new molecule attached
to it. We have re-solved the structure of TS about 100 times'.
Indeed, the cost and time required to obtain high-resolution X-ray images is
a serious constraint for all molecular design teams. And, as Professor Barry
Robson, science director of Proteus, points out, 'X-ray pictures can be
seriously misleading. If you are working with a very mobile molecule such as
LHRH (a hormone involved in controlling fertility and in fighting cancer)
you have to be very careful to match its movements with your drug.'
For large biological molecules such as antibodies, X-ray crystallography is
even more difficult and time-consuming. Indeed, Professor Tony Rees of Bath
University says the world's crystallographers publish only two or three
antibody structures a year and 'there are only 14 structures in the (public)
database, compared to the 1bn structures possible in the immune system.'
To get round the problem, Prof Rees has worked with Oxford Molecular to
produce a modelling program for antibodies of unknown structure. Starting
with the primary (amino acid) sequence, the AbM program predicts the 3D
structure with an accuracy that Prof Rees says is at least as good as a
'moderate resolution X-ray structure'. This is good enough for a
pharmaceutical company that needs to design a 'humanised antibody' from a
mouse antibody.
Although what really matters in molecular design is the computational
software and hardware behind the computer screens, 'visualisation is
extremely important,' says Mr Johnson of Agouron. 'I've been in the field
long enough to remember what it was like without any graphics, when you just
had wire models of a protein. The visual image gives you real insight.'
Agouron has a molecular auditorium at its San Diego headquarters, in which
30 to 40 people can see 3D molecular images on a big screen.
Soon, drug designers will be able to use virtual reality technology to work
from inside those 3D images. VR helmets will give the illusion of walking
through the screen of a graphics computer and being surrounded by molecules.
It will be possible to pick up images of atoms and rearrange them in new
chemical patterns by moving the head and manipulating a hand-held device.
A prototype system - the result of a joint project by York University,
Glaxo, IBM and specialist VR developer Division - was unveiled last year.
'The sheer quality of change that you experience as you move into three
dimensions is difficult to describe,' said project director Dr Rod Hubbard
of York University. 'Even though the image you see in VR is still crude
compared with the high-resolution computer graphics we normally use, this is
in many ways compensated by being able both to move easily around the image
and to interact directly with the molecular model through natural head and
arm movements.'
Eventually, said Dr Peter Murray-Rust of Glaxo, scientists might be able to
'experience' biological molecules such as proteins instead of having to
'learn' them from two-dimensional books.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

930422

