FT934-8645

FT  15 NOV 93 / Meatiemen's revolt shakes City to its medieval roots


   By RACHEL JOHNSON and JOHN AUTHERS


THE WORLD'S oldest meat market is squaring up to one of Britain's oldest
local authorities in a battle for control of the City of London.
The conflict, between the meat traders of Smithfield and the Corporation of
London, has forced the corporation to draw up unprecedented plans to reform
its electoral procedure - which dates back to the Middle Ages.
The move follows a threat by the traders to pack the next election, due next
month, over plans to increase their rents dramatically.
Mr Michael Cassidy, chairman of the corporation's policy committee,
confirmed that the meat traders' revolt had forced thoughts of reform. He
said: 'We are giving consideration to . . . (extending) the franchise to
limited companies.'
The meat traders have been galvanised into political action by plans to
refurbish their market to meet EU regulations. which could cost each of the
140 of them between Pounds 100,000 and Pounds 170,000. The City Corporation
has already spent more than Pounds 30m on the first phase.
By April 1994, Smithfield's bloodstained sawdust and hanging carcasses must
be replaced with a temperature-controlled zone where meat is electronically
pulleyed through self-lock doors rather than carted around the Victorian
market by aproned men with wooden wheelbarrows.
Mr Dave Bellinger, of the Smithfield Meat Company, said: 'The corporation
are refurbishing the market and trying to increase rents by 400 per cent.
The traders are saying they can't afford it.'
Having already rejected tenancy terms offered by the corporation in April,
the traders are plotting to infiltrate its decision-making body, the
132-strong common council, in elections to be held early next month. They
intend to pack City wards with their own supporters with the aim of creating
a powerful 'meatiemen' group.
At first sight the electoral arithmetic is not favourable. There are 15,929
eligible voters in the City's 25 wards. In the Farringdon Without ward, home
to Smithfield, there are 6,689 voters among the sole traders, partnerships
and residents/tenants, and only 140 meat traders.
But low voter turnout and electorates of fewer than 100 in other wards have
got the corporation worried.
The corporation has been exposed to the challenge because it has the most
restricted local-authority franchise in the UK, with votes for partnerships,
sole traders, livery companies and City residents, but none for the big
companies that account for most of the City's business.
Anomalies mean that partners of large accountancy practices with numerous
offices in the square mile can vote in seven separate wards. BP, the oil
company, which is the square mile's largest employer, does not have a single
vote.
The meat traders are not over-optimistic.
The proprietor of Meat City in Farringdon Road remarked: 'The corporation's
never lost a case in (its) life and it's not going to start now.'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931115

