FT932-13265

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (31): Crusader
against life's unfairness - Disclosure is the means by which an ex-insurer
would reform the industry / Hindsight


   By JOHN AUTHERS


MR JOEL JOFFE, one of the most eloquent advocates of reform of the life
assurance industry, benefits more from hindsight than most people.
He was a founding director of Allied Dunbar, now the UK's biggest
unit-linked life assurance company; and, with colleagues Sir Mark Weinberg
and Sir Sydney Lipworth, helped to revolutionise the life industry during
the 1960s and 1970s. He retired as deputy chairman only two years ago.
What has moved him to change tack? 'I felt very strongly about the consumer
getting a fair deal and knowing what the pitfalls with products were. I
tried within the industry to change things. Back in 1985, when regulation
was being considered, I submitted a paper which says exactly what I'm saying
now.'
He certainly does not feel that the consumer is getting a fair deal at
present, and his views seem to be getting across.
His submission is believed by many to have had a big impact on the Office of
Fair Trading, whose report published last month sent shock-waves through the
life assurance industry. Its main provisions recommended that companies
should disclose far more about the underlying costs of life assurance
policies.
Mr Joffe supported that report, and gave his reasons in evidence to the
House of Commons select committee on social security.
He said: 'Life insurers are very generous in explaining the benefits of
policies to the consumer in order to sell them, but they are very reticent
about the drawbacks.'
One serious example is the surrender value. This jargon term refers to the
amount of money that policyholders will receive if they stop paying premiums
before a policy has matured. The MPs' attention was directed towards
statistics compiled by the OFT, which showed how badly policyholders were
penalised if they surrendered a 25-year policy after 20 years - when 80 per
cent of the premiums would already have been paid.
The OFT figures for the UK's 20 largest life companies showed that the
20-year surrender value was on average 57 per cent lower than the maturity
value. This varied widely between companies, with total reductions varying
from 47.1 per cent at best to 70.3 per cent at worst. Differences in final
maturity values were much less marked.
According to Mr Joffe: 'The reason is self-evident. The insurance company
wants to sell the policy in the first place by projecting these quite
attractive maturity values, but doesn't draw the attention of the consumer
to the fact that, if they cancel it, they get back about half of what they
would get if they took out the same plan with another company.'
Mr Joffe has argued his case with skills in advocacy honed in a rather more
dangerous environment. As a young lawyer in South Africa, he defended Nelson
Mandela at the Rivonia trial of 1962. He left the country soon afterwards,
because he and his wife did not feel happy to bring up children there.
That assignment required rather more courage than his current crusade
against life insurers. 'They removed my passport, and I didn't enjoy having
the special branch outside my office and my phone tapped. With the British
life industry you get accustomed to being attacked verbally, but in South
Africa you were more bothered about being attacked physically. I feel
happier dealing with the words.'
Disclosure is the main weapon Mr Joffe would use to force the industry into
line, but he also has some other positive proposals. He believes that the
current problem of 'regulatory arbitrage' must be stopped. The Financial
Services Act established a regime of self-regulation, which meant that banks
and building societies could choose their own regulator.
The industry is trying to form a new unified body called the Personal
Investment Authority. But, as self-regulation is being maintained, no
individual company can be forced to join it. This is the problem of
regulatory arbitrage, which allows companies effectively to choose the
softest regulator.
Mr Joffe would like to give the PIA a chance of success, but, he told the
MPs: 'If it doesn't, there's an urgent need for statutory regulation, which
would replace the PIA with a system probably along the lines of Oftel or
Ofgas, which would be able to take firm action to ensure that the consumer
gets a fair deal. I am hopeful for the PIA, but I am not optimistic.'
Another reform he is aiming for is an examination for sales agents,
administered by a central body. This would allow professional-type
qualifications, and would ensure competent sales people. 'That might lead to
more objective advice aimed at high quality sales which endure, rather than
the high quantity sales encouraged by many life offices at present.'
He does not enjoy his campaign, which is motivated primarily by a sense of
justice. But Mr Joffe, now aged 60, has other crusades which do give him
great pleasure. For the past six years he has been chairman of the executive
committee of Oxfam, the famine relief charity, and he is in the process of
setting up an NHS Trust in Swindon, where he lives.
While at Allied Dunbar, he worked from within to make it one of Britain's
most socially responsible companies. He was a member of the working party
which founded the Per Cent Club with Sir Mark Weinberg, and Lord Laing of
United Biscuits as joint chairmen. Members of the Per Cent Club are
companies which give at least 0.5 per cent of their profits to charity.
Given all his criticism of the industry, and scepticism about sales methods,
it may seem surprising that he feels that life insurance salesmen are not
the main culprits. Instead, he holds to the belief which informed the Per
Cent Club that company directors have a heavy social duty, particularly when
dealing with the public's savings.
His words, coming from a man who once sat on the board of one of the land's
most powerful insurers, should be marked well: 'The people who bear the
responsibility are the boards of management of insurance companies. It's
they who invent the remuneration systems, it's they who push for selling
regardless of quality, and it's they who are responsible for the design of
the products and the literature.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXX

930423

