FT934-11517

FT  30 OCT 93 / Books: The great traveller


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


AN EMPIRE OF THE EAST: TRAVELS IN INDONESIA
by Norman Lewis
Jonathan Cape Pounds 16.99, 237 pages
GRAHAM Greene called Norman Lewis 'one of the best writers not of any
particular decade, but of our century.' Others are content to acknowledge
him as the doyen of English travel writing. Either way, all Lewis's
qualities are paraded in his latest travel book, which takes him to
Indonesia: to Sumatra, East Timor and Irian Jaya.
Many writers would feel overwhelmed by Indonesia, an archipelago scattered
across 3,000 miles of tropical seas, with a population approaching 200m that
is divided, uniquely, into 300 ethnic groups speaking approximately 250
languages, each island possessing a different history and culture from the
next.
But not Lewis. Like all the best travel writers, he is monumentally
unflappable. He simply starts at the start and proceeds to the end,
providing, as he goes, a textbook illustration of the qualities - charm,
generosity, reportorial perspicacity and wisdom high among them - that have
made him such a much-loved guide to places strange and far.
Not that this is a guidebook. It is the antithesis of guidebookery: a
brilliantly-rendered account that pilots the armchair traveller from strange
spot to strange spot, from lowland to highland, from the 20th century to the
Stone Age, as though by magic carpet.
Lewis's vast experience as a traveller shines through everywhere. On a
Sunday afternoon he visits Well Beach Number Three, as it is called in
Indonesian, on the weirdly beautiful island of Weh, off the northern tip of
Sumatra.
He is greatly taken by the sub-aquatic pleasures of Well Beach Number Three,
where he sees more fish, and a greater variety of them, than he had seen
anywhere on the planet - 'even in such remote Pacific islands as Raiatea.'
He is excellent on big issues like transmigration: the shipping of millions
of people from one part of Indonesia to another to relieve population
pressure.
'Painstakingly,' he says, 'all Brazil's errors in the movement of
populations from rural wastelands and city slums into the Amazon were copied
in Indonesia, although on a much larger scale.'
If the primary aim of transmigration was to relieve Java and Bali of excess
population, the secondary aim was to guarantee national unity by the spread
of Javanese culture through the islands.
'This so far has not happened,' he maintains. 'In fact the resentment
provoked by what are generally viewed as government-sponsored Javanese
colonies tends to diminish whatever ingredient of Indonesian patriotism may
have previously existed. However many transmigrants are sent to East Timor,
nothing is more certain than that only a permanent presence of the army will
prevent it from declaring its independence.'
Within a few lines of this passage Lewis has switched, with the grace of
quicksilver, from the cultural weightiness of transmigration to a
beautifully controlled description of the pleasantness of life in the small
Sumatran town of Lamainang, away from the hugger-mugger of the
transmigration settlements.
In Lamainang market, girls in blue and scarlet bargain excitedly for jungle
fruit and several kinds of bat. A pet stall offers cockatoos, long-tailed
mice and a small member of the tarsier family, which surveys the world
through troubled eyes, as well it might.
'Everyone's existence in Lamainang was enlivened by a clear mountain river
squeezing through this small town, which drew a happy attendance of people .
. . a thin old man, trousers rolled up, dabbed in a pool with a net; a woman
brought her duck, carried under her arm, for its daily excursion on the
river.'
The high point of the book is a journey into the Irian Jaya highlands, into
the almost-Stone-Age realm of the Dani people. No one can use wryness as
effectively as Lewis. Here he is at a church service of tribespeople, some
wearing necklaces of graded boar's teeth, in a mission hall in Endoman, an
experience, says Lewis, that calls for extreme theological simplification:
'What possible contacts could the minds of these villagers have with the
intellectual subtleties evolved in 4th-century Byzantium shortly after the
Emperor Constantine's conversion to the new faith? How could the preacher
Engen, peeping out through the shutters of the Stone Age, explain to them
the mystery of the Holy Trinity, Redemption, Atonement, and the union of
divine and human natures in the Hypostasis of Christ? . . . It was a case of
the blind leading the blind.'
In addition to a magic carpet, Lewis possesses the beadiest yet kindest of
magic eyes.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931030

