FT933-5292

FT  03 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Rubber producers may pull out
of price pact


   By REUTER


   BANGKOK


THE WORLD'S biggest rubber producing nations began a meeting here yesterday
to discuss the possibility of pulling out of the International Natural
Rubber Agreement in protest at the failure of consuming country members to
renegotiate the pact, Reuter reports from Bangkok.
Members of the Association of Natural Rubber Producing Countries, said their
threat to quit the agreement stemmed from delay by consumers to agree on
amending its terms for shoring up chronically weak rubber prices.
The six-member ANRPC, led by Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand, has tried for
two years to negotiate a new pact to replace the current six-year agreement,
which is due to lapse in December.
Producers said earlier that they would block an automatic two-year extension
of the pact at the next council meeting of the International Natural Rubber
Organisation in November persisted in impeding efforts by exporters to raise
prices.
Inro, which administers the current agreement, groups producers in ANRPC and
more than 20 consumers led by the US, the European Community and Japan.
Leading ANRPC members have said they may launch their own price support
efforts if the current United Nations-sponsored pact is not improved in
favour of producers.
Rubber prices have declined to 30-year lows in real terms.
Producers, led by Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand, have been in deadlock
with consumers since March on whether to cut Inra's reference price,
currently 207.2 Malaysian/Singapore cents a kilogram, the median point of a
range outside which market intervention is triggered.
The price must be cut by 5 per cent if the average daily Inro market
indicator price is below the group's 'may-buy' level of 175 cents in the six
months before the review.
A Thai official said producers had offered to accept a price cut at the last
Inro meeting in Kuala Lumpur in May on condition that consumers commited
themselves to working on a new agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930903

