FT932-6778

FT  27 MAY 93 / Cambodian Elections: Khmer Rouge keeps the world guessing


   By VICTOR MALLET


   PHNOM PENH


THERE was a time when mere mention of the words Khmer Rouge was enough to
strike fear into the hearts of Cambodians. It was Khmer Rouge cadres who
executed, starved and tortured to death about 1m people in the attempt
between 1975 and 1978 to build a rural, racially pure and communist state.
More recently, the Khmer Rouge has violated a 1991 peace agreement and
killed several United Nations peacekeepers, including three Bulgarians
gunned down in their UN camp by previously friendly Khmer Rouge guerrillas
they had invited to supper.
The Khmer Rouge's confused response to the UN-organised election this week,
however, has dented its reputation for single-minded ruthlessness.
Khmer Rouge radio broadcasts, notices pinned to trees, and visiting bands of
guerrillas had warned Cambodian villagers not to vote, on the grounds that
it would legitimise the government installed in 1979 by the Vietnamese
invasion which overthrew the Khmer Rouge regime. Voters were threatened with
death.
Not only were the threats ignored (the turnout was at least 85 per cent),
but Khmer Rouge leaders in several districts actually let people go to the
polls and encouraged them to vote for the royalist party Funcinpec, the main
opposition party standing in the election. Widespread attacks on polling
stations, expected by the UN, did not materialise.
The Khmer Rouge seems to have dithered and then decided against an all-out
assault on the vulnerable polling stations scattered across the country, in
the hope that Funcinpec, its former ally against the Vietnamese occupation,
will win a majority and grant the Khmer Rouge a role in government.
Prince Norodom Ranariddh, Funcinpec leader, has promised to hand executive
power to his father Prince Norodom Sihanouk if Funcinpec wins, and Prince
Sihanouk, backed by China, had spoken of the need to bring the Khmer Rouge
into government in the interests of national reconciliation.
The many enemies of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia and abroad are worried that
Prince Sihanouk, far from punishing the organisation for its intransigence
and unwillingness to submit itself to a popular vote, is poised to reward it
with an undeserved share of power.
They argue, it would be folly to let the Khmer Rouge into a weak coalition
government without insisting its guerrilla army be dismantled.
Prince Sihanouk yesterday sought to ease fears that he might accommodate the
Khmer Rouge by completely reversing his stand on the issue. He told European
parliamentarians the guerrillas had suffered a defeat from which they would
not recover and he now opposed Khmer Rouge participation in government.
'The election is a great success for Cambodia and the world, and an
unbelievable defeat for the Khmer Rouge,' the notoriously fickle prince was
quoted as saying by Mr Claude Cheysson, the European MP and former French
foreign minister.
The Khmer Rouge is keeping its options open, and its fighters are prepared
to continue the civil war if necessary.
According to Mr Yasushi Akashi, chief of the UN Transitional Authority in
Cambodia, Khmer Rouge front-line military strength has increased by 50 per
cent to about 15,000 men since last year: 'They seem to be headed by more
dedicated, more determined, more active and aggressive commanders.'
Mr Akashi's figures are disputed - other estimates suggest there are 12,000
Khmer Rouge front-line troops - but there is no doubt that Khmer Rouge
guerrilla units have used the 19 months since the peace agreement to seize
territory previously controlled by allies such as Funcinpec.
The Cambodian government has vowed to treat Khmer Rouge fighters as bandits
if it wins the election, but there are doubts if the guerrillas can be
crushed in the same way as previous communist insurgencies in Malaysia or
Thailand.
Before contacts between the UN and the Khmer Rouge were severed a few weeks
ago in the face of Khmer Rouge threats, the guerrillas in some districts
impressed UN military observers with their discipline and smart uniforms;
they apparently treated villagers well and paid for the rice they took. In
other areas, however, they are notorious for forcing peasants to work for
them and for seizing control of paddy fields by planting mines.
Khmer Rouge leaders struck a sympathetic chord with nationalistic Cambodians
by massacring immigrant Vietnamese fishermen and condemning corruption in
the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian government, but their own dealings with
corrupt generals from Thailand (Cambodia's other traditional enemy) have not
gone unnoticed.
Publicly, Khmer Rouge leaders admit to 'mistakes' in the past and say they
are free marketeers rather than communists. Most Cambodians, however, are
convinced they have neither repented nor abandoned their own destructive
brand of leftism.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930527

