FT934-8556

FT  15 NOV 93 / Rising tide of despair: James Buxton looks at the crisis
hitting salmon farms


   By JAMES BUXTON


Salmon farmers along the sea lochs of the west coast of Scotland are near to
despair. In the past six weeks the price they have been getting for their
fish has fallen by 45 per cent, dropping well below their break-even point.
The price has collapsed because of a big increase in the quantity of
Norwegian salmon on the European market, already dampened by recession. The
concern of the Scottish farmers is intensifying because the UK government
has not responded to their demands to ask the European Union to impose
emergency protection measures on the salmon market.
'It's absolutely appalling,' says Mr David Windmill, managing director of
McConnell Salmon, which operates in the Western Isles. 'We've been through
hell over the past three years. Now we're being hit once again by a much
bigger salmon producer which can't control its own industry.'
The crisis in the salmon farming industry is more than just an issue for
Scotland, where the industry employs 6,000 people. As well as affecting
Ireland, another salmon producer, it is an important issue to be resolved
before Norway can join the EU because of its past record of over-production.
There have already been some signs that British consumers are benefiting
from lower prices for salmon. In recent weeks Safeway and Sainsbury, the
retail superstores, have cut salmon prices, and prices in the highly
competitive smoked salmon market are likely to be pared down for the peak
Christmas season.
The introduction of salmon farming in Norway and later in Scotland in the
1980s made the king of fish more widely available and much cheaper because
of vastly increased output. Last year Norway produced 141,000 tonnes
compared with Scotland's 38,000 tonnes and Ireland's 9,000 tonnes. But
Norway's dominant position has been a constant source of problems for other
producers, and itself.
The issue came to head in November 1991, after a glut of Norwegian salmon
pushed down prices just as it is doing now. The EU temporarily imposed a
minimum import price on salmon from Norway to protect its own growers, and
insisted the country put its house in order.
The Norwegian government responded by advancing money to the banks to fund a
scheme to buy in and freeze excess fish then sell it outside the Union. The
Norwegian Fish Sales Organisation, which sold all Norwegian salmon and
exercised some control over the industry, went bankrupt because it had
become overextended trying to support a guaranteed minimum price. It took
many farmers with it, put further strain on the already stretched banks and
forced the government to refinance them.
These moves, plus other measures to hold back Norwegian production, sent
prices up again in 1992. In Scotland, surviving farms made themselves more
efficient and returned to profit. At the annual Scottish fish farm
conference last February the Norwegians warned that if European salmon
producers did not combine to rationalise production there would be a crisis
by 1996.
So it came as a shock when in late September the Norwegians indicated that
instead of the 120,000 tonnes of fish they had predicted for 1993 they were
on course to produce 180,000 tonnes, rising to 220,000 tonnes in 1994.
This year, like competitors elsewhere, Norwegian salmon producers have
benefited from breakthroughs in dealing with the threats of infestation by
sea lice and the disease furunculosis. The rate of losses among fish in
cages on some Scottish salmon farms has fallen from about 20 per cent to 5
per cent.
But fish farmers in Scotland believe some Norwegians have put more smolts
(young fish) into cages for growing into salmon than they had admitted.
'Since the bankruptcy of the Fish Sales Organisation in 1991 the Norwegian
industry has been a free-for-all,' says Mr Frank Odie of Framgord, a salmon
wholesaler in Shetland.
Prices started falling as more Norwegian fish came onto the European market
from September onwards. The average price dropped from Pounds 1.74 a pound
that month to Pounds 1.44 in October. It is now about Pounds 1 a pound. This
spells disaster for Scottish salmon farmers whose break-even point is about
Pounds 1.30 a pound.
Scottish salmon farmers responded by asking the UK government to seek
emergency EU action against Norway. This would entail either setting a limit
on the tonnage of fish that can be imported from Norway, or reimposing a
minimum import price.
The Scottish Salmon Growers' Association justifies this request on the
grounds that Norwegian producers are selling salmon at below cost prices on
the EU market. The association also says that the Norwegian government
unfairly subsidised its salmon industry through the 1991 bank bail-out.
'The Norwegian salmon industry lost Pounds 300m in 1990-92,' says Mr William
Crowe, the SSGA's chief executive. 'Of that about Pounds 150m was absorbed
by the government.'
In spite of promises of imminent action from some ministers, the UK
government has not moved, apparently because Treasury ministers oppose the
kind of trade protection the farmers want. The UK failed to support an
application last week by Ireland for emergency EU action.
Norway has reacted to the threat of EU action and also fears another glut.
Most farmers have cut down on fish feeding to reduce weight gain.
The Norwegian fish farmers' federation has asked the government to limit the
number of fish that can be harvested, though many observers think this
solution is impractical as it would be difficult to police.
Meanwhile Norway still hopes to join the EU within the decade. Mr Donald
MacRae of TSB Bank Scotland believes the EU should make it a membership
condition that Norway regulates its salmon industry and stops subsidising
it.
'If Norway were a member of the EU it would become subject to EU competition
laws. If I were Norway I would be building up my salmon production as fast
as possible before entry,' he said. The Scottish salmon farmers believe that
is exactly what it happening.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

931115

