FT934-11660

FT  30 OCT 93 / EC Summit: Leaders agree to act together abroad


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


EC LEADERS yesterday agreed to send monitors to cover the parliamentary
elections in Russia in December, according to a draft communique at the
Brussels summit.
The move was heralded as a first, modest step towards fulfilling the
Maastricht treaty's provisions for a common European foreign and security
policy.
EC leaders also identified four areas for similar 'joint actions,' including
central and eastern Europe, the Middle East, South Africa, and the former
Yugoslavia.
Joint actions is the Brussels code-word for something less than sending
combat troops to trouble zones around the world, but something more than the
reactive diplomacy characterised by the EC's so-called 'political
co-operation.'
The EC has plenty of experience in supporting and monitoring democratic
elections. Notable examples include recent polls in Nicaragua and Albania, a
European Commission official said.
The UK, which jealously guards its sovereignty in matters of foreign policy,
pushed hard for sending monitors to Russia. 'This is something the EC can
offer. It's urgent, time-limited, and it's cheap,' said one British
official.
Other diplomats noted that President Boris Yeltsin's government had
expressed support for the move, despite some western criticism about his ban
on opposition newspapers and media.
The UK has made Pounds 500,000 available for supporting democracy in Russia.
This includes funds which officials said could be spent not just on election
leaflets, but also news-sheets for alternative points of view to the Yeltsin
government.
On the former Yugoslavia, EC leaders were cautious, calling for measures to
restore a viable economy 'if the peace process takes on concrete form,'
according to the draft.
Separately, Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, and Mr Alain Juppe,
French foreign minister, were said to be close to agreeing new measures to
ensure safe passage of UN aid convoys to Sarajevo this winter.
British officials said the UK was anxious to avoid an open-ended commitment
to keep open supply routes, because of the risk to British, French and UN
ground forces. 'We don't want to be punching our way through,' said one
aide, 'we are thinking more in terms of engineering works and rebuilding
bridges.'
On central and eastern Europe, the twelve expressed support for the Balladur
plan for a stability pact in the region 'to settle the problem of ethnic
minorities and strengthen the inviolability of borders.'
One objection to the Balladur plan is that it could be interpreted as an
invitation to minorities to bring latent, or existing frontier disputes to
the Community for resolution.
On the Middle East, EC leaders resolved to support the peace process by
political, economic and financial means. This could include police training
in the occupied territories, as well as engineering works such as drainage
and telecommunications.
Mr Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, is to
visit Brussels early next month to discuss these measures, as well as the
EC's five-year Ecu500m (Pounds 388m) aid plan for Jericho and the Gaza
strip.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931030

