FT934-8910

FT  12 NOV 93 / World Stock Markets: Renewed foreign demand for golds
provides lustre - A look at Johannesburg's prospects


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Since Mr Nelson Mandela, leader of the ANC, called in September for the
lifting of all remaining economic sanctions against South Africa, investors
have been trying to assess the implications for the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange of the country's readmission to the global investment community.
The task is not simplified by a backdrop of political uncertainty and
violence.
In terms of traditional criteria the JSE, like many of the world's major
bourses, is in demanding territory. Although the industrial market has
performed poorly this year - it has risen by only 5 per cent to yesterday's
4,607from 4,359 at the start of the year - it is currently on a p/e ratio of
15, compared with an average of 9.5 since 1980.
This is only marginally below the 15.4 multiple seen just before the market
crashed in October 1987, and underlying earnings growth remains anaemic.
Notwithstanding the case for caution, Mr Johannes van der Horst, general
manager of investments at the life office Old Mutual, South Africa's largest
institutional investor, recently predicted that the industrial index will
have reached about 5,100 by October 1994, implying a total return (including
income) of 15 to 20 per cent for the year.
This assumes, uncontroversially, a continuing decline in interest rates and
modest earnings growth on the industrial index of 12 to 15 per cent. He
believes this could reach 25 per cent, 'if things go right for a change', a
hope supported by yesterday's preliminary GDP figures showing 8 per cent
growth in the third quarter.
Two points can be made about this analysis. First, if there is a crack in
world markets, and the US in particular, all bets are off. The JSE
Industrial index tracks the Dow very closely and if it turns down, the JSE
is sure to follow. Secondly, if there is no such crack, Mr van der Horst is
probably erring on the side of caution.
There are certainly some who believe that the market, in a year's time, is
likely to be closer to 6,000 than 5,100.
The case for greater optimism is based largely upon anticipation that there
will be significant foreign buying of the JSE in the coming year. Most of
the activity is expected to come from the US, where many investors have only
been freed recently from sanction constraints to invest on the JSE. The
current year has already seen a reversal of the pattern occurring in
previous years when foreigners were net sellers of equity.
This has largely been on the back of the US purchase of South African gold
shares, which helped to drive the golds index up to a high of 2,149 at the
end of July after starting the year at 768. After dropping to 1,457 in
mid-September, it has since recovered to its current level of 1,900 on the
back of a firmer bullion price.
While most Johannesburg brokers remain bullish about gold, US buying is
expected across a broad spectrum. Mr Richard Stuart of brokers Martin & Co
notes that there is 'plenty of US money looking to come in'.
He says that US investors are not particularly concerned about ratings,
which are not high compared with their own market. They believe, too, that
earnings are depressed after four years of recession. 'They will just buy
the socks off the market. They know how their herd behaves - it will not
wait for earnings growth to come through.'
Although, in the first instance, this will be 'hot' money coming from the
hedge funds, and likely to cause great volatility on the JSE, more sober
money is also having a look.
There is talk of up to seven country (or Southern Africa) funds being set
up, while the prospect of the International Finance Corporation (IFC)
classifying South Africa as an emerging market and Morgan Stanley including
the coun-try in its international index could trigger significant index
buying.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

931112

