FT933-5125

FT  04 SEP 93 / Books: The King recalls


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


YESTERDAY CAME SUDDENLY by Francis King
Constable Pounds 16.95, 336 pages
FRANCIS KING wrote To The Dark Tower when he was 23. Now, at 70 not out and
30 or so novels later, he is hard at work on a new one. In between there
have one or two books of short stories, hundreds of reviews, and the odd
biography. A 'prolific writer' is what King calls himself in this book of
memoirs, Yesterday Came Suddenly, and that seems absolutely right. Like
Justice Shallow, whom he resembles in no other respect, King is 'an early
stirrer'. He tells us that it is his custom to rise at 5 or 6am whatever the
time of year and write for a couple of hours before breakfast, and then
perhaps four more during the day.
His industry is legendary. Before she took up the law, the late Anita Ryan
QC was a colleague of King's at the British Council in Florence. She had an
abiding memory of King in the half-hour break between classes repairing to
the staff common-room, brushing aside offers of coffee, impervious to
chatting groups, as he sat apart at a table to work at his next novel before
resuming work for the Council.
The story of this entertaining book is that, industrious as he was, writing
novels could not in King's case become a full-time job until recently. It
had to be combined with such chores as running the Council office in Kyoto,
a seven-year stint as drama critic of the Sunday Telegraph, and the honorary
occupation of presiding over International PEN.
He also describes himself as being very sociable, and here again one cannot
quarrel with his choice of epithet. No-one can have made more friends and
kept more of them; many were fellow-writers, people such as Ivy
Compton-Burnett, Olivia Manning, J R Ackerley, Robert Liddell, Elizabeth
Taylor. King has had lasting friendships with all of these as he has with
many less eminent authors. He has a revealing anecdote or two about them
all, never outrightly malicious but usually wildly indiscreet (eg Ackerley
peeing on the sheets and the dog getting blamed). There are many other
friends in different walks of life who throng these pages about whom King
has witty, tender and insightful things to say .
I confess that I too have been a friend of King's for almost 50 years; ever
since we met at Oxford just after the war. Why then are you reviewing his
book? you may ask. Well, partly because I could not resist reviewing it and
partly because King is not a man who pulls any punches about his friends'
work; nor would he wish me to pull any punches when reviewing his.
The book reproduces the author's conversational manner, his riveting way of
describing those extraordinary occurrences or coincidences that are
constantly befalling him. Its weakness is that though it follows a
chronological path from childhood in India to middle age and third age in
Kensington, it lacks a firm structure and tends to rattle on until you
become almost sated with anecdotes. But to anyone who has read his novels it
fills many gaps in one's knowledge of the author.
His regular readers know, for instance, that he was born in Switzerland and
partly brought up in India, where his father was a British officer in the
police; India under the Raj was the setting for his novel Acts of Darkness.
Now we have the full account of his uncle's murder and his father's death
from the then incurable TB, the family's desolation, King's life in England
as a 'remittance child", his relations with his remarkable mother, who lived
to be more than 100 and who inspired his novel The Widow (the one book of
his she disliked), his schoolboy career at Shrewsbury where he was happy in
spite of brutalities, his time at Oxford broken by the war, not in his case
by military service but by farm-work. (He was a conscientious objector; he
gives his past reasoning and present views).
As a post-war undergraduate, with one novel published and poetry in The
Listener, King, I recall, was aloof from undergraduate society. He seemed
glad to go down and delighted to be appointed to a British Council job,
first in Italy, then in Greece, Finland, Egypt and Japan. He was one of
several writers employed at that time by the Council - Louis Macneice,
Ronald Bottrall, D J Enright, James Kirkup - all of whom King remembers.
Other colleagues included Francis Toye, the musicologist, and Roger Hinks,
the diarist. King was a diligent worker for the Council and rose to become a
director. He reveals that this was combined with a very full private life.
His accounts of his and other peoples' mainly homosexual amours are a
hilarious replacement for the usual descriptive and cultural digressions in
a book about countries where the author lived in happy, working exile. King
took early retirement and resided for many years in Brighton - see The
Brighton Belle and other stories - before coming back to London. It was in
Brighton that he found himself involved in a prolonged and costly libel
action started by a neighbour (see The Action) and Brighton where he met the
love of his life, a man he first encountered through putting an
advertisement in the local paper, requesting information about the work of a
deck-chair attendant, for the purposes of a novel.
The last chapter describes how after their many years of happiness as a
couple his lover died of Aids, and King himself afterwards underwent an
operation for cancer. The mood changes here to molto adagio after the long
joyous allegro of the middle section.
'I have often said' - King concludes - 'that I am never happier than when I
am writing. That is true. But it might have been better for me and for those
close to me if it had not been so.' Where is the writer who could not
similarly reproach him or herself? But none, surely, with less justice.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

930904

