FT934-11347

FT  01 NOV 93 / International Bonds: Low interest rates could open up Swiss
sector


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


THE PROSPECT of Swiss interest rates remaining low for the next year could
open up the Swiss bond market to a much wider range of foreign borrowers.
The fall in interest rates and structural changes, including the abolition
of stamp tax and the easing of syndicate restrictions, have contributed to
the large increase in new issue volume in the Swiss foreign bond market this
year.
However, Swiss banks believe easier access for a broader spectrum of issuers
is needed to further enhance the market's liquidity and transparency.
In the last few years, the Swiss bond market has become as exclusive as St
Moritz because investors have restricted themselves to buying bonds issued
by borrowers with high-quality credit ratings or with strong name
recognition.
Syndicate managers say investors have adopted this strategy as a reaction to
their bad experiences with borrowers with low credit ratings in the
mid-1980s.
Last year, 55.50 per cent of foreign straight Swiss franc offerings were
issued by borrowers with a triple-A rating, up from just 21 per cent in
1989, according to data from Swiss Bank Corporation (SBC). From January to
October 4 this year, 49.1 per cent of issuers had a triple A-rating.
The fall in Swiss interest rates to their lowest levels for five years has
produced good profits for investors in Swiss bonds this year. 'Swiss bonds
carried coupons of 6 per cent to 7 per cent at the start of the year, now
the same debt has coupons of 4 per cent to 4 1/4 per cent,' says one
syndicate manager.
But investors will have difficulty in matching those profits next year if
the market consensus that Swiss interest rates are close to the bottom of
their cycle turns out to be correct.
Swiss National Bank (SNB) officials said last week that further falls in
Swiss interest rates could occur in the months ahead, but they warned that
the central bank would not risk reigniting inflationary pressures by easing
monetary policy.
Nevertheless, the SNB's expectation that the Swiss year-on-year inflation
rate will fall below 3 per cent in November, and fall to 2 per cent by May
of next year has reinforced the bond market's view that yields are unlikely
to rise again for at least another year.
One way for investors to enhance their returns in a stable to falling
interest rate environment would be to buy bonds issued by borrowers with an
inferior credit rating.
Syndicate managers say such borrowers would be prepared to pay a good margin
over the market yield to secure Swiss franc financing at low interest rates.
There are signs that investors are softening their stance as they search for
yield. Bond offerings for Pemex, Mexico's state-owned oil company, and for
the National Bank of Hungary, both of which have sub-investment grade
ratings, were well received by the market.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

931101

