FT932-3267

FT  15 JUN 93 / Branson suggests frequency swap to end Radio 4 row


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR RICHARD Branson of Virgin Group has proposed to the BBC a swap of radio
frequencies that might end the growing row over the fate of Radio 4 on long
wave.
The BBC has run into serious difficulties over its plans to launch a new
24-hour rolling news service on long wave and restrict Radio 4 broadcasts to
the FM frequencies.
This would cut off a much-loved radio service to those in the UK who do not
have an FM radio or who live in areas which cannot receive FM. In addition,
hundreds of thousands of listeners in continental Europe would no longer be
able to listen to Radio 4 on long wave.
Mr Branson has his own problem. In April he launched the UK's first national
commercial pop station - Virgin Radio 1215 - on medium wave, a frequency he
believes is hardly suited for music because its sound quality is poor
compared with FM.
With his eye on the BBC's FM frequency, he has met Mr John Birt, the BBC
director-general, to suggest a grand swap of frequencies.
Under the Branson proposal, the BBC would get Virgin's medium wave
frequency, which Mr Branson argues is more appropriate for speech than
music. In return, Virgin would get the coveted FM frequency.
The BBC could then run its planned news services on medium wave, which is
easily available all over the UK, and Radio 4 could continue on long wave
and be audible on the Continent as it is now.
The BBC confirmed last night that Mr Birt and Mr Branson had met, but
refused to go into detail. In practice, the BBC has a number of options.
It could, for example, simply switch its proposed rolling news service to
FM, leaving Radio 4 on long wave.
The Virgin chairman plans a meeting next week with groups campaigning to
keep Radio 4 on long wave. He will outline his proposals to the national
heritage select committee on the future of the BBC next month.
Opposition to ITV rules change dwindles, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930615

