FT933-5128

FT  04 SEP 93 / Books: Of apes and men


   By A C GRAYLING


THE GREAT APE PROJECT by Paola Cavalieri and Peter Singer Fourth Estate
Pounds 9.99, 312 pages
LET US admit our fellow Great Apes - the chimpanzees, gorillas and
orang-utans - to the same moral community as ourselves, thereby according
them rights to life, to liberty, and to protection against torture -
especially the kind of torture inflicted in the name of scientific research.
Such, in sum, is the message of this important and spectacularly fascinating
collection of essays. Written by some of the world's foremost scientists and
philosophers, it launches the 'Great Ape Project', a campaign to bring our
fellow apes within the sphere of ethical concern at present reserved for
humans alone. And it does so in a highly readable and educative manner,
crammed with wide-ranging discussions of apes' use of language, the
evolution of the ape family, ape learning and behaviour, and lucidly written
accounts of the project's philosophical and legal implications.
All the Great Apes are so closely related that there is a mere 1.6 per cent
difference in the genetic constitution of humans and chimpanzees. The family
trees of today's humans and chimpanzees stem from the same ancestors less
than 7m years ago. Go back only another 2 or 3m years, and the human-chimp
branch of the clan shares common ancestors with today's gorillas. Ten
million years is a brief span in the history of life on earth. Yet we do not
need to contemplate this tiny evolutionary divergence, or the genetic
proximity between members of the Great Ape family, to recognise their
kinship: it was obvious long before scientists measured it.
It is indeed because of this very genetic closeness that some of the Great
Apes - chiefly, chimpanzees - are kept in captivity and subjected to medical
experiments for the benefit of other Great Apes - namely, humans. Imagine
this: a group of humans embarks on a colonial adventure, in the course of
which they capture specimens of other humans from other continents, and
exhibit them in their zoos - or, suitably stuffed and mounted, in their
museums; they breed them in research laboratories for experimental purposes;
they even hunt them for sport. Would there be much difference between this
and the way we treat our fellow apes? Humans have done - and sometimes still
do - these things to other humans, but we condemn their behaviour. The
eloquent argument of this book is that subjecting our fellow apes to this
treatment is equally wrong.
Chimpanzees do not have larynxes like humans, and therefore cannot vocalise
as humans do. But they can use language. Several essays describe the
acquisition of sign or code languages by chimpanzees, up to a developed
competence similar to that of a two-and-a-half year old human child. This
language-possession is genuine; it is not merely an elaborate mastery of
tricks, such as a circus dog might display. Chimpanzees formulate novel
sentences with which to communicate ideas and emotions, and they do so in
the course of their relations with their human companions in an entirely
natural way. This fact alone demands of us a radical shift in our attitudes
to them: how can we speak to them and yet still expropriate their forest
homes, lock them up in zoos, and inject fatal viruses into them?
Non-human apes, especially gorillas, were until recently demonised in film
and literature. Their similarity to us was used not as proof of kindred but
as a means of symbolising the supposed bestiality within us. When Dr Jekyll
drank his potion he exposed a mythologized savage inheritance; in some
depictions, his hands grow hairy, his brow beetles, his teeth enlarge: he
becomes a horrifying gorilla-man.
In the popular imagination, if it is not violence then it is stupidity which
marks the ape, betokened by tree-swinging, armpit-scratching and gibbering.
One way to insult someone is to call him an ape. Yet our fellow apes are
intelligent, inquisitive, affectionate and sociable creatures, with
capacities for suffering and grief that match our own, and with a grave
beauty and dignity to which many of these essays testify.
If you can think of arguments against treating non-human apes just as we
treat human apes - if, in particular, you think they should be accorded
fewer rights than humans - you will be sure to find powerful
counter-arguments to your view somewhere in this rich spread of essays. The
editors have performed splendidly in choosing and monitoring contributions
in such a way that every essay is a model of lucidity, informativeness, and
substance. Together the essays present an overwhelming case for a revision
in our treatment of our fellow apes. The editors and contributors press for
immediate acceptance of a 'Declaration' which demands for all Great Apes the
rights of life, liberty, and security from torture and experimentation.
Their essays powerfully show why we should agree.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

930904

