FT932-3389

FT  15 JUN 93 / SPD plays it safe in choice of new leader: The heads of all
three main parties are now in place for the elections


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


MR RUDOLF SCHARPING, the worthy, youthful, but decidedly uncharismatic
premier of the west German state of Rhineland-Palatinate, was yesterday
unanimously proposed as the next national chairman of the opposition Social
Democrats.
His nomination by the party's national executive committee is intended to
mark the end of a divisive leadership struggle which has left the SPD
drifting in the opinion polls since the surprise resignation last month of
Mr Bjorn Engholm, the former party leader.
It follows Mr Scharping's clear victory in an unprecedented weekend poll of
rank-and-file members, which gave him more than 40 per cent support, against
33 per cent for his nearest rival, Mr Gerhard Schroder, premier of Lower
Saxony.
His selection means that the leaders of all three main political parties are
now in place for the elections next year, although Mr Scharping refused to
say yesterday whether he would run as SPD candidate for chancellor.
It also means that all three, the governing Christian Democratic Union, the
minority Free Democratic party in the coalition government, and the SPD,
have opted for safe, centrist but essentially uninspiring leaders.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl has no challengers within his CDU, although he is
widely accused of failing to give clear leadership, and his popularity is
languishing in the polls.
On Friday, the FDP voted overwhelmingly for Mr Klaus Kinkel, foreign
minister, as its leader. A civil servant for almost his entire career, and
only a party member for two years, he is solid, plain-speaking but no ball
of fire.
Now the SPD has opted, both at grass-roots level and as party leader, for an
equally uncharismatic figure: Mr Scharping is young (45), hard-working,
clearly competent, but rather wooden in presentation. Yet his confirmation
as national chairman at a party conference on June 25 now appears a foregone
conclusion.
With typical caution, he refused to be drawn on the question of whether he
wants to be the party's candidate to oppose Mr Kohl at next year's national
elections, although previously he has said that the party chairman should be
the candidate for chancellor, too.
He is the obvious choice, but the current deputy leader, Mr Oskar
Lafontaine, who failed to defeat Mr Kohl in 1990, has said he wants to run
again.
Mr Scharping, a career politician since his student days, would only say
that the party had to decide before election day. He hoped it would decide a
bit sooner, he admitted.
His refusal to give any such hostages to fortune is clearly seen by party
supporters as an advantage over Mr Schroder, whose obvious ambition and
clear commitment to fight the next elections in tandem with the Green party
may have frightened off votes.
On the other hand, Mr Scharping's lack of political profile is an obvious
disadvantage in the coming battle with Mr Kohl, himself a former premier of
Rhineland-Palatinate.
In spite of his unpopularity (37 per cent of voters think he is doing a good
job, against 50 per cent who do not), the current chancellor towers over all
other figures in his own party, and among his rivals.
The leadership struggle in the SPD has scarcely helped. Some 70 per cent
said in a recent poll that they did not think the party was capable of
heading a future government. Some 33 per cent of SPD voters expected the CDU
to win next time round.
Somehow Mr Scharping has to change that perspective, and he has just 18
months to do so before the next elections.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930615

