FT934-8814

FT  13 NOV 93 / Man in the News: Wooden-top carving a role - Al Gore


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


The Clinton White House has been so much on the defensive, both at home and
abroad, that any small victory offers a welcome psychological lift.
It was understandable, then, that vice-president Al Gore's apparent defeat
of a shifty and ill-tempered Mr Ross Perot in this week's televised debate
about the North American Free Trade Agreement should have 'elated' President
Bill Clinton and put a new spring in the step of many of his staff.
The role is a traditional one for vice-presidents and would-be
vice-presidents during an election campaign: take the battle to the enemy
with the slogans and personal assaults that might sound unpresidential from
the top of the ticket.
On policy questions such as Nafta this attack-dog role is less usual, yet by
most measures Mr Gore appears to have carried it out effectively.
Opinion polls conducted for the CNN network and USA Today newspaper
immediately after the debate showed that Mr Gore had enhanced his approval
rating to 72 per cent, compared with 57 per cent before.
Perhaps more remarkably, Mr Gore may even have improved Nafta's chances of
passing its crucial test on Wednesday in the House of Representatives. The
same poll showed that 57 per cent of those questioned favoured the trade
pact after the debate, compared with only 34 per cent before.
For Mr Gore, the surge is the latest climb in a roller-coaster ride up and
down the public opinion polls. Since his entry into Congress in 1977, the
public perception of the Tennessee politician has oscillated between
'wooden-top (policy) wonk' with a future on the fringes, and cerebral
heavyweight bound for the very top.
It is true that Mr Gore speaks slowly in public, and moves his robust body
with the grace of a marionette. Yet the 'wooden' label that he acquired
during his failed bid for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988 has
stuck to him with more tenacity than may be warranted.
Friends describe him as a dryly humorous prankster with an uncanny knack for
balancing a broomstick on his nose. And it is Mr Gore himself who most often
tells the joke: how do you tell Al Gore from a roomful of Secret Service
agents? Answer: he's the stiff one.
As a campaigner in 1988 and again in 1992, the occasional wooden speeches
alternated with stirring, often effective, sometimes even emotional
harangues. And in the campaign debates, he was always an accomplished
performer.
This week, the perception of woodenness served him well, by ensuring that he
needed to do no more than hold his own against the sharp-tongued Mr Perot to
be declared the winner. His performance was not flawless - the main lapse in
preparation was his inability to respond with details when Mr Perot falsely
denied his charges of hiring lobbyists - but it did the trick.
It is not just the perceptions of Mr Gore's personality that have
oscillated. The assessments of his clout as vice-president have also
fluctuated.
Newspaper reports either portray him as a deputy president with real weight
in the Clinton administration, or as an ambitious man champing furiously at
the limitations of his job, which has always been largely ceremonial.
There is not much that Mr Gore can do about this. John Adams, the first man
to hold the job, described the vice-presidency as 'the most insignificant
office that ever the invention of man contrived or his imagination
conceived'.
The one real power the vice-president holds is the casting vote in the event
of a tie in the Senate. Mr Gore is unlikely to match the record 29 such
votes cast by John Adams, but already has two important tie-breakers under
his belt from this year's budget battle.
Mr Gore likes the description of the job made by Thomas Marshall,
vice-president under President Woodrow Wilson: 'He cannot speak, he cannot
move. He suffers no pain. He is perfectly conscious of all that goes on, but
he has no part in it.'
But the vice-president is no cipher and is better positioned to play a
significant role in the administration than those of his predecessors who
were picked to balance the ticket ideologically.
As centrist southerners just two years apart in age, Mr Gore and Mr Clinton
operate on the same wavelength on many issues. During last year's campaign,
Mr Clinton sometimes stole lines from his running mate's speeches, and he
still sends drafts of many of his speeches to the vice-president for advice.
Mr Gore has clearly carved himself a role in some specific areas, notably
technology, including the space programme, and the environment. He has also
taken on the task of 'reinventing government' through simpler management and
deregulation.
These specialities closely parallel those of Mr Dan Quayle in the last
administration. Mr Gore, however, has avoided taking on institutional
responsibilities in the way that Mr Quayle did through his chairmanship of
the National Space Council and of the Council on Competitiveness.
But he has placed allies in key positions in the agencies overseeing these
areas: Ms Carol Browner as head of the Environmental Protection Agency and
Mr Jack Gibbons as the president's science adviser.
Possibly of greater significance for the Clinton presidency, Mr Gore is
credited by some in the administration with instilling in the president a
sense of discipline.
Here again Mr Gore's influence is cemented by the appointment of his allies
in the White House power structure, notably Mr Roy Neel, his own chief of
staff, who took over as deputy White House chief of staff this summer.
In the longer perspective Mr Gore's victory over Mr Perot may prove
ephemeral. He may have helped Nafta's prospect marginally but he has no
casting vote in the House of Representatives. It is in that chamber that the
Nafta will live or die.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931113

