FT933-5126

FT  04 SEP 93 / Books: Critical outsider who thrived on support - A fine
biography highlights the still unresolved contradictions of a brilliant
political theorist


   By STEVEN LUKES


HAROLD LASKI: A LIFE ON THE LEFT by Isaac Kramnick and Barry Sheerman Hamish
Hamilton Pounds 25
HAROLD LASKI'S life is fascinating and instructive. He found it so
fascinating that he was given to telling stories, sometimes tall stories,
about his relations with the famous and powerful. We know that Francis
Galton, the eugenicist, found him brilliant, as did Oliver Wendell Holmes,
who treated him like a son and whose friend and confidant he became. He was
close to Justices Frankfurter and Brandeis and to countless other left and
liberal luminaries on both sides of the Atlantic, and also in Europe (the
authors tell us too little about his relations with these). In Britain he
moved to centre stage as Chairman of the Labour Party after the war, by
which time he seemed to know almost everybody.
One of the subsidiary pleasures of this superb biography is the detective
work the authors have done in sifting fact from fiction. He did, from his
childhood in Manchester, know Churchill, whom his wealthy businessman father
had supported in his resolute stand against anti-semitism. He did, as an
Oxford student, have a blazing row with Lloyd George about women's suffrage.
And he was a frequent correspondent with Franklin Roosevelt, who enjoyed his
company. The authors have unearthed a story Laski was careful never to tell:
his abortive attempt, while at Oxford, to blow up Oxted railway station in
support of the suffragettes.
They conclude in his favour: his romancing was only an exaggeration of an
extraordinarily successful strategy, pursued throughout his life, of being
the critical outsider while 'thriving on the company, support and applause
of the very people one has mocked, satirized and sought to topple'. They
plausibly suggest that the marginality and alienation of his status as a
radical Jewish intellectual in Britain lent that strategy its peculiar
intensity.
What is fascinating is how to account for its exceptional success. For he
did not only impress the Establishment. He became 'a mass preacher and
public teacher, one of the most widely read and listened-to public
intellectuals of this century  .. more interested in teaching people about
and ushering in socialism than in his scholarly or political reputation.'
He was, on all accounts, 'brilliant': articulate, witty, knowledgeable, with
a sense of fun and an easy accessibility. He was an outstanding, magnetic
teacher, whose influence radiated from the LSE throughout the Third World. A
political theorist with an early taste for pluralism and syndicalism, who
became a statist Fabian and eventually a Marxist of sorts, it was not,
however, because of his ideas that he made friends and influenced so many
people.
On the contrary: he was not an originator but rather an indefatigable
synthesiser on the hoof of prevailing grand ideas that seemed to provide
justifications and scenarios of radical change while protecting the
intellectual freedom that made his style of radicalism possible. Hence his
extraordinary eclecticism that leads the authors, rather kindly, to suggest
that his thought had many 'layers'.
In fact, it was riddled with contradictions. He believed that capitalism was
outmoded and doomed but that the ruling class could be won over by reason,
and that revolution by violence could be averted through revolution by
consent. He also believed the powerful would resist the advent of a militant
socialism whose absence he never ceased to lament.
He thought the State was irredeemably partisan and potentially neutral and
that the Labour Party was a force for socialist transformation and
hopelessly reformist and trade union-dominated. He was 'fiercely egalitarian
and yet an intellectual prone to elitism and cultural snobbery'. He was
ambivalent about the United States, loving it and fiercely criticising it,
and, more seriously, about Soviet Russia, acutely attacking the Webbs'
adulation of it, but subsequently seeing in it the harbinger of a new
civilisation.
He was 'a cosmopolitan rationalist and a cultural, ultimately Zionist, Jew'.
Perhaps one key to his extraordinary appeal in his day was the prospect that
so well-informed and brilliant a mind could find a way to resolve the
contradictions he so clearly exhibited.
Yet the story is not only absorbing. It is also revelatory of what a 'life
on the left' can no longer be. Laski's life is, in a way, a parable of what
we have irretrievably lost. For the contradictions it so amply contained no
longer excite the optimism that they can be overcome. Above all, we we have
lost the possibility of assuming that 'socialism' names a socio-economic and
political order that is feasible and viable and more efficient than and
morally superior to capitalism.
Without that assumption, a life on the left today must face questions that
Laski's style of thought always avoided: how to make capitalism work for the
benefit of the least advantaged, the vulnerable and the excluded; how to
tame the destructive effects of markets; how to attain more social justice
in face of the declining reach of the state.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

930904

