FT934-11454

FT  01 NOV 93 / Sweet and sour tastes in colonies rejoining China: Good
relations over Macao contrast with friction over Hong Kong,


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


OFFICIAL visits are a time for gilding lilies, but the contrast between
Macao, the Portuguese colony which reverts to Chinese sovereignty in 1999,
and Hong Kong could not have been greater.
At the weekend Chinese government officials were falling over themselves
with praise for Portugal and its President Mario Soares, who concluded a
three-day visit to the colony yesterday.
Mr Guo Dongpo, the head of China's Xinhua news agency, Beijing's de facto
representative in Macao, praised the good relations between the two
countries. His colleague Mr Guo Jiading, who leads the Sino-Portuguese Joint
Liaison Group overseeing the transition, said the two sides were in complete
agreement about matters relating to the transfer of the colony.
That cannot be said for Hong Kong, which an hour away by hydrofoil lies on
the western side of the Pearl River estuary. Talks between Britain and China
about Hong Kong's political development are mired. Over recent days British
officials have let it be known that, if there is no movement from China
towards a compromise, talks may break down as early as next month.
Portugal's position on its south China coast colony has always been
different from Britain's. While Britain took Hong Kong from China in 1842
following the first Opium War, Beijing has always tolerated Macao and has
always exercised much greater political influence over Macao.
Settled in 1557, the two islands and peninsula which constitute the colony
were accepted by the Ming and Qing emperors who, for reasons of trade,
allowed the settlement to flourish. So, too, have China's Communist rulers.
When the socialists took power in Portugal in 1974, it was the Chinese
government which had to persuade the Portuguese to stay. As with Mozambique
and East Timor, Portugal's new government wanted out - and quickly.
A secret deal between the two was concluded in Paris in 1979 whereby
Portugal agreed that Macao was sovereign Chinese territory and agreed to
administer it until China wanted it back. This agreement was revealed only
in 1987, when the two agreed that Macao would revert to China in 1999.
Over the weekend Mr Soares sought to bolster confidence in the colony,
saying that he had full confidence in Macao's future under Chinese rule.
Although the crowds flocked to see the Portuguese president, few among the
Chinese community will mourn the passing of Portuguese administration.
Earlier this year a Cantonese talkback radio show was summarily taken off
the air after many of the callers rang in to criticise the Portuguese
administration. Businessmen find the colonial government unnecessarily
bureaucratic. 'I try to have the least to do with the government as
possible,' said one, adding he preferred to cut deals with mainland
partners.
One of the few areas of conflict between China and Portugal is over the
issue of localisation of the civil service. Little has been done to date,
possibly reflecting the fact that the governorship of the colony and the top
posts in government are rewards given by Lisbon to loyal supporters at home.
China's involvement in Macao's economy is every bit as great as - possibly
greater than - its role in Hong Kong's economy. An attraction for many
mainland officials and businessmen is that Macao has no publicly quoted
corporate sector, relieving them of the irritant of disclosure.
According to one western banker in the colony, the mainland Chinese business
interest in Macao is dominant. 'They have a very solid presence in Macao and
a very influential one,' he said.
Bank of China is the largest bank, controlling about half the banking assets
in the colony. Xinhua, unlike its opposite number in Hong Kong, is highly
visible and active in business, especially trading and property development.
As in economy, so too in politics, where Beijing holds the whip hand.
Elections last year for 16 of the Macao Legislative Assembly's 26 seats saw
a virtual clean sweep for pro-Beijing politicians. There is little popular
agitation for greater democracy, as there is in Hong Kong.
Underlining Beijing's position in Macao is the power of the head of Xinhua.
Since the Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s he has been de facto
governor of the colony. Last year his status was upgraded. Mr Guo Dongpo no
longer has to report to Beijing through the head of Xinhua in Hong Kong.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931101

