FT932-7059

FT  26 MAY 93 / Clinton hones effort to secure deficit package


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday intensified his lobbying for the House of
Representatives to pass his deficit reduction package tomorrow, but was told
by some Democratic congressmen that he needed to make his case in a
nationally televised address.
Congressman Dan Glickman from Kansas emerged from a morning White House
meeting of Democrats with the president to declare that 'the American people
do not completely understand what's in the programme'.
Congressman Bill Richardson of New Mexico complained that 'we seem to have
lost the perception game'.
He was referring to congressional critics who contend the package relies too
much on tax increases and not enough on spending cuts to achieve its goal of
reducing the budget deficit by about Dollars 500bn (Pounds 324.6bn) over
five years.
House members are particularly agitated that their vote tomorrow may be
negated later in the Senate, as happened with Mr Clinton's economic stimulus
programme.
The bill in front of the House includes the energy tax, the particular
object of Senate discontent.
The Democratic leadership in the House remains guardedly confident that it
can carry the day.
A total of 218 votes are needed to pass, and the Democrats currently hold a
257-176 edge, with one independent and one vacancy. Mr Clinton was to meet
with freshmen members later yesterday.
One indication of the administration's concern was the report that it is
considering moves to bypass the Senate finance committee, which is due to
vote next week on the programme.
Alternative plans include having the budget committee write the bill or, in
extremis, having it written on the Senate floor itself.
The Democrats only hold an 11-9 majority on the finance committee which
could disappear if Senator David Boren of Oklahoma carries out his threat to
oppose the bill unless the energy tax is substantially amended.
The president's general cause was not helped by two public opinion polls
yesterday showing sharp declines both in his own popularity and in support
for his economic programme.
A CNN-USA Today poll had his approval rating down to 44 per cent and ABC
News to 46 per cent, the latter a 13 point drop in the last six weeks. The
first poll found support for the economic programme also down to 44 per cent
while 64 per cent of the ABC poll agreed it relied too much on increasing
taxes.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930526

