FT934-10178

FT  06 NOV 93 / Prisoners who find freedom inside: Christian Tyler goes
behind bars to meet inmates who learn how to cope with life through art


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


THE MAN with the grizzled hair, a gold ring in one ear and large tattoo on
his forearm was talking about Cezanne. 'I've got to paint,' he added. 'I
don't care if no-one ever likes my paintings or looks at them. It's just
colour that excites me.' But two exhibitions of his work and the offer of a
teaching post seem to confirm the potential of this artist who first picked
up a paintbrush, almost accidentally, only six years ago. He continued, the
eyes in the gaunt face starting to brim: 'It's the only way I have found
that can express what I feel: anger, love, pity. Before, I just expressed it
by being aggressive and physical. My whole life was prison or crime.'
It is the literal truth. Steven Down, the speaker, was sitting in the
lifers' block of Norwich Prison. Now 42, he has spent more than 20 years
inside for the murder of a security guard. A few hours before speaking these
words he had been told he was to be released on November 3.
Punishment, deterrence and rehabilitation are the three legs of the penal
system. The more men put inside to satisfy the first two aims, however, (and
Britain's jails are already overfull) the less chance there is of satisfying
the third. Overcrowding stifles reform - and the lesson of Norwich Prison is
that reform does occur.
Michael Howard, the home secretary, created a judicial furore last month
with his lock-'em-up speech and promise of six privately-run jails to take
the extra customers. Inside Norwich, the good folk who run the education
service were manifestly nervous about the signals coming from Whitehall. The
Home Office seems anxious to soften the impact of Howard's declaration to
the Tory Party conference. When Howard said prison should be more austere, a
spokesman explained this week, he meant it should be more constructive. He
meant that more prisoners should work or study instead of hanging about the
landings. Nor would the recommendations of Lord Justice Woolf - the liberal
who reported on the Strangeways riot in 1990 and who led the judiciary's
counterblast - be shelved.
'People are sent to prison as punishment, not for punishment,' said Paul
Killick, the young playwright recently appointed writer-in-residence at
Norwich jail. 'People ask, what about the victims? But, as the judge said,
these prisoners are going to come out one day. The angrier they are when
they come out, the worse for everybody.'
Bridgid Everitt, the head of education, described her job as helping
prisoners make positive use of their time inside and helping them plan for
their release. Whether this can be formally described as rehabilitation is
unclear: but she claimed that literature and the arts, by stimulating
thought and self-awareness, help prisoners 'make connections' to the world
as it really is, not as they might prefer to imagine it - or hate it. To
that extent, it helped them readjust to normal society.
Norwich Prison has 600 inmates, from juvenile remand prisoners to low-risk
'lifers' and psychiatric detainees. It has had a good report from Judge
Stephen Tumim, chief inspector of prisons. Certainly the atmosphere in the
main jail strikes a visitor as uncomfortable rather than menacing. In the
main block prisoners walked freely about the landings, dropped in and out of
each others' cells, to the constant blare of pop music.
A day in jail is long enough - long enough, at least, to establish that
prisoners are entirely cynical about the system which tries (in the words
inscribed on each of the jail's buildings) 'to look after them with humanity
and to help them lead law-abiding and useful lives in custody and after
release.' Unfairly or not, even those who have found some kind of redemption
in art give themselves, not the system, the credit for it.
Leroy Cooper is a Jamaican Liverpudlian whose first arrest, in the build-up
to the Toxteth riot in 1981, has given him a certain notoriety. Wearing a
bandanna, dreadlocks and what he calls his 'Clark Kent glasses,' Cooper
swung with studied brashness into the education room on the jail's second
landing. 'They make no attempt to reform you,' he declared, 'just leave you
in a cell to rot. But you need help to deliver the fledgling person. For
many of them (the prisoners) art is just filling time, but for me it is my
life: it is an artistic, creative statement.'
Cooper produces Undercurrents, a community arts magazine in Liverpool, and
sees himself as a visionary local leader who has been branded a troublemaker
by vindictive policemen. Nine years after a jail term for assault on the
police, he is awaiting sentence for a drugs offence. 'In between I went from
a rebellious, uncaring and shallow youth to a mature man,' he said.
The rhetoric may sound artificial but Cooper's cheerful arrogance ('I have
the drive, I have the intellect') is probably his way of recovering the
self-esteem that prison destroys in every man. Stripped of his
self-identity, a man who thinks he counts for nothing is dangerous: he will
seek revenge on society when he can.
This erosion of identity is what Gary Sparkes says he fears most and what
impelled him to start writing plays and poetry. He said his aim was to
improve himself in spite of the system not because of it: he felt nothing
but contempt for the authorities. 'I never classed myself as a criminal. I
was an idiot. But the longer they leave me in jail the more likely they are
to create an anti-social individual. I came in a non-criminal. I now have a
mass of criminal knowledge.'
Self-justification is part of most prisoners' armoury. But Sparkes, a tall,
handsome, quick-witted fellow originally from Romford in Essex, says he was
never unemployed and never engaged in crime. He had a wife, a house near
Haverhill with a Pounds 47,000 mortgage and a job with an estate agent.
After he was made redundant, everything went wrong. He worked as a
rough-neck in the Scottish oil industry but could not find permanent work,
fell into arrears on the mortgage while the house itself lost value.
Desperate for money, he borrowed Pounds 500 to finance a 'dope deal' and
lost that, too.
So he held up two post offices with a replica pistol. He pleaded guilty to
the offence and says now he genuinely feels bad about what he did. 'There
was a girl in there (the post office), very pretty, Asian about
five-foot-two, the same as my wife. But I did this to her.' He has lost his
home, his friends and his wife. For him, he said, the punishment is already
complete.
While he was in jail his wife sent him Oscar Wilde's Picture of Dorian Gray,
attaching a note which said: 'Don't take offence'. Sparkes, who until then
was more of a Stephen King reader, felt 'nothing but sympathy' with Wilde's
hero.
Awaiting sentence, he has embarked on a campaign of what he calls
self-preservation, forcing himself to treat the prison as a hall of
residence in which the food and lodging happen to be free and in which he
can find subjects for literary reflection. 'You see everything in this
place: closet queens, men desperately in love with their wives, some
incredibly thick, some extremely intelligent. It's an interesting place to
live. From the personal point of view this place has been good for me.'
But it is a slippery path between optimism and despair. 'You become horribly
cynical,' he said. 'I can see so easily how this could be the lot for me.
Freedom has got nothing to do with bars, anyway. I am not silly enough to
think the pot of gold is beyond that gate. If I can manage to hold out for
the duration of my sentence I am going to be able to lead a life
afterwards.'
Terry Shepherd is another who finds writing a solace but not an escape.
'People say it's just a distraction. I don't think that's right. You have to
be very aware of what's going on around you - and the people who do write
are more aware of what prison is than those who don't. People with no
interest in the arts are just living day-to-day, scrounging, smoking dope,
almost like an animal life. At the end of the sentence you go out, and what
has prison done?'
Shepherd trained as a chef, was introduced to Shelley by a schoolteacher and
thinks English poetry died with Sylvia Plath. He is a a self-confessed
loner, an introvert who speaks almost inaudibly. When drunk he becomes, as
he put it, 'very extrovert.' He means aggressive. He has previously served
nearly seven years in Parkhurst, Isle of Wight, for grievous bodily harm and
is now remanded on a charge of using or threatening violence. (In both
instances, he maintains, he acted in self-defence).
Poetry, he declared with undeliberate rhetoric, was about 'removing the
debris of the mind and getting down to basics. I could not do prison without
art. If they
took away my pens and paper I'd go barmy. I really would.'
It may not be surprising - though it is illuminating - to hear the
shorter-term prisoners discuss their artistic impulses. But how many men can
survive a life sentence without succumbing to the brutish culture of the
nick which regards emotional sensitivity as a contemptible or homosexual
weakness, and self-improvement as a sell-out to the 'system'?
The lifers' prison at Norwich is a low-category block which looks more like
a hostel than a place of detention. It stands in a small landscaped park,
surrounded by a high white fence, and there are no bars on the big sash
windows. Most of the inmates live in partitioned dormitories; the lucky ones
share a large, scruffy bed-sit.
To sit in such a place with three convicted murderers and feel at ease while
they talk about their 'raison d'etre' is a strange sensation. Lee Squires is
a former martial arts instructor who has done 11 years of a recommended
20-year sentence for killing a sub postmaster with a crowbar during a
robbery. He took up acting in Wormwood Scrubs and is also a sculptor whose
tortured plaster-and-acrylic figures would look at home in any contemporary
gallery.
Squires described how he had ignored the threats of other prisoners to break
the taboo which requires inmates to hide their weakness from each another
and their anger from the authorities.
After his crime, he said, the knowledge that he had taken another man's life
gave him several years of emotional distress and violent mood-swings. He
emerged, he claimed, a quite different man. 'I am more honest, expressive,
truthful. I am more articulate and understanding about relationships.'
Contrition did not reduce a man's sentence, however.
He maintains that even those who have been right through the penal system
from their youth can discover another self. 'There are some very evil,
disturbed, dangerous people,' he conceded. 'But they are in a minority.'
If ever there were an untypical-looking lifer, it is Joe White, the
energetic and articulate actor-manager with whom Lee Squires works. White
has put on 13 plays in four prisons culminating in a convict performance of
Dorfman's celebrated Death and the Maiden at the Tricycle Theatre in
Kilburn, London.
Looking himself every inch an actor, White maintains that drama can work
strange transformations: he described the scarred convict from the Gorbals
who never came out from behind his dark glasses until he went on stage, the
dour West Indian whose inaudible voice was released, the introvert lifer
whose family scarcely recognised him. Prison drama also attracted hatred:
one disturbed inmate, refused a part in For King and Country, drew a knife
and threatened to 'take out' a member of the cast to make room for himself.
By a prison convention, White is classed by colleagues as one of the
'non-criminals': he killed a friend with a shotgun while under the influence
of the drug LSD during a period of drop-out depression.
'We agree our offences warranted punishment in prison,' he said. 'And it's
fair to say that victims were not helped for years until counselling. But we
are still part of society. People have to understand why they have done what
they have done. By creatively grappling with the experience of prison you
can maintain a strong sense of self. We are outcasts but art enables people
to look at you as a human being.
'Outside they say we are having fun in prison. But this is the only thing
that has a significant rehabilitational effect. I have become more the
person I should have been.'

The Financial Times


London Page I

931106

