FT934-8824

FT  13 NOV 93 / Major aims to boost 'back to basics' campaign


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, will give fresh impetus to his 'back to
basics' campaign next week in a speech linking traditional social standards
with economic success.
His determination to raise the profile of the campaign emerged after a
series of meetings on law and order in London yesterday. The prime minister
told community leaders in Ealing, west London, that he shared the widespread
frustration about rising crime. He urged people to give more help to police
efforts to catch criminals.
He said: 'We need to encourage a greater sense of responsibility and a sense
of self-discipline if we are to get down to tackling the roots of crime.'
The main impetus of Mr Major's drive will come on Monday, when he plans to
use his annual speech to the Lord Mayor's banquet in the City of London to
stress that the initiative is 'more than an exercise in nostalgia'.
His central theme will be that voters strongly support the government's
plans for a return to traditional values in areas such as law and order. He
will argue that the campaign, launched at last month's Conservative party
conference in Blackpool, is an integral part of the government's economic
strategy.
Mr Major will argue, for example, that traditional values in education can
play an increasingly important role in improving the skills base and
competitiveness of industry.
He will also link the campaign firmly to traditional rightwing economic
values such as support for sound public finances and low inflation.
Mr Major has told friends: 'The way to make Britain great again in the
future is by getting these things right now.'
The government's commitment to the campaign was further underlined last
night by a series of speeches by senior ministers stressing their belief in
traditional values.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, told the Conservative Group for Europe
that 'the prime minister's back to basics message applies just as much to
economics as it does to law and order and education'.
The message was rammed home by several other leading Conservatives,
including Sir Norman Fowler, the party chairman; Mr John Redwood, the Welsh
secretary; Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, and Mr John Patten,
the education secretary.
Labour launched a counter-attack, suggesting that the stress on traditional
values may move to the centre of debate when the parliamentary session
starts next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931113

