FT932-13484

FT  23 APR 93 / SA violence brings out white fears: Philip Gawith reports on
the mood of alarm in the business community


   By PHILIP GAWITH


MR Nelson Mandela, African National Congress president, this week issued a
plea to whites not to leave the country. He said South Africa had no chance
of prospering without their skills. For white South Africans it was a timely
recognition from the country's most important black leader that they too are
an important constituency whose needs must be considered.
Since the assassination 10 days ago of Mr Chris Hani, the prominent
activist, South Africa has heard much of black anger. But the other side of
black anger is white fear, and there has been a lot of it about.
Local radio chat-shows have been awash with calls from whites anxious about
their future, and removal companies have reported the usual upturn in
inquiries from those planning a quieter life elsewhere.
In its own way, the death of Mr Hani was as much a shock to white South
Africans as to blacks. Many white liberals described the week after Mr
Hani's death as the worst of their lives. This was not so much physical fear
 -of spears tapping on the windows, in the words of one - as depression and
foreboding.
At one level, this makes little sense: the number of deaths per day has
remained below levels prevailing earlier in the year. What it illustrates is
the fragility of spirit in the white community. Although most whites favour
the reform process there are grave fears about what the future holds.
White politicians have sought to calm their constituency, but the assurances
they need can only come from black leaders whose attention has been focused
rather more on their own support base. Mr Mandela's comments at a small
Johannesburg gathering on Wednesday represented progress, but would have had
much more impact if spoken at a mass rally or on prime-time television. As
it was, few newspapers reported them.
Also, they sit uncomfortably alongside the ANC's calls for a six-week mass
action campaign. Few things depress white sentiment more than visions of a
future in which city centres are permanent hostage to some form or other of
mass protest.
The prospect of further mass action has also been met with alarm in the
besieged business community, which has experienced three successive years of
negative economic growth, with little, if any, revival expected in 1993.
The barometer of manufacturing confidence, published by the independent
Bureau for Economic Research, showed confidence levels before Mr Hani's
death were barely above the nadir reached during the the foreign debt crisis
of 1985. They can only have deteriorated over the past two weeks.
The view from the ground confirms this gloomy perspective. Mr Ian Willis,
chairman of Holdains, the country's second largest packaging group, notes:
'It is as tough today as it has been, and for the rest of this year it will
get tougher.' His views are echoed by Mr Ken Ironside of Barlow Rand, the
largest industrial group in South Africa. He says sales volumes continue to
decline, trading conditions remain difficult, and even in successful areas,
such as food and pharmaceuticals, conditions appear to be getting worse.
Mr Willis says he doubts whether Mr Hani's death will 'disrupt where the
train is headed'. It will, however, in the words of Mr Jan Robbertze,
managing director of Anglovaal Industries, serve to 'keep uncertainty and
underlying unease in place'.
These factors, together with the depressed economy, have already nearly
throttled investment spending. Reserve Bank figures show that South Africa's
investment rate (gross domestic fixed investment as a percentage of gross
domestic product) has fallen from an annual average of over 23 per cent in
the period 1965-1985 to a post-second world war low of 15.9 per cent in
1992. This figure barely covers depreciation.
Mr Derek Keys, finance minister, has made fostering business confidence a
priority, but was recently forced to confess that his efforts so far had
borne little fruit. The ANC does not see business as a constituency and is
largely silent on the issue. Indeed, the ANC's political and economic
pronouncements have a negative effect on business confidence.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930423

