FT934-8809

FT  13 NOV 93 / Drama spills off the stage: Threatened cuts in the UK arts
grant


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


The UK arts world, always a febrile community, is currently stirring itself
up into a frenzy. Next month the government is expected to cut its annual
grant to the Arts Council, which currently stands at Pounds 225.6m. The
proposed cuts will mean that thousands of arts organisations, from the Royal
Opera House, Covent Garden, to the Dodgy Clutch Theatre Company in Whitley
Bay, in the north-east, will receive less subsidy.
For the more imaginative practitioners in the arts any reduction would
signal the arrival of the fourth horseman of the Apocalypse. The other three
are already in place: the recession has caused a fall in box office income;
arts sponsorship by business has this year suffered its first decline in
decades; and local authorities, which collectively contribute almost as much
as the government to the arts, are being forced by the squeeze on their
funding to reduce their commitment. With an Arts Council cut, all four
sources of revenue for arts companies would be reduced.
A year ago Mr Peter Brooke, the national heritage secretary, warned the Arts
Council that its 1994-95 budget would be 2 per cent, or Pounds 5m, less than
this year. Now the arts establishment feels that its charmed life may be
over.
Many in the arts assumed that the council would escape the axe. After all,
the total heritage budget, which includes libraries, museums, English
Heritage, as well as sport and tourism, just nudges Pounds 1bn, less than
half of 1 per cent of government expenditure. Also, the arts can argue a
strong financial case for special treatment: it attracts foreign tourists;
it provides creative exports; and it is a generous provider of value-added
tax revenue. In addition, the great national orchestras and theatre, opera,
and dance companies enjoy international acclaim. As Lord Palumbo, chairman
of the Arts Council, said yesterday: 'The arts are quite simply our great
success story. Cutting the arts by 2 per cent will not only yield no
significant saving; it will represent a net cost to the exchequer in lost
tax receipts.'
By the summer, it seemed there would be no way to avoid lower funding.
Indeed Mr Anthony Everitt, secretary-general of the Arts Council, expressed
concern that the council might suffer a Pounds 10m cut. Arts activists began
to lobby. The six leading opera companies produced a document, which was
sent to the prime minister - and opera-loving Mrs Norma Major - detailing
the impact of a 2 per cent reduction. It would mean that English National
Opera might terminate its community programme and commission no new work;
Opera North would cut its 1994-95 programme from 11 operas to nine; the
Royal Opera, Covent Garden, had already dropped a new production of Oberon.
Leading orchestras and theatre companies, such as the Royal Shakespeare
Company, joined in the campaign by alerting audiences to the threat, and
suggesting they protest to their MPs. Every influential trustee and board
member of an arts organisation was asked to put in a word if they came
across a cabinet minister. A rally in London is planned for November 23
involving hundreds of luminaries, including Richard Eyre, director of the
Royal National Theatre, and actors Anthony Sher and Timothy West.
Every effort is being made to convince civil servants and sceptics. 'This is
a real crisis,' says Mr Colin Tweedy, director-general of the Association
for Business Sponsorship of the Arts. 'Our backs are really against the
wall.'
Evidence suggests he is right. All four of the national flagship companies -
the Royal National Theatre, the RSC, the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden
and the English National Opera - are struggling with deficits which
collectively exceed Pounds 7m. Mr Jeremy Isaacs, general-director of Covent
Garden, says: 'I have run this House in the black for the past two years but
in planning next year's budget I'm looking at a shortfall of millions.' He
will be attending the rally on November 23, to point out that 'the cuts are
serious for audiences, for the public, not just for producers and
directors'.
As for the regions, Mr Chris Butcher, of the pressure group National
Campaign for the Arts, says: 'There is hardly a company we question that is
not facing some kind of crisis.' In the past few weeks the Liverpool
Everyman has gone dark; the Lyric Hammersmith has announced it will close in
April if it cannot raise Pounds 350,000 to balance its books; and London
Contemporary Dance Theatre faces a threat of closure.
A fall in box office income has made the outlook worse. Audiences in the
West End have fallen by 1 per cent in the past 12 months, and an increasing
number of seats are sold through special discount offers. The Royal Opera
House and the ENO (which saw its audience slide to 63 per cent of capacity
last season) are both considering marketing initiatives. London's South Bank
Centre is brightening up its repertoire in an effort to stem an audience
decline from 81 per cent to 61 per cent of capacity in the past 20 years.
In addition, arts sponsorship, which grew rapidly to Pounds 64m last year,
has suddenly dipped. Companies are reluctant to be seen supporting arts
events while announcing redundancies. 'If the government cuts back on the
arts, so will business,' says Sir Simon Hornby, chairman of the ABSA. 'There
is this nonsense that the arts are elitist. They are only elitist if they
don't get government support.'
The argument against elitism has been most forcefully put by local
authorities such as Birmingham, Glasgow and Manchester, which have invested
heavily in the arts to raise morale in their communities, and to promote a
better image in their search for business investment. But even they are
being forced to freeze their support. Other cities, such as Bristol and
Liverpool, through indifference or lack of income, are doing little to help
their local theatres and arts centres to survive the current crisis.
The only hope of the cavalry riding to the rescue is the national lottery.
By 1995, the Arts Council will expect to handle an extra Pounds 75m a year
from its slice of the lottery revenue, which in total is estimated at about
Pounds 375m. This is designated to support new buildings - but improving the
back stage at Covent Garden, or the heating system at the National Theatre,
or enlarging a concert hall here and a dance studio there could improve the
financial future of many arts companies, because council grants could be
spent on productions.
In theory, lottery money should not affect the amount the government spends
on the heritage. In practice, the proposed cuts were almost certainly made
with one eye on the lottery receipts. But there must be doubt whether some
worthy arts companies can survive another 18 months of financial penury.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931113

