FT934-11787

FT  29 OCT 93 / GEC in 1p per share bid for Ferranti


   By TONY JACKSON


LORD WEINSTOCK extended his grip on the UK defence industry yesterday with
confirmation that his company, GEC, is the mystery bidder for Ferranti
International. The agreed offer will cost GEC a minimum of Pounds 110m, of
which Pounds 10m will go to Ferranti's shareholders and the rest to its
banks.
Ferranti's board defended the token 1p per share bid on the grounds that the
company had no alternative. Mr Eugene Anderson, chairman, said a large
prospective deal with Bahrain, the Delmon Eye contract, had run into delays
within the past week. 'When it became clear the order wasn't coming in
within days or weeks, it was a question of doing a deal like this or calling
in the receivers,' he said.
Mr Anderson said he had been talking to Lord Weinstock about various
possible deals for at least a year. 'He has been interested in parts of
Ferranti from the beginning, and has already bought several of them,' he
said. 'This is the final piece.'
GEC would not specify how much of Ferranti it intended to keep, beyond
saying it was interested in its systems for naval combat and air defence,
and its sonar and simulator business. It dismissed speculation that it would
gain access to Ferranti's Pounds 100m pension fund surplus. Mr David
Newlands, GEC finance director, said: 'The pension fund is the pension fund.
It would be a matter for the trustees.'
GEC said its bid might depend upon it gaining 90 per cent of the shares,
then it could compulsorily buy the rest. Mr Newlands said: 'We may have to
reorganise some of the businesses, and that can be difficult when you have
minority shareholders.'
Since the 1p offer was announced on Tuesday, there has been a heavy turnover
of Ferranti shares at prices up to 4p. They fell 2 3/4 p to 1 3/4 p
yesterday.
Mr Anderson said he was concerned that shareholders might be led by
'complacency or apathy' to hold out against GEC's offer. 'This way
shareholders suffer badly, and I'm sad about that,' he said. 'But 1p is
better than no p'
One large institutional shareholder said it was 'slightly resigned' to the
deal, adding 'what are you going to do if the board calls you up and tells
you that you accept the offer or the liquidators are called in?'
Lex, Page 18
Details, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931029

