FT932-7037

FT  26 MAY 93 / GDP rise confirms recovery


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


GROWTH IN the economy in the first quarter was stronger than originally
estimated, with consumer spending leading the way out of recession.
Official figures yesterday showed that gross domestic product grew 0.3 per
cent in the first three months of the year compared with the previous
quarter, slightly higher than a provisional estimate of 0.2 per cent, and
0.7 per cent higher than in the same quarter last year.
The news, which confirmed that the recession is officially over, was
underlined by a similar upwards revision to GDP excluding oil and gas
production, a more reliable guide to the underlying strength of the economy.
It rose by 0.7 per cent quarter-on-quarter compared with a provisional
estimate of 0.6 per cent. This was the strongest rate of growth since the
0.8 per cent rise registered in the first quarter of 1990, just months
before recession enveloped the economy.
Detailed figures of GDP by expenditure suggest that the recovery is being
led by consumer spending. It rose 0.5 per cent in the first quarter compared
with the previous quarter, to stand 2.1 per cent up on a year ago.
Total investment throughout the economy rose by 0.3 per cent
quarter-on-quarter and was 0.9 per cent higher than in the same period a
year ago.
Manufacturing output rose by 2 per cent in the quarter to stand 2.1 per cent
up on a year ago.
Output of the service industries rose by 0.6 per cent in the quarter. This
was pushed higher by the transport sector's strong performance, particularly
rail, road and air travel.
Buoyant retail sales boosted output of the distribution, hotels and catering
sector, which grew 0.8 per cent in the quarter - up 1.7 per cent on last
year.
There were no first-quarter figures for the construction industry, but
statisticians said the trend was still downwards.
Output from agriculture, forestry and fishing shrank by 2.3 per cent in the
first quarter. There were also falls in oil and gas output - down 6.1 per
cent on the quarter - and other energy and water production, which was down
2.3 per cent.
The figures also showed that income from employment rose by 1.5 per cent in
the first quarter. Compared with a year ago it was 1 per cent higher, but
this figure was distorted by the high level of bonuses paid in the first
quarter of last year ahead of the general election, as people feared that a
Labour government would raise taxes.
Companies' gross trading profits rose by 2.6 per cent year-on-year and were
11.8 per cent higher than a year ago.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930526

