FT933-10089

FT  06 AUG 93 / Madrid to cut Pta100bn in budget spending plans


   By PETER BRUCE


   MADRID


SPAIN'S minority Socialist government, hoping to restore confidence in the
country's recession-hit economy, yesterday announced it was cutting Pta100bn
(Pounds 480m) in planned spending from the 1993 budget and promised
'maximum' cuts in the 1994 budget, which is being drafted.
But the cuts for this year fell way below what analysts and the markets had
been hoping for. In less critical economic situations in 1991 and 1992 the
government found cuts of Pta341bn and Pta200bn in current spending. The
planned central government budget deficit this year of 2.4 per cent of GDP
is likely to be more than 5 per cent of GDP, the finance minister, Mr Pedro
Solbes, told an emergency session of parliament yesterday.
Spending is some Pta1,300bn over target, with tax revenues, hit by the
recession, falling short by Pta700bn.
Before yesterday's debate the cabinet had met until late in the night on
Wednesday to agree on the relatively timid cuts for this year, on the
establishment of a special corps of officials to combat tax evasion and a
sharp increase in the price of petrol.
Mr Solbes told parliament that most of the cuts would be taken by the public
works ministry.
Combatting public spending is likely to remain the key to the country's
ability to be able to bring down interest rates rapidly, despite to
increased leeway given the peseta by more flexible ERM rules. The Bank of
Spain is likely to remain vigorously opposed to anything but the most
orthodox approach to reviving economic growth.
In an effort to back up the government claims to be focussing its efforts on
bringing down inflation, Mr Solbes said he intended bringing back to
parliament draft legislation to make the Bank of Spain autonomous.
Passage of this legislation was interrupted by the spring election campaign.
He said he would also be reintroducing legislation to make public contracts
more transparent and to weaken the control professions have over the fees
they charge.
Mr Solbes said he believed that the recession had already hit bottom in
Spain and that the strength of the peseta, following the widening of the ERM
bands in which it is allowed to move was evidence of confidence in the
economy.
The wider bands would allow further interest rate cuts, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930806

