FT933-12834

FT  22 JUL 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Pink Lady regains
her fizz - The growing market for ads aimed at Hispanic and black audiences


   By JOEL KIBAZO


Two years ago Gaymer Group brands director Gary Holloway had a problem: how
to revive Pink Lady, a sparkling perry drink whose sales were looking
distinctly flat.
Advertising and promotion campaigns by some of the leading agencies in the
UK had failed to stem the decline and the demise of the 30-year-old brand
seemed only a matter of time.
It was then that research carried out for the company identified strong
demand for Pink Lady in areas of London with a large black population. The
idea of targeting this group of drinkers was born, the specialist agency
WM&P was hired and the task of putting the fizz back into Pink Lady had
begun.
Advertising agencies which focus on Britain's ethnic minorities are not only
relatively new - WM&P was formed in 1989 - they have provoked considerable
controversy within the industry.
Notwithstanding some notable and apparently successful campaigns - such as
Pink Lady - doubts remain about the viability of reaching an audience that
represents 5.5 per cent of the British population and is highly fragmented.
Others question the social consequences.
WM&P's founders - former Collets Dickenson & Pearce executive Werbayne
McIntyre and Pauline Robinson, who worked in PR promotion in the UK record
industry - insist that a black agency can perform an important role. Besides
Gaymer, its accounts have included HP Bulmer, Southwark Council, food
company Vee Tee Rice the Metropolitan Police (for whom it conducted a
recruitment campaign).
'We have the specialist knowledge of how to communicate with the different
ethnic minorities in Britain, not necessarily because we are black but
because we have an empathy for the things we are dealing with,' says
McIntyre.
For Pink Lady WM&P decided on a two-pronged approach when it won the account
in 1991. The 'above-the-line' campaign was aimed at the wider market and was
centred on posters, the latest of which hit the streets in May in
multi-racial boroughs of London showing 'cool, fun-loving party people'. It
was backed up by advertising on radio stations.
The 'below-the-line' campaign was targeted at the core audience of black
people through promotions and sponsorship at night clubs, carnivals and
black beauty exhibitions.
Having halted the decline in the first year of the campaign, UK sales this
year are up 5 per cent on a year ago, and up 8 per cent in London. Holloway
is even thinking about using the same approach to promote some of the
company's other brands.
Another agency - Media Reach, formed in 1986 - targets the UK's 1.4m Asians
who speak Urdu, Bengali, Gujarati, Punjabi and Hindi. Its biggest client to
date has been the Central Office of Information (COI) for which it ran 14
radio and newspaper campaigns in the various Asian languages last year.
'Our advantage is that we can communicate with consumers in a language and
culture they understand,' says Javed Hussain, accounts and media director at
Media Reach. 'After all, many products and themes are not common to us.'
Despite its use of Media Reach, recent COI research suggests that the case
for always using a different kind of agency remains unproven. The research
showed that English-speaking ethnic minorities are as likely to read a
general newspaper as one specifically targeted at them.
'What really matters to us is getting the message over in the most
cost-effective way,' adds the COI.
That is just one of the problems. As John Tylee, associate editor of
Campaign, the industry magazine, points out: 'There is only a limited amount
of work for a black agency in the UK. The market is heavily fragmented and
thus not easy to reach. It is perhaps mainly useful only for those products
that gear themselves to a specific market such as cosmetic products.' He
thinks an agency specifically geared to the ethnic minorities will find it
hard to make money in the UK.
John Hegarty, creative director and chairman of Bartle Bogle Hegarty, one of
the leading UK advertising agencies, is more hostile. 'There is a case for
an agency that talks to, say, women or certain age groups, but an agency
identified by race is a dangerous concept. It is a divisive force in our
society and such examples as exist in the US show the failure of that
society. I just hope it does not happen here.'
That may be wishful thinking. Vince Cullers of Chicago, the US's oldest
black advertising agency, started in 1956, says it is looking at the UK as a
base for its agency, not only to service the Caribbean and Africa, but also
the rest of the European Community.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930722

