FT933-9988

FT  06 AUG 93 / Arts: Romeo and Juliet - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


We are, like it or not, celebrating Romeo and Juliet year in London. The
Kirov ballet has just shown us its rickety version of the Lavrovsky
original. Birmingham Royal Ballet brought its staging of MacMillan's
choreography to Covent Garden on Wednesday (more of this anon). Next week
English National Ballet offers the Ashton production on the South Bank. And,
unsurprisingly, the Royal Ballet will also present the MacMillan Romeo as
the autumn season begins at the Royal Opera House. These tiresome facts
indicate the extent to which ballet companies now rely upon the tried and
true - and predictable - to hold an audience. The triumph of the obvious is
the death of repertory.
But I record with pleasure that the admirable BRB triple bill last week of
Job, Choreartium, Concerto, brought an enthusiastic public to the Opera
House: there was a sense of excitement and interest which recalled happier
and more adventurous days of three decades ago when Swan Lake and Romeo were
not the only works the public seemed able to enjoy.
Birmingham acquired its staging of Romeo last year. The new designs by Paul
Andrews are handsome, as I reported at the first performance, and the
lighting by Hans-Ake Sjoquist is exemplary. The problem when this version
was first mounted, and it is one which I still noticed on Wednesday night,
has to do with the density, even the scale, of the company performances.
This is a production in which interpretations look smaller, lighter, than
those we know with the Royal Ballet. Some BRB readings are excellent: I
think Anita Landa's Nurse superb as a portrait of a jolly, fussy, loving old
servant; Alain Dubreuil's Laurence is a real priest - he knows how to give
people a blessing - and, as always with this rare artist, believable at
every moment. But many of the secondary roles looked eager where they should
be weighty with emotion, and choreographic outlines were diminished.
Birmingham's artists, so secure as an ensemble and so ready for any
challenge, here rush every fence. MacMillan's dances need to be explored
more fully.
But the heart of the ballet - which is Juliet's heart - beat strong and true
in Marion Tait's interpretation. Tait is our finest dance actress, incapable
of lying in any role, showing us its secrets through playing clear, potent.
There is, in everything, a lovely modesty to her work. Nothing is done for
vain effect. She serves her character, as she has served her art and her
company, with entire sincerity, and her performances are memorable because
of this. Dramatic insight is matched by a physical intelligence. Sir Kenneth
MacMillan gave her roles that she illuminated - I wish BRB would revive
Playground, in which her anguish still haunts me - and her Juliet is in the
very best traditions.
Juliet's opening moments with the doll are difficult, and on this occasion,
too skittish. Thereafter, the ballet is grandly Tait's. The ecstasy of first
love, youthful passion, and - most poignantly - the bravery and resignation
of the last act, were infinitely touching. A sudden blaze of temperament
before she yielded to Paris; the terrible silent scream as she realised
Romeo is dead, were moments uniquely indicative of Marion Tait's gifts. It
was a wholly truthful interpretation. Her Romeo was the guest artist Robert
Hill, giving an honest and attentive account of himself. The score sounded
very well from the Royal Ballet Sinfonia under Philip Ellis.
Birmingham Royal Ballet plays Romeo and Juliet with varied casting until the
end of this week

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930806

