FT934-8916

FT  12 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Out of the continent of need -
An African is to head the UN's food agency


   By JOHN MADELEY


FOOD deficit countries in Africa can expect a higher priority following the
election of Mr Jacques Diouf, a 55-year-old Senegalese diplomat, as the next
director-general of the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation.
Chosen on Monday by FAO's 168-member countries, Mr Diouf takes over at the
start of 1994 for a six-year term. But he is taking a 'wait and see'
attitude to reforms in the UN's largest and probably most bloated agency.
With a mandate to help increase food output, and an annual budget of about
Dollars 7m a year, the FAO employs 6,200 people, about half of them at its
Rome headquarters. The candidate who ran Mr Diouf a close second in this
week's election, Mr Geoff Miller of Australia, wanted to get many of the
Rome staff out into the field.
Mr Diouf appears to have no such plans. 'I don't want at this stage to say
what I will cut and what I will not cut; this would be completely
irresponsible,' he said after his election. His first action would be 'to
make sure I have all the facts - facts concerning the operations, programme,
management, financial aspects, scientific quality and governance. Once I
have all these elements, then I will be able to know what I should do and if
reforms are needed.'
FAO's management under its present director general, Mr Edouard Saouma, has
come under strong criticism for an alleged dictatorial style and this has
led some countries to withhold their contributions in the last few years.
Mr Diouf will be the first African to hold the post and believes that the
significance of his election is that the continent with the 'greatest need
for a solution to the agricultural problem is Africa'. Over the last 10
years, worldwide food production has increased by 24 per cent and population
by 20 per cent, he pointed out, while 'in Africa production per capita went
down by 5 per cent. We have to correct that.'
With degrees in tropical economy and agricultural economics, Mr Diouf is a
former executive-secretary of the West Africa Rice Development Association
which is trying to increase rice output in the region.
FAO has to face challenges of food production, equity and justice, he says.
'We have 780m who do not have adequate access to food, 190m below the age of
five who have protein deficiency, and we expect by the year 2000 to have a
90m tonne cereal deficit in Africa and Asia. We have to get the
organisational, financial and human resources to face those challenges.'
He discounted the idea that land set aside for farming in North America and
Europe should be used to grow food for the third world. 'My main concern
will be to ensure that food deficit countries manage to produce enough for
their own security - that is the priority.'
Solutions to food problems do exist, he stressed: 'There are grounds for
hope and many countries are successful; if we can take the example of
successful countries we can move forward.' Promising to eradicate any
corruption he found within the FAO, Mr Diouf said the 'most important thing
about this organisation is its credibility'. Its funds come from member
nations, he said, who want to be assured that they are well used.
FAO's new chief is likely to be given a honeymoon period by western
countries that contribute most of its funds. The United States plans to
clear off Dollars 80m of arrears to the FAO by the end of 1995. The daunting
task facing Mr Diouf is to improve the efficiency of a cumbersome
organisation to enable it to make a more substantial contribution to
overcoming food shortages.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

931112

