FT932-7052

FT  26 MAY 93 / Venables awarded extra time


   By JOHN MASON and PEGGY HOLLINGER


MR TERRY VENABLES, the chief executive of Tottenham Hotspur Football Club,
yesterday survived another attempt by Mr Alan Sugar, the club's chairman, to
dismiss him when the High Court postponed for two weeks the hearing that
will decide his soccer future.
The two men took their boardroom battle to the courts amid emotional scenes
as more than 500 Spurs fans demonstrated outside the court, voicing support
for Mr Venables and hurling abuse at Mr Sugar.
Lawyers for the Tottenham chairman attempted to persuade Sir Donald
Nicholls, the vice-chancellor, to lift the injunction which temporarily
blocked Mr Sugar's move to sack Mr Venables and allowed the beleaguered
chief executive to return to his desk.
Mr Philip Heslop QC, for Mr Sugar and the club, cited affidavits from other
club directors which claimed that, following Mr Venables re-instatement,
directors and staff were in a position of unacceptable confusion.
Their request was turned down by Sir Donald who, postponing the hearing
until June 8, ruled that Mr Venables should have a fair opportunity to
respond to the voluminous allegations made against him by Mr Sugar.
Sir Donald went on: 'It is to be hoped that the parties nonetheless can
agree a practical way of working together in the best interests of the
company and of the football club for the interim period.'
Mr Sugar, Mr Venables and their solicitors were locked in a meeting
yesterday afternoon in an attempt to work out an acceptable regime.
A further hearing on an unspecified date will consider Mr Venables' attempt
to force Mr Sugar to sell his 46 per cent stake to himself or a nominated
party. The chief executive is invoking a Companies Act clause allowing a
minority shareholder to force the sale of majority holdings if their owners
are deemed by the courts to be acting against the interests of the company.
Mr Heslop yesterday repeated Mr Sugar's claims that the move to dismiss the
chief executive was motivated by lack of confidence in Mr Venables and his
insistence in supporting Mr Eddie Ashby, the undischarged bankrupt who,
until his dismissal last week, worked as Mr Venables' 'right-hand man'.
It was also disclosed that, after the attempt to sack him, Mr Venables
backed an abortive move by Mr Jonathan Crystal, his ally on the Tottenham
board, to have the club's shares suspended from the Stock Exchange - a
tactic opposed by the club's merchant bankers Henry Ansbachers and its
lawyers Herbert Smith.
Mr Heslop also alleged that Edennote, Mr Venables' private company, was
either insolvent or in an extremely parlous financial state. Mr Venables had
to borrow some Pounds 2m to finance his 23 per cent stake, some of which was
security against his debt.
After the hearing Mr Sugar, escorted by police to the supporters' cries of
'Judas', left the court by a side exit. He said only that he would comment
'when the time is right'.
Mr Venables waved at supporters as he left through the main exit from the
court. When asked if he was happy about the court's decision to adjourn the
hearing, he replied: 'Well I've gotta be, haven't I?'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930526

