FT934-11782

FT  29 OCT 93 / ICI reports sharp profits rise since Zeneca demerger:
Exchange rate gains and cost cutting bring benefit


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


ICI'S first quarterly results since the demerger of Zeneca in June revealed
a sharp improvement in profits due largely to exchange gains following
sterling's devaluation and cost-cutting that started three years ago.
Sir Denys Henderson, chairman of the UK's biggest chemicals company,
welcomed the improvement but said prices remained under pressure across the
business.
ICI's third-quarter pre-tax profit on continuing operations rose to Pounds
73m, up from Pounds 22m, on sales 19 per cent higher at Pounds 2.17bn.
Profits for the nine months rose to Pounds 240m from Pounds 168m on sales up
13 per cent at Pounds 6.35bn.
Earnings per share in the quarter were 5.8p, compared with 0.5p, and 18.2p
for the nine months, up from 11.7p.
Sir Denys said the group had benefited from more competitive exchange rates
and the benefits of rationalisation and cost-cutting that has included the
slimming of the workforce by 30 per cent since 1991.
ICI's shares rose 13p to 718p as the results came in above expectations.
Some analysts, however, said they were concerned the market was taking too
much recovery in product prices for granted in its assumption that profits
by 1996 could be between Pounds 800m and Pounds 1bn.
There was also some concern at the extent of the currency effect, which
could not be repeated next year, and questions over to what extent the group
would be able to continue squeezing savings through its so-called
'self-help' cost-cutting programme.
Mr Colin Short, finance director, said ICI had benefited from Pounds 80m of
currency gains in the nine-month period but that Pounds 75m of that had been
lost because of pricing pressures.
In the first nine months ICI had also made savings of Pounds 260m as a
result of the self-help measures begun in 1991. The cost-cutting and
rationalisation remained central to ICI's continuing profitability and the
group would continue to push towards becoming the most efficient and
lowest-cost producer.
On group prospects, prices remained under pressure in all business sectors.
The group was experiencing steady but unexciting recovery in the US and
difficult trading conditions in continental European markets.
Nine-month trading profits in paints fell after strong growth in Asia
Pacific was offset by difficult conditions in North America and Europe.
Materials profits rose strongly as volumes recovered. Explosives' results
were flat while industrial chemicals profits more than doubled as volumes
increased.
Lex, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931029

