FT932-178

FT  30 JUN 93 / Getting out there and learning some street cred: The
enthusiastic man from the ministry who has been lent by the DTI to TI


   By MICHAEL CASSELL


MR CHRIS JACKSON is stoical about a salary which looks distinctly sickly
alongside the pay of his immediate colleagues.
As a strategic development executive with TI Group, the specialist
engineering company, he plays an important role in determining its future
shape and direction. But many of those around him are paid much more
handsomely.
Mr Jackson, however, is not what he seems. A temporary addition to the small
management team which operates from TI's global headquarters in Abingdon,
Oxfordshire, he is normally found behind a desk at the Department of Trade
and Industry in London's Victoria.
Mr Jackson is a civil servant. He has been for nearly 30 years, working his
way up to grade 5 - assistant secretary - level. He intends to remain a
servant of the government which continues to pay his usual salary while he
is out of town.
The only perk of his present job is the car provided by TI to make the daily
60-mile journey from his home in Sunbury, Surrey. 'I have made a long
investment in my career. Remuneration in the private sector is undeniably
higher but I would have to think three times before changing horses,' he
says.
Mr Jackson, at 46, has become part of the drive, renewed under Mr Michael
Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, to build a new partnership
between the government and industry. The temporary attachment of civil
servants to private companies - conducted in parallel with a programme of
inward recruitment - is hardly new, but the DTI is giving fresh priority to
the strategy.
By the end of last year more than 50 of Mr Heseltine's staff were working on
long-term secondment outside his department, while nearly 60 external
recruits, possessing what Mr Heseltine calls 'street cred', were working in
the DTI. The number is now growing as Mr Heseltine extends the principle
throughout the department.
Before his recruitment to TI, Mr Jackson headed part of the DTI's
environment unit, encouraging businesses to commit themselves to sensible
environmental strategies and also dealing with a range of UK and EC
environmental agencies in the development of policy.
The move to Abingdon meant a new role and something of a culture shock. He
had to field the inevitable jokes about a civil servant's lifestyle,
although he insists the sheer daily volume of work flowing across his DTI
desk is greater than anything he has experienced at TI.
His new colleagues, while expressing curiosity about the internal workings
of government, also made it clear that his government department was not
particularly highly rated, a view which he believes is now changing as Mr
Heseltine gives the department a new remit and fresh focus.
Enlisted at TI to help Mr James Roe, director of strategic development, Mr
Jackson was put to work on medium-term planning for the group, analysing
markets, identifying areas for potential growth and putting potential
acquisitions under the microscope.
His arrival last year came weeks before TI launched its hostile bid for
Dowty, the aerospace components manufacturer. He immediately joined the team
building up a detailed profile of the bid target and, after the takeover,
toured Dowty factories to see how they would fit in to the expanded group.
'Some things strike you at once,' says Mr Jackson, summing up the
differences which separate two very different worlds. 'Life is very much
more fluid and flexible. You have to self-start more and work doesn't follow
a regular pattern. In the DTI, you have a job description which is unlikely
to change from one year to the next.'
Mr Jackson says that at TI, 'you do what needs to be done and you do it
quickly. The pace of events is much faster and there is speedier
decision-making. In government, there are so many people you have to get on
side before you can make any serious moves.'
The need for public accountability, he says, can also act as a drag on
decision-making and he stresses that while accountability remains an
important factor in the private sector, the systems governing it are
'slicker'.
In spite of the equanimity with which he views the prospect of returning to
the civil service at the end of the year, Mr Jackson believes he has been
extremely fortunate to get to the heart of a highly successful international
company. Any DTI colleagues, he says, should jump at the chance to spend
time in a manufacturing company.
But how will his experience in the outside world help the DTI do its job
when he returns to the department? 'A lot of what I have seen merely
reinforces the instincts I already had. But I hope my time here has helped
me understand how companies think, how they see us and how we can better
help each other. The DTI spends a lot of time trying to exhort business,
which always has to relate things to the bottom line, to do things for its
own good. If we can understand its obligations and priorities, so much the
better.'
What will he miss most when he leaves? 'The sheer variety of tasks and the
unexpected nature of the job, which made me uncomfortable at first but which
I now thoroughly enjoy.'
Neither is he entirely convinced about swapping the gardens and fountains of
TI headquarters for the noise and grime of Victoria. 'The other morning I
had to pull up and let a duck lead its babies across the road. You don't do
that too often outside the DTI.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930630

