FT932-291

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (9): Mid-range Unix faces a
crunch - The prospects for the main operating systems strategies


   By PHIL MANCHESTER


THIS year may be the turning point for Unix, the computer operating system
developed more than 20 years ago by the US telecommunications giant AT&T.
Technical development of Unix will soon fall under the control of PC
networking specialist Novell following its takeover of Unix System
Laboratories (USL). There is growing interest in 'downsized' open computer
systems based on Unix and a renewed sense of unity among Unix suppliers.
This should mean that Unix will, at last, find a respectable place in
commercial computing as an open foundation for portable applications which
can run on many different computers.
There are still doubts, however, and Unix's future may not be as rosy as
many of its advocates think. The market it serves - so-called mid-range
systems - has become a target both for large systems suppliers coming down
from mainframes and for personal computer suppliers moving up from the
bottom. It has, therefore, attracted alternatives. Operating systems
software such as Unix is pivotal because it provides the foundation for
applications.
IBM, for example, offers its AS/400 minicomputer with its own operating
software and its larger PS/2 personal computer systems running the OS/2
operating system. Needless to say, IBM also supplies AIX, a version of Unix
for its RS/6000 workstations.
Last month Unix came under attack from Microsoft with launch of Windows NT,
yet another potential alternative for mid-range computing.
Despite these challenges, Unix has a proven record of survival. It was
ignored by all except academics and researchers until a decade ago, when it
became closely bound to the cause of open systems. Since then, it has almost
become synonymous with 'openness'.
Unix is relatively easy to move to new computers - making it popular with
the new minicomputer manufacturers which emerged in the 1980s. Sun
Microsystems, Pyramid, Sequent and others took Unix off the shelf and
tailored it to their hardware, rather than face the expense of building an
operating system from scratch.
There were other factors. To sell their hardware successfully, manufacturers
must offer appealing software applications. Unix has them by the hundred
and, theoretically, they can work on any computer which supports Unix. In
practice, things are not this simple and applications often need 'tweaking'
to work on a different version of Unix. But this is still much less costly
than attempting to move, say, an old IBM mainframe application to a Digital
Equipment or Hewlett-Packard environment.
Unix has other virtues. Until recently, its technical development was under
the control of AT&T which, as a telecommunications company, had no axe to
grind in the computer market. Following an unsuccessful attempt to attack
IBM in the mid-1980s with its own Unix-based computers, AT&T has posed no
real threat. This meant that Unix was mainly free of hardware manufacturers'
influence and was able to develop along 'open' lines.
Through the 1980s, Unix suffered from fragmentation as manufacturers
'enhanced' it to suit their own hardware - making it difficult to move
applications without changing them. This undermined the open principle to
some extent and led to a succession of agreements and rival alliances aimed
at producing a single Unix specification.
At the start of the 1990s, tough market conditions helped force Unix
suppliers together and, in March, they announced support for the Common Open
Software Environment, a blueprint for single Unix standard. But this
new-found unity may owe as much to the imminent threat of Microsoft and
Windows NT as it does to any new sense of co-operation between rival
hardware builders.
Microsoft has recognised that the main market for future mid-range systems
will come from current MS/DOS PC users. They will be more inclined to
migrate to Windows NT, which offers them some continuity, than to a version
of Unix or IBM's OS/2. While this is unlikely to affect Unix's aspirations
in the market for 'downsized' systems, it will not help it gain the critical
mass it needs to dominate the mid-range.
However, Mr Neal Waddington, vice-president in charge of Tandem Computers'
Unix operations, sees a good future for Unix in the downsizing market: 'The
functionality gap between Unix and other proprietary systems is closing.
While Unix is not completely open, from a customer point of view, it's good
enough,' he says.
'Customers are looking for the break-up of the vertically-integrated
proprietary systems so they can buy best-of-breed products at every level,'
Mr Waddington adds.
He sees Novell's takeover of USL as 'very positive. It will lead to faster
convergence of a standard at the binary level. This means we can have a Unix
standard that we can add value to - rather than trying to add standards to
our systems,' he says.
He acknowledges, however, that Windows NT will be attractive to some
customers - though he sees it making its mark on the desktop 'client' rather
than in the back-end 'server' systems.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930629

