FT933-10177

FT  05 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Time for a new look - Neil Buckley reports
on how the DIY chains are fighting to survive in a changed environment


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


THE BRITISH are the biggest DIY enthusiasts in Europe, according to a recent
survey. A quarter of Britons would choose to spend any spare cash on
improving their homes, compared with only 5 per cent in Spain.
As the recession has dragged on, however, even the British seem to have lost
their appetite for putting up shelves and grouting bathrooms. Boots has
recently been fending off rumours that it planned to close half of Do It
All, its DIY joint venture with WH Smith, after revealing it was its only
division to have suffered a fall in sales (of 7.2 per cent) in the three
months to June 30.
Sir Christopher Benson, chairman, told Boots' annual meeting the DIY market
remained severely depressed.
A month earlier, Mr Cyril Stein, chairman of Ladbroke, warned shareholders
that recent trading at its Texas DIY chain had been disappointing. Two
managers have left the chain in recent weeks.
After enjoying double-digit annual profits growth in the late 1980s, through
rapid expansion and nudging gross margins up from about 30 per cent to 34.5
per cent, the DIY chains have had a difficult 18 months. A damaging price
war broke out in late 1991 and flared up at intervals throughout 1992.
B&Q, market leader with 13 per cent, saw operating profits fall from Pounds
90m to Pounds 81m in 1992. Profits at Texas, which has an 8 per cent share,
fell from Pounds 47.5m to Pounds 43.5m, while Do It All (6 per cent) saw a
Pounds 6m profit transformed into a Pounds 14.4m loss.
Now, with more than 1,000 DIY superstores in the UK - more than the number
of food superstores - but with the housing market unlikely to return to the
levels of activity of the late 1980s, retail analysts warn the outlook for
the Pounds 8.5bn DIY market is tough.
'The DIY chains have still got a long way to go, but they have got to get
used to operating in a much more sober environment,' says Mr Richard Hyman,
chairman of Verdict, the retailing research group.
The first attempt to come to terms with that new environment - the price war
 -proved a costly mistake. Verdict believes it cost the chains Pounds 45m,
partly in extra advertising costs, but mainly through lost sales revenues.
Increases in sales volumes did not match expectations and could not
compensate for the lower margins. Moreover, stores found it difficult to
cope with the number of customers attracted by their promotions.
Shoppers may have been alienated by the poor service, the fact that many
items were out of stock and by a suspicion that if the stores could offer
such low prices some of the time they must be overcharging the rest of the
time.
The chains are now starting to believe that the key to survival is to offer
permanently competitive prices, and to develop their own unique identity and
product offer.
B&Q has abandoned sporadic deep discounting in favour of 'everyday low
prices', in line with the belief of Sir Geoffrey Mulcahy, chairman of parent
group Kingfisher, that the way to make money in the 1990s is not through
pushing up gross margins, but through sensible trimming of margins with the
aim of shifting larger volumes.
Kingfisher is also expanding its new Depot format: large superstores of
80,000 sq ft or more, designed to appeal to the serious DIY enthusiast and
trade buyers. It is likely to have 30 Depot stores by the end of this year.
'Kingfisher has adopted a two-pronged approach which will make life very
tough for everyone else,' says Ms Kimlan Cook, stores analyst at NatWest
Securities.
NatWest Securities forecasts that 20 Depot openings a year could double
Kingfisher's DIY sales to Pounds 2bn by 1997-98.
Smaller chains such as Wickes and Sainsbury's Homebase are best placed to
withstand the Kingfisher threat as they have developed strong niche markets.
Wickes is a highly focused specialist, concentrating on repair, maintenance
and home improvement, with a strong own brand, and appealing to DIY
enthusiasts and the trade. Homebase, meanwhile, is stronger in gardening,
home furnishings and decoration, with concessions such as Laura Ashley.
Texas is thought likely to suffer. It has no answer to Depot and has not yet
moved to everyday low prices. Its recent 21st anniversary offer of 21 per
cent price reductions showed it is still prepared to resort to deep
discounting. But some observers believe Texas, too, is differentiating
itself by concentrating more on the home adornment market.
The sick man of the sector remains Do It All, formed from the merger of
Boots' Payless and WH Smith's Do It All in 1990 - just as the housing market
slumped. Saddled with some old stores in poor locations, it did not have
time to establish a coherent trading formula before it was hit by the price
war. Boots says it still believes it can turn the chain round by introducing
a new store format which groups products together according to different DIY
projects, developing its brand identity and offering better service and
information to customers.
Some stores analysts, however, believe Boots will have to reconsider the
chain's position in the market if it does not show a substantial improvement
in the next few months.
One final threat looms over the sector: the possible arrival of large-format
competitors from overseas, such as Home Depot of the US, of which
Kingfisher's Depot remains a pale imitation. As one analyst put it: 'If some
of the big US operators come over here they could make even the best UK
chains look like amateurs.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930805

