FT932-7004

FT  26 MAY 93 / Business and the Environment: The high cost of cleaning up -
Drax has ambitious plans to reduce its emissions, but they may be a red
herring


   By DAVID LASCELLES


Next September, engineers at Drax in North Yorkshire, Europe's largest
coal-fired power station, will commission one of the most ambitious
environmental clean-up projects in the UK.
The exhaust gases from the first of the station's six 660MW generators will
be diverted from the chimney stack into a cavernous rubber-lined steel
chamber where they will be sprayed with a mixture of water and limestone.
That slurry will absorb 90 per cent of the sulphur dioxide from the gases
before they are passed back to the stack and emitted to the atmosphere.
During the following three years, the station's other five units will
receive flue gas desulphurisation (FGD) plants of their own, so that by 1996
Drax should be able to shrug off its notoriety as Europe's dirtiest power
station - though at a considerable price. The clean-up will cost National
Power, Drax's owner, more than Pounds 700m.
The start-up of Drax's FGD plant will doubtless be hailed by the government
as an important advance in its efforts to clean up Britain's power stations
 -and meet its international commitments on acid rain. But while the scale
of the project is impressive, it could turn out to be something of an
environmental red herring.
For one thing, only one of Britain's other 30-odd coal-fired power stations
is having FGD fitted (Ratcliffe in Nottinghamshire owned by PowerGen). And
for another, it looks increasingly as if other means than FGD will be used
to achieve the bulk of the intended reduction in harmful emissions. Changes
in fuel use, rationalisation of the bloated power station network and
advances in fuel-burning technology are likely to play a much larger role.
At the international level, the EC's Large Combustion Plant Directive of
1988 sets targets for reduction of sulphur dioxide and nitrous oxide
emissions (known in the business as sox and nox).
The UK successfully negotiated more lenient targets than continental
countries because of the exceptionally large size of its power stations and
the high sulphur content of British coal. From a 1980 baseline, it has to
cut sox by 60 per cent by 2003 and nox by 30 per cent by 1998.
In both cases, reduction targets for other leading EC members are 10
percentage points higher.
In addition, the UK's Environmental Protection Act requires power stations
to control pollution using the best available technology, not entailing
excessive cost (BATNEEC). Just before Easter, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of
Pollution issued a set of EPA authorisations for power plants intended to
achieve a steady reduction in sox and nox by the year 2001 and meeting the
EC targets.
Unlike previous controls, which gave each generating company a 'bubble' of
emissions which it could share out among its power stations as it wanted,
the HMIP's new authorisations will impose limits on individual stations as
well. That is mainly to bring emissions down faster at stations which are
sensitively placed, such as those in the Thames Valley or close to the Welsh
hills or the Pennines. Drax, located near Humberside, where the prevailing
winds carry its emissions out to the North Sea, gets more lenient limits.
But the overall effect of this will be to reduce the generators'
flexibility, so the new rules effectively represent a tightening of
standards.
The generating companies have a year to come up with plans to meet the new
requirements, but it is already clear that an acceleration of FGD
installation is most unlikely. Roger Witcomb, the director of corporate
planning at National Power, says generators have the alternatives of running
a power station less intensively, or simply closing it down and switching to
cleaner fuels.
The choice will depend on many factors, one of the main ones being the large
cost of FGD. Apart from the expense of the installation itself, FGD actually
reduces the efficiency of a power station as it needs a lot of electricity
to run.
Drax's FGD will add 0.6p to the cost of a kilowatt hour of electricity,
nearly 25 per cent of the price that electricity fetches in the wholesale
pool.
(There are cheaper methods. ScottishPower may clean up its Longannet station
on the Firth of Forth with sea water, but this is not an option available to
inland stations.)
FGD also carries an environmental cost. By adding to power demand, it pushes
up emissions of carbon dioxide. It also increases the quarrying of
limestone, and produces waste material which has to be disposed of (it will
be buried at Drax).
In fact, the economic and environmental case against FGD is becoming much
stronger. What may tip the balance decisively is the growing availability of
natural gas as an alternative to coal.
For the price of its Drax FGD plant, National Power could have built two
1000MW gas stations which were not only thermally much more efficient but
whose emissions were minimal.
Michael Reidy, corporate affairs director of PowerGen, describes FGD as a
'negative investment' compared with the 'positive' opportunities available
for investing in new environmentally friendly plant.
PowerGen has not turned its back on FGD, he stresses (it has plans pending
for an installation at its Ferrybridge station in West Yorkshire), but 'we
will address negative investments when we have to.'
Ian Preston, chief executive of ScottishPower, is more blunt about it. 'We
will not invest in FGD if we can avoid it, ' he says.
He would far rather see alternatives, such as tradeable pollution permits,
recently introduced in the US, which would allow him to take advantage of
the fact that Scottish coal has a lower sulphur content than English. He
would 'sell' his pollution rights to English generators who needed them
more.
All the generating companies are playing their cards close to their chests
as they digest the implications of the new HMIP authorisations. But the
broad message is clear. Only a few large power stations with long, active
lives ahead of them will justify the cost of FGD. Old, inefficient stations
face closure and the rest will be managed in a variety of ways, such as
burning cleaner coal or operating fewer hours.
'There's a huge overhang of capacity in the market,' Witcomb says. 'Only big
plant will be left by the year 2001.'
The effect of this on the structure of UK power generation is becoming
evident. The economics greatly favour gas over coal, and are encouraging a
surge in gas-fired capacity which could replace as much as half the present
coal-fired plant by the end of this decade.
That may be bad news for the miners, but it will lead to marked reductions
in sox and nox - and also of carbon gases for which there is, at the moment,
no commercially viable method of extraction.
The new economics is even giving encouragement to the nuclear power industry
which produces no gaseous emissions. The government will be embarking on a
review of the nuclear industry later this year.
Whether all this activity actually produces a sufficient cut in sox and nox
to restore the environment, rather than merely to meet legal targets, will
continue to be a matter for debate. Fiona Weir, a clean air campaigner at
Friends of the Earth, says that HMIP's new authorisations were a 'missed
opportunity' to accelerate the drive to reduce acid rain. Britain is only
doing the minimum necessary to meet standards which are generous anyway, and
HMIP is not enforcing the introduction of the best clean-up technology.
The power industry, which still disputes the link between its emissions and
the damage allegedly caused to lakes and plant life, says it is doing more
than required.
Whatever the case, the EC is expected to tighten up the emission reduction
targets when it meets to review the LCPD next year, and so the pressures
will increase.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930526

