FT932-188

FT  30 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Major urged to admit pit rescue was
a 'fraud'


   By DAVID OWEN


THE GOVERNMENT should come clean over coal and admit the rescue package it
unveiled in March had been exposed as a 'fraud', Mr John Smith told MPs
yesterday as he clashed with Mr John Major over continuing pit closures.
Anticipating next week's Commons debate in which Labour hopes to rekindle
public interest in the industry's future, the Labour leader said three of
the 12 pits that the government had led parliament to believe would be
reprieved now faced closure.
Was it not a 'perfect example' of the government's style that a white paper
produced for '36 hours' publicity' had not survived for three months in the
real world, he asked.
But Mr Major cited remarks made by Mr Arthur Scargill, president of the
National Union of Mineworkers, that the Labour leadership was 'more
interested in opinion polls and images than in principles and real
policies'.
Some of the threatened pits had geological problems resulting in excessively
high costs, Mr Major said. In two cases, the miners themselves had voted to
close pits - in one case immediately.
Mr Smith said if miners did not vote for closure, they stood to lose
redundancy payments. British Coal was offering coal at 'a knockdown price'
that would give the consumer cheaper electricity than from any other source,
he said.
Mr Smith added: 'If the two privatised generators still won't buy at that
price, does it not prove the market is rigged against coal, and if this goes
on, pit after pit will close and we will lose a vital industry?'
Mr Major replied that the coal industry had been closing in size every year
over the last 30 years.
At least one Conservative backbencher intends either to abstain or vote with
Labour after next Monday's debate.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, calls in an interview today for Tories to
rally round Mr John Major and stop behaving 'like the Labour party used to'.
Mr Clarke told the Daily Express that the prime minister had already 'come
through the worst' of his unpopularity.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930630

