FT934-10129

FT  06 NOV 93 / Travel: Corsica - tourism down, explosions up - It is known
as l'Ile de Beaute. And so it will remain until the bombs and vendettas stop


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


CORSICANS are hotheads by temperament, extremists by political conviction,
thugs by vocation. When they are not blowing up police barracks they are
sticking knives into each other. They are clannish, secretive, proud,
excitable, vengeful, intolerant of authority and intensely patriotic. For
such a small island there is simply too much Latin passion surging about.
Such, at least, is the general view of Corsica entertained by the mainland
French, themselves no slouches when it comes to Latin passion. But then the
French might not have an unbiased view of Corsica: they have been struggling
unsuccessfully to make proud Frenchmen of stubborn Corsicans since they took
control of the island from the Genoese 224 years ago.
One must never, I reminded myself on setting out, take French indignation
too seriously. I was interested to see what a little tour of Corsica might
show me beyond thuggery and passion.
At Marseille airport I picked up a few news periodicals for the hour-long
flight to Bastia. They were not encouraging. I read that Corsican tourism
was down 30 per cent this year. Investment was down. So was employment. The
only thing that was up was explosions.
Last year the FLNC - Corsican National Liberation Front - and other groups
of the Corsican independence movement claimed a record 309 bomb attacks on
the island. So far this year there have been 23 political assassinations.
The most recent was the gunning down in a Bastia street of Robert Sozzi, a
young militant nationalist who dared criticise his FLNC leaders for
fund-raising by extortion and protection racketeering. Added to bombings and
bank robberies, such behaviour is putting French mainlanders off the place
they still call l'Ile de Beaute.
Surely Corsicans could not be as hot-headed outside the political sphere as
in, I reasoned. The local news in La Corse, an island daily, would surely be
a little brighter. But no.
The Costa brothers from the village of Moltifao had shot a hostage in a
hold-up. Andre Bourdelles had shot a man who had crept up and tried to rape
him while he was taking his afternoon siesta. Everyone was shooting everyone
else. Gerard Berthier, for his part, was on trial for shooting his wife, who
had been provoking him.
'Angry, Bertier loaded a pistol and fired a warning shot into the stairs,'
said the report. 'This did not seem to frighten his wife who, on the
contrary, defied him by proffering her left breast: 'Shoot, if you are a
man]', Maryse Camolli shouted. Berthier fired and Maryse Camolli was, this
time, mortally wounded.'
Daily life seemed even more dreadfully hot-headed and Latin than political
life. Not even the sports pages were left unbloodied. They showed a colour
picture of leathery, whiskery-faced men in bandoliers standing over a row of
equally leathery, whisker-faced boar.
The main difference was that the men were alive, the boar dead. Underneath,
La Corse announced it was offering prizes to some of the 500 village hunting
teams which each year shoot more than 10,000 wild boar in Corsica. For an
island of 250,000 inhabitants, that is some shooting.
I stopped just long enough in Bastia to pick up a rental car and headed for
the deep countryside. Even here, though, one cannot entirely avoid the
separatist propaganda blitz. As I drove through a warm, late autumn
landscape seared brown and gold by four months of strong sun, I read the
graffiti that appeared on signpost and rock face along the winding road.
'Corsica Nazione]', 'Independenza]' it cheered in a language that remains
closer to medieval Tuscan than modern French.
But for anyone with their eyes open to what lies behind the spray-painted
exhortations, there is an unexpected dividend to Corsica's centuries-old
legacy of political hot-headedness.
Today Corsica remains one of the most spectacularly beautiful and
commercially undeveloped areas left in the Mediterranean. A little bit of
terrorism goes a long way - who will invest in an island where not even
French mainland insurance companies will offer cover on holiday homes?
Up and over the the mountainous centre of the island I wound. The French
19th century novelist Prosper Merimee called Corsica 'a mountain in the
sea,' and he was right. Just half-an-hour's drive from the coast I was
looking up at Mount Cinto, 9,000ft above the water.
Corsica is one of those places that could be many places. By the sea I had
passed beaches where the palms were as lush, the sand as white and the water
as clear as any South Pacific island. On the Scala di Santa Regina, at the
base of Mount Cinto, my car crawled up rocky, dry, narrow defiles that made
the Hindu Kush look gentle.
Near Calacuccia, amid lonely farmhouses and herds of black, half-wild pigs
snuffling around tree roots, I found myself in chestnut forests reminiscent
of the Cevennes. Still further on, at Valdo Niello, I entered thick pine
forests where chalets and summer-bare ski slopes reminded me of the Rockies.
Finally, just four hours after leaving the east coast, I popped out on the
west, at the gulf of Porto. Its high, bare red granite bays and promentories
rising sheer out of the sea, it is like nowhere else on earth.
If Corsica's countryside is spectacular, wild and in autumn nearly deserted,
its villages are civilised in the sun-drugged fashion that only
out-of-the-way Mediterranean towns can be. I saw only sleeping dogs, widows
in black and old men who watch every move you make.
Nor were there bomb explosions or bank alarms ringing when I was in the old
quarter of Ajaccio, the nearest thing Corsica has to a city. It is a place
of bars and palm trees and sun-faded awnings, whiffs of cat-pee and narrow
streets ending in sudden bright patches of sea.
I liked watching the stone-masons who sat outside the old Bonaparte house in
Ajaccio resting and eating pizzas of anchovies and tomato paste. I liked the
old man who called up to the kitten meowling for him from his first-floor
window: 'Eh] Basta]' Intensely Mediterranean, intensely conservative, this
is a place of slow, fixed rhythms. I am not surprised the young Napoleon
felt he had to clear out to get anything done.
These days, though, nowhere in the Mediterranean escapes the summer crowds.
If the mainland French are nervous of their countrymen's hospitality, the
Italians and Germans are less so. On the magnificent beach of Roccapina I
discovered a bay full of beautiful people; I had no idea that crewing
leisure craft in the nude was so popular.
In the resort town of Porto Vecchio, I dropped into Chez Laurent, a pasta
restaurant built into the town's medieval walls. Dining on lasagna and
gazing down on to the lights of the harbour, I asked Jackie Fadda, Laurent's
American wife, how foreigners got on with hot-blooded locals.
'Once a group of British football hooligans on their way to Sardinia tried
to make trouble in the bars here,' she told me. 'The shotguns were out in no
time at all. A few Brits were hurt and the rest spent most of the night
hiding under cars in the street. I don't imagine they will come back.
'But most foreigners know it doesn't pay to mess around with Corsicans. And
most Corsicans, even nationalists, want nothing to do with political
violence. This is not a political issue as much as an emotional one:
Corsicans get excited when they think of real estate speculators, the Mafia
and multi-national companies taking over and ruining their beautiful island.
It is a question of honour. They are actually a very hospitable people.'
Until the vendettas and bombs stop and the tourists start coming, Corsica,
wild and woolly, will remain l'Ile de Beaute.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

931106

