FT934-10240

FT  06 NOV 93 / Misery piled on misery


A grim joke is doing the rounds of Britain's baking industry, which has
recently seen the price of a white loaf slashed to as low as 9p in some
outlets. 'We won't cut the price any further,' it runs. 'We're simply going
to tape a 10p piece to every loaf instead.'
Bread is one of the biggest casualties of the battle for sales which has
forced UK food retailers to launch promotional discounts, special offers and
budget grocery lines on a scale not seen since the supermarket price war of
the 1970s. But it is far from the only one.
Since the summer, the price of fresh milk in many stores has fallen from 25p
to 21p a pint, barely half the amount charged for doorstep deliveries. Other
volume lines subject to severe price competition include canned fruit and
vegetables, biscuits, jam and tea.
Some retailers are believed to be selling certain items at below cost price
just to get shoppers into their stores. But while price falls are good news
for consumers, they cannot continue indefinitely unless supermarkets get
their suppliers to share the pain.
So far, the City seems unsure which sector will suffer most. Supermarket
share prices have been under pressure for months but J Sainsbury's
promotional campaign last week also knocked many food manufacturers' shares,
just as they were recovering from last year's 'green pound' devaluation and
investors' loss of confidence in consumer brands.
Some manufacturers expect things to get much worse in the months ahead. 'The
outlook is for a really bloody winter for everybody, retailers and suppliers
alike,' says one.
Who fares best in the struggle for diminishing margins depends only partly
on the relative size and strength of the companies involved. At least as
important are the market structure and profitability of individual product
categories.
Most vulnerable are manufacturers in mature businesses, such as canned goods
and bread, which are highly fragmented or glutted with excess capacity.
However, even in some fairly concentrated categories, such as biscuits,
supply and demand have been thrown out of balance by the arrival of new
cut-price competitors.
Nonetheless, Mr David Lang of stockbrokers Henderson Crosthwaite argues that
UK food manufacturing overall is much better placed to brave a price war
than in the past. As the chart shows, the industry has become much more
efficient since 1985, raising labour productivity by more than a third.
Furthermore, big capacity cuts in low-margin sectors, such as poultry, have
reduced their exposure to the commodity cycle. However, such businesses
remain vulnerable to shifts in exchange rates and to the growing willingness
of big supermarket chains to buy abroad.
Conversely, those suppliers likely to suffer least are manufacturers of
distinctive high-quality products, which continue to spend on innovation and
marketing and do not let their prices diverge too far from cheaper
competition. As one industry observer put it: 'Ironically, this could be the
moment when big brands return to investor favour.'
Judging by last week's industry-wide drop in food manufacturers' shares, the
stock market has yet to grasp that distinction. But with the yield on some
shares now above bank base rate, even the most pessimistic investors must
soon start wondering just how much worse the industry's misery can get.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931106

