FT932-6936

FT  26 MAY 93 / UK Company News: GA in US link to form telephone-based
broker - Joint venture to have Pounds 400,000 initial share capital


   By RICHARD LAPPER


GENERAL ACCIDENT, the Perth-based insurer, is linking up with Rollins Hudig
Hall, the US insurance broker, to form a new telephone-based insurance
broking company, underlining increasing competition in the motor and home
insurance market.
SelectDirect, which will open for business in July, is seen as a response to
the rapid growth of 'direct writers', which sell personal lines insurance by
a combination of mass media advertising and telephone sales.
It will resemble telephone-based brokers such as AA Insurance and Swinton
Insurance, the Sun Alliance subsidiary, but the new company will not have a
branch structure or high street presence and aims to achieve a much lower
cost base than these rivals as a result.
Mr Peter Friend of RHH, who is to be managing director, says that
SelectDirect will operate in much the same way as direct writers but will
offer customers a choice of insur-er. The company will make maximum use of
advanced computer and telecommunications technology.
'The creation of SelectDirect is further evidence of our determination to
keep fully abreast of developments in our industry. 'Personal lines' has
been an area of great change in recent years,' Mr Friend said.
Direct writers such as Direct Line, Churchill and The Insurance Service have
steadily increased their share of the motor insurance market in the past
three years. Direct Line insures more than 900,000 motorists and expects to
be the biggest motor insurance company in the country by the end of the
year.
GA's own direct writing subsidiary, GA 1-2-1, has also made inroads into the
motor insurance market since its launch in 1989.
Mr Bob Newton, assistant general manager of GA (UK), said: 'Combining our
tele-marketing skills and experience with the insurance broking skills of
RHH is a natural and powerful next step.'
RHH and GA will each have a 50 per cent share in the new company, which is
understood to have an initial share capital of Pounds 400,000.
It will be based in East Kilbride in Scotland and create about 60 new jobs
by the end of its first year.
RHH intends to place all its personal lines business in the company, while
GA is expected to underwrite only a portion of the business broked by the
new company.
The venture hopes to obtain some Pounds 5m in brokerage commissions within
three years.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930526

