FT932-3124

FT  16 JUN 93 / Technical factors cut trade surplus


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


JAPAN'S customs-cleared trade surplus dipped slightly in May largely as a
result of temporary technical factors, according to figures released by the
Finance Ministry.
Nevertheless, the 0.1 per cent fall in the surplus in May, to Dollars 7.7bn
(Pounds 5bn), will be welcomed by the Japanese government as evidence that
the surplus is reaching its peak after growing for almost two and a half
years.
The fall may help to defuse tensions between the Japanese and US governments
during talks in the next few weeks about measures to reduce the surplus. The
talks are due to come to a head before the Tokyo summit of Group of Seven
leading industrialised countries in the first week of July.
However, news of the decline did little to stem the continued rise of the
yen against the dollar. In Tokyo trading the dollar closed at Y105.03, down
from its Monday close of Y105.20, after it had briefly touched a new low of
Y104.83 in the morning.
The yen's strength hit the Tokyo stock market Nikkei index which fell by
351.47, or about 1.7 per cent, to 20,045.88. The market's fall was a
reflection of the damage a higher yen may do to the profits of Japanese
exporters.
The yen's continued strength, combined with the stock market's fall close to
the critical 20,000 mark, will increase pressure on the Bank of Japan to cut
interest rates.
Mr Yasushi Mieno, Bank of Japan governor, on Monday ruled out an interest
rate cut to prevent the yen rising. However, the central bank announced
yesterday it would hold a meeting of its regional branch managers on July 5
and 6. These meetings have paved the way for a cut in the discount rate in
the past.
Mr Tadashi Okuda, chairman of the Federation of Bankers' Associations,
called on the monetary authorities to make 'timely and flexible' responses
to the yen's surge after warning that the stronger yen threatened to dash
hopes of an economic recovery.
The drop in Japan's merchandise trade surplus was because of a faster growth
of imports. Exports in May rose 5.6 per cent from the same month last year
to Dollars 26.85bn, while imports rose 8.2 per cent to Dollars 19.12bn.
Japan's trade surplus with the US fell by 2.1 per cent from the year before
to Dollars 2.77bn.
Finance Ministry officials said the fall was because of fewer working days
in May compared with the same month last year, as well as longer vacations
taken during the 'golden week' holidays. These cuts helped to reduce
exports.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930616

