FT932-234

FT  30 JUN 93 / Russia keeps pressure on Baltic states


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THE Russian government yesterday maintained pressure on the former Soviet
republic of Estonia when a senior official suggested that the 600,000-strong
Russian-speaking population would be 'pushed towards territorial
self-determination' if a law on aliens passed by the Estonian parliament
last week was not repealed.
Mr Sergei Stankevich, political adviser to the Russian president, said the
law on aliens 'creates in Estonia the pre-conditions for a mono-ethnic, or
single community, state'.
The law's key clause, which has upset the normally acquiescent
Russian-speaking community, lays down that all non-ethnic Estonians must
pass a language examination over the next year as a pre-condition for
continued residence.
Mr Stankevich's comments come as Estonia's north-eastern city of Narva,
where the population is 90 per cent Russian, is set to vote next month in a
local referendum on autonomy for the region. The issue has already been
referred to the Estonian Law Chancellor, the highest constitutional court in
the country.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, has already threatened an
energy embargo if the law is not repealed or altered. In response, Mr
Lennart Meri, the Estonian president, has promised to refer the law for an
'expert opinion' to the Council of Europe and the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe.
Mr Stankevich was scornful of these moves and said the Estonian president
'has more than once spoken out in favour of the law on aliens'.
Russia is also in dispute with Latvia over what it views as 'the restriction
of vitally important rights and freedoms of a significant part of the
population of Latvia'.
Russian-speakers make up between 30 and 40 per cent of the Estonian
population of 1.6m and around 45 per cent of the Latvian population of 2.4m.
The row has halted the withdrawal of Russian troops from the two countries,
though Russia says no other sanctions have been taken. The cutting off of
gas supplies to Estonia was followed by a shut-down in the gas pipeline to
the third Baltic state of Lithuania, with which Russia has no quarrel - both
moves being blamed by the Russian gas industry on non-payment of debts.
However, late last night supplies to Estonia were restored.
The Nordic countries will attempt further to cool tension between Russia and
Estonia when a joint initiative is proposed to the regular meeting of the
Nordic Council tomorrow. Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish prime minister, told the
TT news agency yesterday that 'if nothing is done there is a risk the
conflict could escalate'.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930630

