FT934-11479

FT  30 OCT 93 / Bulls show no sign of tiredness: The dizzying rise in global
share prices


   By PETER MARTIN


There is a dangerous moment in all bull markets when rising prices become
their own justification, when investors find it hard to think of reasons why
shares should not head upwards indefinitely.
That moment is with us now.
As the Dow-Jones Industrial Average reached a new record this week, briefly
passing the 3,700 mark for the first time on Thursday, a straw poll of
investors and analysts produced a striking consensus. The global bull market
still has a way to run, they say: there are no real signs of danger.
'We've got this incredible situation where low interest rates make stock
market investment almost a no-brainer,' says Mr Martin Barnes, editor of the
Bank Credit Analyst, a Montreal publication normally noted for its caution.
This confidence, widely shared, shrugs aside what in normal times would be
clear signs of an over-extended market. Share prices have risen in a
straight line almost everywhere for the past 12 months. Traditional measures
of the value of stocks and shares are starting to flash warnings.
Smaller British companies sell at 30 times their most recent earnings. The
dividend on the average US share represents a yield of less than 2 1/2 per
cent, lower than at the peak of the 1987 boom. German shares have risen 37
per cent in the past year in spite of a worsening economic outlook. The
Japanese equity market, though deprived of the steady rise seen elsewhere,
has stayed well above the 20,000 mark on the Nikkei index even though the
country is heading, on some estimates, for a period of damaging deflation.
Despite these warning signals, three factors lead to continued optimism.
First, much of Europe still stands to benefit from falling interest rates,
with perhaps 2 more percentage points to go. Falling interest rates are good
for stock markets because they will lead in time to higher corporate
earnings, and because they make shares seem more attractive compared with
cash or short-term bonds.
Second, though it is hard to see interest rates falling much further in the
two other main economies of the developed world, the US and Japan, it is
equally hard to see them rising in the near future. The classic credit
cycle, in which falling interest rates lead to higher borrowing and
ultimately to higher interest rates seems unaccountably delayed.
The bottom chart tells the story. In the developed countries, 'narrow
money', the money held for immediate transactions in the form of cash and
current accounts, has been rising steadily, as governments have eased
monetary policy to help pull their economies out of recession. But the broad
measure, a wider definition of money including interest-bearing accounts,
has fallen heavily, and has not yet shown a sustained upturn. It is broad
money that influences future economic activity; because it is so weak, the
normal economic upswing has been constrained.
None the less, the easing of monetary policy is having its effect elsewhere
in the financial system. 'To put it in simplistic terms,' says the Bank
Credit Analyst's Martin Barnes, 'that money has to go somewhere, so it finds
its way into financial markets.'
After the debt binge of the 1980s, both business and individuals are
unwilling to borrow more; and banks have become much more cautious lenders.
Economic activity is kept below the levels at which inflationary pressures
emerge, so interest rates continue low. 'There is too much cash or cash
equivalent which is not producing the returns people got accustomed to in
the past,' says Henry Looser, head of private banking at Bank Julius Bar in
Zurich. 'There is still a lot of pressure to redeploy such assets, most
obviously into the stock market.'
In the US, where this pattern is most obvious, the rush out of
interest-bearing deposits into mutual funds is overwhelming, running at a
rate of Dollars 1bn a day this year.
The third factor underpinning the optimism is the belief in a sea change in
the outlook for world inflation. The rise in the Dow Jones Industrial
Average on Thursday came about partly because the strong gross domestic
product growth reported that day was accompanied by low US inflation
figures: an annual rate of only 1.8 per cent in the third quarter, the
lowest since 1986.
Inflation is low across Europe. Measured in terms of a basket of currencies,
The Economist's commodity index shows prices 23 per cent below their 1985
level; food prices are 31 per cent lower than eight years ago; in nine of
the 12 biggest industrialised countries, wages rose by less than 4 per cent
in the past 12 months.
Is this atmosphere of confidence a sign that the market is reaching an
unsustainable peak? Worryingly, perhaps, few people seem to think so. 'Bull
markets always last longer than people expect,' says Michael Hart, joint
manager of Britain's biggest investment trust, Foreign and Colonial.
That comment was repeated several times this week, itself an indication that
sentiment is shifting from detailed justification of the market's rise to a
more general belief in its self-sustaining properties.
Even if the broad global rally is set to continue, however, there is still
potential vulnerability in a few specific areas. The US market has appeared
over-valued, in foreign eyes, for at least a year: to buy the shares in the
Standard & Poor's 500 index you have to pay for 28 years of current
earnings.
US investors' growing feeling that their bull market is mature has been
reflected in a rush to invest in emerging economies overseas, pushing these
generally illiquid markets up so fast they are vulnerable to any sudden
shift of mood.
Such specific risks aside, there are two more general uncertainties. What if
US interest rates start to rise? After all, long-term interest rates in the
US have been falling for six years, almost exactly as long as the rally of
the early 1980s which ended in the short but steep bear market in bonds of
1987. Though the Federal Reserve expects US economic growth to slow in the
fourth quarter, and there is still no sign of higher inflation there, the
interest rate cycle will undoubtedly turn in time. When it does, equities
will also look less attractive - and the signal could also mark a turn in
sentiment elsewhere.
And what if Europe's recession is longer and deeper than currently feared?
Though the consensus view is for a recovery starting some time in 1994 in
Europe's German heartland, there is a strong minority view that next year
will again bring bad news, with no real upturn likely till 1995. Share
prices may not reflect the damage that such a sustained recession could
cause to Europe's big companies and to its political and social stability.
Still, even people who say, like Henry Looser, that 'the economic situation
in western European economies is much worse than people think' are
optimistic about the effect on share prices - because they believe it will
lead to a faster, deeper cut in interest rates. This form of financial
alchemy, transmuting bad news into gold, surely signals the hour when a bull
market starts to rely on its own momentum.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931030

