FT931-3998

FT  12 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Western Australia aims to boost
onshore oil and gas production


   By KENNETH GOODING


WESTERN AUSTRALIA is to boost onshore oil and gas production by offering
more flexible royalty packages and other incentives to small and
medium-sized exploration companies, according to Mr George Cash, the state's
new Minister for Mines and Lands.
He said yesterday that he had instructed his department to confer with the
oil industry to see what the new coalition government could do to encourage
more exploration but already he had some ideas to put forward.
For example, exploration costs might in future be offset against royalties
on specific areas or wells. At present royalties paid to the state ranged
between 5 and 10 per cent of oil produced and there was no provision for
them to be waived. This problem could be overcome by setting the royalty
rates between zero and 15 per cent.
Deferring royalty payments for five years to help companies' cash flow might
also be considered and there might be accelerated depreciation, enabling
exploration companies to write off plant and equipment over one year instead
of five to 15 years.
There could be special help for companies operating in particularly remote
areas. All or any of these things could be put into individual packages
tailored to help specific companies.
Mr Cash, in Kalgoorlie to attend the Australian Gold Conference, suggested
more exploration might be encouraged if the state also cut red tape by
eliminating the ADollars 3,000 (Pounds 1,475) charge for permit applications
and other charges, which could add up to ADollars 20,000 a year for permits
to explore.
He said he did not expect the state's revenue to suffer. 'The state should
gain in the end,' he said, 'because you don't get revenue unless there are
holes in the ground and this should encourage more holes to be drilled.'
Mr Cash hoped the industry would reflect on these suggestions and let his
department know its views. He had asked the department to report back in six
weeks and expected to have legislation before parliament before the end of
this year. Separately, Western Australia wanted to renegotiate the resource
rent tax, which at present saw oil companies paying all the tax on revenues
generated by wells outside Australia's coastal waters to the federal
government. Mr Cash said it was estimated that Western Australia was
foregoing revenue totalling ADollars 600m from two new discoveries, BHP's
Griffin and Ampol's Wandoo.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930312

