FT933-5104

FT  06 SEP 93 / VW starts inquiry into surging loss at Seat subsidiary


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


MR Ferdinand Piech, Volkswagen chairman, has ordered an examination of the
books at Seat, following a rapid and unexpected surge in losses at the
German car group's Spanish subsidiary.
He is believed to have commissioned a special audit after receiving reports
of a looming deficit at Seat this year of DM800m (Pounds 320m) or more, and
requests for an urgent DM1bn cash injection to save the company from
collapse.
The subsidiary, which was taken over in 1986 and operates some of the most
modern and low-cost manufacturing sites in the group, lost DM180m last year
on sales of DM10bn.
The need for an investigation adds to the burdens of Mr Piech, who is
already weighed down by a bitter clash with General Motors of the US over
allegations of industrial espionage.
At the same time, he is battling to restore his personal credibility after
having had to back away from earlier promises that the struggling VW
automotive group would return to profit this year.
Mr Piech, VW chairman since January 1, last Friday took on extra
responsibilities - for auditing and government relations - after discussions
with the group's supervisory board on measures to save Seat.
No rescue decisions were taken, and a statement issued after the sitting
referred only to 'cause for concern' at Seat and in North American and
Asian-Pacific markets.
Whatever the findings of the audit, which will be reported directly to Mr
Piech, VW appears to have little alternative but to step in with a salvage
operation which could wreck the chairman's hopes of a successful first
financial year at the group.
VW lost DM1.6bn in the first half, although the supervisory board said on
Friday that it expected a positive result in the third quarter for the
German parent and the group as a whole.
The most likely source of cash for Seat is an intra-group transfer of DM1bn
in return for which the parent would take control of the Spanish
subsidiary's Pamplona plant, currently used to manufacture VW-marque Polo
cars.
The sale had already been planned and now it seemed advisable to bring it
forward, Seat said at the weekend.
The company blamed its troubles on the motor industry slump and the
devaluation of the peseta, which had pushed up the cost of imported parts.
It made no reference to the relative advantages for selling prices of the
peseta's loss of value.
In the first half of this year, while VW group vehicle production fell 19
per cent, output of Seat cars tumbled 34 per cent.
VW has invested more than DM4bn in its Spanish business in the past two
years, spending mainly on a new lean production factory at Martorell, and
updating other sites. Pamplona has also been fully upgraded.
In July, Seat scrapped a joint venture with Suzuki of Japan to build 150,000
mini-cars a year in Barcelona.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930906

