FT934-8875

FT  13 NOV 93 / Dasa threatens further closures and job losses


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


DEUTSCHE Aerospace might have to close more German factories and shed a
further 11,000 jobs if business and political conditions fail to improve,
the loss-making Daimler-Benz subsidiary warned yesterday.
The threat emerged during talks in Munich at which Dasa executives rejected
regional political leaders' appeals for a reprieve for six of the company's
52 sites and at least some of the 16,000 jobs scheduled to go by the end of
1996.
The group, which includes Germany's stake in the European Airbus and
joint-venture Eurofighter projects, announced its closure plans last month,
bringing to nine the number of factories, maintenance and logistics centres
facing the axe.
Mr Jurgen Schrempp, Dasa chairman, suggested five more might be in danger in
a newspaper interview published yesterday.
He rejected offers of financial support from the Bavarian and Lower Saxony
governments. Dasa needed no subsidies, he said after the meeting, but
government had to decide whether Germany needed a defence, aircraft and
space industry.
Mr Edmund Stoiber, Bavarian prime minister, said a Bonn cabinet commission,
chaired by Mr Theo Waigel, federal finance minister, was to be set up to
review aerospace and defence policy. Issues to be addressed included
possible indirect means of stimulating the industry and a moratorium on
space spending cuts.
Mr Schrempp also rejected claims from the Lower Saxony government that the
doomed Lemwerder aircraft maintenance works was profitable. The site, which
employs around 1,000, lost DM35m (Pounds 14m) last year. Aircraft
maintenance was simply not an economic proposition in a high-wage economy
such as Germany's, he said.
Dasa, which accounts for around 80 per cent of the country's aerospace
industry, aims to return to profit in 1995. The present job cutting and
works closure programme is intended to save DM1.5bn a year.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931113

