FT934-8656

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: A prosperous punt - A consistent
performer in a risky area / Unit Trusts/Prosperity Emerging Markets


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


EMERGING markets have become a fashionable area of investment but, for many
private investors, they will appeal only as a punt because of the risk in
investing in what are often illiquid markets. Consistency and volatility do
not usually go hand in hand but Prosperity can point to an impressive record
for the performance of its Emerging Markets fund.
The fund, launched in March 1987, is top of the international equity growth
sector in the five years to November 1 and second over three years and one
year (offer to bid with net income reinvested; source, Micropal). It has
performed well in spite of the stewardship of a series of fund managers and
other management changes.
Prosperity Unit Trusts is still owned by Municipal Mutual, the insurance
company which stopped writing new business last year, but management of the
funds was handed to Commercial Union Investment Management in April.
Roger Bade, the present fund manager, has been a fund manager at CU for the
past 10 years with responsibility for the company's UK funds and
environmental unit trust. He took over management of the Prosperity fund in
July.
With much to live up to, Bade has so far maintained the performance of the
fund, which is second over both six months and one month. Since he took it
over it has grown by almost half - from Pounds 21m to over Pounds 30m today.
This is one reason behind the rapid broadening of the fund; Bade has nearly
doubled holdings from about 40 stocks to 76.
His investment strategy is first to seek out countries with good and
sustainable growth prospects. His decision is influenced by factors such as
whether the country has support from the International Monetary Fund and the
degree to which it is open to foreign investors. He then chooses stocks by
trying to decide whether they will benefit from the growth and expansion of
those economies.
Bade is mindful of the volatility of the markets in which he invests. The
perennial problem for unit trust managers, which is magnified for an
emerging markets fund, is that if performance falters and investors want to
liquidate their holdings, the manager may need to sell holdings quickly to
meet redemptions. He therefore limits himself to large liquid stocks which
are easily traded.
The fund can invest in up to 10 per cent of other people's collective
investments and was near this limit when Bade took over its management. He
has sold holdings in collective instruments in those countries which have a
large market open to overseas investors, preferring to reserve such funds as
a way of entering attractive but illiquid markets, such as Colombia, Peru
and Vietnam.
The majority of the fund - 65 per cent - is invested in the Far East.
Currently, Bade is most interested in China. 'It is the largest and most
important emerging market and is not expensive compared with other markets.'
He believes the Chinese culture of making money and entrepreneurship is more
important than fears of the economy overheating. He thinks Hong Kong blue
chip companies may now be over-priced, but he does not hold shares in them.
Although the fund has invested in some Chinese companies directly, such as
Shanghai Petrochemicals and Shanghai Tyre and Rubber, the market is
difficult to enter. Bade has instead gained access through stocks in nearby
countries which are heavily exposed to developments in China.
Bade also favours India for its size and because its developed middle class
has a strong demand for consumer goods. The fund has 3 per cent of its
portfolio in the country and Bade says he would be happy to take this up to
5 per cent, but has been prevented from doing so because of difficulties of
access. He is not tempted to invest directly in the local market and India
funds are currently expensive.
Latin America accounts for just under 23 per cent of the fund with Mexico,
the largest and most developed market, taking the lion's share.
Nevertheless, Bade is underweight in the country, compared with the IFC
index, the oldest emerging markets index, because of continued uncertainties
over the North American Free Trade Area and falls in growth. His favourite
country in the region is Argentina, for having controlled inflation and the
prospect of 5 per cent growth next year. Inflation of roughly 35 per cent a
month in Brazil has dissuaded him from investing there.
Within Europe, Turkey's high inflation has put Bade off, in spite of that
country being one of the top performing emerging markets. He has sold two
large holdings, leaving the fund with no exposure. Portugal accounts for
most of the European holdings of the fund. Inflation fell from 15 per cent
last year to 10 per cent and interest rates have also been coming down,
which make Bade optimistic.
The top 10 holdings account for one quarter of the fund's investments. The
largest holdings are a 3.7 per cent investment in United Engineers
(Malaysia), a contractor, and a similar amount of the fund is invested in
Mexico's Grupo Sidek. Bade has not had much time to travel, relying instead
on contacts with companies passing through London and through brokers'
research. He is also backed up by a team of two Far East experts and a
Portuguese specialist.
If emerging markets are a fashion, is there not a danger that investors will
eventually sell and go elsewhere? While this is a possibility, Bade believes
that one interpretation of last week's turbulence in the world's leading
stock markets is that investors are anxious about low growth in the
developed markets. If so, the investor who wants growth will keep coming
back to emerging markets.
Similarly, Bade thinks it unlikely 'now that the genie has been let out of
the bottle' that governments will be able to reverse the privatisation
process under way in many emerging markets.
Charges. The initial charge is 6 per cent; annual management charge 1.25 per
cent. The bid offer spread is about 6 per cent. There is a 1 percentage
point discount off the initial charge until December 1. The minimum lump sum
investment is Pounds 500 and there is a monthly savings scheme with a
minimum of Pounds 10 a month. The fund does not qualify for a full Pep
allowance.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

931113

