FT933-9978

FT  06 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Spain after the hard ERM


THE SPANISH government has good reason to feel pleased, as well as relieved,
at the outcome of Europe's latest currency crisis. A week ago, the peseta's
days in the exchange rate mechanism appeared to be numbered and the
government's European ambitions looked increasingly precarious. But the
shift to dirty floating, with very wide exchange rate bands, appears, at
least for the moment, to have let the Spanish government off the hook.
For Spain, the collapse of the hard ERM could prove to be a blessing in
disguise. Maintaining the ERM parity has risked becoming an excuse for
avoiding the necessary domestic steps to stabilise the economy. That Spanish
inflation remains stuck at 5 per cent a year, despite three years of ERM
membership and a deepening recession, is proof that the ERM discipline could
not, of itself, bring inflation under control.
The hard part of Spain's journey to European convergence starts now. With
the exchange rate no longer an adequate discipline for policy, the risks
inherent in the structural weaknesses of the Spanish economy - its
persistent budget deficit and sclerotic labour market - become more
disturbingly apparent. Prime minister Felipe Gonzalez and his economic
ministers will not have been fooled by the peseta's relative stability over
the past few days following Tuesday's interest rate cut. Without adequate
steps to address these long-term issues, attempts to revive economic growth
by cutting interest rates could rapidly undermine the peseta and scupper
Spain's convergence plans.
Whether Mr Gonzalez and his team have either the stomach, or the political
support, to take the medicine remains, at best, unproven. But yesterday's
announcement that the government will cut Pta100bn (Pounds 480m) from its
planned spending this year does not bode well. The package of cuts, if
enacted, will only go a small way towards offsetting this year's budget
overshoot.
Even more worrying is the slow progress towards an agreement on wages in
either the public or private sectors. The medium-term imperative, if the
Spanish government wants to revive employment growth, reduce long-term
unemployment and control the growth of temporary contracts, is to relax
Spain's stifling and expensive hire-and-fire legislation. But for the
moment, the priority must be to persuade unions and employers that wage
inflation above 7 per cent a year is not consistent with low inflation and
thus with Spain's European ambitions.
The Spanish government cannot afford to appear sanguine. It must make clear
to parliament and to the unions that the alternatives are either a far
tighter 1994 budget than currently planned and a concerted effort to cut
wage inflation in half, or a longer recession and even higher unemployment.
The collapse of the ERM could help trigger the revival of the Spanish
economy, but only if the new flexibility is used as a reason to take tough
decisions, not as an excuse to postpone them further.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930806

