FT932-13536

FT  22 APR 93 / World Stock Markets: Netherlands manages to regain composure
 -A look at the rise in European turnover in March


   By MICHAEL MORGAN


Equity trading in the leading European bourses continued to grow strongly in
March for the third successive month. Volume increased by 22.8 per cent
during the month after February's 15.3 per cent rise.
But at the same time, stock indices were not rising so steeply as they had
been earlier in the year. The FT-Actuaries Europe index rose only 1.2 per
cent in March, after February's 4.8 per cent gain as investors began to
scale back expectations of further rapid falls in interest rates.
'Expanding volume in markets no longer rising so rapidly suggests that
profit-taking is being matched by new buyers, rather than by prices being
marked down and volume drying up,' says Mr James Cornish of NatWest
Securities in London. 'It is a bullish phenomenon.'
The Netherlands saw the largest rise in trading volume in March, up 29.8 per
cent on February and 49 per cent higher than the average for the previous
three months, to levels not seen since 1987.
On the corporate front, James Capel in London notes in its latest European
Equity Strategy that the trading sector turned in the best performance
during the first quarter, helped by often better than expected 1992 results,
while companies such as Hoogovens and Philips, which produced huge losses,
were 'rewarded' for taking large restructuring charges.
The market also regained much of the composure dented by February's traumas
surrounding Daf, which filed for creditor protection having failed to set up
a rescue plan; and Fokker, about whose takeover by Deutsche Aerospace there
had been doubts.
Spain came a close second with volume climbing 28.9 per cent as the market
returned to outperformance on hopes of lower interest rates. While much of
the trading was domestic, a 21.8 per cent rise in Spanish volume on Seaq,
the London screen-based trading system for international stocks, indicates a
firm recovery in foreign buying interest.
Expectations of lower interest rates helped to lift German volume by 25.5
per cent on February and 63.5 per cent on the average for the previous three
months. This was the highest level of trading since March 1991 during the
euphoria which followed the tearing down of the Berlin Wall.
French trading volume, up 24.4 per cent on the month, was back up to the
level last seen in October 1989. Strong market indices also reflected hopes
of lower interest rates after the French elections.
Italy's 11.7 per cent rise on the month took volume to a four-year high, in
spite of uncertainties caused by the unravelling and ever widening political
corruption scandal. However, turnover was swelled by local and foreign
demand for Fiat amid continuing speculation that the group planned an
international link-up or asset sale.

The Financial Times


London Page 49

930422

