FT933-12634

FT  23 JUL 93 / National Power justifies role in pool price rises


   By MICHAEL SMITH


NATIONAL POWER, the UK's largest electricity generator, said yesterday that
it used its market power in a 'transparent and principled way' in an attempt
to minimise the chances of a referral to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission over recent rises in electricity prices for large customers.
The company said its bidding practices in the electricity wholesale pool
were fully justified and the current pool price was not excessive.
Prof Stephen Littlechild, industry regulator, asked National Power and other
companies including PowerGen and the National Grid for explanations after
pool prices rose 10 per cent in April.
He subsequently warned that he would refer the generators to the commission
if he was not satisfied with their responses. He is due to publish his views
in the next two weeks.
Some analysts believe a reference is increasingly likely by 1995, if not
over pool price rises then over an issue such as the generators' costs and
margins.
Most consumers have been unaffected by the pool price changes because of
fixed-price contracts between generators and suppliers. It is the large
industrial users, who buy directly from the pool, who have been hit hard.
National Power said yesterday that it told the regulator that pool prices
alone, uncovered by fixed-price contracts, would have provided an inadequate
income in the first three years after privatisation. Pool prices were
artificially low because of surplus capacity.
If current prices were maintained this year, pool revenue would cover cash
operating costs and make some contribution to capital investments and debt
and equity servicing costs, National Power said. But its bid prices more
realistically reflected the cost of electricity production.
It added that increases in uplift charges, a mark-up added to the pool price
to pay for administrative costs of the pool, resulted from reinforcement
work being carried out on the national grid.
National Power said it had priced its bids to 'recover our losses but no
more' when power stations were put out of action by the work on the grid.
Sharp upward price movements in the pool appeared to be caused by the
scheduling and price setting mechanism, National Power said.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930723

