FT933-5247

FT  04 SEP 93 / Subtle franchise bid displaced LBC


   By ANDREW BOLGER


LONDON RADIO News, which will replace LBC as operator of two of London's
commercial radio stations next year, was the dark horse of the latest radio
franchising round.
Although LBC's franchise was known to be at risk, most believed the stiffest
challenge would come from a consortium which included Reuters, the news and
information group, Independent Television News and Associated Newspapers,
publishers of the Evening Standard and Daily Mail.
London Radio News, which draws on the expertise of former senior LBC
employees, felt that a low-key approach would be more effective. Bidders pay
the same nominal amount for licences, so were judged solely on the quality
and range of their proposed programmes, plus financial support.
Although admitting that they had been working on this bid 'for some time',
the successful team concentrated resources on quietly preparing as strong a
submission as possible to the Radio Authority. It did not publicise its coup
in landing Mr John Tusa, former managing director of the BBC World Service,
as chairman.
A consortium of pension funds and insurance companies, organised by Guinness
Mahon, the merchant bank, will invest Pounds 4m in London Radio News. The
biggest investor in the private company is Hachette, the French media group,
with a 20 per cent stake.
Mr Peter Thornton, former managing director of LBC, is editor-in-chief of
LRN. He wants to position the two stations so they compete effectively with
the BBC, whether or not the corporation starts its all-day news service.
Mr Thornton said the FM station would be the public's first choice for
instant news with a 20-minute segment being constantly updated. There will
also be sport and City and financial news at the same intervals. He said
this concept worked well in big cities such as New York. The AM service,
London Forum Radio, would offer phone-ins and discussion programmes.
London Radio News will employ about 160 people, compared with LBC's present
staff of about 120. Mr Thornton said: 'We will not rely so much on
personalities, although we will still have some big names.'
The new company might take space in the City Road offices of The
Independent, but there will be no financial or journalistic links between
the two organisations.
Mr Bruce Fireman, a director of Guinness Mahon, is deputy chairman of London
Radio News and sits on the board of The Independent.
Mr Fireman said London Radio News would next year bid for the third national
independent radio franchise, which is to be speech-dominated, but said the
company would be viable if the bid did not succeed.
Advertising in London is forecast to grow at 7 per cent a year - higher than
the national average. London Radio News believes it can reach about 20 per
cent of its potential audience of 10m people and take a similar share of
advertising. It is projecting annual revenue of about Pounds 10m.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930904

