FT933-10125

FT  05 AUG 93 / Money Markets: DM38.1bn drained


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE Bundesbank again announced a slight easing in the cost of lending funds
to commercial banks yesterday by cutting its 28-day repo rate to 7.60 per
cent, writes James Blitz.
Yesterday's move pushed the 28-day repo below the discount rate level of
7.65 per cent, but came as no great surprise to dealers.
Call money has continued to be very low in the German money market following
the vast injection of D-Marks in last Friday's intervention to support the
French franc. The Bundesbank has therefore had to reduce the cost of lending
take control of the market.
The German central bank yesterday withdrew 38.1bn of those D-Marks in its
weekly money market intervention. But that did not stop call money staying
below the repo level, at around 6.65 per cent.
One sign of how easy conditions were was that some repo bids came in at 6.50
per cent.
Yesterday's moves make it quite possible that the Bundesbank will reduce its
discount rate at its next council meeting after the summer recess, because
call money is unlikely to rise much above that official rate floor.
But dealers said a discount rate cut would have little effect and expected
it to be preceded by an unchanged fixed rate repo. French franc interest
rate futures fell back sharply as France's policy of keeping the overnight
rate of lending very tight continued to make dealers think twice about the
future path of official rates.
France, Belgium and Denmark continued to keep their money markets tight in
the immediate aftermath of the relaxation of the European exchange rate
mechanism at the weekend. September French franc futures retreated sharply
as a result, dropping 24 basis points to close at 93.67.
In sterling markets, rate cut speculation was depressed again by France's
attempt to keep the cost of overnight borrowing very high. The September
short sterling contract declined 7 basis points to finish at 94.26 and the
December contract was unchanged at 94.66.
Three-month money was unaltered at 5 13/16 per cent, in spite of a large
shortage of Pounds 1.65bn in the discount market. Dealers were unhappy to
offer bills amid some excitement over interest rate cuts. The overnight rate
of lending was around 6 per cent for much of the day.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930805

