FT934-11792

FT  29 OCT 93 / Police reformers reject many Sheehy proposals: New
performance-related pay formula introduced


   By DAVID OWEN


THE GOVERNMENT is to cut about 2,000 middle-ranking police jobs and
introduce performance-related pay for all ranks as part of a fundamental
reform of police pay and conditions.
The proposals, outlined in the Commons yesterday, will also result in police
pay being linked to an unspecified private-sector benchmark.
But ministers have decided against implementing many of the most radical
proposals put forward by the government-appointed Sheehy inquiry into police
rewards and responsibilities.
This was widely interpreted as an attempt to head off a damaging
confrontation with the police at a time of widespread public concern over
law and order.
The government, which intends to make law and order one of the principal
unifying themes of the next parliamentary session, hopes to secure Royal
assent for a bill implementing the changes by next summer.
Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, said the 'very far- reaching' reforms
would help bring about more effective policing, while recognising the
'unique nature' of a police officer's job.
In its response to the Sheehy inquiry's main recommendations, the
government:
Accepted that the ranks of deputy chief constable, chief superintendent and
chief inspector should be abolished. This process is to be completed by
April 1995. Ministers will take powers to enable a structural severance
package to be implemented but hope that natural wastage in the ranks
concerned means they will not have to use them.
Rejected the introduction of fixed-term appointments for ranks below
superintendent. Fixed-term contracts will apply to chief officer
appointments from two months after the bill becomes law. Ministers will
consider extending this to superintendents at a later date.
Accepted the principle of performance-related pay while rejecting the
formula proposed by the inquiry. Arrangements depending on an 'overall
appraisal' of performance will be introduced 'as soon as they can be worked
up'. Under one possible scheme, police constables may be offered a Pounds
750 rise for commendable performance and Pounds 1,500 for outstanding work.
Rejected lifting the police retirement age to 60.
Accepted the linkage of pay uprating to non-manual private sector pay
settlements and of pay levels to an unspecified private sector benchmark.
Accepted the abolition of housing allowance for officers recruited after
September 1994.
Rejected a reduction in starting pay levels.
Undertook to review police pension arrangements.
Police leaders welcomed the package as 'a triumph of common sense' and a
vindication of their four-month campaign against the Sheehy proposals.
Mr Howard's announcement also met with a generally warm response from the
Tory backbenches, with Mr Kenneth Baker, former home secretary,
characterising it as a 'very sensible, practical and realistic response'.
Mr Tony Blair, shadow home secretary, said there had 'unquestionably been
the great clamour of a government retreat' but it was still 'entirely
unclear' in what direction it was retreating. He called for the government
to spell out in more detail its proposals in a number of areas.
Rail rebels back Tory compromise, Page 9
Ministers fail to agree on spending, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 18

931029

