FT933-10154

FT  05 AUG 93 / International Company News: Murdoch to fund Star deal with
ADollars 500m share placing


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR RUPERT Murdoch's News Corporation plans to raise about ADollars 500m
(Dollars 347m) through an issue of convertible preference shares to help pay
for the acquisition of a 63.6 per cent stake in Star TV, the Hong Kong-based
satellite TV company.
News Corp is issuing 25m convertible shares at ADollars 20 each. The
placement, which is underwritten, will also provide working capital for the
media group.
The shares will pay an annual dividend of 6.25 per cent, payable every six
months until mandatory conversion on April 30 1998. The new class of shares
will require a change in the company's articles of association. An
extraordinary meeting has been called for September 3.
News of the financing came as Mr Julian Mounter, chief executive of the
company which broadcasts to 38 Asian countries, confirmed he would not be
staying on to work for the Murdoch-controlled company.
The resignation of Mr Mounter, who previously ran the New Zealand
Broadcasting Corporation, comes despite efforts by Mr Sam Chisholm, chief
executive of British Sky Broadcasting, to persuade him to change his mind.
Mr Chisholm flew to Hong Kong for talks with Mr Mounter as word of his
intentions spread.
The talks, which went on until midnight on Tuesday, failed to convince Mr
Mounter to stay on as chief executive, or even as a consultant.
It is not yet clear who will run Star or what the role of Mr Chisholm will
be. He is thought likely to remain in London in charge of BSkyB, a
consortium in which Pearson, publishers of the Financial Times, has a stake.
Pearson failed in its attempt to get an acceptable deal to take control of
Star.
News Corporation also issued a statement yesterday replying to criticisms by
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime minister, of the growing influence
of western media in the region.
News Corp said the company was conscious of the Asian way of life and its
unique cultural, historical and religious heritage.
'We intend to make Star TV a service which Asian families can enjoy in their
homes and a service which governments in the region will find both friendly
and useful,' it said.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930805

