FT934-8551

FT  15 NOV 93 / Personal View: Stumbling block to monetary union


   By ERIK HOFFMEYER


Last month's judgment by the German constitutional court clearing the way
for Germany to ratify the Maastricht treaty has been given a general
welcome. However, the court's ruling, coupled with the suspension of the
narrow margin exchange rate mechanism (ERM) on August 2, may well render the
project at the centre of the treaty - economic and monetary union (Emu) -
more difficult to achieve.
Let me deal first with the Brussels meeting of EU finance ministers and
central bank governors at the beginning of August. The meeting was requested
by the German monetary authorities after heavy currency market pressure at
the end of July.
During the night of August 1-2 the French and German authorities agreed to
suspend the narrow margin system. Other members were not in favour of this
decision.
If there had been the political will to continue with the system, it could
have been maintained, and the end-July crisis would have been overcome. This
would have involved, of course, a decision to continue intervention and to
adjust interest rates in the countries whose currencies were under pressure.
The system was created as a result of a strong German desire during the past
two decades for more stable European exchange rates. This resulted in the
establishment, first, in 1972, of the European 'snake', and then, in 1979,
of the ERM.
The decision to suspend the system means that the cornerstone of European
monetary co-operation over the last 21 years has been discredited. It is
difficult to see how it can be rebuilt.
The system became the most important symbol of policy collaboration in
Europe and an essential instrument in creating convergence among member
countries. This can, of course, be achieved in other ways, but, I am afraid,
only with difficulty.
At present, leading EU countries do not display active political interest in
re-establishing the exchange rate mechanism.
With respect to the Constitutional Court's judgment on October 12, there is
a need for careful analysis. In particular, two aspects appear of great
importance.
First, the court's ruling states definitively that the realisation of the
Maastricht convergence conditions prevails over the date - January 1999 -
when, according to Article 109j of the treaty, Emu has to be established at
the latest.
The ruling confirms the tendency to put increasingly massive weight on the
exact fulfilment of the conditions. This will make it more difficult to
realise Emu - particularly in the light of present circumstances. The
economic slowdown is increasing the budget deficit and public debt ratios of
member countries to beyond the reference levels set down in the Maastricht
treaty.
Additionally, the widening of ERM bands may make it difficult to fulfil the
Emu eligibility rule that requires countries' participation in a narrow ERM
band, without being devalued at their own initiative, for two years before
the final fixing of exchange rates.
Just think of the disturbances created by the German unification that
brought Germany away from fulfilling the Maastricht stability conditions.
Although German unification was a unique external shock, disturbances of a
similarly difficult political nature might occur in other countries in the
future.
The second question concerns the court's ruling that, once Emu has been set
up, Germany may leave monetary union if the stability conditions are not
continuously fulfilled.
It is sometimes argued that this is only a theoretical possibility, but it
may still have an impact on markets. The initial phase of Emu is expected to
be characterised by irrevocably fixed exchange rates. Will that be a
credible system if an important member reserves the right to leave if
conditions change?
These are all important questions. I cannot resist the temptation to say
that these reservations are more far-reaching that Denmark's own requirement
to win an exemption from Emu, which gave rise to so much trouble.
The author is governor of the Danish National Bank

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931115

