FT933-5374

FT  03 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Stein dismounts but remains in training -
Michael Skapinker considers how the changes at the top of Ladbroke will work


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


MR Cyril Stein, who is to step down as chairman of Ladbroke after 37 years,
spent yesterday in bed with a temperature.
The fever prevented him from appearing in public to talk about the interim
results, announced yesterday, or to recount how he turned what was once a
bookmaker to the aristocracy into a group with a market capitalisation of
more than Pounds 2bn and interests including the Hilton International hotel
chain, betting shops, property and DIY stores.
Having to give interviews over the telephone from his sick bed has clearly
not dimmed his sense of humour.
Nor has it lessened his determination to continue playing a leading role at
Ladbroke even after the end of the year, when he officially steps down.
Did he regard yesterday as a momentous occasion?
'Yes,' he chuckled. 'The property division made a profit.'
The group announced that Mr John Jackson, at present non-executive vice
chairman, is to become non-executive chairman. Mr Peter George, vice
chairman and joint managing director, will take over as chief executive.
Mr Stein will remain a non-executive director for three years and act as
non-executive chairman of the property division.
Mr Jackson and Mr George, interviewed at the London Hilton on Park Lane,
seemed quite clear about what the change would mean.
Mr Jackson stressed that Ladbroke would now be led by a team rather than a
charismatic individual.
Mr Stein made it apparent that Ladbroke would benefit from his charisma and
experience for at least the next three years.
Mr Jackson said: 'Cyril Stein is a very powerful personality. It's almost
certainly a mistake to secure the succession of such a person by finding a
clone. The way to provide for the succession is with a highly-motivated,
well-trained team. Peter will be very much the leader of a powerful team.'
Mr Jackson added that Mr Stein's continuing presence would not cause his
successors problems. 'It was a matter of discussion between Cyril Stein and
myself. Cyril is a very moral person. Under no circumstances would he create
difficulties.'
Mr Stein said yesterday that the change meant he would no longer have the
final say on group policy. 'I will have my word, but not the final word.' He
stressed, however, that he would be the more active sort of non-executive
director.
He has, he said, always been a hands-on leader. 'I still go around the
hotels emptying ashtrays. That's at Forte hotels. At our hotels the ashtrays
are always clean.' As a non-executive, he would be in the office five days a
week.
He would receive the same weekly report papers he gets now. 'I will have no
hesitation talking to the divisions or the heads of divisions,' he said.
'A non-executive has the same power as an executive director. I will talk to
Peter. I will talk to John. We've worked for some time as a troika. To a
large extent that's the way it will go on.'
Why retire as chairman, in that case?
'I'm 65. I think every company should open the windows and let some fresh
air in from time to time. I planned this two years ago when I made Peter
George joint managing director.
'I'm going to serve another three years, but it does give encouragement to
people down the line. When I phoned the 36-year old who runs our US property
division, he said: 'One down, 11 to go.''
Mr Stein's reluctance to make a clean break could be seen as understandable
for two reasons. The first is that Ladbroke, as it exists today, is largely
his creation.
Originally founded more than 100 years ago in the village of Ladbroke,
Warwickshire, the company began by taking bets on horse races from a select
group of customers. Only those who had personal entries in Debrett's were
accepted.
In 1956, Ladbroke was acquired by a consortium, Beaver Holdings, and Mr
Stein became managing director.
In those days, the company used to make profits of between Pounds 60,000 and
Pounds 70,000 a year, Mr Stein recalled. 'If the favourite won the Derby,
we'd lose a year.'
The legalisation of off-track betting in 1963 provided Ladbroke with the
opportunity to extend its reach beyond the confines of high society.
In 1966, Mr Stein became chairman, floating the company a year later with an
initial market capitalisation of a little less than Pounds 1m.
In the 1970s, Ladbroke's expanded into property and hotels. It also went
into casinos, which provided Mr Stein with the worst setback of his career.
In 1979, Ladbroke lost three of its casino licences after allegations about
the way it had attempted to win business from rivals. The judge who heard
the case in Knightsbridge Crown Court described the way the casinos were run
as 'disgraceful'.
Many predicted Mr Stein would not survive. He did, but he yesterday
described the affair as his lowest point.
'That was a very disappointing year,' he said. 'The problem was the jealousy
of other people who took certain steps to make sure we would lose our
licences, such as people being planted in our business.'
The high point, he said, was the purchase of Hilton International in 1987,
which provided the group with one of the world's best-known brand names.
The second reason for Mr Stein's continued interest is that an end to the
recession could lift Ladbroke's results, defying those critics who have
complained of drift and lack of focus in recent years.
Mr George, who joined Ladbroke at the age of 19 after a brief stint working
for his bookmaker father, agrees that much of the difficult cost-cutting has
already been done.
Problems remain, however. The DIY business is experiencing fierce price
competition and Mr George concedes that the sector's customer service needs
improving. While hotels in the UK are experiencing an upturn, conditions in
many countries remain sluggish.
Mr George said yesterday he had not really thought about what his management
style was. On reflection he offered 'honest, straightforward, direct and
fair'. He added that he did not like surprises.
To someone who has spent his entire adult life at Ladbroke, the dominating
personality of a still-present Mr Stein cannot be regarded as a surprise.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
History of Ladbroke
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1956 Ladbroke bought by investor group led by Cyril Stein
1967 company floated on stock market
1972 Ladbroke moves into property development with purchase of London &
Leeds Development Corporation
1979 Casino businesses disposed of following critical gaming authority
report
1984 Company buys Belgian betting shop chain
1985 Loses out to Allegis in Hilton International auction
1986 Company buys Texas Homecare chain (actual co name was Home Charm
Group)
Lasky's sold to Granada; bingo halls and amusement arcades to Rank
Organisation.
Company biggest shareholder in SIS, set up by big bookmakers to
transmit racing to betting shops
1987 buys 91-hotel Hilton International from Allegis for Pounds 650m
Company makes two right issues in 7 months, sells UK local newspaper
interests
1989 retirement homes business sold
In the last 10 years there have been four right issues
June 84 1 for 5; March 87 3 for 10; Oct 87 1 for 5; and Sep 91 1 for 4.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930903

