FT932-282

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (12): Fending off the product predators -
Varying attitudes to protection in three patent cases / Patents


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


THERE IS little point having a wonderful product to export if foreign
competitors jump on to your bandwagon as soon as it hits the market place.
The obvious answer is to surround the product with patents.
But what real protection do patents provide? Whatever the theory, the
following cases demonstrate the different attitudes towards them.
Renishaw, the Gloucestershire-based maker of high precision measuring
probes, now exports most of its Pounds 45m turnover. But when Mr David
McMurtry, chairman of Renishaw, first commercialised the probe in 1970 -
after developing it on Rolls-Royce's Concorde programme - the company was a
minnow in international terms.
Mr McMurtry immediately set up a ring fence of patents to include not only
international protection for the touch-trigger probe - which measures
machined parts to tolerances of one-third of a micron - but also for new
applications using the original design. Upgraded models received equal
international protection.
But this painstaking and expensive protection of the technology could have
been in vain but for a lucky break. Mr McMurtry wanted to develop his
technology alone, but Rolls-Royce said he could only do it under licence.
Part of the deal was that Rolls-Royce would help protect the patents.
Renishaw's opposition therefore knew they had to also contend with
Rolls-Royce - with its financial resources and reputation - in any attempt
to grind down the smaller company in a protracted law suit.
'If I had been on my own, bigger companies would have copied and told me to
sue,' says Mr McMurtry, who in 1976 fought and won his first patent battle
with DEA, an Italian maker of automated equipment. It lasted two years but
victory enabled Renishaw to maintain handsome profit margins, allowing
research, development and growth funding.
Proteus International, which designs and develops drugs with its own
proprietary software, is at a much earlier stage of development, but is
equally jealous of its technology.
Like many small innovative pharmaceutical companies, Proteus lacks the
resources to develop all its drugs through to market. Despite creating the
intellectual property rights and securing the patent, Mr Kevin Gilmore, the
chairman, believes they are difficult and expensive to defend and is
suspicious of collaborative ventures with larger companies.
'You can out license,' he says. 'But if you do that, I think you are in a
vulnerable position.
In the past many of the larger companies have screwed smaller companies by
saying we now have access to the IPR and are now developing a derivative
that is slightly different so we don't want to pay the royalties.'
Proteus's solution has been to set up fully incorporated joint ventures.
These would typically have full board structures and articles of association
to include provision that derivatives remain corporation property - not the
shareholders.
Any disputes are governed by corporate law. 'The large company is locked
into a corporate structure whereas in an out license or a collaborative
arrangement it simply has a legal agreement,' says Mr Gilmore.
The model has been used by Proteus in a fish vaccine joint venture with
Cobequid Life Sciences of Canada. And Mr Gilmore expects to sign at least
two ventures with large pharmaceutical groups later this year. He accepts
nothing can be guaranteed but says he has narrowed the scope for losing
control of potential money spinners.
Amersham International, the health science group with specific expertise in
making and handling reagents based on radioactive substances, has a more
traditional approach to defending its technology.
Mr Bill Castell, chief executive, says the biggest patent action he could
face is Pounds 3m. He says he would have no compunction sanctioning such
expenditure if necessary.
Any attempt to infringe patents in the group's recently acquired US
Biomedical, will be vigorously defended, Mr Castell says. The patents have
been carefully maintained at Biomedical, which is primarily involved in
making enzymes used by genetic researchers to determine DNA sequences.
Amersham believes the need for protection in other areas of its work is less
acute as there are large technological barriers to entry into the market. Mr
Kirk Stephenson, Amersham finance director, says there is a small club of
only three international nuclear-medicine companies. 'The technology is
complicated,' he says. 'It is difficult to reproduce the production
technique - you have to work hard to charge the isotope.'
In fact, Metastrom - a cancer pain reliever and the product expected to
become the group's largest seller with potential annual sales of Pounds 100m
 -is not covered by patents at all.

The Financial Times


London Page X

930629

