FT933-5271

FT  04 SEP 93 / Aspin blueprint marks shift in national security strategy:
Why the 'Bottom-Up' review of the US forces may exceed expectations


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


WHEN President Bill Clinton picked Mr Les Aspin to be defence secretary,
many doubted that he would have the managerial skills to run an organisation
as byzantine, as ossified and as resistant to change as the Pentagon.
A rumpled academic with degrees from Yale, Oxford and the Massachussetts
Institute of Technology, and 22 years in Congress, Mr Aspin this week laid
out a blueprint for the US armed forces which suggests that he may exceed
expectations. His Bottom-Up Review, replete with charts so incomprehensible
they could only come from the Pentagon, draws on all the number-crunching
power at the disposal of military planners. Yet it carries Mr Aspin's
professorial stamp in its echoes of a slim discussion paper on force options
he produced a year ago when he was chairman of the House of Representatives
Armed Services committee.
The review has already been challenged both as too timid in its effort to
reduce the country's cold war armed forces and as too harsh and likely to
leave the forces demoralised and debilitated.
But it has also been hailed as the most thorough intellectual analysis to
date of what tasks the US needs to prepare its armed forces for.
The intellectual underpinning of the review represents a dramatic shift away
from the national security strategy produced under former President George
Bush in August 1991 - when Desert Storm was just concluded and the Soviet
Union still existed - which has guided military planners until now.
'The size and orientation of Soviet military forces must therefore remain
critical concerns to the United States and the overall health of the
European system will still require a counterweight to Soviet military
strength,' the White House national strategy statement declared. Two years
later, the Bottom-Up Review bases its assessment of force needs on the
principle that the US should be able to win two nearly simultaneous major
regional conflicts - a radical redefinition of the threats facing the
country.
Mr Aspin adds proliferation of nuclear weapons, an eventual undermining of
US economic strength, and the possible failure of reform in the former
Soviet bloc to his list of threats, but says regional dangers are the most
crucial in determining the size and shape of future US forces.
'This one is the most important in terms of deciding the size of the defence
budget,' he said.
To be able to win a single big regional conflict, the Pentagon calculates
that it would need eight active army divisions, along with six reserve
divisions; eight carrier battlegroups; five active marine brigades; and 10
active fighter wings, together with six reserve wings.
To win one such conflict while containing another until forces could be
diverted from the first - a strategy known as 'win-hold-win' which had the
favour of some budget planners at the White House - would require two more
army divisions, two more carrier groups and three more fighter wings.
Mr Aspin's choice of winning in two nearly simultaneous major regional
conflicts adds only one more carrier group and another reserve carrier, but
it requires significant changes in the type of forces and weaponry that can
be brought to bear.
These 'enhancements' to the type of forces include elements such as
improving the navy's F-14 Tomcats to allow them to carry out ground attacks;
adding more smart weapons to the arsenal; and radically overhauling the way
army reserves are organised so that they can be made ready for combat much
more quickly than proved possible in the Gulf War.
The review also reflects some of Mr Aspin's position papers from his days in
Congress in its approach to the defence industry: it proposes the
construction of a third Seawolf submarine not because it is needed, but to
preserve at least one nuclear submarine yard, and to proceed with the
upgrading of about 200 M-1 tanks over the next three years to keep open the
only tank manufacturing plant in the country.
Mr Aspin's review was supposed to be conducted from the bottom up, rather
than as an exercise in trimming the force structure to fit an already
determined budget number, and he has declined to give any overall budget
figure until next week. But the plan risks criticism from both wings of
Congress, where budget numbers are the most important currency.
It has already been derided by some as cutting only a couple of army
divisions and one aircraft carrier group from the force designed under Mr
Bush in 1991, and attacked by others as accelerating a ruinous round of
defence cuts that has impaired morale and left US troops stretched too
thinly. Between the two, it has been criticised as unaffordable within the
Dollars 1,280bn Mr Clinton has budgeted for defence over the next five
years.
Perhaps the harshest criticism, however, is that the Bottom-Up Review is
just a theoretical construct with little chance of being implemented in
detail against the resistance of Pentagon bureaucrats and of Mr Aspin's
former colleagues in Congress, who will be sure to pick away at every
element of it.
If the implementation of the Bottom-Up Review can live up to its
intellectual promise, then Mr Aspin will truly have made the jump from the
senior common room.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930904

