FT932-13270

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance - Survey of
Investment Trusts (26): Be precise in your briefing - Tell your manager
exactly what you are trying to achieve, and remember, if you demand a high
income, you can't expect capital growth as well / Portfolio Services


   By PHILIP COGGAN


THERE IS a bewildering variety of investment trusts for the investor to
choose from. So it is only natural that many people decide to take advice
from an expert.
A number of groups offer services designed to help investors though the
investment trust market.
Some offer straightforward guidance. South Bristol Investment, for example,
will give advice on the trusts which will best suit the individual
investor's needs. It will then steer investors towards the cheapest way of
dealing in the trust. Investors require a minimum of Pounds 10,000 to
qualify for the service, which has a fee of 0.5 per cent of the amount
invested.
At the other end of the scale, some managers take total control of your
money, making buy and sell decisions on your behalf. Fees for this service
are higher. Whether it is worth paying extra, of course, depends on the
manager's success in selecting the right stocks. In a sense, you are paying
two sets of fees, because the manager of the underlying investment trust is
also getting his whack.
On the other hand, a good manager can put together a set of trusts which
precisely meet your needs, whether it be a regular income or steady capital
growth.
Many private-client stockbrokers will steer their smaller clients - those
with less than Pounds 50,000 - towards investment and unit trusts, simply
because that is the only way of getting a reasonably diversified portfolio.
Gerrard Vivian Gray operates a discretionary service, which requires a
Pounds 20,000 minimum. Investors are sent valuations and a full report twice
a year. There is an initial charge of 2 per cent, and an annual fee of 1 per
cent (VAT is added to both). Stockbroking commission is 1.5 per cent on
deals of less than Pounds 7,500, and this reduces to 0.75 per cent above
that figure. Investors have a choice of four different portfolios:
Growth and Income is a mainstream portfolio that offers a yield similar to
that on the FT Investment Trust Index.
High Income aims for a yield 1.5 times that on the All-Share, and invests in
income shares and high-yielding conventional trusts.
Low-risk Growth invests in the zero shares of split-capital trusts and other
reduced-risk securities such as Kleinwort's Endowment Policy Trust.
Higher Risk portfolio is more actively managed, and currently holds capital
shares, smaller company and emerging markets funds.
A monthly income facility is available via the low-risk or high-income
portfolios for an additional annual fee of Pounds 50 plus VAT. With the
low-risk portfolio, capital growth is converted into income, which may be
tax-efficient for those who do not use up their annual Pounds 5,800 capital
gains tax allowance.
Capel-Cure Asset Management offers a similar service with a Pounds 15,000
minimum and three portfolios to choose from - Capital Growth, Income and
Balanced. Split-trust shares are used within these portfolios, but only on a
cautious basis.
The initial fee for the service is 3 per cent plus VAT, with an annual fee
of 1 per cent plus VAT. Commissions are 1.5 per cent on purchases, and 1 per
cent on sales.
It is difficult to judge the success of these services, because the managers
rightly argue that each portfolio has to be tailored to meet the needs of
the individual investor.
Gerrard Vivian Gray has figures for 'model portfolios' which roughly conform
to its four key types: all, bar high income, have outperformed the FT
All-Share in capital terms over the past two years. However, these figures
do not allow for the effect of the annual fee.
Investors can look at alternative products managed by the same group, such
as unit trusts, to try to gauge the company's investment skills. Indeed,
there are unit trusts that invest in investment trusts, and these are an
obvious alternative to a portfolio service - the average fund in the sector
gave investors a 67 per cent return in the five years to March 1, according
to Finstat.
In the end, however, there is always an element of risk; there is no
guarantee that managers who have done well in the past will do so in the
future.
You can protect yourself by telling the manager precisely what you are
trying to achieve - income, capital gains or whatever - and choosing the
portfolio that best meets your needs.
But your expectations must be realistic. If you demand a high income from
your portfolio manager, you cannot expect capital growth as well. And if
world stock markets fall suddenly, as they did in 1987, no portfolio of
investment trusts can be safe.

The Financial Times


London Page XXV

930423

