FT932-39

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (11): More patience for patients - David
Lane examines the unpopular health service reforms


   By DAVID LANE


ALTHOUGH Italians are accustomed to daily trials with officialdom, many have
nevertheless been surprised by the extra hurdles the health service reform
requires them to leap. The De Lorenzo decree, introduced at the end of last
year, sets new bench marks for testing patience, stamina and cunning.
Thoroughly disliked by the public, Mr De Lorenzo's decree has been given
short shrift by the medical profession. 'Chaotic and stupid,' says Mr Benito
Meledandri, vice-president of the Federazione Nazionale degli Ordini dei
Medici (the national medical association). Words of condemnation were
usually stronger among the long queues that formed earlier this year at
local health authorities for 'bollini' (coupons) giving entitlement to free
medicines.
Next month and the following month, about 15m Italians will face another
endurance test devised by former health minister Francesco De Lorenzo. Until
now Italians have been entitled to free access to family doctors. The De
Lorenzo decree has introduced an annual charge of L85,000 a person, payable
by individuals with income of more than L30m, couples with family income of
more than L42m and three-person families with income above L50m. (The income
threshold rises by L5m for every additional family member.)
The method of payment of the tax on general practitioner (GP) services will
probably cause as much complaint as the charge itself. Italy's creaking
bureaucracy is unable to handle modern payment methods such as cheques,
bankers' orders and direct debits. It has to have cash.
Paying the GP tax will mean finding the appropriate giro forms, and there is
a fair chance of an acute shortage of them, and facing interminable queues
at post office counters to pay cash.
In spite of calls to drop the tax, the government is going ahead. Smart
money is on a repeat of the 'bollini' fiasco.
Mr Meledandri says that his association believes that the only way to deal
satisfactorily with the question of financing Italy's national health
service is through general taxation, particularly direct taxation on income.
'We are convinced that those who are fit must pay for those who are sick,
and the wealthy must pay for the poor. Indeed this was the line taken in the
major reorganisation that took place in 1978.
'The De Lorenzo reform seeks the end of the welfare state. His decree was
ideologically based, attempting to abolish public sector health care and
replace it by the private sector.'
It is not surprising that the PDS (Partito Democratico della Sinistra, the
former Communist Party) is also at the barricades. Indeed the doctors and
the PDS are two of many organisations that have collected signatures for a
referendum to abrogate the De Lorenzo decree. And with 850,000 Italians
putting their names to the call for referendum, this will go ahead unless
the government makes the appropriate legislative changes.
The De Lorenzo decree is criticised for being conceptually wrong, poor in
implementation and out of touch with reality. 'We warned that the
introduction of bollini would have a knock-on effect, and this has
happened,' notes Mr Meledandri. Hospitals have experienced a large surge in
admissions by Italians who do not have bollini or whose quota has been used.
Unable or reluctant to pay for medicines and analyses, people are turning to
hospital emergency departments.
This shift of treatment from GPs' surgeries to hospitals leads to higher
costs. Budget minister Luigi Spaventa notes that spending on prescription
pharmaceuticals has fallen sharply this year. (They were 25 per cent lower
in the first quarter.) But hospital costs have soared.
While hospital treatment for minor ailments or for chronic conditions
already being treated by GPs is a misuse of resources, the problem is
exacerbated by a generally low level of hospital efficiency. 'Patients stay
for four or five days when one ought to be enough,' remarks Mr Spaventa.
Mr Meledandri admits that there is inefficiency and waste in the health
service, blaming this on lack of paramedical staff and insufficient
investment. He also admits that the non-medical aspects of hospitals often
fall far short of acceptable standards. 'Lack of clean bed linen, and
inadequate and dirty bathrooms and lavatories are problems. But the patient
can rely on the professionalism of medical staff,' he says.
However, senior cardiologist Bruno Pilato sees non-medical matters as
hampering the work of doctors in hospitals and causing demoralisation. And
professionalism has suffered from poor morale. 'In clear conflict of
interest, doctors have used their positions within the state health service
to further their private practices. In addition to bad management, there has
been dishonesty. There have been numerous cases of equipment being purchased
and never unpacked,' says Mr Pilato.
Given the sums of money spent by Italy's state health service, it is not
surprising that it has been the target for corrupt businessmen and
politicians. 'An example of the party political character of healthcare is
that hospitals have been built and never opened, or opened many years after
construction was completed. Generally delays have been caused by staffing.
Secure public sector jobs are central to the patronage system, and reaching
agreement on beneficiaries can be time consuming,' explains Mr Pilato.
Yet party politics and good health services are not necessarily mutually
exclusive. 'Public services are generally of high standard in Emilia
Romagna, Tuscany and Umbria, Italy's 'red' regions,' notes Mr Pilato.
Indeed, the health service in Italy offers sharp contrasts of good and bad,
of corrupt and honest, of efficient and inefficient, of caring and uncaring,
albeit the negative aspects seem to predominate. Few doubt that
reorganisation is urgently needed to boost professionalism, increase
efficiency and raise standards overall.
However, few believe that the reorganisation introduced by the De Lorenzo
decree meets the needs. The sight of pensioners and the sick condemned to
lengthy queues, in which some failed to reach the front and died while
waiting, suggested that Mr De Lorenzo had failed.
'There is no easy solution,' remarks Mr Meledandri. He points to the
increasing calls on Italy's health services arising from a higher number of
elderly people in the population, and also from the opportunities for better
treatment that are offered by advances in medicine.
Yet at the same time Italy is having to tackle a critical situation in its
public sector finances. There is no scope for open-handedness. On the
contrary, austerity requires that spending be kept rigorously in check.
Mr Meledandri considers that more resources should be allocated. 'Only 6.5
per cent of GDP is spent on health care in Italy. This is too low,' he
states. But it is hard to see that such calls for higher spending will be
satisfied. Cuts in resources are more likely, together with higher
contributions from the public. And in this respect the De Lorenzo decree has
shown the way.
There is scope for better value for money, and this must be an objective if
Mr De Lorenzo's successor, Maria Pia Garavaglia, wants to avoid the
criticism that service cuts and higher charges bring. The reduction of local
health authorities from the present number of 640 to about 100 (one per
province) may help. 'But the risk of political interference still exists in
the local health authorities,' warns Mr Meledandri.
In preparing her reorganisation, Mrs Garavaglia must try to reconcile
conflicting factors, and to allay concerns about a shift in health care from
public sector towards private. The debate has been lit by the De Lorenzo
decree. 'Health is a hot issue,' says Mr Spaventa. The coming GP tax will
keep the temperature high.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                       HEALTH SPENDING 1992 (LBN)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Cost     % of total
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Staff                                  37,752        40.4
Goods and services                     16,546        17.7
Prescribed medicines                   14,500        15.5
GP service                              5,884         6.3
Payments to private hospitals           8,450         9.1
Payments to external specialists        2,616         2.8
Other costs                             5,876         8.2
Total                                  91,624       100.0
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Ministry of Budget and Economic Planning Unit
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 40

930630

