FT934-11285

FT  02 NOV 93 / Dinkins struggles in NY race


   By JUREK MARTIN and PATRICK HAVERSON


   WASHINGTON


MR Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, remains the slight
favourite to oust Mr David Dinkins, the Democrat, as mayor of New York today
in the most eye-catching of dozens of elections across the United States.
The latest polls put the two men on a virtual dead-heat, but this may
understate the extent of support for Mr Giuliani, the former federal
prosecutor.
Four years ago Mr Dinkins beat Mr Giuliani by only 2 per cent, having taken
an apparent double-digit advantage into polling day. Voter turnout among the
city's minorities, especially blacks, will be pivotal.
In other closely watched races, Mr James Florio, the Democratic governor of
New Jersey, still leads Mrs Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican
challenger, though by nothing like the 10-15 point margin he was accorded
two weeks ago.
This race is seen as a mini-referendum on the policies of the Clinton
administration. Both President Bill Clinton and his wife have campaigned for
Mr Florio, whose tax increases three years ago reduced his popularity to
near oblivion.
In the governor's race in Virginia, Ms Mary Sue Terry, the Democrat, is
still trailing Mr George Allen, the Republican son of a famous football
coach.
Mr Michael Farris, the even more conservative Republican candidate for
lieutenant governor, appears headed for defeat.
Changes are also expected at the helm of several troubled US cities, partly
brought about, as in Detroit and Atlanta, by the retirement of the old
generation of Democratic black urban leaders. Contests in Cleveland, Seattle
and Minneapolis will be closely watched.
So, despite its different racial composition, will be the outcome in Miami,
where Mr Stephen Clark, an older white Democrat who speaks no Spanish, is
favoured over a Cuban exile and an outspoken black. Mr Clark, however, is
endorsed by the outgoing mayor, Mr Adolpho Suarez.
In California, Proposition 174 would provide education subsidies, in the
form of vouchers worth about Dollars 2,600 (Pounds 1,750) a head, useable at
private schools.
In spite of the support of former President Ronald Reagan and leading
national and religious conservatives, it is expected to lose today because
of an effective campaign against it by Mr Pete Wilson, the incumbent
Republican governor, and by Mr Clinton.
But a more modest version could well carry the day in the future.
In Washington state, two initiatives, 601 and 602, are designed to force
rollbacks in state spending. Public opinion on both seems evenly divided.
The Wall Street securities house Kidder, Peabody has agreed to keep its
headquarters and 3,000 employees in New York city in return for Dollars 31m
in tax incentives from the municipal government, writes Patrick Harverson.
The decision was a victory for Mr Dinkins, as the loss of Kidder would have
been a blow to the city's shrinking tax base and his re-election hopes.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931102

