FT932-3140

FT  16 JUN 93 / Hope raised for German interest rate reduction


   By JAMES BLITZ and DAVID BUCHAN


   LONDON, PARIS


FOREIGN exchange dealers believe the Bundesbank may cut short-term interest
rates at its council meeting tomorrow after one of its leading members said
German money supply might have fallen within acceptable targets last month.
Mr Johann Wilhelm Gaddum, Bundesbank directorate member responsible for
credit market operations, said yesterday in an interview with AP-Dow Jones
news agency that M3 growth might have moved within the bank's target range
of 4.5-6.5 per cent on an annualised basis. In the first four months M3
expanded at a seasonally adjusted and annualised 7 per cent.
Dealers speculated that slower money supply growth could give the Bundesbank
its first opportunity in more than a month to cut rates at its council
meeting.
The news helped the dollar close more than a pfennig up on the day, at
DM1.6375, while sterling gained 1.25 pfennigs to close at DM2.4925.
In Paris yesterday, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, Bundesbank president,
congratulated France on having lower interest rates than Germany, due to its
better inflation record. He told the Senate France had relative 'economic
and monetary stability, while in Germany we cannot boast the same stability
in prices' - an indication of continued Bundesbank concern about Germany's
inflation rate, which is a couple of points above that of France.
But Mr Schlesinger said the Bundesbank had at least 'kept the D-Mark stable
for 40 years and intends to go on doing so'.
He quashed any speculation that the German and French central banks might
establish a close bilateral link. An independent Bank of France has been
approved by the National Assembly, and action by the Senate is awaited.
Lengthy and close co-operation between the French and German central banks
had taken on a 'particular dimension' during the franc crisis, but this
needed no further reinforcement beyond the links that bound all European
Community central banks, Mr Schlesinger said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930616

