FT933-9969

FT  06 AUG 93 / Breaking up was the easy part: Anthony Robinson on the
contrasting fortunes of the Czech Republic and Slovakia since their 'velvet
divorce'


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


Both Czechs and Slovaks sat glumly together behind what Winston Churchill
called the 'iron curtain' - from Stettin on the Baltic to Trieste on the
Adriatic. Now, to the dismay of most Slovaks, the new 'paper curtain'
created by Germany's tougher asylum laws leaves their state on the eastern
side of the new division of Europe - and their former compatriots in the
west.
The consequences of such a development were not foreseen when Czechs and
Slovaks parted company on January 1 and the invisible dividing line between
the two components of the former unitary federal state became an
international border. But the willingness of Germany's eastern neighbours -
mainly the Czech Republic and Poland - to act as a sieve, filtering out
would-be economic emigrants to Germany from the Balkans and the former
Soviet Union before they reach Germany's own borders, has turned the
Czech/Slovak border into an east-west dividing line.
This is fine for the Czech Republic, which juts like a wedge between Austria
and unified Germany. Its baroque and renaissance cities are a magnet for
western tourists and investors eager to relocate their factories just over
the Czech border, where wage rates are far lower. But it is bad news for
Slovakia and Mr Vladimir Meciar, the prime minister who led this small
country of 5m people to independence, but did not reckon on this degree of
exclusion.
For months after the 'velvet divorce' Mr Meciar objected to Czech proposals
to reinforce a border which left Slovakia in the second division of former
communist Europe. But in talks with Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech prime
minister, at last month's summit of central European states in Budapest, the
Slovak leader agreed to joint Czech-Slovak border patrols, clearer
demarcation of the border and restrictions on the number of border posts
open to foreigners - provided that this did not affect the rights of Czechs
and Slovaks with identity cards to cross the border freely without passport
formalities.
Although the agreement ensures that the border remains physically of little
consequence for Czech or Slovak citizens, its psychological significance is
much greater. It marks the limit of the Czech Republic's exposure to the
east while making Slovakia appear as a mere appendix of western Europe, its
eastern border joined to the economically distressed Ukraine and linked via
the Danube to the unstable Balkans.
Despite the obvious desire of both sides not to aggravate relations between
two closely related peoples, the first few months of separate statehood have
shown how economic, geopolitical and unexpected factors (such as the German
asylum laws) have combined to accelerate the course of development in
opposite directions.
Before the 'velvet divorce', Slovak nationalists complained that seven
decades of cohabitation had left Slovakia as little more than a maker of
components and industrial products, such as steel, which it sold mainly to
the Czech Republic. With independence, they believed, Slovakia would finally
be able to sell more of its products abroad.
It has not been so. Since the divorce, two-way trade between the two
republics has fallen by 40 per cent. But the slowdown in continental Europe
has made expansion into western markets more difficult for both, in
particular Slovakia.
For the Czech Republic, the Kcs8.8bn drop in exports to Slovakia in the five
months to May was a factor in the 2.3 per cent drop in first-quarter gross
domestic product. But Mr Jan Vik, deputy governor of the Czech central bank,
says that Czech exports to other markets rose by Kcs11.5bn over the same
period. Slovakia, whose only direct contact with western markets is across
its short border with Austria, lacks the flexibility to seek new markets for
its more limited range of products.
Last month Mr Julius Toth, the finance minister, gave up a six-month
struggle to maintain the parity of the Slovak crown with the Czech currency.
After rejecting the suggestion of the International Monetary Fund in
February for a 30 per cent devaluation, he finally acquiesced in a decision
of the new independent central bank to devalue by 10 per cent on July 9.
Shortly afterwards, the IMF agreed a Dollars 90m soft loan. Independent
economists and foreign observers expect further measures in the autumn, such
as a 20 per cent import surcharge, as recommended by Mr Toth, or further
devaluation, or both, designed to boost exports.
International institutions, including the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, have pledged in excess of Dollars 100m to help finance
privatisation and infrastructure projects. But private foreign investors
remain elusive. Before the split, Slovakia received only 10 per cent of
foreign investment into Czechoslovakia. It has received little since.
Even the biggest of Slovakia's deals, Volkswagen's DM35m (Pounds 13.6m)
investment in an assembly plant in Bratislava, is now seen by industry
ministry officials as of ambiguous value. They see it as mainly designed to
keep General Motors and other potential investors out of a market they
believe VW intends to dominate through its controlling stake in Skoda
Automobilova, based in the Czech Republic.
The contrast between development in Slovakia and in the Czech Republic is
stark. The Czech bankruptcy law passed in April has not yet led to the
expected shake-out of loss-making state enterprises. But preparations are
advanced for the launch of a second wave of mass privatisation. This will
concentrate on the sale of utilities and companies such as the breweries
which were once viewed as crown jewels. Prague is awash with tourists while
foreign investment, which topped Dollars 1bn in the three years before the
split, is rising again after a hiatus.
Two of the Czech Republic's biggest companies, for example, have signed
agreements with top German groups, positioning themselves for the eventual
recovery of demand in the former Soviet Union for Czech trams and other
engineering products. AEG-Westinghouse has joined up with CKD of Prague to
form AEG-CKD Transport Systems, with a turnover of DM170m which is projected
to rise to DM300m by 1995. The venture will build trams for both the western
and eastern markets. Meanwhile, Skoda Pilsen has teamed up with Siemens to
make steam turbines. Skoda Pilsen has also recently formed a consortium with
12 other Czech companies to resume arms production for the domestic market
and export.
The arms decision illustrates how far the Czech Republic under the
leadership of Mr Vaclav Klaus has moved away from the romantic liberalism
espoused by those who led the 'velvet revolution' in November 1989. One of
the first acts of the post-communist government was to renounce
Czechoslovakia's traditional pre-eminence in arms production. (Most arms
plants were in Slovakia and this decision was an important factor leading to
the separation of the two states.) Now the remaining link with the recent
past is President Vaclav Havel, whose dream of a caring revolution has been
submerged by a nationwide desire to get rich quick.
The clearest indicator of how both countries are faring can be seen in the
differing fortunes of the two men who emerged from the general elections in
June 1992 as the undisputed leaders of their respective parties and
countries.
Mr Klaus, who led his Civic Democratic Party to victory on a platform of
market reform and individual choice, has become even more outspoken in
support of foreign investment, privatisation and market choice. His open
contempt for those unable to shake off their pseudo-Marxist attitudes earns
him respect rather than affection. But the polls show him to be more popular
than ever, while his social democrat opponents concede they have little
chance of unseating him at the next election in 1995.
By contrast Mr Meciar, who never actually promised independence but enticed
nearly 40 per cent of the Slovak electorate into believing that a vote for
him was a vote for national pride and prosperity, looks increasingly like a
man who won a prize but does not know what to do with it. The populist, who
appears increasingly like the communist apparatchiks of old, seems unable to
sketch out a viable future for the country. He is sliding down the polls as
his former supporters contemplate an uncertain future at the ragged edge of
Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930806

