FT933-5279

FT  04 SEP 93 / Italian judge accused of corruption


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


MR Diego Curto, one of the most senior judges in the Milan judicial system,
was yesterday arrested on charges of corruption linked to the 'Enimont'
affair.
His arrest followed well-publicised leaks from Milan investigating
magistrates that he had allegedly accepted a bribe of L320m (Pounds 133,000)
as a result of his role in the complex judicial proceedings surrounding the
reorganisation of the chemicals industry in 1990.
It is the first time a leading judicial figure in northern Italy has been
arrested since the corruption scandals came to light 16 months ago. One of
the most disturbing features of the allegations is that he was purportedly
receiving money as late as July this year.
The arrest sheds further light on the murky events surrounding the end of
Enimont, the chemicals' venture between the Ferruzzi group's Montedison and
ENI, the state oil concern.
Mr Curto, a Sicilian-born judge who has written seven novels, has been under
investigation since the beginning of August. His arrest follows the reported
confession of Mr Vincenzo Palladino, former deputy chairman of the major
state commercial bank, Comit.
Mr Palladino, a political appointee at Comit of the Socialist Party, was
arrested on charges of corruption on July 29 and released by Milan
magistrates from jail to house arrest on Wednesday. Mr Palladino played a
crucial role in the battle for control of Enimont when Mr Raul Gardini, the
former head of Montedison, sought to obtain a controlling stake through
friendly third party shareholders.
Mr Gardini's move was blocked by the Milan courts on the orders of Mr Curto,
who froze dealings in the shares in November 1990. The shares were then
placed under the tutelage of Mr Palladino for 22 days.
During this period a deal was worked out between Mr Gardini on the one hand
and ENI and its political masters on the other. This allowed ENI to purchase
Montedison's 40 per cent stake for an inflated L2,800bn and that of the
third parties for L1,400bn. Out of the inflated price Mr Gardini is alleged
to have paid at least L120bn in bribes, mainly to the Socialists and
Christian Democrats.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930904

