FT932-6672

FT  27 MAY 93 / Book Review: The 'sick and tired' trade policy


   By DAVID DODWELL


TRADING FREE: THE GATT AND US TRADE POLICY By Patrick Low
The Twentieth Century Fund Press Dollars 24.95, 297 pages
US autoworkers will tell you that there is a single, overriding reason for
the industry's plight - unfair foreigners who exploit government subsidies
and dump their models to gain market share in the US.
President Bill Clinton's economic team appears tempted by the same world
view. Mr Mickey Kantor has frequently expressed the view, during his first
few months as US trade representative, that foreigners must change their
unfair trading practices - whether it is EC subsidies for Airbus or the
labyrinth of non-tariff barriers which block US exporters from the Japanese
market.
The US is sick and tired of opening its market and playing by the rules
while foreigners twist the rules to keep US companies out. Moreover, abuse
of the multilateral trade rules laid down by the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade more than 40 years ago has brought the organisation into
disrepute and eroded US faith in multilateralism.
This rationalisation of the ills besetting US trade - and of 'realistic'
solutions - takes a severe and carefully argued beating in a book to be
published next month by Patrick Low, an economist in the World Bank's trade
policy unit in Washington. 'The greatest challenge of all in the trade
sphere is not how to deal with the misbehaviour of foreigners, nor how to
revamp the Gatt. It is how to confront the politics of responsibility
avoidance at home, and to design and implement policy in the national
interest,' Mr Low argues.
Underpinning his case with an analysis of 70 years of US trade policy, Mr
Low flags a growing danger of the US administration falling victim to the
same forces that led in 1930 to the ruinously protectionist Smoot-Hawley
Act.
'The dangers of pork barrel politics and unrestrained protectionism, from
which Congress insulated itself (after Smoot-Hawley), have been allowed to
creep back into the system,' he argues. Section 301 of the 1974 Trade Act,
which gives Congress the power to punish unfair trading practices, allowed
the US to pursue gains for exporters without having to provide offsetting
market-opening reforms likely to anger protected domestic industries.
The Trade Act marked the end of a 30-year period during which gains for
exporters could only be negotiated multilaterally at the expense of
protection for domestic manufacturers. Section 301 also gave legal standing
to the concepts of 'unreasonable', 'unjustifiable' and 'discriminatory'
trade practices which underpin the 'responsibility avoidance' practised so
widely today.
According to Low, 'responsibility avoidance' involves two tendencies:
blaming problems in trade performance on 'unfair' practices by foreigners;
and disguising the US administration's role in setting up protectionist,
market-sharing agreements. This has been done principally through voluntary
export restraint deals, 236 of which were implemented in the 1980s.
Low argues that legal and procedural restraints on protectionist action have
progressively been eroded since the 1974 act, leaving only the
self-discipline of policy-makers as a safeguard for free trade.
Even this self-discipline is being eroded as Congress has chipped away at
the powers devolved to the executive in trade policy, seeking to promote
sectoral interests at the expense of national ones. Congress has withdrawn
delegated authority, introduced more protectionist statutes, and even
imposed instruments, such as section 301, which are inconsistent with the
Gatt. It is adamant that domestic laws should override obligations under
international trade laws if the two should ever clash.
'The US has been arming itself legislatively over the years in a way likely
to make policy more protectionist and more confrontational internationally,'
he writes. This has created, he says, 'a situation in which trade
restrictions can take effect with no one in particular seeming to be
responsible for them'.
The result, he argues, has been to 'divert policy debate away from domestic
failings and competitive difficulties, and focus it instead on the trade
policy behaviour of foreign governments and firms'.
Low believes the solution does not lie in rejecting multilateralism, despite
contrary claims of a growing body of economists in the US who argue that
there is no option but to pursue managed trade arrangements. He insists that
multilateralism is not out of date: 'It was never properly tried in key
respects. The system did not break down; it had never been applied.'
The Gatt was 'never complete', he argues. Key sectors such as agriculture
and textiles were excluded from the outset. Laws that were inconsistent with
the Gatt and which pre-dated the agreement were allowed to remain. Some
policy areas, such as subsidies, were never included. The agreement's
failings are not due to the fact that multilateralism has been tried, and
found wanting, but that a 'conspiracy of non-compliance' from the earliest
days of the Gatt left it fatally flawed.
Low also warns against learning false lessons from the short-term 'success'
of managed trade deals such as the US-Japan semiconductor accord. He
describes them as a 'source of trade instability and political tension'.
Only a third of 301 actions from 1975 to 1990 had the desired result, he
says. Many triggered retaliation, and carried a high cost in terms of trade
friction. They are thus unlikely to achieve any more than short-term gains,
with foreigners 'reluctant to co-operate, resenting the unilateral,
intrusive and accusatory flavour of designations'.
If the Clinton administration is planning to pursue managed trade options,
it should first recognise the trends revealed by Low, and then address the
potent case he makes in favour of 'trading free'.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930527

