FT934-8817

FT  13 NOV 93 / System for credit scoring opened up


   By ALISON SMITH


PEOPLE REFUSED credit will be told more about the reasons under guidance
about the use of 'credit scoring' published by the credit industry
yesterday.
The guide to credit scoring - the method of deciding whether to give
consumer credit on the basis of points for characteristics such as age and
employment - has been revised for the first time since it was issued 10
years ago.
The guide sets out procedures, techniques and arrangements for checking
scoring systems. Its coverage has widened to include the banks, building
societies, mail-order traders and other retail credit providers such as
shops that issue in-store cards.
In future people whose application for credit has been 'credit scored' and
refused will have a right to be told that this method of assessment has been
used, and be given the main reason for the decision.
This might be that they had failed to acquire enough points on the credit
scoring, that the rejection was based on credit agency information, or that
they fell outside the policies of the organisation offering credit - for
example, of lending only to homeowners or to people in a particular age
range.
The credit industry has resisted suggestions that potential borrowers who
are rejected should be given more detailed information - it is worried about
the risk that this knowledge could be used to manipulate further
applications by omitting or changing the damaging information.
In a report on credit scoring from the Office of Fair Trading last year Sir
Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading, highlighted the importance
of providing more information to customers as a way of increasing confidence
in the system.
He accepted the case for not having detailed guidance about the factors used
in scoring, but hoped to see emphasis placed on personal information about
potential borrowers rather than on more non-personal data such as where
people live.
The OFT is to update its leaflet for the public 'No Credit?'.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931113

