FT932-3235

FT  15 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Armed with a recipe for healthy growth -
Baxters of Speyside has expanded rapidly in recent years


   By JAMES BUXTON


A SHAGGY Highland calf dozes in the sunshine. The river Spey sparkles blue
in the distance. Piped bagpipe music rings out from loudspeakers as visitors
trickle from a restaurant into a row of shops, one of them a restored 19th
century grocery.
All this is happening outside the production plant of Baxters of Speyside,
maker of high quality soups and preserves, near the little town of Fochabers
in Morayshire, north-east Scotland. The visitor centre, which gives 180,000
people a year a free tour of the factory, followed by a chance to buy cans
of soup and jars of jam, is a key part of the company's marketing effort.
'The visitor centre makes them remember Baxters' products,' says Ms Audrey
Baxter, the family-owned company's managing director. 'It is also a Pounds
1m business in its own right.'
Baxters has expanded rapidly in recent years: its sales doubled from Pounds
18m in 1987 to about Pounds 35m last year, and Ms Baxter expects them to
double again in the next five years. It employs about 650 people.
Though the company is still a relatively small food producer it has
established a niche for its range of premium foods in the ruthlessly
competitive UK food retailing sector. Its products are sold by all eight of
the big supermarket chains, which account for 70 to 80 per cent of the UK
food market, and it quotes independent research showing that it makes the
UK's top selling brands of premium soups, branded jams and some other
products.
Baxters of Speyside has been a famous name in soups since shortly after the
second world war when Mr Gordon Baxter, Ms Baxter's father, developed a
business, founded in 1868 by his grandfather.
Gordon Baxter had a talent for marketing, and his wife, Ena, devised some of
the company's most successful recipes such as its Royal Game Soup.
Last summer Gordon Baxter, now 75, handed over as managing director to his
daughter, remaining chairman. (His two sons also have senior posts in the
business). Audrey Baxter, who is married to a local businessman, joined the
company in 1987 after working for Kleinwort Benson in London.
'This business has taken off in the past six years,' Ms Baxter says. Until
her arrival, she says, it was 'run on instinct.' She drew up the company's
first three year plan 'so that everyone knew where they were going,' and
took charge of marketing, later becoming commercial director.
The polarisation of the food market over the past eight years with its
concentration in the hands of a small number of retail groups has presented
big opportunities to any food manufacturer who can command shelf space. Ms
Baxter says that Baxters has been able to achieve this partly because its
brands command premium prices which 'deliver profitability for the
retailer.'
'The two forces which drive us,' she says, 'are marketing and innovation.'
Baxters' greatest asset is its brand, which is nurtured through editorial
coverage, especially in women's magazines. Baxters advertises nationally on
TV and has an annual advertising budget of Pounds 2m. It exploits its base
in rural Scotland and benefits from the trend towards healthy food.
As for innovation, Baxters' chefs are continually developing new products to
satisfy the supermarket chains. The company offers vegetarian soups, and
will launch fresh soups sold in cartons in September. The drive is to
attract younger consumers, after the company found that many of its
customers, who are predominantly in the ABC1 social group, were aged between
45 and 60.
Baxters has rationalised its exports, which account for about 15 per cent of
turnover. Instead of exporting to about 60 countries and 'diluting our
efforts,' according to Ms Baxter, it now concentrates on six main markets,
led by Ireland, North America and Germany.
Baxters maintains contact with the big retailers on two levels. The family
handles dealings with their top executives - Gordon Baxter may invite them
to salmon fishing on the Spey. Detailed operations with retailers in England
are handled by Food Brokers, a sales company, but this will end in November
when Baxters introduces its own 14-person sales force. It already has its
own sales force in Scotland.
One threat to Baxters is that retailers, envious of the margins the brand
can command, will increasingly challenge it with their own products under
their labels. Ms Baxter says that Baxters already does own label
manufacturing for unnamed retailers but says this accounts for less than 15
per cent of turnover.
'I don't regard own label products as a threat to us, they're just
competition,' she says. The other challenge is to continue successfully
repeating the formula of marketing and innovation.
Though profit figures for the whole group are not readily available, Baxters
of Speyside, the main subsidiary, made an operating profit of Pounds 3m on
sales of Pounds 29.2m in the year to May 1992, a margin which food analysts
say is good by industry standards.
Baxters is 98.6 per cent owned by the Baxter family, who were recently said
by the Sunday Times to be worth Pounds 60m, based on a notional valuation of
the company.
'We have no debt at the moment, and as a family-owned company we can plough
much more of our cash back into the business than a quoted company,' says Ms
Baxter. Expansion, she says, should be funded internally.
The issue of whether the company might be taken over has been developed into
part of Baxters' marketing mystique. So far it has refused 172 takeover
offers and Gordon Baxter says his reply to persistent suitors is: 'I'll
leave a note for my executors to contact you if there is a change of mind.'

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930615

