FT931-3897

FT  13 MAR 93 / US to close 31 military bases


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


MR Les Aspin, the US defence secretary, , yesterday recommended closing 31
major military bases in the US and scaling back operations at a further 134
installations.
The reductions, he estimated, would produce savings on the defence budget of
Dollars 3.1bn (Pounds 2.18bn) a year, starting in the year 2000. But he
conceded that 57,000 civilian and 24,000 military jobs would be lost.
His proposals are already under fire in Congress. The independent base
closure and realignment commission has until July 1 to consider them and
forward a final recommendation to the president, who has a further two
months in which to take final action.
Conscious of the controversy, President Bill Clinton has gone to some
lengths to soften the blow. Yesterday he was on an aircraft carrier off the
Virginia coast, demonstrating solidarity with the troops, while on Thursday
he annnounced a Dollars 20bn four-year defence conversion plan which he
dubbed 'swords into ploughshares.'
Mr Aspin admitted yesterday that the proposed base closures would hurt local
economies. California, already deep in recession with unemployment just
under 10 per cent, takes the hardest hit, losing over more than 30,000
military and civilian jobs as a result of closing and consolidation.
Five affected facilities are in the congressional district represented by Mr
Ron Dellums, now chairman of the House armed services committee and a long
time critic of military profligacy. But special pleading by senator Dianne
Feinstein and congressman Vic Fazio appears to have saved two famous
installations, McLellan Air Force base outside Sacramento and the Monterey
Presidio facility which houses the military's language school.
The navy, with 23 of the 31 proposed closures, takes the hardest hit. If Mr
Aspin's proposals are implemented, it will be left with just two main ports
in the US, in San Diego and Norfolk, Virginia, down from the seven of
President Ronald Reagan's era.
Abroad, 29 installations are to close: 14 in Germany, eight in Greece, four
in the Netherlands and two in Britain.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930313

