FT932-231

FT  30 JUN 93 / Australia 'needs to raise ADollars 20bn'


   By EMILIA TAGAZA and REUTER


   MELBOURNE, CANBERRA


THE AUSTRALIAN government is under pressure to introduce new direct taxes
and broaden indirect taxation. An official report yesterday showed national
savings at the lowest level in 30 years and that the government needed to
raise ADollars 20bn (Pounds 8.6bn) a year in order to achieve its target
budget deficit of 1 per cent of gross domestic product in 1996.
The report, commissioned by the federal government, found that national
savings stood at 16 per cent of GDP. The low savings level was due largely
to the public sector, with both federal and state governments running
greatly increased deficits in recent years.
Some new taxes that could be considered were inheritance and wealth taxes,
and widening capital gains tax to include family homes.
Mr John Dawkins, the federal treasurer, is expected to use the report as
ammunition in next week's annual meeting with state premiers to prepare for
the federal budgets. State governments have been openly hostile to Mr
Dawkins' calls to further cut their spending and raise taxes.
Australia yesterday accepted a ADollars 45m compensation payment from
Britain for cleaning contaminated nuclear tests sites in South Australia
used by the UK in the 1950s, Reuter reports from Canberra.
Senator Gareth Evans, foreign minister, and Mr Simon Crean, primary
industries minister, said details would be settled soon and Australia would
agree not to pursue further its claims relating to the test sites at
Maralinga and Emu.
The test sites were home to Aborigines. The Tjarutja Aborigines were granted
title to traditional lands inside Maralinga in 1984, before a scientific
team discovered the land was more contaminated than the British had
reported.
The Aborigines are now denied access to 1,200 square miles of their land
because of the contamination and are seeking compensation.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930630

