FT934-9999

FT  08 NOV 93 / Arts: Escape at Sea - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Just once in a while, a new work makes one say: 'I've never felt this way
before'. I cannot call Second Stride's 'Escape at Sea', performed last
weekend at the Place, a success. An excessively complex mixed-media polyglot
collage, it holds its audience much of the time at too great a distance.
Yet, in certain passages, it exerts a mysteriously absorbing power over our
sensations.
The starting-point of 'Escape at Sea' is exile. We hear chunks of the story
of 'The Sleeping Beauty' in French; and chunks of Chekhov's 'The Seagull' in
Russian. Only chunks; like several earlier Second Stride works, 'Escape at
Sea' is full of fragmentation. In this case, the fragmentation helps to
express the sense of exile. 'Escape at Sea' becomes, in part, a
contemplation of the transmigration of culture. Later, we watch parts of
'The Seagull' in English, by which time we have sensed that Chekhov - like
'The Sleeping Beauty' - is part untranslatable, part international.
But 'Escape at Sea' has a whole lot more going on in it than that. Part of
it is a deconstruction of male-female relationships in 'The Seagull', and
this part is sometimes highly poetic. We see the actress mother bandaging
the injured head of her playwright son, or competing with a younger girl for
the affections of the mature writer; the severe young woman taking snuff as
she converses with a male companion; and more. And we see some of their
gestures and situations being echoed (even by performers of the opposite
sex), multiplied, contrasted.
Also from 'The Seagull' we see images of a play-within-a-play. From Old
Russia harsh ceremonious behaviour; folk dance; and modernist poetry. All
stylised and set to music. The composer Orlando Gough does not write music
congenial to singing and his music is over-amplified. Another problem is
that several of the dances (co-choreographed by Ashley Page and Ian Spink)
contain some awkward transitions and failures of fluency.
But numerous little incidents have an uncanny potency in the theatre. Lynn
Seymour (as the actress Arkadina) fixing her make-up, or felling a man with
a slap; an array of women and men all applying perfume on their necks in
unison; Philippe Giraudeau stripping and lying, both bleak and vulnerable,
on a slab. These vignettes add up into a whole system of meanings, playing
off each other in our heads with strange irony; or they do when 'Escape at
Sea' succeeds. The rest of the time it becomes mere Babel.
Amid the cast, the four female actress-dancers are outstanding. Lynn
Seymour's voluptuousness, her force and her powers of big-theatre projection
all stand in marvellous contrast - how well she shows Arkadina's
self-dramatisings - against the cooler, more economical and objective
performing styles of Catherine Malone, Lauren Potter, and Lucy Burge.
Philippe Giraudeau, also exemplary, comes across as an intellectual who
painfully exposes his inner self. When 'Escape at Sea' works, we are made to
feel many separate layers of human nature - brainpower, will-power, nerves,
emotions, instincts, sensuality - all adjusting in relation to one another.
Tours to the Tramway, Glasgow, on November 19-29 and to the Belfast
Festival, November 24-27

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931108

