FT931-4105

FT  12 MAR 93 / Arts: Othello - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


This sterling Othello ushers in Bill Alexander's new regime as artistic
director of the Birmingham Rep. I welcome the way it draws attention to
Othello and its players (rather than directorial concepts); the way it
evades (on the whole) the awkwardly echoing Rep acoustics; and the way it
uses the depth and breadth of the Rep stage to great effect. All fine omens.
Alexander and his designer, Kit Surrey, make the most of the sheer size of
this stage. Surrey has paved the floor in huge black tiles that spread right
forward to meet the auditorium's front row, across into the sides (the wings
are invisible) and way back to the rear - where a rear wall, also in black
stone, may sometimes be dimly discerned. Simple properties - a curtain, a
bed, a hanging cross, a council table  - help to define particular scenes.
Or, as when people rush across the stage with flaming torches looking for
Desdemona in Venice, you sense the sweep of an entire city.
Jeffery Kissoon is a statuesque, smouldering Othello who never has to fake
to create the character's heroic stature. He paints his every entrance in a
different mood - calmly assured before the Venetian council, overwhelmed by
emotion on arrival in Cyprus, light and imperturbable in his first duo with
Iago - and then, in later scenes, possessed, wracked and, finally, bleakly
fixated. You see the changeability of the man; and you see, above all in
body language, how this mighty man becomes passive to jealousy - his legs
shaking as he sits in a form of excitement that is almost sexual.
His voice can be huge, and hugely emotional. His accent is Caribbean. I
dislike his way of barking climaxes, of letting minor syllables (even minor
lines) drop away without proper vocal support, and of chopping up single
clauses into mini-phrases. ('Most. Humbly. Therefore.') Considering his
extensive experience in Shakespeare, he should know more about
verse-speaking. But, though he runs quite a gamut here, he seldom displays
any relish for actorly virtuosity; and he aims constantly for the role's
human truth.
As Iago, Hilton McRae allows himself a few flashes of technical display  -
notably, an oh-so-slow ascent from the floor after Othello has wounded him
and then a sinisterly croaking delivery of 'I bleed, sir; but not kill'd'
Shame. In general, he makes Iago marvellously plausible in the eyes of all.
(And when he leaves pauses in a line - 'her body's . . . lust' - he at least
shows that the words form a single phrase.) Whereas Kissoon is a
bass-baritone and is all volume and colour, McRae is a light baritone-tenor,
accurate and toneless. Who this Othello is, you know; who this Iago is,
never.
Alex Kingston makes Desdemona into an earnest, winsome, unappealing bore.
You can see how she is trying to avoid any pastel-pretty feebleness, but you
cannot really see why Othello should have been spellbound by her in the
first place. She ties her permed mane into a different knot for each scene,
but always looks a mess; she walks leadenly; and she talks as if her
marriage to Othello was something that happened during the practical year of
her honours degree in sociology. She is completely believable, even intense
 -but in no way heartcatching.
Katy Behean's Emilia is a model of natural, detailed playing. Some of the
other roles (Cassio, Lodovico, Gratiano) are given with less character than
undergrad charm and clarity. But everything has energy and tension; Othello
itself never palls. In addition to the cast of 12, Alexander has hired 19
supernumeraries, who swell the big public scenes with splendid visual
impact. I love the way Iago seems to throw a stone over the audience and
break Brabantio's window behind us. Sound-effects, lighting, are all of a
high order.
At the Birmingham Rep until April 10

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930312

