FT934-8395

FT  16 NOV 93 / Business and the Law: Whiff of controversy hangs in the air
 -The MMC's decision to allow perfume manufacturers to maintain a 'complex
monopoly'


   By ROBERT RICE


Quite a few eyebrows have been raised in response to last week's rejection
by UK competition authorities of the complaint by Superdrug, the discount
drug store retailer, that perfume manufacturers were unfairly refusing to
supply it in order to maintain high prices and make monopoly profits.
Many observers found it hard to reconcile the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission's two central findings: that a 'complex monopoly' existed under
which the leading perfume houses acted as a group in refusing to supply
retailers they had not authorised themselves, and recommended resale prices;
yet that these practices did not operate against the public interest.
Consumer organisations, Superdrug and other retailers were incredulous. The
Consumers' Association said it was 'an inconsistent, incoherent and badly
argued report'. It accused the MMC of putting the interests of the industry
before those of the consumer and of strengthening a market where people were
paying 20 per cent more than necessary.
But competition lawyers were less surprised. The MMC, they said, was bound
to take into account the fact that the European Commission had exempted the
distribution systems of the perfume houses from Rome Treaty competition
rules since 1974.
The MMC was boxed in, particularly in the light of the recent approval by
Brussels of the distribution arrangements of two leading perfume
manufacturers, Yves Saint Laurent and Givenchy.
Mr Steven Sidkin, a partner of City solicitors Fox Williams which
represented German manufacturer Meuhlens during the MMC inquiry, was
delighted with the outcome. But he conceded that, if the MMC had concluded
the complex monopoly operated against the public interest, it 'would have
had a devil's own job making recommendations which didn't conflict with the
European Commission's position'.
The fact that the MMC would have found it difficult to go against Brussels
underscores the problems of achieving subsidiarity in competition policy.
It also suggests the MMC was prepared to ignore the fact that the issue of
special treatment for the distribution of perfumes is still far from cut and
dried. The European Commission's approval of the YSL and Givenchy regimes is
being challenged in the European Court of Justice by Leclerc, a French
supermarket chain. And the issue is still under debate inside the European
Commission itself, where many officials cannot see why perfumes should
benefit from rules originally designed to apply to technically complex
products.
The basis of selective distribution systems is that the supplier limits the
distribution of goods only to those wholesalers and retailers which satisfy
certain criteria and which, as a result, have been allowed to join the
system.
They constitute probably the only group of restrictive agreements which are
allowed to remain outside the scope of the Rome Treaty competition rules
because of the advantages they are said to confer on the distribution of
certain types of goods.
The main category of goods they are said to benefit are consumer products
which are expensive, technically complex and require sales and service
facilities of a high standard to ensure customers get satisfaction from
their purchases. Goods in these categories include motor cars and consumer
electronics such as hi-fi equipment and personal computers.
At first glance it is not immediately obvious why perfume should be
included. The perfume houses argue that their products can be satisfactorily
sold only in a suitable atmosphere or ambience, where the up-market image of
the fragrances is not spoilt by association with more mundane and less
expensive goods.
They have further claimed that products that come into contact with the skin
require specialist point-of-sale advice and that, while not technically
complex, perfume requires a level of special selling expertise.
By and large the MMC has accepted these arguments. Others are not convinced.
The Consumers' Association says its own surveys show consumers are
interested in the brand of perfume, not in where they buy it: most customers
have decided on the basis of advertising what they want to buy before they
enter a shop. Many customers actually feel intimidated by sales assistants
standing behind elaborate display counters. And many 'authorised' retailers
fail to observe the conditions set by the manufacturers and are 'shabby in
the extreme'.
The CA says the manufacturers' main purpose in setting up selective
distribution systems is to prevent supplies of their perfumes from reaching
discount retailers such as Superdrug and Tesco, the UK supermarket chain.
This, the CA alleges, is an anti-competitive practice specifically outlawed
by Brussels, even in the context of selective distribution systems.
The European Commission's reasoning for continuing to exempt the perfume
houses distribution arrangements was set out in the YSL and Givenchy cases.
These decisions allow the manufacturers to take into account factors such as
the qualifications and experience of staff, the area set aside for selling
the supplier's products and the range of cosmetic products stocked when
deciding whether or not to supply a retail outlet.
The standards by which these factors are assessed must be applied in a
non-discriminatory fashion. Manufacturers are not allowed to refuse supplies
because of a retailer's pricing policy or because of the number of
'authorised' outlets in a given area.
The supplier can require the retailer to accept certain obligations, such as
participation in the manufacturers' promotional activities and carrying a
minimum level of stock. The retailer must be allowed to sell on the products
to other 'authorised' outlets.
In granting these exemptions, the European Commission accepted that the
promotion of a prestige brand image was 'an essential factor' in marketing
fine fragrances. It accepted the need for appropriate facilities, including
'specialised technical advice' at retail outlets, was 'a legitimate
requirement'. It also made clear that other manufacturers who met these
terms could apply to the Commission for 'comfort letters' confirming that
their selective distribution systems complied with the requirements of
European law.
On the strength of these decisions more than 30 perfume houses have made
applications to Brussels for comfort letters. The decisions also appear to
have played a decisive part in the MMC's thinking.
But the Leclerc case could still upset the apple cart. The 30 applications
are on hold pending the outcome of the case. Oral hearings are scheduled for
early next year but a final judgment is not expected before the end of 1994.
According to Mr Michael Reynolds, head of the Brussels office of UK
solicitors Allen & Overy, it is theoretically open to the European Court to
find there is no justification for extending selective distribution
exemptions beyond goods which are technically complex.
If that is what the court decides, manufacturers of other luxury goods sold
under prestige brand names which have benefited from exemptions in the past
 -such as watches and clocks, jewellery and even porcelain - could be forced
to reassess their distribution arrangements.
Whatever the outcome of the Leclerc challenge, the whole issue of selective
distribution for perfumes will be reviewed by the European Commission in
1997 when the YSL and Givenchy exemptions come to an end. According to Mr
Reynolds, there is sufficient difference of opinion inside the Commission to
make the outcome of that review far from certain.
Meanwhile, the issue of restrictive distribution arrangements in general
will remain under the microscope both in the UK and in Europe.
Mars the US confectionery company has brought actions in Brussels and other
European capitals challenging the ice cream distribution arrangements of
Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch consumer products manufacturer which is the
world's largest ice cream manufacturer.
Mars is challenging Unilever's policy of 'cabinet exclusivity', which
involves supplying freezer cabinets to small retailers free of charge on
condition that they are not used to carry competitors' products.
The US manufacturer claims cabinet exclusivity unfairly inhibits entry into
the ice cream market and penalises smaller producers.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director general of fair trading, referring the issue to
the MMC in May, appeared to agree. Cabinet exclusivity was 'a major factor'
in the growth in Unilever's share of ice cream sales and consumers would
benefit if retailers were free to stock a wider choice of products, he
suggested.
Brussels is expected to complete its examination of the issue of cabinet
exclusivity in the new year. The MMC will report in the spring. The battle
over the right of manufacturers to control their lines of distribution is
beginning to gather pace.
 ---------------------------------------------------
                SENSE ON SCENTS?
 ---------------------------------------------------
European Commission conditions for approving
selective distribution of perfumes:
 ---------------------------------------------------
Manufacturers allowed to assess
a retailer's staff, sales area and
range of stock in deciding whether
to supply.
 ---------------------------------------------------
Standards used to assess these
factors must be non-discriminatory.
No refusal to supply permitted
because of a retailer's pricing
policy.
 ---------------------------------------------------
A retailers can be required
to take part in promotional
activities and carry a minimum
level of stock.
 ---------------------------------------------------
A retailer must be allowed to
sell on to other authorised
outlets.
 ---------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 14

931116

