FT934-8658

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Countdown to Christmas - A look at
the latest investment offers


   By PHILIP COGGAN and SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


ONLY 42 investing days remain before Christmas and fund management groups
are racing to plant their seasonal offerings before potential savers. The
fall in interest rates and the recent strength of world stock markets means
this is an ideal time for the groups to launch new funds. It does not
necessarily mean it is an ideal time for investors to buy them.
At least there is plenty of variety about the funds on offer. Five are
covered below (a sixth, the Kleinwort Second Endowment Policy Trust, is
featured on page III).
Two cover Europe, one focuses on ethical investments, one on global
utilities, and a fifth has an international portfolio including high yield
government bonds and emerging markets equities.
Investors also have a choice between unit and investment trusts. The old
rule used to be that there was little point in buying an investment trust
new issue. For a start, after allowing for expenses, you were buying the
shares at a premium.
Then, either the shares would fall quickly to a discount to asset value (in
which case, it was best to wait and buy them in the after-market) or another
trust, with a similar investment strategy, would already be available at a
discount.
For the moment, that rule does not seem to apply. Either trusts have some
unique selling point which ensures sufficent demand to prevent shares from
falling to a discount; or they have a split capital structure which, because
of the tax advantages, has a similar effect; or they issue warrants, which
compensate investors for the discount effect.
Friends Provident has both a unique selling point (the first ethical trust)
and a split capital structure. Govett has warrants and a high yield which
might create demand from Pep investors. Also, its investment combination is
something not offered by other trusts and (because of the government bond
content) would be difficult for private investors to replicate elsewhere.
For unit trusts, the launch is probably as good a time as any to buy,
especially as the managers will usually offer a discount off the initial
charge during the first few weeks.
The appeal of the European trusts might be questioned by some investors who
realise that many leading European economies are in deep recession and that
continental stock markets have recently been reaching all-time highs.
Nick Train, investment director of GT Management, points out that, while
nominal interest rates have fallen in Europe, real interest rates remain
high. He believes governments will have to cut rates further to stimulate
their economies. Then, as has happened in the UK and the US, falling rates
will lead to substantial flows of funds into equities and bonds as investors
switch out of cash.
Although the price-earnings ratio of European equities is high, Train argues
that European shares look cheap compared with other markets on a
price-to-assets and a price-to-cash flow basis.
GT also believes that most Pep investors are over-exposed to the UK and
should develop a more diversified portfolio. GT's fund will have no UK
investments at all and more than 50 per cent is in equities to comply with
Pep regulations.
Trades Union Fund Managers Ltd is also optimistic about prospects for growth
in Europe; its trust is managed by Hill Samuel. Although TUFML expects most
of the investment to be from unions, it hopes the fund will appeal to all
investors.
Shares in TUFML are owned by the TUUT Charitable Trust, and a proportion of
management profits from the TU British fund are paid into the trust to be
used for charitable purposes.
Those who invest in the European Trust through TUFML can sign an income
mandate so that the yield on their investment is donated to the Labour
party. There are plans under way to arrange a similar mandate for donations
to charity.
The Global Utilities trust is not technically a new fund but the re-launch
of Gartmore's UK and International trust. It is the first in the field and
makes a lot of sense; one problem with UK-only utility funds is their
vulnerability to a change in the regulatory climate.
That risk is diversified by investing internationally; the downside for
investors who seek income is that the yield is far less than on UK utility
funds.
*****
Name. TU European Trust
Aims. To provide capital growth over the medium term through investment in
large and medium sized companies quoted on European stock markets, including
the UK.
Yield. 4 per cent gross.
Minimum investment. Pounds 1,000, or Pounds 50 per month.
Charges. 4 per cent initial and 0.875 per cent annual.
Pepable? Yes, at no extra cost.
Comment. This is only the second trust launched by TU Managers and it comes
some 30 years after the launch of its TU British trust. Charges on the fund
are noticeably lower than the industry average.
The manager for both funds is Hill Samuel. The performance of TU British was
above average in the 10 years to November 1 and in the year to November 1,
according to Micropal but below average over the five and three-year
periods. Hill Samuel envisages some 30 per cent of the fund being invested
in the UK. Investment policy will be influenced by Trades Union Congress and
Labour party views.
*****
Name. Govett High Income Investment Trust.
Aims. To provide a high level of income with the potential for capital and
income growth by investing internationally.
Yield. 7 per cent gross, paid quarterly.
Minimum investment. Pounds 1,000.
Charges. The annual management charge will be 1 per cent. The costs of the
issue will be 4.8 per cent.
Terms. Shares are on offer at 100p, with warrants attached on a one-for-five
basis.
Pepable? Yes, at no extra charge for those who apply through the offer.
There is a Pounds 25 charge on sales of shares.
Comment. An unusual mix of UK equities, high yielding bonds and emerging
markets shares.
The idea is that the bonds provide the yield, the emerging market shares
produce capital growth and the UK equities offer a little bit of both.
This is not a trust for first time investors, but one for income-seeking
savers who are prepared to take a risk.
*****
Name. Friends Provident Ethical Investment Trust.
Aims. To offer an attractive yield, combined with the prospect of capital
growth by investing in UK equities, selected in accordance with Friends
Provident's ethical guidelines.
Terms. A combination of ordinary shares and zeros. Payment is in two
instalments - 60p upfront and a further 40p (on the ordinaries) and 43p (on
the zeros) in February 1994.
Yield. 8 per cent (in the form of income) on the ordinaries and 8 per cent
(in the form of capital growth) on the zeros.
Minimum investment. Pounds 1,000.
Charges. Issue expenses of under 4 per cent, annual charge of less than 1
per cent.
Pepable? Yes, at no extra charge.
Comment. The past has shown that investors do not necessarily sacrifice
profits if they follow their principles and Friends Provident is a
specialist in the field. The zeros represent a low risk option for the
cautious with a conscience.
*****
Name. GT European Equity & Bond Fund.
Aims. To capitalise on the recovery in European equity and bond markets,
whilst providing investors with a high income.
Yield. 4.25 per cent gross, paid twice a year.
Minimum investment. Pounds 1,000.
Charges. Initial 5 per cent, annual 1 per cent.
Special terms. A 1 per cent discount until November 26.
Pepable? Yes. the initial charge on a GT Pep is just 4 per cent (however,
the launch discount does not apply).
Comment. GT already has a European unit trust which has a fairly good
performance record for its sector.
It is 4th (out of 15) funds over the 10 years to November 1 and 18th (out of
128) funds over the one year period. Growth over the two periods was 393.5
per cent and 32.7 per cent respectively.
The balanced nature of the fund provides some comfort to those who feel that
stock markets are too high, but who want more attractive investment returns
than can be provided by cash.
*****
Name. Gartmore Global Utilities Fund.
Aims. To provide a mixture of income and capital growth by investing in
world utility companies, such as electricity and telecom groups.
Yield. 3 per cent gross.
Minimum investment. Pounds 1,000, or Pounds 20 per month.
Charges. 5.25 per cent initial and 1.5 per cent annual.
Special terms. A 2 per cent bonus allocation of units during the promotional
period, until the end of January.
Pepable? Yes, at no extra charge. At least 50 per cent of the portfolio will
be in UK and European utility companies.
Comment. Utilities make up around 12 per cent of the FT-A World Index and
they tend to be fairly stable stocks with good dividend yields. They are
also important in emerging stock markets. With a number of UK utilities
funds already in existence, Gartmore is restructuring its UK and
International fund to fill an obvious market niche. Chances are it will be a
solid fund, featuring neither at the top nor the bottom of performance
tables.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

931113

