FT934-8730

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: A kipper saved my bacon - Diary of a
Private Investor


   By KEVIN GOLDSTEIN-JACKSON


THE WAITER slammed a plate with two pieces of rather ragged, cold kipper in
front of me. 'Here]' he said. This was supposed to be lunch? It looked more
like the inedible remains of someone's breakfast.
Twenty minutes earlier, I had rejected the original main course presented to
me because it was not what I had ordered. Now, everyone around me was poking
at unappetising desserts.
It was March 1990. As chairman of the governors of a local school, I had
been invited by the headmaster to attend a conference for head teachers. All
morning, we had endured being sealed in a gloomy, airless room at the
conference location: a Queen's Moat House hotel.
This experience was hardly an encouragement to buy shares in Queen's Moat.
Even when analysts and other City pundits were recommending the shares, I
avoided them, especially when business in the hotel industry clearly was
tough with an ever-increasing number of hotels being advertised for sale by
receivers.
In the same way that personal experience can often point the way to
profitable investments, it can also provide warning signals and help prevent
losses.
Early in the 1980s, I avoided investing in Trans World Airlines because of a
bad experience on a flight from the US to Britain. The cabin crew had taken
some time to be convinced that one of the engines was on fire, even though
smoke was clearly visible from the aircraft's passenger windows.
Eventually, the aircraft changed course and returned to the airport but no
TWA staff were available to advise on replacement travel plans.
After passengers had waited some hours without information, I used a pay
telephone to call TWA's head office - where I was told that the jet was well
on its way to London and could not possibly be back on US soil. This
experience saved me from large investment losses.
When Mrs Fields' Cookies was launched on the UK stock market in 1986, I
avoided it because a visit to one of its shops in London revealed a limited
product range and few customers. The shares, floated at 140p, were suspended
at 10p in 1991 and the company is now controlled by bankers.
From 1981-85, I was a director of Independent Television Publications, then
the publisher of TV Times. At one point I was told, informally, that many
thousands of badly-produced copies had had to be scrapped by one of the
magazine's printers. This was because its boss had ordered that the presses
could be stopped only with his personal approval.
On this occasion, with reject copies pouring off the presses, it had taken
some time to make contact with him and gain his assent to a temporary
shut-down for repairs. The man concerned was Robert Maxwell.
I knew from reading newspapers in 1971 that a Department of Trade
investigation had thought him unfit to run a public company. And while, no
doubt, he did help to sort out the British printing industry, I still
regarded his business methods as questionable. The printing episode revealed
that he was also rather stupid; thus, I therefore never invested in any
Maxwell-controlled companies.
My two daughters and I used to like Lyon's Maid ice lollies. I thought about
investing in Clarke Foods when it took over the ice cream interests of
Allied Lyons in January 1992, but decided to wait until the spring to assess
its sales against the competition.
We were rather surprised several times to find that our favourite was not
available in local sweet shops, and it was clear that Clarke was having
production and/or distribution difficulties. I did not invest. Clarke called
in administrative receivers in October 1992.
When I walked around London in 1989, the unlet office blocks and shops that
I saw led me to dispose of my last shares in the property sector. Thus, I
avoided the subsequent sharp downturn in property company share prices and
the collapse of companies like Mountleigh.
I still see many unlet shops and empty office blocks - yet, property shares
have soared this year and I have missed out on some spectacular gains. So,
some personal experiences are good only if other investors, especially big
institutions, share them.
Many investment decisions have to rely on such published information as
company reports and press coverage, since it is impossible to gain any
relevant personal experiences from the companies concerned. It was, however,
a personal experience that made me rather cautious about the role of
auditors.
Many years ago, I was researching a television documentary. I was about to
discuss the project with a City whizzkid when I overheard him on the
telephone. He was trying to take over another company and wanted to boost
his own company's impending results. He suggested that the numbers and
values of the company stocks should be increased for the purposes of the
accounts, as the auditors were unlikely to go around and count everything.
Recently, there has been criticism of small accounting firms such as Bird
Luckin, auditor to Queen's Moat. This almost implies that, to be really safe
in an investor's eyes, a company should be audited by one of the big firms.
However, even they have had their share of failed companies - such as
Coopers & Lybrand with British and Commonwealth Holdings; Rush and Tompkins
(Dominion International); and Price Waterhouse and Ernst & Young with Bank
of Credit and Commerce International.
In my view, investment based on personal experience is the best way to avoid
corporate disaster.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

931113

