FT933-10085

FT  06 AUG 93 / Drop in asylum seekers


   By ARIANE GENILLARD


   BONN


THE NUMBER of foreigners seeking asylum in Germany fell by a third in July,
the first full month since tough laws were introduced.
A total of 20,658 applied for asylum, 33.7 per cent fewer than the previous
month. The sharpest reductions came among nationals from Romania and
Bulgaria. Fewer applications were also recorded from former Yugoslav
republics other than Bosnia.
The fall is largely attributed to tougher asylum procedures which came in
force at the beginning of July. 'These number prove that the new law works,'
said Mr Erwin Teufel, premier of Baden-Wurttemberg and a member of
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union.
But Mr Edmund Stoiber, premier of Bavaria, warned that problems remained
despite a drop in the number of applications. Mr Stoiber and other
conservative politicians have voiced concern that more would-be asylum
seekers are instead becoming illegal immigrants.
Under the stricter law, asylum seekers face new, faster procedures if they
come from a 'safe country of origin' which figures on a list adopted by
parliament. Authorities now have to decide on their case within 19 days
instead of the average of 12 months it took previously.
Moreover, border guards can turn back asylum seekers coming over the German
border if their case is deemed 'manifestedly unfounded'. The federal border
protection office said 1,100 asylum seekers had been turned back in July at
the German-Polish border on these grounds.
The fall in the number of asylum seekers came as Mr Klaus Kinkel, the Free
Democrat foreign minister, called on Germany to tackle the larger problem of
adopting an immigration policy.
The Free Democrats and opposition Social Democrats have long argued that a
solution to the growing number of asylum seekers, which peaked at 440,000
last year, should be followed by a policy defining the status of foreigners
coming to work in the country.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930806

