FT932-3189

FT  15 JUN 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar/yen breaks new ground


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE YEN moved to another post-war high against the dollar in early European
trading yesterday following the lack of any visible progress in the
US/Japanese trade talks at the weekend, writes James Blitz.
In Monday's Asian trading, the dollar came under intense selling pressure,
moving from around Y106 at the start of the session to around Y105.20 by the
close in Tokyo.
Shortly after London opened, the dollar moved down to Y105.00 and stayed at
that level for much of the day. As trading in the UK capital drew to a
close, it was again under pressure, touching Y105.02: there was no sign of
intervention from the Federal Reserve throughout the day. In New York,
however, the dollar improved to end at Y105.10.
The most obvious reason for yesterday's move was the lack of substantive
success in the US/Japanese trade talks at the weekend. The US has pressed
Japan to set an explicit target for cutting its huge trade surplus with the
US, but the lack of any agreement led dealers to think that Washington would
press ahead with its dollar depreciation policy.
Mr Mark Austin of Midland Global Markets in London believes the pressure on
the US currency results from the huge quantity of dollars which Japanese
exporters are still holding on to, and which they have not yet hedged.
Mr Austin believes that these companies have refrained from selling dollars
in the hope that the yen might reverse its rise. But as the Japanese
currency continues to appreciate, these dollars are being sold.
A strong view in the market is that Y100 is now within sight. At least one
dealer was prepared to bet yesterday that a clear break of Y100 might even
cause a new round of panic among Japanese investors, forcing the dollar down
much further.
But some European investors think the yen has reached such high levels that
it is risky to buy the Japanese currency from here. Mr Jim O'Neill, head of
research at Swiss Banking Corporation in London, believes it is particularly
expensive for European dealers to climb on board the yen bandwagon, now the
currency is at Y64.71 to the D-Mark.
With so much attention on the yen, there was little scope for dealers to
push European currencies very far. The dollar was stuck in range trading
against the D-Mark, with the market awaiting this week's consumer price
inflation data in the US, and the Bundesbank council meeting on Thursday.
The dollar ended at DM1.6240, against DM1.6255. In New York it finished at
DM1.6285.
The franc held at FFr3.363 per D-Mark in spite of another cut in French
interest rates. Sterling was  1/2 pfennig up at DM2.4800. Mr O'Neill expects
the pound to move sharply after Mr Kenneth Clarke's keynote Mansion House
Speech today. 'With little happening on the European crosses, the speech
will get more attention than it deserves,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

930615

