FT933-12679

FT  23 JUL 93 / US Justice Department may act on Microsoft


   By WENDY GOLDMAN ROHM and LOUISE KEHOE


   WASHINGTON, SAN FRANCISCO


THE US Justice Department is considering pursuing an anti-trust action
against Microsoft, the world's largest personal computer software company,
following failure of the federal trade commission to reach a decision on the
case after a three-year investigation.
On Wednesday the commission deadlocked 2-2 over whether to accept a staff
recommendation to issue an administrative complaint against the company -
the second time it has failed to agree on the case.
Ms Ann Bingaman, President Bill Clinton's new anti-trust chief at the
Justice Department, acknowledged interest in reviewing the case. Ms Bingaman
said she had not yet seen the Microsoft papers, but signalled that the
administration would take a tougher line on anti-trust issues than its
Republican predecessor.
'We plan to get pro-active looking at anti-competitive conduct,' she said.
The case stems from complaints by competitors that Microsoft uses
anti-competitive practices to achieve its dominant role in the market.
They allege that Microsoft has attempted to raise false concerns among
customers that its Windows program does not work properly with operating
system programs sold by competitors. There are also complaints that
Microsoft's program-licensing methods are designed to exclude competitors.
Microsoft expressed satisfaction at the outcome of the FTC meeting.
'The commission has investigated a number of complaints raised by Microsoft
competitors. We are gratified that, after an exhaustive and conscientious
review, the FTC has determined that these allegations, regarding Microsoft's
business practices, do not justify issuing an administrative complaint,'
said Mr William Neukom, Microsoft vice president of law and corporate
affairs.
Novell, Microsoft's chief competitor in the PC software market, emphasised
that the case remained open, and that no decision had been reached because
of the voting deadlock. Mr Neukom said the commission's vote should not be
characterised as deadlock. 'A motion was made to issue a complaint, the
motion failed.'
However, Commission insiders said the FTC refrained from closing the case to
allow for a trial if the Justice Department took up the matter.
Microsoft dismissed as a 'wild reach' suggestions that the Justice
Department would take up the case. 'It would amount to an admission by the
FTC that they are not capable of handling this kind of investigation,' said
Mr Neukom.
Nonetheless, both Microsoft and its competitors yesterday began intensive
lobbying of the justice department.
Feature, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930723

