FT934-10000

FT  08 NOV 93 / Arts: Argerich's Schumann - Concert


   By MAX LOPPERT


It is the privilege of the very richest musical talents to be constantly
fresh, illuminating and, above all, surprising in their music-making. Martha
Argerich, who played the Schumann Piano Concerto in Saturday's Barbican Hall
concert by the visiting Orchestre de la Suisse Romande, under their Chief
Conductor Armin Jordan, is one of those talents. The first surprising thing
she did was to turn up at all (in recent seasons her last-minute
cancellation record for London concerts was threatening to match previously
unassailable ratings by Richter and Michelangeli).
The second was to transform a work this particular audience-member thought
he knew inside out into an adventure of entirely unsuspected dimensions,
bursting with fresh excitement, fantasy, daring and elemental brilliance.
Not for Argerich the familiarly gentle, inward-turned approach to the
concerto; not for her the 'domestic' scaling-down of dynamics, rhythmic
articulation or tone-colours. From the first entry, and without in the
slightest overstepping the bounds prescribed by the score-markings, she
seemed determined to mine the piano-writing for every ounce of its dramatic
potential.
There was natural electricity in her attack, spontaneous responsiveness in
her shaping of melodies, a constant sense of new vistas opening up; in the
last movement, the speed, energy and flashing agility of her playing proved
simply - jaw-droppingly - astonishing. In no way was the 'norm' for Schumann
performances re-produced, or even faintly adumbrated. Once again this
pianist placed herself among the most mercurial, most magical of re-creative
artists, with a power of touch, depth of tone and freedom of expression that
must be the envy and despair of even the most formidable of among
piano-virtuoso confreres.
After a slightly thin, unfocused start the Geneva orchestra did well to keep
abreast of Argerich's imaginative impulses and even, toward the end, to
match them. The concert opened with a modern (1985) Swiss composition, a
vapidly pretty piece of texture-making entitled 'Iris's Scarf' by Eric
Gaudibert, and closed with the Shostakovich Tenth Symphony. I apologise to
the orchestra most sincerely for funking their second half; but after a
concerto experience such as had been offered in their first, fresh air was
for me the only conceivable finale.
Barbican Hall concert by Orchestre de la Suisse Romande sponsored by Credit
Suisse

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931108

