FT931-4150

FT  12 MAR 93 / Minister says EC laws will not delay tendering


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


MR WILLIAM WALDEGRAVE, minister for public service, said yesterday that
European Community legislation protecting employees' rights in mergers will
not delay plans to put almost Pounds 1.5bn of Civil Service work out to
tender.
The minister was responding to confusion over whether work contracted out to
the private sector is covered by the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of
Employment) regulations 1981, which implement the EC legislation in UK law.
If the regulations apply, a successful bidder must take over staff on their
existing terms and conditions - reducing scope for savings through lower pay
or staff cuts.
The uncertainty has already affected contracting-out in several government
departments including the Home Office and the Crown Prosecution Service.
Contracting-out began last November and the initial phase of tendering in
most areas of the Civil Service is due to be completed by the end of
September this year. But contractors have warned that the uncertainty could
wreck plans to increase the programme.
Mr Waldegrave said that the question of whether the regulations apply had to
be decided on the facts of each case. Even when Tupe rules applied, he
expected bidders to be able to make 'genuinely innovative proposals' that
would offer good value for money.
The minister has published guidelines on the scope of the regulations. These
set out the factors that are likely to mean that a contract is affected by
Tupe, such as contracts where the new employer takes on 'substantially the
same staff to do the same work as before, using the same premises and the
same equipment'.
Later, Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary, said he would continue to
take legal action against local authorities which use the confusion to
insist that contractors take over existing staff.
Mr Howard said, however, that councils can specify that Tupe regulations
will apply where it is clear 'at the point of inviting tenders that this
would necessarily be the case'.
Mr Jack Straw, a Labour environment spokesman, described Mr Howard's
statement as 'a climb-down'. He added that the minister had 'tacitly
admitted that the Tupe regulations may cover compulsory competitive
tendering'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930312

