FT934-8589

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Harrogate (6): Local labour may give city its edge
 -Despite a lack of incentives, the district has shown it can attract inward
investment


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


HARROGATE has not previously tried to sell itself to inward investors. With
full employment until spring of 1990, it did not need to. Inquiries were not
turned away but were not deliberately solicited either. Policy was to be
reactive, not proactive.
The district's circumstances have changed but adjustment may take some time.
An attack of nimbyism, for example, has fed opposition to a small business
workshops programme in Nidderdale, where a change of use was required for an
old mill building.
Harrogate's leaders also admit privately that the town has some
disadvantages to overcome. The most obvious is a lack of grants for
potential incomers, who are being wooed by other areas with sometimes
substantial incentives, but there is also a problem with transport links.
It is not that Harrogate is not well placed nationally - as a glance at the
map shows. The A1, which is being upgraded to motorway standard, provides a
good north-south link, but east-west roads are usually frustrating to drive
along and traffic is always heavy throughout the network of local roads
between Harrogate, Bradford and Leeds.
Leeds-Bradford Airport, about 12 miles from Harrogate, is underdeveloped,
and has to operate under night-flying restrictions which spark widespread
local controversy - and more nimbyism when attempts are made to change them.
Harrogate council supports extending the flying hours, along with business
throughout the region. The argument is that a better array of scheduled
services to the rest of Europe is needed to ensure Yorkshire and
Humberside's long term economic development in partnership with other EC
regions rather than just regional development in British national markets.
Getting to Manchester airport, which has all the necessary services to allow
easy day trips to most European cities for those within reasonable distance,
is awkward because of local roads. There is also a worry about rail links
after privatisation of the railways.
Harrogate, therefore, presents an interesting contrast to many of its
competitors for inward investment. They can usually offer grants and other
incentives, as well as better transport infrastructure and communications,
plus easier accessibility to important regional assets, such as Manchester
airport.
So where is Harrogate's edge? The way in which the local economy is
developing suggests it could well be the type and availability of local
labour. Much of the national struggle for inward investment is about
attracting jobs for large numbers of, at best, semi-skilled men in areas of
high unemployment.
This year Harrogate reached two important inward investment shortlists. It
was knocked out by Chester in bidding for the MBNA America Bank, but
National Westminster Bank awarded Harrogate the other prize - its expanding
Switch card operations.
MBNA was the big one - a Pounds 43m project to establish a new affinity
credit card lending operation employing 800 people. Cheshire was able to
offer regional selective assistance from the government worth Pounds 7m, but
Harrogate had no incentives to compete with. However, the Switch operation
will bring 400 jobs. What Harrogate had to offer was instant availability of
42,500 sq ft of National Power's partly vacated offices at about Pounds 10 a
sq ft.
Local labour supply was also of the right kind - adaptable and used to
office work. Efforts are already being made to put the necessary training
systems in place to deal with any mismatch between existing skills and those
likely to be required by inward investors.
Working jointly with North Yorkshire County Council and the areas training
and enterprise council, Stuart Quin, Harrogate's economic development
officer, reckons the town can move quickly to support any reskilling that
may be necessary.
'The fact we have made two shortlists in financial services suggests we have
a chance with other big projects. We have also been looked at seriously for
two modern manufacturing relocations.
'Inquiries have gone up significantly in recent months,' says Michael Walsh,
Harrogate's chief executive.
Harrogate now has four general target areas for inward investment:
Modern manufacturing, such as electronics, precision engineering, electrical
engineering. The leafy, clean local environment is of the type that appeals
to such companies around the world.
Finance and business services. Local growth during 1981-91 in this sector
matched that of Leeds. (The reasons are examined in a separate article).
Medical and health care. Harrogate already houses the headquarters of the
regional health authority. It also has close ties with St James's Hospital
in Leeds, Europe's largest teaching hospital. Hazleton Laboratories Europe -
part of Corning - employs 600 people in Harrogate, carrying out research and
testing for big drug companies. The company has planning consent for a 60
per cent increase in size.
New small business. The area has already made a mark as a small firms
economy. In the 1980s Harrogate had one of Britain's fastest growth rates in
new company registrations and now has more than 3,000 small businesses, with
an average payroll of four or five people each. Harrogate enterprise agency
is recognised nationally as one of the best.
Recent movements into the area vindicate this strategy. One example is Coda,
a computer software company specialising in mid-range accounting packages,
which has brought in 120 jobs. Founded in 1979, the company moved from Leeds
 -where it was located in the city centre shopping area - to Harrogate in
1991.
Having grown to 300 employees in 20 offices worldwide, it wanted to
establish a new corporate headquarters but needed to stay in the general
area so it could retain its existing staff. Since many of them already lived
north of Leeds, Harrogate looked obvious. Coda was able to buy land and
build it own premises for about Pounds 3m.
Link Interchange Network - the hole-in-the-wall automated teller system for
32 financial institutions, mainly building societies - relocated to
Harrogate from London in 1991, to meet its requirement for room for further
growth.
The management says there has been a shift in the company's culture since
moving to Harrogate, where staff openly acknowledge their rewards and
recognition should be based on the contributions they make. Staff
'ownership' of the company's ambitions were felt essential to cope with
constant change and growth.
The implication that staff were less well-motivated in London is borne out
by very low staff turnover in Harrogate, a welcome change from the high
figures common in metropolitan locations, such as London.
Another important factor is that North Yorkshire is a very attractive place
to live, making key members of management and staff essential to a company's
success and continuity much less reluctant to move.
John Webster, a partner in Cluttons, a firm of Leeds-based chartered
surveyors which introduced NatWest to the National Power offices which
Switch will occupy, is cautiously optimistic. He reckons more than 100,000
sq ft of commercial property has been let or sold in the last 12 months -
despite depressed national markets - with plenty more in the pipeline.
Homeowners Friendly Society has started building a 35,000 sq ft headquarters
for completion next year so it can burst out of the 15,000 sq ft building it
built only in the 1980s. The old building will then be for sale or let.
At Ripon, part of Harrogate district, the Inland Revenue will move into
11,000 sq ft of new offices when they are completed next year. The National
Health Supplies division has also chosen Harrogate for its east Pennines
purchasing and supply unit.
British Fuels, Albion - a clothing company - and Bradford & Bingley Society
have this year all taken space at Gregory Properties' office development in
Harrogate, leaving only two small units of about 2,500 sq ft each available.
A town centre development by St Martins Property Corporation now houses
Lovell Homes, which moved from Middlesbrough, Crinc Wellman, a US waste
management company which has picked it as its UK base, and Saffery
Champness, the chartered accountants. Only two small units remain.
Other relocations include the Westcourt Group, a property company relocated
from Darlington. An unnamed government department also has 6,000 sq ft of
town centre space in legal process at present.
Harrogate will still face a shortfall of about 5,000 jobs by the end of the
century if it cannot replace those it has lost since 1990, but a lot seems
to be happening in a place which has only been trying to market its wares to
inward investors for a couple of years.
The lesson it suggests for others is that while reputation, image and the
quality of life on offer are crucial elements in selling relocation, the
nature of the available labour force may matter more than anything else,
even if you have no incentives to offer.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931115

