FT934-8424

FT  16 NOV 93 / Former accounts body chief censured


   By ANDREW JACK


A LEADING member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and
Wales has been criticised for failing adequately to supervise one of his
employees, who was convicted of forgery and deception.
Mr Brian Worth, a former head of the institute's investigation committee,
was 'admonished' by its disciplinary committee in connection with his
supervisory action while he was chairman of Clark Kenneth Levanthal (CKL),
an international network of accountants including Clark Whitehill in the UK.
The investigation was triggered in late 1991, at which point Mr Worth
resigned his institute position. It followed the conviction at the Old
Bailey of Mr Nicholas Young, a former executive director of CKL.
Mr Young used CKL's address and stationery to attract investors and claimed
their money would be invested in offshore trusts. In fact it was spent on a
system of horse-race betting.
The findings against Mr Worth were privately announced to those involved on
Thursday last week, but were made public in a statement yesterday by Cameron
Markby Hewitt, his solicitors, issued 'in order to quell speculation'.
The statement said that the disciplinary committee had found that 'Mr Worth
should have made further enquiries into the explanation by Mr Young that
money which he paid to CKL came from the performance of clerical services
for friends based overseas'.
It said Mr Worth had been 'genuinely misled' by Mr Young, and that the
committee had concluded there was no evidence that further enquiries would
necessarily have uncovered Mr Young's true activities.
Mr Richard Hornsby, of the CKL Victims Group, which is suing Clark Whitehill
and CKL for compensation, said: 'I think this is good news. It shows there
were no security procedures at CKL.'
Legal action is expected to start early next year. More than 60 investors
are suing for more than Pounds 8.5m plus interest in money taken by Mr
Young.
Mr Worth, who is considering whether to appeal against the ruling, hired two
expert witnesses for his defence alongside Cameron Markby, which has been
defending Clark Whitehill against the civil action.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931116

