FT933-9952

FT  06 AUG 93 / UK Company News: A technique for success - Raymond Snoddy on
the Reed/Elsevier merger


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


ASK THE chairmen of Reed International and Elsevier, Peter Davis and Pierre
Vinken, what difference the merging of their two companies has meant in the
past six months and they say - Editions Techniques.
The first results announced yesterday by Reed Elsevier, now one of the
world's largest publishing and information groups, were good - a headline
profit before tax of Pounds 281m for the six months to the end of June.
But it was the acquisition of Editions Techniques, France's largest legal
publisher completed last month in a Pounds 77m deal which demonstrates, they
believe, the benefits of merger.
Reed International, which owned Butterworths, the English legal publisher,
had been interested in Editions Techniques for some time but had never been
able to buy it.
Reed, Mr Davis confesses, had found it easier to expand in the English
language common law countries of the Commonwealth.
Pierre Vinken, a former neurosurgeon, had plenty of experience of medical
publishing, none in the specialist field of the law. Together they managed
to buy the company.
'The negotiations were all conducted in French - fluent French,' says Pierre
Vinken pointedly. The task was assigned to the old Elsevier finance team
which is based in Neuchatel in the French-speaking part of Switzerland.
'Symbolically and strategically, it was much more important than Pounds
77m,' says Mr Davis of the deal.
The acquisition is a small example of what the merger was supposed to be
primarily about - providing complementary entrees to different markets, Reed
to continental Europe, Elsevier to the US, rather than cutting costs.
Then there is the extra clout that the combined resources of the two
companies can make available if the right opportunities come along.
Their gaze at the moment is focused on Official Airline Guides, the former
Maxwell company being sold by administrators Price Waterhouse. Reed
Elsevier, which has signed a non-exclusive letter-of-intent to pay Dollars
425m (Pounds 285m) for the business, is now in the final stages of due
diligence.
The outcome for Reed Elsevier could still be influenced by the sale of
Macmillan, the US publisher, now under way. The Robert M Bass group together
with Paramount are seen as favourites for the Macmillan deal but they have
made it clear they want OAG as part of the package. 'It's like playing chess
on two boards,' says Pierre Vinken.
Even if Reed Elsevier fails to get OAG, there appears to be no shortage of
potential takeover targets for the company. It has a list of 15-20
prospects, many of them in continental Europe and the US.
The basic work of integrating the two companies has been carried out and
both sides said yesterday it was working well.
One question no-one at Reed Elsevier could, or would, answer yesterday was
how the pre-merger businesses were doing relative to each other.
'My businesses are doing better than your business? We don't have
conversations like that,' said Mr Davis.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930806

