FT932-13542

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (4): Perceptions turn doubtful - Politics
full of uncertainty


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


President Hosni Mubarak is nearing the end of his second six-year term in
office with the country in a state of political uncertainty greater than at
any time since he succeeded Anwar Sadat in 1981.
Then a modest and unassuming man who eschewed the flamboyance and
histrionics of his predecessor, Mr Mubarak appeared to offer a calmer, more
practical approach to the mountain of problems faced by a nation wearied by
war, stifled by bureaucracy and embittered by the perceived corruption of
the government and the unrealised promises of Mr Sadat.
The peace treaty with Israel held; Egypt remained aloof from the turmoil
elsewhere in the region; the economic 'open door' policy registered modest
successes, and with the release of political prisoners and a degree more
freedom for the media, the nation's intellectual elite welcomed the new
opportunity to express themselves.
With the return of the Arab League to Cairo, and generous debt forgiveness
by western nations in recognition of Egypt's supportive role in driving Iraq
out of Kuwait, Mr Mubarak appeared to be riding high in the nation's esteem.
But as Mr Sadat discovered before him, international successes are no
substitute for domestic achievements.
Egypt's relentless economic problems, most of all the unsatisfied demand for
employment among the country's young, require an enormous national effort
just to prevent further deterioration. The perception that Mr Mubarak's
government is proving unequal to the task appears to be growing at all
levels of society and has been heightened by the official response to the
spate of bomb attacks launched by Islamic extremists.
By declaring all-out war against the terrorists and by demanding that the
country's political organisations declare whether 'they are with us or
against us,' the government is dictating a choice that calls into question
its own performance.
'People should not be reduced to a choice between a corrupt ruling party and
a reactionary religious one,' according to Dr Ismail Sabri Abdullah, a
leader of the leftist Tregammu party and former planning minister under
President Sadat. His view appears widely shared across the political
spectrum, especially by liberal, secular professionals and the Coptic
minority which fears that a long-drawn out confrontation between the
security forces and Islamic extremists will radicalise the country and
further worsen economic conditions.
Mr Mubarak, however, remains adamant that the extremist violence is
sponsored from abroad, will be defeated within months, and that there cannot
be any comparisons between Egypt today and what is happening in Algeria or
has happened in Iran.
He may be right. But his critics fear that that the consequences of the
president having misjudged the situation could be disastrous for the
country.
Mr Said el-Naggar, once considered by President Mubarak as a possible prime
minister, has launched the New Civic Forum as a vehicle for articulating a
more fundamental appraisal of Egypt's political requirements if it is to
overcome the economic deprivation which is proving a fertile recruiting
ground for extremism.
'I would like to think that Mr Mubarak understands that a third term in
office for him can only be justifiable in terms of real political reform,'
he says.
He wants an end to 'what is in effect one-party rule' and the start of a
three-year transition process which would lay the foundations for all
parties to compete equally, including the legally banned Moslem Brotherhood.
'One major reason for the growth of Islamic fundamentalism is that political
parties cannot express themselves as they should in a proper democracy,' he
asserts. 'Repression, sometimes in a most severe and cruel way, is not the
answer. It is a policy that cannot work.'
Mr Husayn Amin, career diplomat, writer and academic, is even more outspoken
on the failings of the government. 'It has to be recognised that we are at
the end of the road,' he says. 'This government is incapable of combating
Islamic fundamentalism. It is perceived as so corrupt that it is incapable
of winning the support of the masses. If you want to combat extremism then
you had better arrange a new regime, a government that is seen as honest,
capable, liberal and democratic and which can persuade the people to give it
a chance.'
He and others are dismissive of Mr Atef Sidki, the prime minister, and of
the ruling National Democratic Party, which they claim has no ideology and
serves only as a haven for opportunists and profiteers. 'The perception in
the country is that the ruling party will never permit a transfer of power,'
argues Dr Sabri Abdullah. 'Therefore elections become quite meaningless. So
the people's hope for change is not linked to the ballot box.'
The last general election, at the end of 1990, was boycotted by three of the
main opposition parties - the conservative New Wafd, the Socialist Labour
Party and its tactically allied Moslem Brotherhood - providing an even wider
margin of victory for the NDP. But the most virulent, specific criticism is
reserved for Mr Safwat el-Sherif, the long-serving minister of information.
The steadily increasing religious content of television programming,
designed to demonstrate that the regime is more devout than its radical
opponents, is said by the minister's critics to be playing directly into the
hands of the Islamic factions by allowing them to dictate the political
terrain. The nation's newspapers, the least fettered in the Arab world, are
also devoting increasing space to religious issues, a process mockingly
referred to by Mr Amin as 'our writers booking their seats in the next
regime.'
The fact that he, and others, are willing to speak so openly is acknowledged
as a tribute to Mr Mubarak's continued liberalism and compares favourably
with President Gamal Abdul Nasser and with President Sadat, who before his
assassination in 1981 jailed over 1,500 of his most vocal critics.
Few believe that Mr Mubarak would ever resort to such tactics. But neither
do they see much evidence that the president is willing to accept advice
from outside his immediate circle.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930422

