FT932-6655

FT  27 MAY 93 / ITV takeover rules to be reviewed: Brooke to consider
allowing 'large' television companies to merge


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR PETER BROOKE, the national heritage secretary, is planning to launch a
detailed review of the rules preventing most independent television
companies taking over each other.
There is growing concern that as broadcasting becomes a more global business
the ITV companies may be too small to compete on the international stage.
The 1990 Broadcasting Act designated nine of the 14 regional ITV companies
as 'large' and therefore unable to take over each other.
Broadcasters such as Central Independent Television, in the Midlands, and
Carlton Communications, the weekday franchise holder in London and minority
shareholder in two other ITV companies, have been lobbying for a change in
the rules.
They have said that while most ITV companies cannot take over each other or
merge, any of them could be taken over by European Community companies from
the beginning of 1994.
Mr Brooke is very concerned that British broadcasting - an industry that is
highly regarded internationally - should not go the way of the British
motorcycle industry, for example, because of unreasonable restrictions.
He plans to call a meeting on the issue with all of the ITV companies. In
particular, he wants to hear the economic case why there should be a
relaxation of the rules to allow larger commercial television companies to
emerge in the UK.
The Independent Television Commission, the regulatory body for commercial
television, has made it clear to Mr Brooke it would not oppose such a move.
The ITC believes it would be possible to have a consolidation of ownership
while enforcing all the obligations in the separate regional broadcasting
licences, including local programme production.
The only merger since the passing of the Broadcasting Act has been between
Yorkshire and Tyne Tees in the north of England. Tyne Tees was the largest
of the five 'small' ITV companies and was taken over with the approval of
the ITC.
Some ITV companies have been asking for an extension of the blanket
moratorium on hostile takeovers which runs out on December 31. This is
unlikely to be granted by the government.
There is clearly more sympathy for arguments that more ITV mergers should be
possible to get economies of scale and create a critical production mass.
Changing the rules on ITV ownership has the additional attraction for the
government of not requiring primary legislation.
If the government does change its mind on allowing 'large' ITV companies to
merge it could enable, for instance, Mr Michael Green's Carlton to take over
another major such as Central.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930527

