FT933-5096

FT  06 SEP 93 / France may veto farm trade accord


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


FRANCE yesterday revived its threat to veto the European Community's draft
farm trade accord with the US unless substantial changes are made to the
agreement.
Over the weekend, a senior French official warned that France would tell its
EC partners at a meeting of the Council of Ministers on September 20 that
France would refuse to sign the Blair House accord unless agricultural
discussions with the US were reopened.
'Unless it is now reopened,' the official said, 'there will be a crisis in
September rather than December' - the target date for finishing the Uruguay
Round of global trade liberalisation talks.
France in the next few weeks will step up its campaign to persuade the rest
of the Community of the need to water down the restraints on European farm
exports agreed last November.
France wants to secure the support of a majority of member states at the
Council of Ministers meeting. But the prospect of Paris using its veto on
the issue marks a toughening of the rhetoric of the Balladur government. In
its five months in office, it has sought to negotiate itself out of its
isolation on agriculture, rather than publicly brandish its veto.
'If the Commission does not budge,' said the official yesterday, 'we will
invoke the Luxembourg compromise (the convention by which a veto may be used
in defence of a vital national interest).
'And if it does not budge, the Commission, which is charged with the
solidarity of the Community, will be responsible for its breaking up.'
Mr Peter Sutherland, Gatt's new director-general, is due in Paris on
Wednesday to see Mr Edouard Balladur, prime minister, and is expected to
warn him that re-opening the Blair House accord would be counterproductive
for Europe in terms of winning new US concessions, and would cause the
Uruguay Round to miss its December 15 negotiating deadline.
In Bonn yesterday, Mr Klaus Kinkel, German foreign minister, indicated he
hoped France would settle for a reinterpretation of the agreement rather
than renegotiation.
While Germany has made sympathetic noises over the French position, it has
made clear it does not want to reopen the accord.
'We have had a delegation of experts in Paris,' Mr Kinkel told German radio.
'Perhaps we will come to a point through interpretations where a change in
the Blair House accord will not be necessary.' He added that a solution
might be found before the September 20 meeting of EC ministers.
However, Mr Kinkel said he understood France's opposition to the accord,
which entails a 21 per cent reduction in subsidised farm exports.
France, which has sought in particular to ensure the agreement is compatible
with the EC's own farm reform, is likely to deny the need for haste on
agriculture when many non-farm aspects of the Gatt negotiations are behind
schedule. It will try to secure new concessions by putting the onus on other
member states more anxious than France about the December deadline.
Meanwhile, French farmers, who are planning mass demonstrations on September
15, are now accusing the government of duplicity, of showing a softer face
on Gatt to France's partners than to its farmers.
See editorial comment

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930906

