FT932-6683

FT  27 MAY 93 / Arts: A zestful 'Belshazzar'


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


When the oratorio Belshazzar had its first performance in 1745, it was
performed at the King's Theatre in the Haymarket, which Handel had booked
for the winter season. A composer with a talent for enterprise was evidently
an acceptable figure at the time - perhaps Lloyd Webber has more illustrious
predecessors than one imagined.
For this performance in the Covent Garden Festival we were back on hallowed
ground, in St. Paul's Church. The performance did not go the full distance
in 'authentic' performance practice, but it captured much of the zest, the
strong dramatic atmosphere that is at the root of so many Handel oratorios,
despite a penny whistle serenading us from outside in the piazza.
The conductor, Peter Ash, and the Covent Garden Festival Orchestra performed
the score with few cuts (none at all in the choruses, for which the New
Company Choir proved more than adequate). The main four soloists lost an
aria each and couple of da capo repeats were snipped out. I doubt that many
people complained when they were sitting on hard church pews. Audiences in
Handel's day must have had 'authentic' bottoms which were more resilient
than ours.
In any case, in its central act where Belshazzar indulges in his revels,
this is a vividly-dramatised work. Handel sets the scene of the writing on
the wall with great skill, varying the pace so that he can build a scene of
mounting cumulative power - the gift of a practised opera composer. The
central figure of Belshazzar is keenly drawn, a young man, reckless,
assertive, in Jamie MacDougall's forthright portrayal.
The acoustics in this church are good for solo singers, probably rather
flattering. Carol Smith offered a mix of period purity and deeper colours in
the soprano music of Nitocris and Jonathan Kenny made a plangent
counter-tenor Daniel; Michael Druiett was the bass Gobrias. All the solo
numbers, however, were decisively trumped when Jean Rigby marched on as the
general Cyrus to proclaim her victory with a display of proud and energetic
coloratura singing.
With its small garden in which the audience can relax during the interval,
St Paul's Church makes a distinguished venue and the least I can do is get
its architect right: he was of course Inigo Jones, not Wren, as I stated on
Tuesday.
Covent Garden Festival sponsored by the BOC Group

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930527

