FT932-3392

FT  15 JUN 93 / Bosnian 'safe area' in UN plea: Serbs increase pressure on
besieged Moslem town of Gorazde


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


RADIO messages from the besieged eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde yesterday
appealed for outside intervention to save the UN-proclaimed 'safe area' as
Serb forces pressed ahead with their three-week offensive.
Bosnian Serb commanders said their troops were just 150 metres from
Moslem-positions in Gorazde, the last government stronghold in the
once-mostly Moslem east of the country.
In an ominous note which was likely to signal an intensification of Serb
attacks, a Bosnian Serb officer accused Moslem fighters of 'slaughtering
hundreds of Serbs' in villages surrounding Gorazde, according to the
Belgrade news agency, Tanjug. Serb commanders previously have used the claim
that Serb civilians are 'endangered' to justify an attack.
In an another move to consolidate their self-proclaimed state, Serb forces
set up checkpoints on the UN-controlled road from Sarajevo airport to the
besieged capital.
The Serb barricades violate a year-long UN agreement for an international
airlift to Sarajevo airport and the unhindered transport of food and medical
supplies on the airport road, a vital lifeline for the 380,000 people
trapped in Sarajevo.
General Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb commander, at the weekend agreed to
the deployment of UN military observers in Gorazde. His go-ahead suggested
that the Serb strategy in Gorazde may be similar to their operations earlier
this year around Srebrenica, the first UN-designated safe area.
In Srebrenica the intensity of Serb attacks, combined with a year-long
siege, forced the Bosnian authorities to agree to a demilitarisation of the
area. The area has been described by relief workers as an unsafe and
wretched refugee camp.
'The Serbs may be seeking to create yet another unviable refugee camp out of
Gorazde,' a western diplomat based in Belgrade said yesterday. Serb forces
control traffic leading to the six UN-declared safe areas, making remote the
possibility of any long-term future for Moslem-led Bosnian enclaves in
Serb-held eastern Bosnia.
Reports from amateur radio operators yesterday called Gorazde a 'real hell
under constant attacks from Serbian multiple rocket launchers and grenades'.
'Everything is burning and the villages are being destroyed,' said the
reports, which could not be independently confirmed because amateur radio
operators are the besieged town's only link with the outside world.
Bosnian radio said more than 50 people were killed on Sunday in a Serb
rocket attack on a hospital in the town.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930615

