FT932-6810

FT  27 MAY 93 / It is lonely at the top for Fiat's Agnelli


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


ON HIS pedestal as chairman of the Fiat group, Mr Giovanni Agnelli has
become a lonely man.
In recent months, 12 Fiat group executives have been implicated in
allegations concerning illicit payments to Italy's political parties to
obtain contracts and favourable treatment.
Now the investigations have reached just one notch below him - Mr Cesare
Romiti, his faithful long-standing chief executive. Milan magistrates have
placed Mr Romiti on the list of persons officially under investigation.
The Milan magistrates want to cross-check evidence voluntarily provided by
Mr Romiti against testimony of Fiat executives already arrested. The
magistrates are understood to be anxious to check whether Mr Romiti himself
was directly involved in contacts with politicians and to clarify details
about the use by Fiat of overseas funds paid illicitly through a Swiss bank.
The involvement of Mr Romiti - and more directly that of Mr Giorgio Garuzzo
and Mr Francesco Paolo Mattioli, respectively the group's chief operating
officer and chief financial officer - raises the awkward question of how
much the chairman himself knew of these illegal transactions.
Within the group, executives say Mr Agnelli was not concerned with the daily
running of the group and its 1,300 companies. As such he was unaware of the
extent of Fiat being a party to the system of bribes until around April this
year. When he did, they say, he immediately went public on April 17 with a
speech at Venice admitting Fiat had erred.
This then led to Mr Romiti's appearence before the Milan magistrates and a
complete volte face in the group's previous stance of non-cooperation with
the judiciary. Fiat also hastily approved a new code of business ethics for
the group.
One of the team of Milan magistrates admitted this week that Fiat's
evidence, combined with that provided by Mr Carlo De Benedetti, the Olivetti
chairman 10 days ago, has unlocked the main keys to the illicit system of
financing the political parties. This appeared to go some way towards
exonerating Mr Agnelli.
The 72 year-old Fiat chairman is on record as saying that when the first
group executive was arrested in May 1992, Mr Enzo Papi, the managing
director of the construction arm Cogefar-Impresit, he understood this was an
isolated instance with at best one or two other cases.
However, this suggests that there was no attempt to conduct an inquiry at a
senior level until nearly a year later. During this time a number of Fiat
executives had already spent considerable time in jail before agreeing to
talk to the authorities.
It also suggests that Fiat's top management either preferred to ignore the
growing wave of evidence of widespread corruption coming to light from last
autumn onwards, or adopted a policy of sitting tight.
In either case the image of the group has suffered, as has that of both Mr
Romiti and Mr Agnelli. As commentator Massimo Riva wrote yesterday in the
newspaper La Repubblica: 'Dealing with Fiat one writes Cesare Romiti but one
must read in for this Giovanni Agnelli, the man who is the real symbol and
incarnation of economic power, the standard bearer of the Italian industrial
system, the oracle to whom a good part of the country turns to decide the
course of their investments and consumer habits.'
There is indeed the question of why Fiat - through its enormous influence in
Confindustria, the industrialists' confederation, and through Mr Agnelli's
unparalleled prestige and personal contacts as well as ownership of one
national newspaper, La Stampa, and shares in another, Corriere della Serra -
did not denounce earlier a system of bribery which had got out of hand.
The uncomfortable answer would appear to be that Fiat grossly underestimated
the cancer of corruption in the system and at the same time found it
convenient to play along with the extortionate game of the politicians.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930527

