FT932-208

FT  30 JUN 93 / City set to defend terror measures


   By GILLIAN TETT


   THE Corporation of London


the local authority for the City - is preparing for a long defence of its
controversial proposals for tough new anti-terrorist measures in the City.
The proposals, which include a ban on non-essential traffic, the
introduction of vehicle checkpoints and extra police surveillance, have been
greeted with discreet dismay by some Whitehall officials. They fear that
introducing Belfast-style measures in the wake of the Bishopsgate bombing in
April would present the IRA with a propaganda coup.
But Mr Michael Cassidy, chairman of the corporation's policy and resources
committee, insisted yesterday that the corporation was intending to press
ahead with the proposals.
He has recently met officials from the Department of Transport and other
government departments to smooth out some misunderstandings.
Although he conceded that some middle-ranking officials had expressed their
opposition to the plans, he insisted that the cabinet was broadly supportive
of the anti-terrorist measures.
The corporation has submitted its proposals, which would probably require
legislation, to the Home Office and is expected to make an announcement
soon.
The Home Office yesterday said that the final decision rests with the
corporation, although it warned that it would be opposed to excessive
anti-terrorist measures.
'We do not want the IRA to get any more publicity or propaganda out of this.
We want to protect the citizens, but not with disproportionate measures,'
the Home Office said.
In spite of government pressure, the proposals appear to have strong
business support in the City, particularly from foreign banks who have
warned Mr Cassidy that without further anti-terrorist measures the City's
status as a financial centre could be badly undermined.
Representatives from the Corporation of London and City of London police
have met the Bank of England, Stock Exchange, National Westminster Bank,
Lloyd's, and other business institutions in recent weeks to draw up the
proposals.
Mr David Edmonds, general manager for group property at NatWest, said that
the banks were now pushing for a speedy discussion and decision on the range
of proposals.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930630

