FT932-3405

FT  15 JUN 93 / Venables not wanted at Spurs, Sugar says after ruling


   By JOHN MASON, Law Courts Correspondent


MR ALAN SUGAR, chairman of Tottenham Hotspur, last night sought to impose
his authority on the troubled football club after winning the first round of
his legal battle with Mr Terry Venables, whose dismissal as chief executive
was upheld by the High Court.
Speaking with some bitterness, Mr Sugar said that he and his family had been
put through 'hell' by Mr Venables and that, in future, the north London club
would be run on 'correct' business lines.
As some fans threatened to boycott ticket sales and the club was warned that
several players might not renew their contracts, Mr Sugar said Mr Venables
had no future at Tottenham except in his role as a non-executive director.
'We don't want him at the club,' said Mr Sugar, 'and if I have anything to
do with it, he's not coming back at all.'
Mr Sugar was speaking after a senior High Court judge, Sir Donald Nicholls,
rejected an attempt by Mr Venables to extend the injunction preventing Mr
Sugar and the Tottenham board from sacking him as chief executive.
Hundreds of Spurs fans demonstrated their support for Mr Venables, cheering
as he left court.
Some supporters then threatened to starve Tottenham of ticket sales in an
attempt to force Mr Sugar to leave the club.
Mr Eric Hall, Mr Venables' commercial agent, who also represents several
Spurs players, said after the hearing: 'I represent about 12 players and
they've all told me in the last couple of days that they certainly will put
in for transfers and leave Tottenham Hotspur.'
Mr Sugar acknowledged that the battle between himself and Mr Venables had
damaged the club. However, he went on: 'Everyone has forgotten that this is
a company. What has happened is no different to what happens every day in
corporate life.'
Mr Venables insisted that he would pursue his court battle to force Mr Sugar
to sell him his 47 per cent share in the club. Mr Sugar said he would fight
that move vigorously.
The legal battle between the two men will resume this autumn or early next
year. However, Sir Donald yesterday said this move would probably prove
'difficult' for Mr Venables. He ordered Mr Venables to pay Mr Sugar's legal
costs.
Mr Sugar said the search for Mr Venables' replacement would now begin but
this would not be a hurried 'cosmetic' process. He would be talking to the
existing team management duo of Doug Livermore and Ray Clemence.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930615

