FT933-10211

FT  05 AUG 93 / Letter: M&S's plans for Brooks Brothers


   From Sir RICHARD GREENBURY


Sir, Nikki Tait's report on Brooks Brothers was inaccurate and misleading
(Management, July 8).
First of all, it is quite clear from the report that Miss Tait has no
understanding of the factory outlet business. When it was originally
introduced by other retailers it was, as described in the article, for the
clearance of surplus stocks, etc. It has moved on since then quite
dramatically, with thousands of stores having been developed by all the
great names in American retailing. Together with 'Outlet Malls', it has
developed into the fastest growing sector in a highly competitive American
retail scene.
Almost all factory outlets are distinguished by low occupancy costs and more
flexible staffing arrangements, which enable a retailer to sell the same
full-price product that he is selling in the mainline store at a
significantly lower price, while still making a profit. I think you will
find that even companies like Ralph Lauren now trade very successfully in
such stores. That is why Brooks Brothers has become involved and the sales
performance, together with the profitability that is developing, is clear
for all to see and should have been equally so to your reporter.
We certainly did change the archaic remuneration scheme which provided our
sales staff with an average annual salary of Dollars 49,000, which of course
means that many were earning as much as Dollars 70,000-Dollars 80,000 per
annum. This level of remuneration was almost twice the national average and
the majority of staff accepted a very modest change to their bonus system,
bearing in mind the mass unemployment that has occurred in American
retailing over the past five years.
We have not cut back on capital expenditure in Brooks Brothers and continue
to give it the necessary funds to modernise its stores, and in particular to
develop new information and distribution systems. Frankly, without these, it
would have no future.
We are not trying to popularise Brooks: clearly this wouldnot be in its
interests and we are not so stupid as to think it would be. Brooks Brothers,
however, cannot develop and grow based upon a declining number of ageing
Wall Street customers and must broaden its base at least into the
40-year-olds, while of course maintaining the loyalty of its more
traditional customers. We are succeeding with this policy.
It is not surprising that we are struggling to match the 1988 results: so
are most other American retailers; some of the greatest names are either in
the bankruptcy courts or have already closed down. It may come as a surprise
to Nikki Tait, but the American retail scene has been in recession for the
past few years and continues to be so. Throughout that time, Brooks Brothers
has consistently made a profit, which is more than can be said for many of
them.
Richard Greenbury,
chairman,
Marks and Spencer,
Michael House,
Baker Street, London W1A 1DN

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930805

