FT933-10260

FT  05 AUG 93 / Hurd moves swiftly to heal Tory split over Europe


   By DAVID OWEN


GOVERNMENT ministers have launched a concerted attempt to heal Tory wounds
over Europe ahead of next year's European parliament elections.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, has been holding private meetings
with Tory MPs representing all shades of opinion on Europe in an effort to
highlight policy areas where there is common ground.
Yesterday's meetings with Mr Bill Cash, the arch Euro-sceptic MP for
Stafford, and Mr Hugh Dykes, the strongly pro-European MP for Harrow East,
were portrayed by the government as fulfilling a pledge made during last
month's tumultuous Commons confidence debate.
Winding up the debate - called in response to the government's defeat over
Maastricht's social chapter - Mr Hurd promised to 'listen carefully to the
wide range of views within our party and outside'.
Mr Ian Taylor, the staunchly pro-European Tory MP for Esher who also met Mr
Hurd this week as a representative of the Positive European group, said
yesterday the foreign secretary had invited the group to develop its views
on 'the post-Maastricht agenda'.
Mr Taylor said he emphasised to Mr Hurd during a 40-minute meeting that
Maastricht was 'very much worth the effort' despite the exchange rate
mechanism's difficulties, but argued that there was now a need to explain to
people how the European Community could work to their advantage.
'We have spent a long time in necessary legal debate but what we now have to
do is show the EC is something individuals can benefit from,' Mr Taylor
said.
The meetings came as the continued bitterness of the party's divisions over
Europe was underlined by a savage attack by Sir Edward Heath, the former
prime minister, on Mr Norman Lamont, former chancellor.
In The Times newspaper Sir Edward criticised Mr Lamont for his 'blundering
and panic' in the handling of events leading up to sterling's suspension
from the ERM last September.
Mr Hurd is understood to believe there is enough consensus to prevent the
party tearing itself apart either in the European election campaign or ahead
of the next EC intergovernmental conference scheduled for 1996. The Tory
European election manifesto is expected to reflect this.
Mr Hurd - who will chair the European election manifesto committee - is said
to believe that the recent turmoil in currency markets has consigned the
issue of monetary union to 'even longer grass than it was sitting in
before'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930805

