FT934-8917

FT  12 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Talk of Opec cut revives oil


   By ROBERT CORZINE


REPORTS that Saudi Arabia might consider cuts in the production ceiling set
in late September by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries
yesterday lifted oil prices after the benchmark Brent blend fell to new
post-Gulf war lows.
The price of Brent blend for December rose to Dollars 15.65 in late London
trading after earlier falling to Dollars 15.20. One London trader said the
news agency report caused 'the market to perceive that Opec might cut the
ceiling' of 24.52m barrels a day. 'People were hesitating to sell,' he said.
The report, however, did not say whether Saudi Arabia was prepared to cut
its own 8m b/d quota.
The markets also strengthened as a result of the vote in the United Nations
Security Council last night to impose new sanctions on Libya that could
affect its ability to export oil. The ban includes new equipment, such as
high capacity pumps and refinery machinery, as well as parts and spares for
Libya's oil transport and export facilities. It is designed gradually to
erode the country's export capacity, but the uncertainty over Libyan exports
could help to underpin the oil prices temporarily, according to analysts.
The quick reaction to the Saudi report highlighted the growing nervousness
of the markets ahead of Opec's next ministerial meeting in Vienna on
November 23. Yesterday Mr Rehda Malek, the Algerian prime minister, was
quoted by a newspaper in the United Arab Emirates as saying that oil
producers 'should show greater restraint' in order to boost prices.
On Monday, Opec's Economic Commission meets to discuss its forecast for
short-term demand. It will prepare a report for Opec ministers which is
expected to show a continuing decline in demand for Opec oil. 'What we have
here is a combination of seasonal factors, . . . weak world demand and
stepped-up non-Opec production,' an Opec official said yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

931112

