FT933-12597

FT  23 JUL 93 / People: Brown benefits from ABCC's expansion


The frantic pace of change at the Association of British Chambers of
Commerce over the past three years has put an increasing burden on its small
staff. To keep up with the increased workload the chambers have appointed
their first deputy director general.
Richard Brown, 32, formerly director of policy, has been promoted to handle
the chambers' external affairs and international relations. Recent visitors
to the association's cramped Westminster offices have included chamber
representatives from Russia and Bulgaria and Brown has a busy programme in
Europe over the next few months.
A graduate in French and Spanish from the University of East Anglia, Brown
has been with the chambers for three years. Before that he spent seven years
with the British Institute of Management, ending as director of policy.
Brown will be number two to Ron Taylor, the director general and an old
chambers' hand who has spearheaded the attempts to beef up the British
chamber movement. The association is attempting to create a core network of
some 50 chambers with the resources to match their German and French
counterparts, which enjoy considerable government backing.
In January the association merged with the National Chamber of Trade which
draws its members mainly from the retail sector. This boosted membership
from 90,000 businesses to 214,000. Staff numbers have gone up from 20 to 26
and the association has taken a far more active role in the economic debate.
The result of all this activity has been to give the association a far
stronger role. It was previously seen as a poor relation of some of the
larger local chambers in London, Birmingham and Manchester and was not taken
very seriously.
Brown, who lists his leisure activities as swimming and writing, has just
completed his third book. Due out in October, it is a study of how
implementation of the Maastricht Treaty will affect business. He has been
following the Treaty's tortuous passage with close interest and some
trepidation.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930723

