FT934-11438

FT  01 NOV 93 / Consumer industries lead output growth


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


MANUFACTURING OUTPUT expanded faster in October than in the previous month,
and there was particularly buoyant growth in consumer industries.
The Purchasing Managers' Index, an early indicator of manufacturing output
trends based on a survey of purchasing managers, indicated an expansion of
manufacturing activity for the ninth consecutive month. The index - based on
a weighted average of five survey variables - rose from 51.7 per cent in
September to 53.6 per cent last month. The increase contradicted the latest
survey evidence from the Confederation of British Industry, which pointed to
a flattening of output and new orders.
The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply, which carries out the
survey, said there was a substantial expansion of production and new orders,
with consumer industries showing the greatest growth in new orders. The
output index rose from 54.3 per cent in September to 57.9 per cent last
month. For new orders, the index rose from 50.9 per cent to 56.3 per cent.
Respondents said an improvement in domestic demand was the source for much
of the growth in new orders in October, although a slight overall increase
in overseas orders was also recorded after two months of falling exports and
export orders.
The increase in production many also have been linked to preparation for
Christmas. The index measuring stocks of finished goods registered little
overall change on the previous month as de-stocking was reported to have
been offset by Christmas stockbuilding.
Less encouraging was a fall in the employment index last month from 51.3 per
cent to 48.8 per cent. This followed three months of rising employment in
manufacturing. The north of England had the highest growth in new orders
during October although demand continued to grow strongly in the south-west,
the Midlands and Wales.
Mr Peter Thomson, director-general of the institute, said: 'This is good
news, particularly as it is founded on hard data, direct from the factory
gates - not conjecture. It shows clearly that fresh vigour continues to
return to UK manufacturing, as demonstrated by the marked upturn seen in
output and order books.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931101

