FT932-6680

FT  27 MAY 93 / Arts: Fassbaender at full steam


   By DAVID MURRAY


Anyone who has heard - no, experienced - Brigitte Fassbaender in full, black
cry knows what to expect when the Kraken wakes. Her mezzo, which grows
deeper with the years, can carry an extraordinary charge of pain: exposed
but stoical, disabused, disdaining any kind of appeal for sympathy except
naked candour. In the Jon Vickers stakes for heart-seizing vocal Affekt, she
is a top contender.
That is a crucial factor in her recently developed Winterreise; but we might
have heard it coming as far back as her memorable Rosenkavalier Octavian,
with a young aristo's manly shyness and nervous dignity undercut, or
underpinned, by those forcefully poignant tones - or in her cool Capriccio
Clairon, darkly suggestive beyond the meagre role Strauss composed. There is
also tough, unwinking intelligence, and abrasive humour (she is a Berliner
by birth). In fact Fassbaender counts by now as a monstre sacre, and the
Wigmore Hall audience on Monday gave her a vociferous welcome.
What she sang, however, was a wide-ranging selection from Hugo Wolf's Morike
Lieder, to which her formidable powers are not ideally matched. She
delivered almost everything in the first half forte or fortissimo as if she
had come straight from Carnegie Hall and forgotten to adjust the volume. In
that, her excellent pianist Jean-Yves Thibaudet vied with her: it was hard
to tell who was challenging whom for domination. As a result 'Auf einer
Wanderung', which is an iridescent vision, sounded as heartily down-to-earth
as 'Fussreise'.
There was more light-and-shade in the second half - though she belted out
the rapt 'Gesang Weylas' hymn, not a good idea. 'Der Feuerreiter' was of
course stridently dramatic but there were lovely measured nuances in 'Denk'
es, O Seele', one of Morike's death-haunted prayers, and in the radiant 'Im
Fruhling'. In the latter it was only to be expected that Fassbaender's
closing sigh (Alte unnennbare Tage] - 'Old, unutterable days]') should hint
at memories of a really unspeakable kind, just as in 'Nimmersatte Liebe' the
light erotic play of Je weher, desto besser - 'the more it hurts, the
better]' - would sound like raw masochism.
What hardly ever felt right was Thibaudet's pulse. Too often his address
seemed unfeelingly swift and bright, hustling the songs along before they
could cast any long shadows. Still, I look forward anxiously to hearing the
new Decca CD of this programme - for in the recording studio Fassbaender and
her partner must surely have scaled down their dynamics, and perhaps even
relaxed the pace.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930527

