FT934-8416

FT  16 NOV 93 / PM stresses links between traditional values and success


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, yesterday sought to infuse fresh life
into his 'back to basics' campaign by linking traditional values firmly to
economic success.
Delivering his annual speech at the Lord Mayor's banquet in the City of
London, Mr Major also warned Europe to act quickly to restore
competitiveness, and held out the prospect of a reinvigorated London.
Mr Major dismissed claims that his campaign for a return to traditional
values was an exercise in nostalgia, recalling that his own working-class
upbringing gave him 'no reason to be nostalgic'.
The prime minister said the campaign was aimed at inculcating respect for
basic economic values such as low inflation, free markets and a climate that
encouraged free enterprise. These values were linked to social values such
as self-discipline, respect for the law, concern for others and greater
acceptance of personal responsibility.
'Some will say these values are obvious. If so, why have so many people
forgotten them,' he said.
Mr Major said huge strides had been made towards 'commonsense policies' in
the 1980s. But traditional values were equally relevant to the urgent tasks
of the 1990s, such as declining competitiveness.
In the only explicitly party political section of his speech, Mr Major
launched a strong attack on the manifesto for next year's European elections
issued by the European socialist group, to which the Labour party belongs.
He said Europe's competitors in Japan, south-east Asia and the US 'must be
astonished by the group's call for the introduction of a 35-hour or four-day
week. And I must say it takes my breath away too.'
It was 'past time to sound the alarm' about the declining competitiveness of
the European Union, which risked being overtaken as an economic power by the
countries of the Pacific basin.
Mr Major said the EU would be economically outpaced by the year 2000 if it
continued to lose its share of world trade at the present rate.
The prime minister said the government would shortly begin a wide-ranging
consultation exercise to determine how to improve prospects for London.
He said businesses were still coming to London, bringing jobs and growth,
but he said that if London was to stay ahead it had to develop and compete.
The prime minister added that the government would help to establish the
inward investment agency which has been mooted by the City corporation and
others.
Mr Tony Blair, Labour's home affairs spokesman, said Mr Major's
back-to-basics campaign was 'going nowhere fast'. He said the government was
'uncertain whether it is going back, or what it is going back to'.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, said Mr Major's speech was 'a
mixture of wish lists and nostalgia, when what Britain needs is a firm
lead'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931116

