FT932-6592

FT  27 MAY 93 / International Bonds: Britannia launches unusual four-year
floating-rate note


   By SARA WEBB


BORROWERS flocked to the Eurobond market in a variety of currencies, using
fixed and floating-rate instruments yesterday.
Britannia Building Society launched an unusual floating-rate deal which
Samuel Montagu, the lead manager, structured to provide separate additional
detachable interest rights, or ADIRs.
The Pounds 100m, four-year deal had an issue price of 100 for the whole
package, consisting of 99.71 for the notes and coupon and 0.29 for the
ADIRs.
It is understood that the lead manager kept the ADIRs, which it pointed out
are 'instruments likely to appeal to financial institutions'.
The coupon is three-month Libor plus 15 basis points, and the ADIRs entitle
the holder to receive 5 per cent minus three-month Libor if three-month
Libor falls below 5 per cent.
The lead manager said the instruments would be of interest to investors who
think Libor will be less than 5 per cent (three-month Libor is currently 6
per cent).
Barclays Bank also tapped the sterling sector, raising a further Pounds 100m
tranche of perpetual, subordinated debt (known as upper tier two capital)
following its initial Pounds 200m deal in early April.
The latest tranche was priced to yield 135 basis points over the 9 per cent
gilt due 2008, whereas the initial tranche had a yield spread of 140 basis
points at launch and tightened to 131 basis points in the secondary market.
The debt is callable at par after 15 years and if it is not called the
coupon will be refixed - either at the current level of 9.875 per cent or at
240 basis points over the five-year benchmark gilt, whichever of those is
higher.
BZW, the lead manager, said the decision to issue a further tranche was made
in response to strong investor demand, particularly in the UK. In the course
of the day it rose from the fixed re-offer price of 98.951 to 99.0625.
Elsewhere, Compagnie Bancaire, the specialised financial business owned by
Paribas, aimed its five-year Ecu100m deal at the retail sector.
While the Danish referendum result a week ago was greeted as good news for
the Ecu bond sector, there has not been much new issuance in Ecu since then.
The deal is expected to be well-received given the shortage of current
coupon Ecu paper.
Daimler-Benz International Finance tapped the Eurobond market with a L125bn,
seven-year deal and is understood to be keeping the lira proceeds.
The deal saw good demand in Germany, Benelux and Switzerland from investors
who are familiar with this blue-chip name. The borrower has tapped the lira
sector before. Deutsche Bank, the book-runner for the deal, said it looked
at recent seven-year lira issues for reference, and the deal was priced to
yield 10.63 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

930527

