FT931-3969

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (11): Urgent search for drastic
solutions - Property owners in Sweden believe that government intervention
would stabilise the market because it would reduce the necessity for fire
sales / Sweden


   By VANESSA HOULDER


THE search for drastic solutions to Europe's commercial property malaise is
nowhere more urgent than in Sweden.
The past two years have seen a sharp reversal of the growth of the 1980s,
when bank deregulation, tax reforms, cheap credit and a general mood of
business confidence rapidly inflated office values.
From mid 1990, high real interest rates and a worsening recession have
severely undermined the commercial property market. Vacancy rates have
tripled, property values have halved, the investment market has dried up and
scores of property companies have collapsed leaving their assets in the
hands of the banks.
The slump in the property market has undermined the Swedish banking system
which is suffering from an estimated SKr200bn of non-performing loans. Of
the large commercial banks only one, Svenska Handelsbanken, looks as though
it will be able to survive without government support.
The mounting pressure on the banking system has prompted the government to
set up a commission to examine the matter. While the form in which the
government will intervene is not yet decided, it is possible that the
government will end up guaranteeing the banks' non-performing assets.
The prospect of taking responsibility for banks' bad debts is viewed with
dismay by a government committed to privatisation and to containing a
spiralling budget deficit. But it may be the price that has to be paid to
restore confidence in the Swedish banking system and to stop the free fall
in the property market.
Property owners in Sweden believe that government intervention would
stabilise the property market because it would reduce the necessity for fire
sales. 'When the government and bank negotiations come to an end it will
provide a floor to prices. It will calm things,' says the director of a
large property company.
The enormity of the banks' problems with their SKr275bn of commercial
property loans means that working out the solution will be a lengthy
process. 'The banks understand that they cannot just sell the property. They
will have it for the next 10 to 20 years,' says Mr Anders Klein, a banking
analyst at Enskilda Securities.
The banks are reluctant property owners. They have little appropriate
expertise to manage their newly-formed property companies because
historically they have been legally prevented from direct ownership of
assets. 'The banks were not prepared for this,' says Mr Magnus Dager of
Knight Frank & Rutley, property consultant. 'They were not staffed for it.'
The task of managing the newly-formed property holding companies is
daunting. 'Sorting out the problems of 2,000 properties round the world is
an absolutely huge problem,' says Peter Leimdorfer, a property adviser. 'The
properties have often been mismanaged as the owners have lacked the
resources to manage the properties'.
Few of the properties now owned by the banks are in demand from Sweden's
institutional investors. Many are unlet. Office vacancy rates have risen
from 2 per cent to 7 per cent, as a result of the flagging economy and a
surge in construction activity.
The development market was buoyant throughout the second half of the 1980s
until it was checked by the imposition of a 30 per cent tax on new
developments in 1989. Development activity reached a peak of 600,000 sq m of
new offices in 1989, according to Leimdorfer Bernhardtson Westerberg &
Partners, consultants.
Swedish developers also expanded overseas. The gradual lifting of exchange
restrictions from late 1987 prompted many construction companies and
developers to venture abroad to Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria
and the UK. More than Skr100bn was spent on investments and developments. In
some cases, particularly in London, these overseas developments have given
rise to even heavier losses than in Stockholm.
At home and abroad, the banks' prospects of recovering the most they can
from their loans ultimately depends on a revival in the health of the
letting market.
Much depends on the state of the Swedish economy, which is facing daunting
problems with growing unemployment and a spiralling public sector deficit.
There is also concern that the scale of the problems inflicted by property
losses could set back the recovery by restricting the banks' ability to make
new loans. However, the krona's forced devaluation last November may have
brought forward a recovery in the property industry. Mr Larsson of Enskilda
believes that short-term interest rates may come down to 5 or 6 per cent in
1993-4. Together with a small rise in inflation, that might help the
overindebted property market.
Although no recovery in rental values is on the horizon for three or four
years at the earliest, Mr Larsson believes that the fall in the property
market may level off by the end of the year. 'It is possible that we have
seen the worst,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

930312

