FT934-8630

FT  15 NOV 93 / Trade pact vote hanging in the balance: Arm-twisting on
Nafta will go on to the last minute before the US Congress decides


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE debating, cajoling and arm-twisting will continue up to the very last
minute this week as members of Congress prepare for Wednesday's crucial vote
in the House of Representatives on the North American Free Trade Agreement
with Mexico and Canada.
The congressional votes have been counted, recounted and double-counted, and
still no-one can predict the outcome with real confidence.
'The undecided members of Congress still hold the balance,' Vice-President
Al Gore said yesterday.
If Nafta passes the House, it is expected to be approved more easily by the
Senate. It would then come into effect on January 1, lowering tariffs and
dismantling trade barriers between the US, Canada and Mexico.
President Bill Clinton said this weekend that he had won 27 members over to
Nafta in the three days since Mr Gore debated the issue with Mr Ross Perot
on television, and claimed to have the necessary momentum to win on
Wednesday. One more member, Ms Maria Cantwell, was due to announce her
support yesterday, despite Mr Perot's anti-Nafta rally in her Seattle
district.
But Congressman David Bonior, the Democratic whip who is leading the battle
in Congress against Nafta, said he had topped the 218 needed to win in the
434-member House.
'We have about 222 votes going into this weekend and we think we are going
to hold our votes,' Mr Bonior said yesterday, though other anti-Nafta
campaigners said they wanted a cushion of at least eight or nine members to
counter last-minute defections.
The White House's strategy for winning the Nafta vote is built on gaining
around 100 of the House's 258 Democrats and around 120 of the 175
Republicans.
Some pro-Nafta campaigners believe they will have the Democratic votes they
are counting on, but worry that the Republicans are so far assured of only
105 members and will be hard pressed to find their 120-vote contribution.
In the last month, however, the administration has been hard at work on a
wider spread of side-deals to alloy the doubts of wavering members.
'The only deal that hasn't been made is for working families,' Mr Bonior
complained.
Votes have been hard to buy. Deals on citrus and sugar won fewer vote
commitments than the White House had hoped for, and the promise of a North
American Development Bank doubled its yield this week when Congressman Ed
Pastor cited it as a reason he would vote for Nafta.
Asparagus growers and airlines have also received a helping hand, but the
administration denied that it had promised to build sewers or bridges in the
districts of uncommitted members.
What many congressmen are looking for, however, is a political umbrella. Mr
Clinton offered one to hesitant Republicans by promising to help them in
next year's congressional elections if his fellow Democrats bring up their
vote for Nafta against them.
Congressional vote counters say that Nafta is unlikely to pass by more than
one or two votes, if it passes at all. Several members of Congress may have
promised the president that theirs will not be the vote that kills the trade
pact; if the Ayes top 218, there will be a rush of these provisional Nafta
supporters to vote No.
Editorial comment, Page 19
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
TRADE TALKS CALENDER
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
NOVEMBER 17, WASHINGTON: Congress votes on North American Free Trade
                         Agreement, linking the US, Canada and Mexico.
                         Failure would flag serious US difficulties in
                         ratifying a Gatt Uruguay Round deal, even if an
                         agreement is reached in principle in Geneva by
                         December 15.
NOVEMBER 17-21, SEATTLE: The Apec summit cements closer economic and
                         political ties across the Pacific. Leaders are
                         committed to providing fresh Uruguay Round
                         initiatives if needed.
DECEMBER 2, BRUSSELS:    Economic Union (formally EC) foreign ministers
                         meet: will they clip the wings of EU
                         negotiators in the final critical states of
                         Uruguay Round negotiations?
DECEMBER 15, WASHINGTON: US administration's negotiating authority in
                         the Uruguay Round expires, imposing an
                         effective deadline for the talks. Brinkmanship
                         can be expected to the last minute, as the US
                         has to deliver an agreement to Congress by
                         midnight - or 6:00am Geneva time
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931115

