FT932-7025

FT  26 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Mayhew outlines Ulster plan


   By TIM COONE


   DUBLIN


THE British government outlined its latest blueprint for the political
structure of Northern Ireland to the Irish Republic's government in Dublin
yesterday.
But no new initiatives emerged from the ministerial meeting that might
kick-start the stalled round-table political talks.
It had been hoped that yesterday's meeting of the Anglo-Irish conference
might give a fresh momentum to the talks process now that the province's
local elections are over.
But Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, said the UK
government's proposals were still incomplete and would only be presented 'as
and when the talks resume'. He said the British blueprint would not be 'an
agreed paper between the two governments'.
Mr Dick Spring, the republic's foreign minister, said he was satisfied that
there would be further consultations between before the British paper was
completed.
The province's political parties abandoned negotiations last November
without agreeing new political structures. The refusal by the hard-line
Democratic Unionist party to sit at the table until the Irish Republic
relinquishes its territorial claim to the province continues to be the main
hurdle to further progress.
Sir Patrick said yesterday that articles two and three of the Irish
constitution, which set out the republic's territorial claim on the
province, were 'a significant factor' blocking progress.
Mr Spring reiterated his government's position that he would not accept
preconditions and issued a plea to unionists. 'Why not come and talk?' he
said. 'It doesn't help anybody to set out preconditions. We are available
for dialogue.'
Both ministers said they intend to initiate private meetings with the
leaders of Northern Ireland's main political parties in an attempt to
establish the basis for fresh talks.
Sir Patrick welcomed the moves by the republic to amend extradition
legislation 'to close loopholes that have recently been opened up by
judicial decisions'. The question of internment, demanded by unionist
leaders in the wake of the IRA's latest bombing offensive in Northern
Ireland, was not discussed.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930526

