FT933-12580

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (6): Help may
not be enough - France: The likely impact of the Balladur government's plans
for public works


   By ANDREW TAYLOR


THE FRENCH construction market has been in decline since the second half of
last year. Despite the rescue programmes announced by the new conservative
government, most construction companies and building producers expect output
to fall further this year.
At best, turnover will be flat next year. Few companies expect much growth
in 1994.
Recovery, they say, will have to wait until the French economy improves.
While unemployment continues to mount, consumer confidence will remain weak.
The public will spend less on goods and manufacturers and shops making and
selling them will continue to lay off workers.
As a result, companies are more likely to close factories and reduce
operations rather than invest in new buildings and better facilities.
Lafarge Coppee, the French cement producer and one of the world's biggest
building materials companies, says that sales of cement in France during the
first six months of this year fell by more than 10 per cent.
The rate of decline is likely to slow in the second half, says the company,
only because comparisons will be made with a very poor second six months in
1992. Even so, it expects cement sales in its home country to be down by
about 8 per cent this year following a similar fall in 1992.
Government and independent forecasters have suggested that the fall in total
construction output will be between 2 and 3 per cent this year. Contractors
and building materials producers believes this understates the true extent
of the steepness of the downturn which they say is more in line with the
decline in cement sales and one of the best guides of construction activity.
Bouygues, among the country's biggest builders and civil engineers, has
forecast a 6 per cent fall in its French construction turnover, including
road building, this year.
Most contractors expect total construction output to fall by at least 5 per
cent this year, despite plans by the government to encourage higher spending
on public works and housing.
Mr Edouard Balladur, the prime minister, hopes this will be achieved through
a mixture of tax incentives, increased borrowing capacity for local
authorities and subsidised mortgage rates for the poor.
The government's plan, announced in two stages during May - and with further
proposals likely - involves freeing an extra FFr18bn (Pounds 2.05bn) to be
spent on public works during the next two years.
Part of this will be channelled through a five-year programme of jointly
financed central and local government projects, mostly roads, due to be
completed by the end of this year. Authorities are to be allowed to raise
more money to enable this to reach its target of 97 per cent completions,
instead of 86 per cent currently.
A new five-year programme is to be announced shortly and will provide a
further guide of the government's determination to use the construction
industry to revitalise the French economy.
Extra public money is also to be found to enable very large infrastructure
projects, which had ground to a halt because of lack of funds, to be
completed.
Beneficiaries are expected to be the Tunnel du Somport, a road tunnel
through the Pyrenees and the A86 orbital motorway around Paris.
The industry has welcomed the fillip but points out that many of these
schemes were already in the programme. The extra FFr18bn, provided it can be
raised, compared with a total spend on construction last year, excluding the
do-it-yourself market and black economy, of more than FFr650bn.
The government has also moved to assist the housing market with a programme
of tax and interest rate incentives which it hopes will raise the number of
homes built by 30,000 during the next 18 months.
High real interest rates and fear of unemployment have severely weakened the
French housing market. The number of new home starts last year fell by 8.5
per cent to 277,000 from 303,000.
Mr Pierre Bosset, French construction analyst with stockbrokers James Capel,
says that builders expect housing starts to fall to about 250,000 this year.
'The Balladur plan might add another 5,000 starts this year and perhaps
another 10,000 to 15,000 next year but is unlikely to add more. Housing will
remain a difficult market while companies are announcing redundancies daily.
French interest rates are still high by comparison with Britain,' says Mr
Bosset.
Overbuilding in the late 1980s means that investment in office construction
is unlikely to improve even when the rest of French construction recovers.
Paris is estimated to have four years' supply of offices either built or in
the process of construction, much of which will need to be taken up before
new schemes are contemplated.
Private investment in factories and shops will not improve until the general
economy recovers and consumer confidence increases. There are few signs of
this happening in the short term. Gross domestic product is expected to fall
by about 1 per cent this year while the unemployment rate is forecast by the
French National Institute of Statistics to rise to 12.5 per cent.
Meanwhile manufacturers, which have suffered under the French government's
policy of protecting the franc's value through high interest rates, have
been running down stocks and closing unused production capacity.
Government efforts to encourage housing and increase public works will take
time to work through and at best may only stem the decline in construction
output rather than reverse it. Contractors and building material producers
can expect more pain in the second half of this year. Recovery may have to
wait until 1995.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930723

