FT934-11480

FT  30 OCT 93 / Man in the News: Blueprint for a banking baron - Alexandre
Lamfalussy


   By PETER NORMAN


In endorsing Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy to head the new European Monetary
Institute, European Community leaders have chosen a man who shuns the
limelight but who is not afraid to put forward trenchant views.
The EMI, which will have the job of preparing for European economic and
monetary union at the end of this century and is expected to be a forerunner
of the planned European central bank, will be headed by a firm believer in
international monetary co-operation, and someone who has been a persistent
advocate of greater European integration.
He will have little sympathy for the UK government's determinedly
anti-federal European stance, and still less for London's view of the EMI as
a low-key institution. From the Bank for International Settlements in Basle,
where he is currently general manager, Mr Lamfalussy has been scathing of UK
policy in the past. In the early 1980s he dismissed the first Thatcher
government's adherence to dogmatic monetarism, without regard to soaring
unemployment, as being akin to an experiment in the natural sciences rather
than a balanced economic policy.
Mr Lamfalussy was one of four outside experts appointed members of the
Delors committee of central bank governors, which in 1988 and 1989 drew up
proposals for the EC's move towards Emu that became the basis of the
economic and monetary aspects of the Maastricht treaty.
He can claim to have invented the EMI. Mr Lamfalussy was a prolific
contributor to the Delors committee's discussions, writing three special
papers on aspects of Emu. In one, he proposed that EC central banks should
create a joint subsidiary for the second stage of Emu which would centralise
some of their operations and perform certain of their functions. This in
effect was a blueprint for the EMI, although Mr Lamfalussy had in mind a
more powerful body than the new institute is likely to be.
The paper's contents - a mixture of academic reasoning and a strong
awareness of power relationships, the art of the possible and the
technicalities of financial markets - bore witness to his varied career.
Mr Lamfalussy is a Belgian citizen who has moved from academia through
commercial banking to the top of the BIS, the central bankers' bank. A
sprightly-looking 64-year-old, he was born in Kapuvar, Hungary, and fled to
Belgium 20 years later to escape communism. He has been honored with a
barony by his adopted country.
In Belgium, he studied economics at the University of Louvain, Belgium's
premier university for economic studies, until 1953, when he moved to
Nuffield College, Oxford, as a research student.
He combined the careers of a bank economist and academic until the
mid-1970s, by which time he had become an executive director of the Banque
de Bruxelles and chairman of its executive board, as well as a professor at
Louvain. Shortly after Banque de Bruxelles merged with Banque Lambert, he
moved to the BIS in 1976 as economic adviser and head of the monetary and
economic department, becoming BIS general manager in 1985.
With his high forehead and serious spectacles, he looks very much the
academic. As befits a professor, he is precise in his diction, and speaks
perfect, accent-free English. He is famously discreet and would never
divulge anything about the monthly talks among central bankers at the BIS.
Although he has never worked in a central bank, he has earned the central
bankers' respect. 'He is one of the tribe,' says a senior European central
bank official.
In a debate, says the official, he is able to accommodate and bring together
the views of several factions. But Mr Lamfalussy does not believe that
burying his own beliefs is a necessary part of diplomacy.
'If you look at successive BIS annual reports, you see someone who is
willing to go significantly further than most international bureaucrats in
giving an analysis which sticks its neck out, says something substantive
rather than tired cliches and is sometimes quite imaginative,' says Prof
Richard Portes, director of the Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
As one of those rare officials who straddles the world of economics and
finance, Mr Lamfalussy has shown a good nose for defining issues and
proposing solutions, well in advance of the herd. He has been in the
forefront of those expressing concern that the fast-growing involvement of
banks in derivatives could pose systemic problems for the banking system. In
1991, he warned of problems facing Britain from its membership of the
European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
His willingness to stand up and be counted owes much to the fact that the
BIS is not controlled by individual member states. Its ownership, with 84
per cent of the stock held by more than 30 central banks and the remainder
by private shareholders, is sufficiently diffuse to keep carping governments
at bay.
We have still to see how the EMI develops. If Mr John Major, UK prime
minister, has his way, its future will be less than glorious. Other EC
leaders are keen, however, to see it supervise and rehabilitate the European
Monetary System in the second stage of Emu, starting on January 1, and pave
the way for a European central bank.
Mr Lamfalussy is keeping his own counsel on his plans for the EMI. He
intends to use the time between now and the end of the year to work out his
strategy and priorities.
Some commentators have lamented the EC's failure to attract a senior central
banker to head the EMI. But, according to Mr Portes, Mr Lamfalussy's
experience in running the BIS could be an ideal apprenticeship for putting
the EMI on its feet.
Since it was set up in 1930 to manage the transfer of German's reparations
after the first world war to allied governments, the BIS has seen great
changes in its structure and functions. Mr Lamfalussy has succeeded in
carrying on this tradition, putting the BIS at the centre of efforts to
achieve common rules on prudential supervision for international banks, for
example.
'For a long time he has faced the problem of finding roles in life for his
present institution,' Mr Portes says. Now he must find a role for the EMI
over the next three years.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931030

