FT932-6854

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (10): Young economies attract
institutions - Exotic currencies


   By JAMES BLITZ


IN THE last 12 turbulent months, commercial bank dealers have made unusually
large profits trading in the major currencies - the dollar, D-Mark and yen.
But foreign exchange managers, with their eyes on the future, wonder
whether, in 20 years' time, the big currency plays will be in the Chinese
renminbi, the Thai baht and the Argentinian peso.
Until recently, the trade in these so-called 'exotic' currencies was mainly
directed at providing a service to corporates with direct investments in
Latin America, eastern Europe and south-east Asia.
But the growth rates of these developing economies are now much greater than
those in Europe, the US and Japan - and their equity and bond markets are
expanding rapidly.
As a result, exotic currencies are beginning to attract institutional
investors, like pension and fund managers, who want to be exposed to the
higher returns that can be made by investing in these markets.
The nature of dealing in 'exotics' is still very different from that in the
major currency pairs. Bank dealers do not make a rapid entry and exit into
these less liquid markets, in the way that they do with the dollar or
D-Mark.
Instead, investors look for long-term exposure to the higher interest rates
offered in these countries at a time when short-term rates in the developed
world are declining.
Miss Birgitte Jespersen, head of the world currency desk at Citibank in
London, says that the past year has proved how resilient these currency
markets can be when the rest of the global FX market is in crisis.
'At one stage, I thought the turmoil in Europe would have a spill-over
effect on these other markets. But some people are beginning to think that
exotic currencies are more stable than those elsewhere.'
For a currency market-maker, investment in an exotics desk can be highly
lucrative. In recent years, the rate of return from trading these currencies
has grown as fast as the profits made trading the major market.
But there is little sign that banks are rushing to set up exotics desks all
over London.
It remains a sophisticated - and skills intensive - business to get into.
'If you build a business like this without a strong customer base in the
first place, then it will not come to you,' says Ms Jespersen. 'And the
customers tend to have a natural interest in the countries they are
investing in.'
One factor which may improve the profile of the exotic currencies would be
progress in economic reform in China and Russia, potentially the two largest
markets in the world.
Political chaos in the Kremlin, uncertainties over privatisation in Russia
and inconvertibility are all cited as reasons why the rouble is far from
being considered by London dealers as a currency to trade.
The Chinese renminbi is much more likely to attract dealers' attention in
the near future. The Chinese authorities have recently set up swap centres,
which allow foreign companies to exchange hard currency for the renminbi at
a fixed rate. With China's growth rate at around 12.8 per cent, this is
clearly a currency to watch.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930526

