FT933-5127

FT  04 SEP 93 / Books: Revisiting Ultra's huts


   By ZARA STEINER


CODEBREAKERS edited by F H Hinsley and Alan Stripp Oxford Pounds 17.95, 321
pages
ULTRA was the British success story of the Second World War. The ability of
British codebreakers to read and interpret enemy signals gave the Allies a
decisive advantage that shortened the European war. The story has been told
in the magisterial multi-volume account produced earlier by FH Hinsley and
his team, an essential and unique source book for every war student, writes
Zara Steiner.
This collection of recollections by the men and women who worked at
Bletchley Park, an ugly Edwardian mansion with its adjacent 'huts' which was
the centre of Britain's wartime codebreaking activities, is a more informal
effort to recall and recreate the atmosphere of the times and to give an
authentic picture of the work done by an unusual assortment of individuals,
many recruited through the 'old boys' network at Cambridge and Oxford and
some straight from school. Among the first contingent of 30 recruits who
joined the small group of regular intelligence officers were mathematicians,
classicists, historians and linguists, most strangers to the arcane
mysteries of code and cipher-breaking and knowing nothing about the services
they came to serve.
For many readers, the most interesting parts of these individual memoirs are
the accounts of recruitment - mathematicians calling on old friends and
fellow scholars, a brief interview with a tutor or professor, 'probing my
interest in the three Cs - classics, chess and crosswords' - and the
evocations of the wartime atmosphere at Bletchley Park. Only one essayist
speaks of positive vetting: there was little time or need for such
investigations. Even when the Bletchley Park group grew from under 100 in
1939 to more than 4,000 in 1944, the secret was kept, as it was for some 30
years after the war ended. The British success was predicated on the
Germans' conviction that their signals could not be read and that their
Enigma machines were entirely secure.
Those of us who suffer from varying degrees of mathematical illiteracy will
find the technical chapters describing the actual functioning of the
cryptographic machines and the methods used to encipher and decipher the
signals difficult, if not impossible, to follow, despite the excellent
diagrams and pictures. There are also the problems of trying to reproduce
the esprit de corps of the past, particularly for those of the
'professor-type' trained in the more austere disciplines of their craft.
Some sense of the camaraderie emerges; there are fascinating vignettes of
some of the key figures of the day, including the 20-year-old Harry Hensley
whose uncanny ability to interpret the German naval decrypts convinced the
Admiralty to treat the young man with the greatest respect.
For some, particularly those working on the production of Ultra
intelligence, the time at BP was clearly one of the high points of their
lives. For the 2,000 Wrens engaged on the painstaking work of maintaining
the 'bombes', the machines used for discovering the wheel-setting for Enigma
machines, life was as monotonous as it was stressful, and not made any
easier by their inability to say anything about their wartime activities.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

930904

