FT932-6587

FT  27 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Supreme Court's sword over
Comibol - A judgement crucial for foreign investment in Bolivian mining


   By CHRIS PHILIPSBORN


Bolivia's Supreme Court is expected to rule shortly on the legality of joint
ventures between two private companies and Comibol, the state mining
corporation. The decision will be watched closely by the country's mining
industry since it may put the final nail in the coffin of Bolivia's attempts
to attract foreign investment to its beleaguered public mining sector.
The private companies whose joint venture deals with Comibol are being
scrutinised by the Supreme Court are Cominesa, a subsidiary of Specialty
Metals of the US, which made a bid for the Tasna bismuth/gold mine, and
Mineracao Taboca, a subsidiary of Brazil's Paranapanema, which wishes to
exploit the Kenko tin tailings of the Catavi-Siglo XX mine.
Neither company has been able to start operations because of union
opposition but it had been hoped that a new government after general
elections on June 6 would have dealt with the issue and cleared the way for
work to begin. It is now possible, however, that an unfavourable decision by
the Supreme Court could annul the contracts altogether. In the mining
industry it is believed that this may well be the likely outcome.
The difficulty with both contracts is the failure of the Bolivian government
to issue supreme decrees to ratify each joint venture - necessary because
Comibol is state-owned. The mining unions took the matter to court after
they had discovered that the proper procedures had, allegedly, not been
followed.
The government subsequently tried to issue back-dated decrees but the
attempt was discovered and blocked. This is the latest in a series of
blunders by the government of President Jaime Paz Zamora which have done
little to foster confidence in the country's public mining sector.
The real danger for the country's mining industry is clearly spelled out by
Mr Armundo Guzman, Comibol's new executive director, who thinks that a
decision against the existing joint venture contracts would be 'crazy.'
'It would stop all foreign investment from coming to Bolivia,' he says.
Mr Guzman believes that the government has acted within the framework of the
constitution. Several industry figures are not so certain.
A negative ruling from the court would be a severe blow not just for private
investment but for Comibol itself. Mr Guzman, who came to the corporation in
January, says the group might have to close all but one of its mining
centres by the year's end. Comibol has made a loss of over Dollars 672m
since 1980 and has been hard hit by the fall in the international market
price for base metals, particularly zinc.
The collapse in the International Tin Council buffer stock operation in l985
convinced Comibol to shift the bulk of its production from tin to zinc, but
it has failed to secure the long-term contracts which have shielded some
private Bolivian zinc producers from the price slide.
Already, San Vincente, a zinc-silver mine, and San Jose, a lead-silver mine,
have closed. Mr Guzman says others due for closure shortly include
Unificada, a silver-zinc mine, and Colquiri, a tin-zinc mine. The only
Comibol mine likely to escape the cuts is Huanuni, which produces high grade
tin ore destined for the corporation's Vinto smelter.
Quite apart from the closure of the corporation's mines, however, perhaps
the strongest indictment of this government's handling of the public sector
mining industry is that, under an agreement with unions, all workers
employed in Comibol mines which have ceased production will continue to
receive full pay and benefits indefinitely, thus greatly reducing the
corporation's ability to cut costs and improve efficiency.
Comibol now finds itself in a Catch 22 situation which may be further
aggravated by the pending Supreme Court decision. The corporation has an
increasing stockpile of 'dirty' zinc ores heavily contaminated with
antimony, which it cannot sell. Its productive mines are fast running out of
high grade ores and virtually no new reserves have been developed. Low grade
reserves can be exploited only if there is an upturn in zinc prices, which
remains unlikely.
The corporation is therefore trying to switch production back to tin, but it
is unable to do this, or to develop new reserves, without foreign
investment. This is precisely why the prospect of an unfavourable decision
by the Supreme Court strikes fear into the hearts of Comibol executives,
since it would, in the words of one industry observer, 'worsen the already
tarnished image of the government and Comibol with foreign investors' and
condemn the remainder of the corporation's mining operations to indefinite
closure.
According to industry sources, Comibol has over 2,000 ore deposits. This
fact alone will ensure that foreign and private capital will continue to
take an interest in joint ventures with it. But the state-owned
corporation's great handicap has been its high political profile and
inescapable links to the government of the day.
Comibol can only continue hoping for an enlightened administration which
will allow it the freedom fully to exploit its remarkable potential.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930527

