FT934-10121

FT  06 NOV 93 / Books: The Prince's new clothes


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


MACHIAVELLI'S CHILDREN by Edward Pearce Victor Golancz Pounds 18.99, 219
pages
NO DOUBT it is only coincidence, but this is the second book about British
politics to revolve around Niccolo Machiavelli within the last 12 months.
The first was by Lord McAlpine, the former Conservative Party treasurer.
Called not The Prince but The Servant, it was dedicated to 'the most
magnificent Baroness Thatcher of Kesteven' and claims that she could have
been better served.
Edward Pearce has come to a different conclusion. He quotes Machiavelli's
dictum that 'when seeking advice of more than one person, a prince who is
not himself wise will never get unanimity in his councils or be able to
reconcile their views', and comments 'fundamentally, she (Lady Thatcher) was
the prince who is not himself wise'.
Never mind the discrepancies, however. Pearce's book is not primarily about
the lost leader. He has simply picked up the old Machiavelli precepts and
applied them to the 20th century.
Never mind the validity either. Quite often the precepts do not apply at
all. For example, Pearce writes 'Pierre Mendes-France was a politician of
rugged, inveterate conscience by whom Machiavelli would have been
perplexed'. And 'Machiavelli, enthusiastic about violence, is reticent about
sex. Mistresses do not much figure in The Prince.' Still, we have Pearce's
assurance that the old maestro would have thoroughly disapproved of Harold
Wilson's relationship with the now Lady Falkender.
The Machiavelli references are the exhibitionist part of the book, very much
in line with the author's own tastes. He admires showmen: Peron, Mussolini
and (up to a point) even Hitler. He is fascinated by dictators, demagogues
and byzantine politicians. He appears to believe, in that naively snobbish
English way, that no intellectual good ever came out of the US, except
perhaps for Adlai Stevenson, who remarked in Machiavellian style that
flattery is all right, 'provided you don't inhale'. Yet Machiavelli would
have been just as flummoxed by Stevenson as by Mendes-France.
Pearce is very much an old world man. To be sure, some of Machiavelli's
Children may have been written tongue in cheek, but what the author really
likes is melodrama: big figures on a big stage, uncomplicated by detail. The
Machiavelli formula, however, is a useful platform for a string of anecdotes
and extraneous comment. I like the story of Ernst Rohm, the head of the
Sturmabteil, who was the only man to call Hitler Adolf instead of Mein
Fuhrer - 'a mistake never again made by anyone else'.
Pearce is strong on Hitler in general, and on Stalin. He prefers the former:
'Hitler was an orator, an electric presence . . .Stalin was a bureaucrat . .
. his addresses on film sound like any bored minister of state reading a
brief, and quite lack the zing of John Gummer.' The Tory Party is never far
away. Pearce the old parliamentary sketch-writer makes splendid play of
Machiavelli's notion of the over-zealous lieutenant: for instance, Gerry
Malone, now the MP for Winchester, standing up at a party conference to
demand 'Poll Tax Now]' Some of the targeting may be eccentric, but the book
is full of malicious pleasure.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

931106

