FT933-9878

FT  06 AUG 93 / Economic woes mount for Ciller


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ISTANBUL


TURKEY'S highest inflation figures in 15 months, announced this week, could
hardly have come at a worse time for Mrs Tansu Ciller, the new prime
minister, as she prepares to launch her promised economic reforms.
Coupled with the recent resignations of three of her most senior
bureaucrats, including Central Bank governor Rusdu Saracoglu, a pivotal
figure in Turkey's economic progress in the 1980s, Mrs Ciller needs quick
results if she is to survive the expected challenge to her leadership in the
delegate convention of the True Path party set for November.
The Ciller economic programme envisages acceleration of state sell-offs,
reform of farm support policies, and tax changes to close the budget gap.
She promises more social spending.
Diplomats, however, say she faces an uneviable policy dilemma: whether to go
for bold reform now and risk confronting conservatives in her party and
other vested interests, or sit tight until after the party convention.
Her job is not made easier by annual inflation which rose to 73 per cent in
July, a month in which it would normally decline because of seasonal factors
such as cheaper food.
The government's need to finance the deficit, projected at around 15 per
cent of GDP for 1993, continues to sap the private sector by fuelling high
real interest rates and crowding out other borrowers. Mrs Ciller has had
some success in reducing short-term domestic borrowing, but in so doing has
been forced to approach the Central Bank with budgetary demands, thus
fuelling monetary expansion.
In Ankara last month, Mr Wilfried Thalwitz, deputy president of the World
Bank, applauded the government's plans.
The bank says it is prepared to help finance insurance and unemployment
schemes, without which the closure and labour redundancies related with
privatisation will would be politically difficult.
But already Mrs Ciller is confronted with public sector opposition to her
wage restraint policy. Big union protests have taken place almost daily for
the past two weeks in Ankara and other cities. Among the state sector
unions, Mrs Ciller's radical proposals for privatisation are likely to get
an even cooler reception.
The trade deficit is worsening, and for the first time the current account
looks under strain despite increased flows from tourism, Turkey's largest
single foreign exchange earner. Mrs Ciller believes that the lira is still
overvalued. However, a senior adviser this week denied rumours that a
devaluation was in the offing.
More worrying have been the signs of discontent within the bureaucracy over
Mrs Ciller's anti-inflation policy, particularly her attempts to cut high
interest rates. She still contends this the main cause of Turkey's
chronically high inflation.
On this point, Mr Saracoglu was uncharacteristically blunt in his criticism
of the prime minister.
His resignation, followed by the departure of state planning chief Ilhan
Kesici, reflects the opposition of many government economists.
No replacement has yet been found - the leading candidate, Mr Mahfi Egilmez,
a former Treasury official, was reported to have declined the offer.
Unlike President Suleyman Demirel, whose strategy was to 'talk up' the
economic prospects, Mrs Ciller has been apocalyptic in her warnings about
the consequences of failure. Many economists believe her best chance lies in
using the dismal inflation figures to argue for radical reform.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

930806

