FT932-6856

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (8): No getting away from it -
Profile of Midland's Rob Loewy


   By EMMA TUCKER


FOR Rob Loewy, head of foreign exchange at Midland Global Markets, work
never really stops. Even when he goes on holiday he is plugged into CNN
within hours of departure, in spite of vows beforehand to switch off.
But that, he says, is part of the attraction of the job.' You can never
really relax. If you pick up a paper or switch on the news there will always
be something that affects you.'
Mr Loewy, 35, carries out his job from the middle of London's biggest
dealing room. He is responsible for 100 people in London and a further 21
dotted around Midland's nine regional treasury centres.
Being head of foreign exchange at a major clearing bank is quite different
from working in one of the big American investment banks, he says, stressing
the need to cater for small orders as well as the professional end of the
wholesale market.
'We would like to be the bank that can quote prices for as little as Pounds
10,000 through to Pounds 10bn,' he says.
Midland's merger with Hong Kong bank last year expanded foreign exchange
operations enormously. There are now over 700 dealers in the dealing room,
offering a range of financial instruments including foreign exchange, gilts,
off- balance sheet trading, European government bonds, futures and equities.
Having everyone together on one floor, says Mr Loewy, improves the flow of
information in an age where big events that move financial markets have
ramifications for several areas.
The merger was only one of the elements adding to an already pressurised job
last year. Black Wednesday, and turmoil on the European currency markets,
came along to test Midland's foreign exchange capabilities as the banks were
joining forces.
'There has been an increase in the number of speculators,' says Mr Loewy,
thinking back to September 16 when the pound was forced out of the European
exchange rate mechanism. 'But the role we play as a UK commercial bank is
very different. We have an enormous set of internal limits that are there to
protect our share holders and investors. We can't afford to take huge
risks.'
Mr Loewy started work as a foreign exchange dealer, aged 21, after
graduating from Birmingham University, where he read political science. He
joined his first employer, Chemical Bank, in 1978 just as foreign exchange
was beginning to expand. By the time he left for Hong Kong Bank in 1989, he
was responsible for foreign exchange operations at Chemical Bank.
He is now used to getting out of bed before 6am and driving the 9 miles to
the office before starting work at 7am. He leaves 12 hours later, and on
occasion comes in during the night to watch particularly important orders.
At home, a Reuters terminal is installed and he carries a bleeper
everywhere.
'I have a stable home environment, a wife and two small children,' he says.
'My wife is very understanding of the pressure and the hours that are
necessary for this role. She probably realises that there are not many ways
in which she can alter or change that.'
When he is not overseeing Midland's increasingly complex foreign exchange
operations, Mr Loewy is involved with recruitment, visiting the regions, and
keeping abreast of customer requirements.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930526

