FT932-7125

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (2): Something
interesting is afoot - GE's support for an unorthodox power system


   By ANDREW BAXTER


When the largest company in any industry secures a worldwide licensing deal
from one of the tiniest for a relatively new technology, something
potentially very interesting is probably afoot.
Such was the case in February when General Electric, the world leader in
power generating equipment, announced a worldwide licensing agreement with
Exergy of Hayward, California to further develop and market a technology
that could increase overall efficiency of GE combined cycle power systems.
Behind the deal lies the Kalina cycle technology developed by Dr Alexander
Kalina, a Russian emigre who is the principal owner of Exergy. Dr Kalina,
like many other engineers, was looking for ways to improve the overall
efficiency of electric power generation.
Using as a basis theory developed by Dr Myron Tribus, a former GE turbine
designer who is now a director of Exergy, Kalina decided to 'throw the book
away' and change a system that has been in place for 140 years. Instead of
concentrating on equipment and materials that could lead to only marginal
improvements, Dr Kalina focused on the very process by which heat is
converted into electricity.
The Kalina cycle, therefore, is an alternative to the standard steam cycle
by which 70 per cent of all electric power is generated. The standard or
Rankine cycle uses a single working fluid (usually water) to make steam in a
boiler, expand it through a turbine to generate electricity, and then
condense the spent steam, pump it and return it to the boiler. Because the
thermodynamic requirements in the various parts of the cycle differ, this
creates compromises, says Exergy.
In contrast, the Kalina cycle changes the working fluid in different parts
of the system, by using a fluid that is a mixture of two or more components
with different boiling points - typically, ammonia and water - and varying
their ratio, to avoid compromises in the standard steam cycle.
The result is that more electricity is produced from the same quantity of
fuel. According to Exergy, the Kalina cycle improves the efficiency of
thermal power plants by 8-80 per cent, depending on the particular
application. Assuming a 15 per cent increase in efficiency, 100 per cent
adoption of the Kalina cycle in the US would save fuel worth Dollars 6bn at
1991 prices. Emissions, including greenhouse gases and particulates, would
decrease by 15 per cent, says Exergy.
As with many small companies trying to interest large established suppliers
in a new technology, success has not come overnight for Exergy, which was
founded in 1980 to exploit the Kalina cycle.
In 1984 it decided that the best way to demonstrate the advantages of the
Kalina cycle was to build a prototype power plant, and three years later it
signed an agreement with the US Department of Energy to build one at the
Department's Energy Technology Engineering Center in Canoga Park,
California.
In 1991, a major milestone was passed when the 3.2MW plant, using exhaust
gases from an adjacent test facility as its heat source, was successfully
operated. The working fluid is ammonia and water, and the lynchpin is a
'distillation condensation subsystem' in which the composition of the
mixture is changed - so that different mixtures can be used in the boiler
and condenser.
It was about this time that GE began a detailed, two-year study of Kalina
cycle technology. By the time the two companies had announced a deal this
year, both the efficiency and economics of Kalina cycle systems had been
improved by the companies' joint efforts.
GE's worldwide licence for the Kalina cycle covers its application only to
combined cycle power generation. Using a mixture of ammonia and water
increases the thermodynamic availability of energy transfer from the gas
turbine exhaust to the steam turbine. 'So you can use a bigger steam turbine
for free,' says Mr Del Williamson, vice-president for sales at GE Industrial
& Power Systems.
The effect of the Kalina cycle could be to raise the thermal efficiency of
combined cycle power generation by one or two percentage points from the
current 55 per cent-plus. This would help the power industry save millions
of dollars a year in fuel costs, and could, therefore, be very important to
GE from a competitive point of view.
According to Mr Williamson, GE is now working on scaling up the technology
to establish what the cost would be. GE expects to have demonstrator units
in place over the next three years.
Mr Tribus points out that there are no theoretical limitations to the size
of the Kalina cycle. Standard equipment is used, and the only material that
has to be avoided is copper, which is attacked by ammonia.
'I am convinced this will give GE an unbeatable advantage over everybody
else,' says Mr Tribus.
In practical terms, the Kalina cycle version of a combined cycle plant would
have a modified heat recovery steam generator (boiler), to include the
elements of the distillation/condensation subsystem. A low pressure
condenser, recuperative heat exchanger, gravity flash tank and high pressure
condenser would replace a single condenser in traditional plants.
For the utility, the payback would depend on the market and the fuel price,
says Mr Williamson. 'Where fuel prices are low, the payback will not be so
attractive,' he says. And if the payback was more than three or four years,
the system may not be seen as attractive.
Exergy, meanwhile, is working on several other applications for the Kalina
cycle. It will be five years until the cash rolls in from any GE sales of
combined cycle plants with a Kalina cycle, which could be too long to wait
if Exergy wants to develop its plans for coal-fired plants, says Mr Tribus.
Here a particular attraction is the repowering market. 'You could take out
the guts of an old coal-fired plant, put in our plant, and increase output
by 20 per cent for the same coal usage,' he says.
To exploit this market, Exergy may well raise Dollars 50m-Dollars 60m to get
into the coal-fired business itself. A less likely possibility would be to
find a partner with engineering ability and market knowledge.
Exergy is also negotiating with several companies that want to take a
licence for applying the Kalina cycle to geothermal power generation. The
efficiency gains are as high as 80 per cent here because the Kalina cycle
performance improves in lower temperatures.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930525

