FT934-10249

FT  06 NOV 93 / Civil servants to step up protests


   By RICHARD DONKIN, Labour Staff


CIVIL SERVANTS yesterday promised further industrial action in the spring
after a one-day strike that government offices claimed to have survived with
few problems.
Unions declared the action had focused public attention on plans to
privatise many public services and said the action had been the biggest day
of protest by civil servants for 12 years.
The plans for spring include escalating the protest throughout other public
sector unions in a second day of action.
The five unions which carried out yesterday's action claimed support from
about 75 per cent of their 300,000 members, and said the strike had caused
'massive disruption'. But the Treasury said that the figure was closer to
150,000.
Among the closures forced by the action was the Tower of London, which had
to turn tourists away when Beefeaters joined the strike. Prisons were
disrupted in Scotland when warders walked out on a three-hour stoppage over
the lunch period. The Prison Officers Association began a separate dispute
at the same time by stopping overtime in protest at the same policy of
'market testing' in prisons.
The six UK passport offices were operating with skeleton staffs dealing with
urgent travel needs, while a quarter of the country's unemployment benefit
offices and Jobcentres were closed. Support was strong at the Driver Vehicle
Licensing Agency in Swansea.
Only 99 of the 500 Department of Social Services benefit offices were able
to open normally although some others were able to offer a limited service,
either over the counter or by manning telephone lines. Few benefit payments
were expected to have been affected, because they are met mostly by postal
cheques or by direct debiting.
Mr William Waldegrave, public service minister, admitted the strike had hit
some departments 'quite hard' but he criticised civil servants for trying to
make themselves immune from efficiency savings.
'If we don't test our services against private competition, how do we know
we are running them at the best cost?' he said. Some of his own department's
staff rejected his arguments and 38 of them attended a mass rally at Central
Hall, Westminster.
Mr Barry Reamsbottom, general secretary of the Civil and Public Services
Association, was barracked during a heated meeting in London by members who
wanted stronger follow-up action. He called for unity, saying: 'Our campaign
will continue right up to the next general election.'
In some areas, including Merseyside, Bradford and Lincoln, as many as 90 per
cent of civil servants were reported to be on strike. The response in other
areas was described as more patchy.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931106

