FT934-8912

FT  12 NOV 93 / Foreign Exchange: Yen firms against the dollar


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


FOREIGN currency trading all but ground to a halt as markets in the US,
Canada, France and Belgium remained closed for national holidays, writes
Conner Middelmann.
Most currencies languished in directionless trading, and with many US market
participants expected to take a four-day weekend, today's session could be
similarly uninspired.
The Japanese yen saw most of the action yesterday and firmed markedly
against the dollar, which closed in London at Y106.45, down from Y107.20 on
Wednesday. The dollar's breach of key support at Y106.70/80 quickly sent it
sliding as low as Y106.25 before recouping some of the loss.
According to Mr Chris Furness, senior currency analyst at the market
analysis firm IDEA, there is intermediate support for the dollar at Y106.20,
with strong support at Y105.20.
'At that point we would expect to see some action from the Bank of Japan,'
he said. The Bank of Japan and the US Federal Reserve were rumoured to be
intervening in support of the dollar overnight, but most traders said they
saw no evidence of such actions.
The dollar recouped an initial fall against the D-Mark to finish at
DM1.6915, up from an intraday low of DM1.6855 and little changed from
Wednesday's close of DM1.6920. The next impetus for the dollar could come
from the release of October US retail sales figures at 1330 GMT today, with
most traders expecting a month-on-month 1.2 per cent gain.
One reason for the D-Mark's softer tone were statements from Bundesbank
director and central bank council member Otmar Issing, who said in a
magazine interview that the Bundesbank will explore its scope for future
rate cuts by 'probing with small steps'.
Mr Issing also said that further easing hinges on developments in Germany's
inflation rate and in its M3 money supply growth measure, and warned that
risks to German price stability are not yet fully subdued.
Also dampening the German currency was the softer call money rate, which
declined to around 6.35 per cent, from 6.45 per cent on Wednesday, amid
ample liquidity in the banking system.
Sterling extended the previous day's recovery and briefly breached the
psychologically important DM2.50 barrier. However, it ran out of steam at
that level and ended the day at DM2.5000, up from DM2.4975 on Wednesday.
'In these thin markets almost any trade will move the currency, but that
does not necessarily mean the move is sustainable,' commented a London
currency trader, who expects sterling to remain locked in a narrow range
until the November 30 Budget.
Traders today will be looking to the publication of UK September industrial
production numbers to provide evidence of the latest state of the UK
recovery. Information in recent days has suggested that it is patchy and
uneven.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

931112

