FT933-9986

FT  06 AUG 93 / Letter: Social security must be more than just a safety net
for poor


   From Ms CAREY OPPENHEIM


Sir, Bill Robinson argues that social security has one role alone - to help
the poor - and that it should be reformed accordingly ('Don't pay the rich
to be ill', August 3). His argument is flawed on a number of counts.
He fails to recognise that Britain's social security system has, and must
have, a number of roles in a complex society. It fosters solidarity by
ensuring collective security against risks such as unemployment; it should
maximise opportunities for self-support; it must prevent as well as relieve
poverty, for example by smoothing income over the life-cycle.
He goes on to dismiss the insurance principle on the grounds that it is a
costly myth. But while it may be a myth in actuarial terms, it embodies an
important principle of our social security system that carries a powerful
resonance in the public's mind that we all contribute and gain. To reject it
is to embark on the creation of a social security system which is reduced to
a residual safety net.
To argue that the benefit system provides incentives to become sick,
disabled or a lone parent betrays an extraordinary ignorance of the reality
of living on meagre levels of benefit. The princely sum of Pounds 73.60 a
week for a lone parent cannot be an incentive to have a child on your own.
Bill Robinson's prime target for reform is child benefit because a 'big
share goes to the better off'. However, recent figures from a parliamentary
answer show that just 8 per cent of child benefit expenditure goes to
high-earning families once income is adjusted for family size. This is
because families with children are clustered at the middle and lower ends of
the income distribution. If the government chooses to target the more
affluent it should look closely at the system of tax allowances, reliefs and
higher rates.
The recent growth of the social security budget is not primarily due to the
national insurance principle or perverse incentives but largely because of
pressures outside the social security budget, in particular the recession,
and also the costs of deregulation in the housing market. Even the growth of
lone parents, sick and disabled is related to the state of the economy -
their reliance on benefits rises in recessions. The government's own
document, The Growth of Social Security, shows that, if Britain's economy
continues to grow, we can afford our social security system.
Carey Oppenheim,
Child Poverty Action Group,
4th floor, 1-5 Bath Street,
London EC1V 9PY

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930806

