FT934-11481

FT  30 OCT 93 / Leaders set out Ulster principles


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR and Mr Albert Reynolds, the British and Irish Republic prime
ministers, last night set out six guiding principles as they sought to
revive the momentum for a political settlement in Northern Ireland.
For the first time Mr Major spelled out explicitly that his government would
be willing to bring Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, into peace
negotiations. He was adamant that this would be possible only if the IRA
renounced permanently the use of violence and demonstrated over 'a period'
its commitment never to return to terrorism.
As both leaders acknowledged the growing pressure on London and Dublin - and
on the constitutional parties in Ulster - to fill the political vacuum, they
said in a joint communique that the first principle of any settlement was:
'The situation in Northern Ireland should never be changed by violence or
the threat of violence.'
They added: 'Any political settlement must depend on consent freely given in
the absence of force or intimidation.'
Negotiations could only take place between governments and parties committed
exclusively to constitutional methods. There could be no talks or
negotiations between their governments and 'those who use, threaten or
support violence for political ends'.
The two leaders then reinforced that condition by stressing that there would
be no agreements with organisations supporting violence. All parties
claiming a serious interest in advancing the cause of peace in Ireland
should renounce the support for violence.
But in language that reflected the Dublin government's view that the
republican paramilitaries must be persuaded to stop the fighting, the
communique added: 'If and when such a renunciation of violence had been made
and sufficiently demonstrated, new doors could open, and both governments
would want to respond imaginatively to the new situation which would arise.'
Pledging to press ahead with their own efforts to secure negotiations
between the constitutional parties in Northern Ireland, Mr Major and Mr
Reynolds added that the two governments would work together on a new
'framework for peace, stability and reconciliation'. They added that such an
initiative could only be taken by the two governments.
London and Dublin acknowledged the 'courageous efforts' of Mr John Hume, the
leader of the mainly Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party.
But there was 'no question' of the report he had drawn up after his talks
with Mr Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, being adopted or endorsed.
Last night Sinn Fein was non-committal on the statement by the two prime
ministers, saying only that leaders of the party were planning to study it
in detail over the weekend.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931030

