FT934-10241

FT  06 NOV 93 / Man in the News: New mayor's city challenge - Ehud Olmert


   By JULIAN OZANNE


No city in the world is more sensitive to more people than Jerusalem, which
is revered by Christians, Moslems and Jews; the future status of Jerusalem
is also the hottest single issue on the historic Israeli-Palestinian peace
agenda.
These sensitivities are about to be tested after the election this week of
Mr Ehud Olmert, of the right-wing Likud party, as mayor of Jerusalem. Mr
Olmert, 43, defeated the Labour party's Mr Teddy Kollek, ending a 28-year
era during which the 82-year-old incumbent came to symbolise the fortunes of
the divided and disputed holy city, which is only recognised by two
countries as an official capital.
Mr Olmert, a successful lawyer and former cabinet minister with a reputation
for brashness, strongly opposes the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord signed
in September in Washington, and the prospect of an independent Palestinian
state. His commitment to retaining Jerusalem for 'eternity' as a united city
under Israeli control and his encouragement of greater Jewish settlement in
Arab areas of Jerusalem has provoked the prospect of increased Arab-Jewish
tensions.
'I will use all my powers as mayor to fight for the policies I believe in,'
he says. 'I will try to avoid unnecessary conflict with Palestinians but I
will work hard to protect Jerusalem as one united city under Israeli
control.'
His first actions have been designed to calm the concerns of those - in and
outside Israel - who fear the surprise election of a Likud politician could
worsen Arab-Jewish relations and jeopardise the peace process.
Mr Olmert chose to hold a victory tour in the cobbled-stone souk of the
Moslem quarter of the Old City, where the bells of the Holy Sepulchre Church
compete with the muezzin's call to prayer. The mayor-elect pressed the hands
of carpet-sellers, argued in Hebrew with Arab merchants about building
licences and patted the heads of Palestinian school-children.
His remarkable triumph, greatly assisted by a large turn-out of voters from
the ultra-orthodox Jewish community, has proved a political embarrassment
for Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. The Jerusalem election was the first test
of public opinion since the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian accord and Mr
Rabin had treated it as a vote of confidence in his peace policy. Mr
Olmert's election has also angered some in Jerusalem's secular community,
who fear the increasing power of the religious right could lead to curbs on
bars, cinemas and social events during the sabbath.
The need for a reconciliation between its diverse constituencies has never
been more imperative as the city enters perhaps its most crucial period
since the 1967 Six Day war, when the Israelis wrested the Old City in East
Jerusalem from Jordanian rule. Mr Olmert will be mayor to 544,000 people -
72 per cent Jewish - when the city's future is discussed as part of the
peace process between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation over
the next two years. Several options will be on the table, ranging from
international supervision of the Israeli-occupied parts of the city, to a
physical division of the city along pre-Six Day War lines.
Mr Olmert has pledged that he will allow Jews and Palestinians to settle
anywhere they choose in the city. In practice this would allow Jews to move
into neighborhoods in Israeli-occupied areas, which under Mr Kollek were
reserved for Arabs. Already one member of Mr Olmert's municipal coalition
administration, which is dominated by the religious right, has said there
are plans to settle 100,000 Jews in Israeli-occupied East Jerusalem.
Mr Olmert has also said he will treat Jews and Arabs equally, both
economically and socially, after years during which Palestinians living in
the occupied East of the city have been treated as second-class citizens.
For instance, they have been denied permission to obtain building licences
to develop property, their main complaint against the administration.
'The former administration has consistently neglected the needs of the vast
majority of people in East Jerusalem. It is a disgrace to look at the state
of services such as roads, garbage collection and cleaning there,' Mr Olmert
says. 'I am committed to carrying out a policy which treats all the citizens
of Jerusalem as equals. This is my elementary obligation as a human being.'
In spite of his early alignment with fire-brand right-wing politics, Mr
Olmert has gained a reputation as a campaigner for social justice. As health
minister and later minister responsible for Arab affairs between 1988 and
1992 he was credited with persuading the then Likud government to launch an
initiative for Palestinian elections in the occupied West Bank and Gaza
Strip to choose delegates to negotiate self-rule.
But Palestinians, the vast majority of whom abstained in the election, are
skeptical of Mr Olmert's promises of equal treatment. Few, however, mourn
the passing of Mr Kollek who, in spite of his 'moderate' international
reputation, concentrated most of the investment on infrastructure in the
Jewish West side of the city.
As Mr Olmert walked up the main commercial high street in East Jerusalem
this week, one Palestinian shopkeeper said: 'Teddy did absolutely nothing
for us. Look at this street. It hasn't changed at all. It looks exactly the
same as it was when the Jordanians left in 1967.'
Even if Mr Olmert delivers on better treatment for Palestinians in
education, social services, and building licences, he will not succeed in
dampening Palestinian demands for their rights to sovereignty over the
occupied East of the city.
'We will always refuse Jerusalem to be under Jewish control, no matter what
the Israelis say they will do for us,' Mr Ibrahim Abu Omar, a carpet seller
in the Old City told Mr Olmert on his walkabout.
As Israelis and Palestinians gear themselves up to tackle the question of
Jerusalem's status, Mr Olmert's unequivocal and uncompromising stand on the
future of the city is likely to complicate what was always expected to be
the most difficult subject of negotiations.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931106

