FT934-10263

FT  06 NOV 93 / City broker admits theft and deception


A CITY investment broker swindled clients out of huge sums to keep his
'tottering' business afloat, Inner London Crown Court heard yesterday.
Mr Kenneth Renton, of Virginia Water, Surrey, pleaded guilty to 14 charges
of theft and four offences of obtaining property by deception between May
1991 and January 1992 involving some Pounds 645,000. A further 20 charges of
theft and deception concerning a further Pounds 1m were denied and not
proceeded with.
Mr Stephen Waller, prosecuting, said Mr Renton had been chairman and
managing director of Wentworth Asset Management, which ran into financial
difficulties in 1991.
Bank of Scotland told him to clear his overdraft and, unable to meet his
obligations, Mr Renton used his non-executive directorship of the
Leeds-based Mount Charlotte hotels group to persuade people to invest in a
bogus share issue.
'He told investors that it was a no-risk investment which would be very
profitable for them. In fact, it was to keep his tottering investment
business in existence,' said Mr Waller.
Mr Renton disappeared in April 1992 after failing to keep an appointment
with his former accountant, Mr John Collard. Mr Renton's wife, Marjorie,
contacted the police and four days later Mr Collard decided to bring in
Fimbra, the self-regulating body for financial advisers.
On the same day, Mr Renton phoned his wife from a hotel and said he had
attempted suicide with an overdose. The next day, he was arrested at
London's Heathrow airport.
He told officers his company had gone a little 'awry' because of the
recession and his bank's 'humpty' attitude. He had decided to recycle
clients' cash.
Mr Waller said Mr Renton had claimed that the actor Sean Connery had
invested in his company, and that it had assets of more than Pounds 60m.
Losers included the Canadian stockbroker Mr Otto von Botho and his wife
Susan, who ploughed in a total of Pounds 280,000, and Sir Edward Goschen,
the banker and retired stockbroker who lost Pounds 185,000, the court heard.
Judge Peter Fingret adjourned the case until December 3 for a pre-sentence
report and granted Mr Renton Pounds 75,000 bail.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931106

