FT932-186

FT  30 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Mates points to Polly case
'incosistency' - Former minister 'lays out the facts' to MPs concerning his
relationship with Asil Nadir


The following is an edited version of the central allegations and the
sequence of events outlined by Mr Michael Mates to the House of Commons
yesterday.
My involvement began in the autumn of 1991, through a constituent who
brought me details of alleged wrongdoing by the authorities in the case of
Mr Nadir. I asked to meet Mr Nadir himself.
Some of his complaints concerned his advisers in the City; others concerned
official institutions, the Inland Revenue, the Serious Fraud Office and the
police.
With Mr Nadir's permission, I spoke to Mr Anthony Scrivener QC, until
recently chairman of the Bar. It was clear that the defence team were
concerned at some of the matters which had arisen during the course of the
prosecution.
I met the then attorney-general to express my concern. At his request I then
wrote to him the first of the letters that have brought me to the position
in which I find myself today. The only person who had copies of those
letters are the attorney-general, Mr Nadir and the SFO. It is a matter
perhaps of speculation as to who leaked the letter to the press last week.
It was claimed that I was embarrassed by this leak. Far from it. Three days
previously I had asked the attorney-general's permission to publish all of
the correspondence between us because I felt it was the only way to bring
out into the open the reason for my involvement. The attorney-general
indicated that this might give him some difficulty. I respected that view
and will continue to do so.
Of course I understand why the press would publish a letter or any other
material that was leaked to them. I make no criticism of them for that. I
just ask that, with me gone, inquiring journalists will now ask the
question: why was material being selectively leaked to them? Whose agenda
was being served by its publication?
Many have asked why I became involved in this case and why I continued my
involvement after I joined the government. I must say at once that on the
latter point I took careful advice that it was proper for me to pursue this
matter as a minister.
Let me simply lay out the facts as they were presented to me. I start with
the raid on South Audley Management, a property management company
controlled by Mr Nadir's family, on September 19 1991.
Inevitably, the publicity surrounding the raid had a serious effect on the
share price of Polly Peck International, or PPI. The following day, the
20th, Mr Nadir was asked to go to the SFO headquarters in Elm Street for an
interview during which time his presence was announced to the press.
On October 30, the SFO mounted a highly publicised raid on the headquarters
of PPI in Berkeley Square. In fact, 10 minutes before the police arrived,
journalists had knocked on the door and told PPI staff they were there in
answer to an invitation from the SFO.
But there's a further point. By that time, PPI was already in
administration. By arrangement with the administrators, the SFO had already
had full access to PPI headquarters and to all the documents there. Their
people were already working inside the building. The SFO were effectively
launching a raid, in the full glare of publicity, against the
administrators.
This clearly had a cumulative effect on the public's perception both of PPI
and of Mr Nadir.
A process of what some might call 'trial by media' had begun, aided and
encouraged by the SFO.
For their part the SFO have consistently maintained that their
investigations and thus their ability to bring the case to trial have been
hampered and delayed by their inability to operate in Turkish-controlled
northern Cyprus.'
The defence therefore offered an opportunity to short-circuit this problem.
In June 1991 they commissioned Binder Hamlyn, one of Britain's leading
accountancy firms, to carry out their own investigation into the
relationship between Polly Peck in London and its subsidiaries in northern
Cyprus, which formed the basis of the charges.
The SFO's first response was that Binder Hamlyn must have been shown forged
documents. When the defence then presented the SFO with a report from an
independent forensic expert, on the SFO's approved list, saying this was not
so, they changed their ground and, despite requests from the defence to go
to northern Cyprus to check the accounts, they have maintained that this
would be impossible because northern Cyprus was not a recognised country.
It is well-known that the police have on occasions visited northern Cyprus
to make inquiries in connection with criminal proceedings in this country
and I simply do not understand why they could not follow the usual practice.
There seems, too, to be some inconsistency over who made the complaints
which the SFO were investigating. The present charges do not arise as a
result of a complaint by the Stock Exchange and there is evidence of
improper collusion between a senior officer of the Inland Revenue and the
SFO. While the SFO deny any such collusions the officer involved has
admitted it to a journalist, whose name I know, and who would be happy to
give the details of this illegal collusion to an independent inquiry.
Mr Nadir and his advisers believe that he has been denied the opportunity
properly to prepare his defence. They also believe that he has in the
process been denied his rights under the law.
During the raid on Polly Peck's headquarters in October 1990 many documents
were seized. Professional privilege was claimed by Mr Nadir's lawyers and it
was agreed that these documents would be placed in sealed bags until the
issue was resolved by independent counsel. He found that the vast majority
of the documents in the sealed bags were privileged documents.
But before counsel saw these papers the SFO had opened the bags. They have
admitted that two bags were opened but they claim it was due to a
misunderstanding. In fact more than two bags were opened because other
papers from other bags have found their way into the hands of the
administrators.
I turn finally to what the House may view as the most serious aspect of this
whole affair, namely that quite improper pressure has apparently been
exercised by the SFO upon the trial judge Mr Justice Tucker. It is this
sequence of events above all which demands independent inquiry.
On November 6, in court during the hearing of an application to vary Mr
Nadir's bail, counsel for the SFO said in court that police were
investigating a complaint that there was a conspiracy to bribe Mr Justice
Tucker, the trial judge, and that he should consider standing down because
it might be necessary to interview him.
The allegation was that a sum of money would be paid to the judge following
the success of the application to vary bail.
And at a subsequent hearing in December the chief superintendent responsible
for investigating the allegation of attempted bribery, told the court, when
cross-examined, that he had never had evidence which would justify
interviewing the judge, nor had the police ever declared their intention to
do so.
The only conclusion is that the SFO misled the judge about the intentions of
the police. The House will realise that the mere making of such an
allegation in court could compromise any chance of the judge being seen to
be impartial.
Quite rightly he refused to give up the case. Then at a hearing in March
1993 another bizarre suggestion was made by counsel, namely that the police
were investigating a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.
The suspected conspirators were, said counsel, Mr Nadir, Mr Wyn Jones,
assistant commissioner of Metropolitan Police, Mr Anthony Scrivener QC and
the judge himself, Mr Justice Tucker.
Needless to say the police have not ever questioned the judge, Mr Wyn Jones
or Mr Scrivener. This appears to have been a deliberate attempt to
destabilise the defence.
The day before, as on the day before so many preparatory hearings, Mr Nadir
was arrested. He was cautioned and interviewed on suspicion of a conspiracy
to pervert the course of justice and the co-conspirators I have mentioned
were named.
At the end of the interview his solicitor inquired as to whether any other
of the suspected conspirators had been arrested or interviewed. The House
will not be surprised to learn that the answer to this was 'no'.
The cumulative effect of what had happened in March and April - the alleged
bribery of the judge, the conspiracy to pervert the course of justice and
the seizing of his defence papers - left Mr Nadir in a state of severe
depression and despair.
It was in that context that a decision was taken to raise his spirits and
that was the context in which I made the fateful decision to give him the
watch.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930630

