FT934-8463

FT  16 NOV 93 / It's springtime for Prague privatisation: The Czech
government's determination to promote a new wave of sell-offs


   By PATRICK BLUM


CAPITALISM may have lost its gloss for Prague intellectuals infuriated by
the demise of state support for film makers, but the Czech government has
lost none of its fervour for sweeping privatisation.
Now free of its entanglement with Slovakia - although not of the asset
disputes that followed the divorce of the two republics on January 1 this
year - the government is launching a wave of mass privatisation by vouchers.
Around 770 companies are up for sale, with a book value of CzK145bn (Pounds
3.3bn), using voucher books on sale since October 1. The first of five
bidding rounds for shares are due to start in February and investors should
receive their shares by the end of next year.
A similar scheme in the former Czechoslovakia, in 1991, drew 8.5m Czech and
Slovak investors. But critics say the process is too slow, and prone to
manipulation and delays.
Shares of companies sold in the first wave were only transferred to
individual investors and privatisation funds - which control more than 70
per cent of privatised stock - this summer. 'We're only starting to look at
the numbers. We're all discovering what we really own,' says one fund
manager.
Mr Viktor Kozeny, whose Harvard Capital & Consulting company is the third
largest fund in terms of asset value with stakes in 51 companies, says he
wants to sack about one-third of his companies' managers and employees to
make them more efficient and profitable.
Other funds prefer to wait and see how their companies perform, encouraging
managements to adapt to the new market conditions gradually, rather than
forcing boardroom revolutions.
Critics say such caution may be commendable, but it is delaying
restructuring and the rationalisation of companies deeply in debt. The
collapse of traditional markets in the former Comecon trade bloc, and the
disruption caused by the transition to an emergent market economy, have led
to a huge amount of inter-company debt, variously estimated at
CzK80bn-CzK150bn. No one really knows the exact amount.
Estimates of the private sector's share in the national economy vary from 40
per cent to 60 per cent, but its share of industrial production remains
below 20 per cent and almost two-thirds of the workforce is still employed
in the public sector. The government believes, however, that the scheme is
the quickest way of off-loading a large volume of state assets, even if its
impact on the economy is delayed.
Meanwhile, privatisation funds have to come to grips with managing their
newly acquired portfolios. The biggest fund backed by Ceska Sporitelna, the
large savings bank, has more than 1m shareholders and 514 companies in its
portfolio; three other funds have stakes in more than 260 companies each.
Vested interests, and the fear that precipitate action could unleash an
uncontrollable wave of bankruptcies, have encouraged a wait-and-see
approach, disappointing those hoping for more rapid change.
A new bankruptcy law, which came into force in April, was designed to help
encourage companies to settle their accounts or face insolvency proceedings,
but until now there has been only a trickle of business closures.
The government would like the process to be speeded up, but institutional
investors are more guarded. The banks, which are owed about CzK130bn in
loans, are reluctant to start bankruptcy proceedings which may embroil them
in costly and lengthy litigation with little prospect of recovering their
money.
'The banks provide financial backing for the funds which own important
stakes in a large number of companies which owe money to each other and to
the banks. So nobody wants to rock the boat,' says one analyst.
No one knows how long this state of affairs can be maintained, but it is a
potential cause of instability in an already fragile structure.
Uncertainty has been reflected in erratic trading on the Prague Stock
Exchange and the rival over-the-counter RM-System. Trading volumes have been
small, with sudden bursts of activity caused by a few large transactions in
a handful of shares. Share prices, which had been in the doldrums for
months, have risen sharply recently as investment funds consolidate their
positions. However, analysts believe that on the current rate of increase
some shares may soon be overpriced.
One drawback is that foreign investors have stayed away, preferring to deal
off the exchanges and directly with the funds, making it difficult to know
what is really happening in the market.
'There is a split market with two systems, not enough transparency, and
there are no custodian facilities for foreign investors. If people trade off
the exchanges, there's no way to know what's going on,' says one fund
manager.
This may not worry Czech investors paying CzK1,000 plus a small fee for
their voucher books. Lured by the hope of quick prosperity, millions of
Czechs contributed to make the first voucher privatisation a resounding
success, but the appeal may have faded.
About 2.1m Czechs have registered since voucher books went on sale last
month. The authorities hope up to 3.5m people will register by the end of
November deadline.
A full picture will only be available once the official list of investors is
published in January or February. Until then, investors will have to wait to
know whether they have made a wise choice.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931116

