FT934-11503

FT  30 OCT 93 / Private View: The savage in the three-piece suit - What
drives an English gentleman to spend five harsh years wandering in the
desert with the bedouin? Wilfred Thesiger, one of the last of the great
explorers, considers his craving for adventure among the world's most
isolated tribes


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


A GENTLEMAN nomad, a tribesman in a three-piece suit: Wilfred Thesiger is
oxymoron personified. In London he carries a furled umbrella, at home in
Africa a spear.
This ascetic, upper-class Englishman is one of the last explorers to have
filled in the globe's blank spaces: you can see the desert etched into his
face. Though 83, he is as tall, lean and straight-backed as the Samburu
warriors of northern Kenya among whom he lives.
Wilfred Thesiger is a glorious anachronism. Where others only uttered their
hatred of the modern age, Thesiger lived his. Where others only dreamed
their adventures with the help of Kipling, Conrad or Buchan, Thesiger went
out and created his own.
His exploits are well known: he has described them in his own spare prose
and vivid black-and-white photographs. At 24 he was the first European to
survive a journey among the Danakils of Abyssinia, tribesmen who showed off
by killing and castrating their neighbours. He twice crossed the Empty
Quarter of southern Arabia by camel. He lived for years with the marsh Arabs
of Iraq (now being exterminated by Saddam Hussein). His only regret, he
said, was that he did not see Tibet before its desecration.
Can the mind of an explorer be mapped?
I met Wilfred Thesiger at his Chelsea flat during one of his rare visits to
London and asked him if he understood why he had been so determined to risk
his neck.
'No, I don't. I mean, in a sense it was born into me.' As a child in
Abyssinia, where his father was head of the British legation, he had been
mesmerised by the savage splendour of a tribal victory parade. 'Then I
wanted to hunt, and to get into areas that were virtually unknown, among
tribes which hadn't any contact with the outside world.'
Nowadays, I said, people would look for a deeper psychological explanation.
'I wouldn't know anything about that.' He smiled. But he described as
'decisive' the experience of being sent home to St. Aubyn's prep school in
Rottingdean, near Brighton.
'I arrived a friendly, forthcoming little boy, I think, and immediately I
started telling stories about tiger hunts (in Jaipur with his uncle, Lord
Chelmsford, then Viceroy of India) and being taken to see the British guns
firing on the Turks near Aden, and I was regarded as a complete little liar.
I was in a sense rejected by the other boys and driven back on myself.'
You escaped into the wilderness because you could not feel at home in your
own country?
'I didn't think in those terms.'
Is there any explanation you have heard applied to you that you accept?
'No. I haven't discussed it like this before.' He added: 'What it did do,
this rejection by my contemporaries, it spoiled Eton for me to some extent.
Even there I was suspicious of the other boys and I think slightly
aggressive.'
He was not popular, and that perhaps was why he preferred to travel with
Arabs or Africans, avoiding other Europeans. (He introduced Gavin Maxwell to
the marsh Arabs. The trip was not a success).
'When I was in Arabia my great aim was to get on to level terms with these
people, to live as they did, meet the challenges of the desert on equal
terms. I wanted no concessions. I think to that extent I won their respect,
and the result was that three or four of them identified themselves with me
and were prepared to take very considerable risks.'
The respect you earned from the bedouin made up for failing to win it at
school?
'Again, I wouldn't be thinking in those terms. But I think it probably did.'
But why, I asked, does a man choose such extraordinary physical privations:
the starvation, the thirst, the tedium? It's almost masochistic.
'No, it was a life that tested one to the full. It was this desire to meet a
challenge, to be tested to the full.'
Thesiger had risked his life hunting lion but it was the hardship of five
years in Arabia that forged him, he said, and the nobility of the desert
nomads that fired him.
'All Arabs want to excel, to be known as more generous, more hospitable,
brave and so on. Because it was a small society on the move everything was
known. If you distinguished yourself it was 'God whiten the face of
so-and-so'. If you behaved badly it would be heard everywhere.'
You felt obliged to undergo this test?
'It was what satisfied me. I don't feel obliged to do it. When I went to the
marshes, the Arabs didn't match up to the bedou in that sort of way. I
enjoyed being with them, but the challenge was gone.'
Perhaps, like the hermits of old, he went into the desert to meet his God.
But no. Thesiger does not believe in a Creator, only some fundamental
physical law. He went to the desert for companionship and for 'the dunes of
silence.'
'Without the bedou it would have been a meaningless penance. If I had gone
off to the North Pole I might have got associated with the Eskimos. If I had
gone to the South Pole the penguins wouldn't have satisfied me.' He laughed
like one who rarely makes jokes.
Thesiger was a 10-year-old at prep school when his father died suddenly. His
mother became obsessively devoted to her four boys. Was this a classic
recipe for . . . ? I broke off as the old man leaned forward to point to the
framed photograph of a beautiful woman: 'There she is, you see.'
Again I elaborated the theory of the absent father and devoted mother and
said: Does that make any sense to you?
'No, it all sounds complete nonsense. I mean, it wasn't anything to do with
my father not being there that I had to go off and do the things I'd wanted
to do while he was still with me.'
The elegant clubman opposite said he felt no affinity with England, a
country he has not lived in for 60 years, since his Oxford days. And he is
going blind. 'I couldn't bear coming back to England, going into a sort of
old man's home for the blind. I'd rather live out in Kenya and be led about
by them on a stick.' He smiled ruefully.
He shares a mud and timber house with his adoptive Samburu family, helps
officiate in circumcision rituals and - a former boxing Blue - teaches boys
to box.
You never wanted a family yourself?
'No. To have married and everything would have crippled me - there was a
girl once I was attracted by when I was almost a boy. Then you have
children, they've got to be educated. I wanted complete independence.'
Thesiger's sexual ambivalence is common gossip. A journalist colleague
recalls meeting the explorer in the Yemen and being shown a box of dried
foreskins. But I could remember nothing in print and had no idea how he
would react to my next question. Thesiger took it blithely.
'I think in a curious way I had very little sexual sort of . . . in either
direction.'
Thinking of his heroes, TE Lawrence and Alexander of Macedon, I said many
adventurers seemed to have been ambivalent.
'If you travelled in the desert as I did, how many times did we see women?
You arrived in camp and the women looked after you. There was a very
attractive girl on one of the wells. The others used to pull my leg about
her. I was attracted by her, but you were moving about the whole time with
men - and some of them were really only boys.'
Hoping it sounded tactful, I asked: Do you prefer boys?
'I suppose in a sense, yes. But I am not thinking sexually. I have much more
an emotional attachment because I know where I am with them. I was a boy
myself. With girls I wouldn't begin to know what to talk about. I mean, I
never have.'
In the past people would leave England to escape the stigma of a homosexual
inclination, I said. Was that your case?
'No, it certainly wasn't. In the sense that I was to some extent - I suppose
I am to some extent - homosexual it had nothing to do with it. My whole
driving thing in all this was exploration.
'No. I lived in a celibate society. I've never had much interest. I find it
extraordinary when people are prepared, like the Prince of Wales with Mrs
Simpson or whatever her name was, to give up everything for another person
like that woman.'
Thesiger had a lunch date at the Travellers Club. When I suggested it was
time to wind up he demurred. 'Ask as many questions as you want. It's rather
interesting, your probing me like this.' So I asked if he had satisfied his
need for the wilderness.
''Need's too strong. Craving. It was an urge, a craving.'
You never questioned where this craving comes from?
'I don't question things. I'm not that sort of person.'
You've had time to think about it, sitting in the desert under the stars at
night . . .
'My mind doesn't work that way. You're giving me credit for being much more
intellectual. I'm not an intellectual.'
So you wonder why I am trying to find out why you do these things?
'I think it's a bit odd.' He laughed, then added: 'Let me say something. I
think this is one of the reasons for all this trouble like football
hooliganism. It's that most young people - young men anyway, perhaps the
girls to some extent . . . I know nothing about 'em - want to meet a
challenge, want to see how they will face up to some sort of danger.
Hardship and danger. I think it's a desire that's almost born into most
people. Now, kicking a football about in Battersea Park doesn't satisfy you,
therefore you join a gang.
'It did at one time reintroduce tribalism into this country: the Mobs (he
meant 'Mods') and the Rockers. Two quite separate tribes, dressing
differently, behaving differently and fighting when they met.
'There's dissatisfaction with a world which gives them no opportunity for
this. So you hang about in the streets, you paint your hair green, sit there
and wait to collect money off Americans taking photos of you. I thank God
that I lived when I did and that I'm not 18 today.'
I have called Wilfred Thesiger a glorious anachronism. But the last word
should go to Lawi Leboyare, the young father in Thesiger's adoptive family.
The explorer was chiding him one day for his love of cars, transistor radios
and pop music. 'Of course,' laughed the young man, 'the truth of the matter
is that you are Old Stone Age.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

931030

