FT934-11516

FT  30 OCT 93 / The Financial Times Guide To Secondary Education (9): Expats
flock to green playing fields - John Authers finds that British boarding
schools are attracting more pupils from abroad


   By JOHN AUTHERS


BRITISH boarding schools have at least one growth industry to be proud of.
The last survey by ISIS (the Independent Schools Information Service)
revealed that the numbers of pupils coming from overseas had risen, in spite
of an alarming 6 per cent fall in the total number of boarders.
For many schools, improved recruitment from expatriates and non-UK nationals
could be the key to their survival, and they have improved their service for
children from overseas as a result. Some of this is marketing hype with more
than a hint of desperation - school prospectuses now tend to emphasise their
closeness to major airports - but genuine improvements have been made.
Standards of accommodation have improved markedly.
Even the examinations are changing. This survey is based around A-levels
which are still, in spite of increasing attacks from educationalists, the
'gold standard' of British education. But the international gold standard of
education is the International Baccalaureate.
Four schools in our survey now offer the IB - the Anglo-European School,
Cheltenham, Malvern, and Sevenoaks - while others are considering doing so.
It is accepted to a growing extent by British universities, but also,
crucially to many outside the UK, by universities in other countries. The
entries for Sevenoaks and Anglo-European both include IB results, using a
formula to convert them into A-level equivalents.
Sevenoaks initially introduced the qualification for purely educational
reasons, according to Richard Barker, head for the last 11 years. IB
requires three subjects at a higher level, at a similar standard to
A-levels, plus three subsidiary subjects.
The six must include English, maths, a modern language, a science, and a
humanity, with only the sixth subject left optional. This allows
specialisation for those fixed on a particular degree - for example maths,
physics and chemistry could be the three higher subjects - while ensuring
that they retain far greater balance.
IB candidates must also produce a 4,000-word essay and master a compulsory
paper in the theory of knowledge, which takes students through a whirl of
language, logic, induction theory and ethics, as well as specialist fields
such as architecture. Rather than taking the standard university route
through the subject, and studying philosophy author by author, the students
have to answer questions such as: 'Do governments have the right to outlaw
abortion?'
Finally, IB candidates must satisfy requirements in creativity, action and
service, which typically means taking part in Duke of Edinburgh's awards,
the combined cadets force, or voluntary services, such as helping
handicapped children.
Alison Berresford, whose parents are much-travelled expatriates, is
confident that the IB has offered her a better education than A-levels could
have done: 'How can 16-year-olds know what to specialise in? By the time you
are 18, 19 or 20 you should have some better general knowledge which you
can't have perfectly at 16.'
The exam attracts foreigners as well as expatriates. Christian Artmann is
German and studying the IB in Kent because he is unhappy with what he
regards as the poor prospects of German sixth-form education. University in
the US might follow.
Adam Abote is an Ethiopian, who was evacuated from his home country to avoid
the civil war there. He wants to progress to college in American university
 -Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, he hopes.
His parents sent him to Sevenoaks, he says, simply because he could do the
IB there. The IB has been the key to an expansion in boarding numbers by the
school - very rare as boarding numbers contract in the recession - which now
hosts 30 nationalities.
More schools can be expected to introduce the IB in the next few years, a
development which can only be beneficial for all concerned.
Once the curriculum is in place, the greatest obstacle in most parents'
minds is the distance from home involved. At least British children at
boarding school can usually go home for a weekend if the homesickness gets
too much for them - not an option if your parents live in Singapore.
Schools have found an answer to this. Independent commercially run
'guardianship' services are now on offer, which give children the chance to
phone someone they can trust and ask for advice. Almost as important, the
guardians can also deal with the school when they have problems, rather than
trusting to awkward trans-global telephone conversations.
Gabbitas, Truman and Thring, based in London, offers the largest
guardianship service, while some schools, such as Rossall in Fleetwood,
Lancashire, offer special deals with local guardians.
Rossall has traditionally had a high proportion of overseas students and is
now going out of its way to attract children from overseas. It provides free
escort services to take children to and from Manchester airport and also
operates an overseas club, run by two members of staff, which takes pupils
on weekend outings to give them a broader view of Britain.
All of this should be good news for expatriate parents. While British
independent schools are looking so far afield for recruitment, they can be
expected to offer better value for money.
They offer fluency in the English language, and a passport to British higher
education, which is much admired throughout the world. But in some cases,
the hard-sell recruitment campaigns which they take across the world
represent a last bid for survival. Expatriates now have the luxury of a wide
choice, and it should be used with care.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931030

