FT932-6548

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (6): Hardliners retain formidable blocking
power - Foreign policy / Courting western political and financial support
remains paramount


   By ANDREW GOWERS


FOR 45 minutes last December, government ministers from north America and
all over Europe found themselves half-wondering whether their world was
coming apart.
If their ears had not deceived them, Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russia's foreign
minister and a man known for his outspokenly pro-western views, had just
told a gathering of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe
that his country's post-communist policies of working with the west were at
an end; that its interests elsewhere set limits to its rapprochement with
western Europe; and that Nato was courting confrontation by interfering in
the affairs of the former Soviet bloc.
He had, in other words, just appeared to junk the whole strategy that had
made the end of the cold war possible - and demanded an end to sanctions
against Russia's ally Serbia to boot.
Fortunately it was no more than an appearance. After hectic consultations,
Mr Kozyrev coolly took the podium again, saying his earlier speech had been
a pack of lies - a rhetorical warning to the west of what would happen to
Russian foreign policy if President Boris Yeltsin were swept from power by
his conservative and nationalist opponents.
For western governments, it was a stunt in the worst possible taste but one
not without resonance. Indeed, the brief alarm Mr Kozyrev managed to
generate in Stockholm was eloquent testimony to the uncertainties that
continue to shroud Russia's bold attempt to align itself with the west and
join the club of great capitalist democracies.
The broad lines of this strategy are not in doubt, and as the foreign
minister said they will not be so as long as President Yeltsin survives. On
the contrary: as his political travails at home have grown in recent months,
he has come to rely all the more - like Mikhail Gorbachev before him - on
foreign policy successes.
Courting western political and financial support, of course, remains
paramount, as symbolised in the Yeltsin-Clinton summit in Vancouver, in the
Russian leader's prospective attendance at the Group of Seven summit in
Tokyo in July, and in his desire to sign a free trade deal with the European
Community as soon as this summer.
But other important relationships have also been receiving increased
presidential attention in the past year - those with China (often cited as
an economic model for Russia by those who oppose Mr Yeltsin's reforms),
South Korea (a significant potential investor and rival to Japan) and India.
In the Middle East, ties have been repaired with Iran and with Syria.
If it once seemed as if Russia's domestic woes were causing it to turn in on
itself, the retreat from the world is now over. There may not yet be an
over-arching vision of Russia's international role - no easy matter for a
country straddling two continents, a third of the earth's land surface and a
patchwork quilt of ethnicities and religions. But that it wants to be a
player is not in doubt.
In recent months, however, Mr Yeltsin has not been immune from attack on the
foreign policy front. And as a result, the government has been forced to
trim its sails on some issues and to set out a position that is more
distinctive, less automatically acquiescent with the west, on others. As Mr
Sergei Karaganov, head of Moscow's Institute of Europe and a foreign policy
adviser to Mr Yeltsin, puts it: 'We are paying the price of saying 'yes'
even before we were asked. Now we have to fight for our interests - and some
of them will be different from those of the west.'
For the opposition in parliament, Mr Yeltsin's pro-western posture is a
useful stick with which to beat him in their domestic power struggle: it
accuses him of kow-towing and failing to defend Russia's vital interests,
and has been demanding Mr Kozyrev's dismissal for the best part of a year.
Hardline nationalists and communists go further, advocating the
reconstitution of the former Soviet Union or aggressive measures to protect
the 25m ethnic Russians living outside Russia's borders, the pursuit of arms
sales to renegade states in the Middle East such as Iraq and Libya, and
support for fellow Slavs in Serbia against international pressure.
More than political slogans are at stake in this latter-day version of the
age-old Russian battle between slavophiles and westernisers. The hardliners
can command up to 40 per cent of the votes in parliament, and although they
do not thus far appear to have had much impact on Mr Kozyrev's day-to-day
diplomacy, they do have formidable blocking powers when combined with the
third or so of centrist deputies who tend to side with them on foreign
policy questions.
The result is that several important international treaties are still
awaiting ratification, including the Start 2 US-Russian strategic arms
limitation agreement which parliament says it has no intention of ratifying
until it receives Mr Kozyrev's scalp.
Senior foreign ministry officials do not attempt to disguise their
frustration with such parliamentary antics.
'We can't talk to these people,' says Mr Sergei Yastrzhemsky, Mr Kozyrev's
spokesman, of the government's 'red-brown' opponents. 'They don't know any
words of argument, only tired old ideological cliches.'
As one example of the trouble they can cause, he cites a treaty between
Russia and Hungary which deputies have blocked on the grounds that it
contains an apologetic reference to the 1956 Soviet invasion.
Whether these disputes have a much broader political effect is hard to say.
Even Russian foreign policy pundits agree that most of the populace are far
more pre-occupied with the struggle for daily survival than with esoteric
questions concerning their country's role in the world.
But such issues can on occasion take on symbolic significance in a country
many of whose citizens still feel confused and humiliated by defeat in the
cold war and by the loss of empire. The dispute with Japan over the Kurile
islands, which the Soviet Union occupied at the end of World War Two and
which Tokyo badly wants back, is one example.
Repeated attempts to arrange a Japanese visit by Mr Yeltsin over the past
year have foundered, at least in part because the Russian president has felt
it politically impossible to offer sufficient concessions. The issue will
inevitably continue to bedevil Russian-Japanese relations, and limit Japan's
willingness to provide Moscow with aid outside the multilateral framework of
the G7, for the foreseeable future.
The conflict in the former Yugoslavia, where Russia has been broadly
supportive of western-led mediation efforts, has lately become another
domestic political football. Under fierce attack in April for not showing
sufficient solidarity with the Serbs, the government sent its own peace
envoy to Belgrade and felt obliged to distance itself from western policy by
abstaining in a UN Security Council vote on tightening sanctions.
It was not until after his referendum victory on April 25 that President
Yeltsin felt bold enough fully to rejoin the international consensus and
issue an unequivocal ultimatum to Serbia.
Mr Karaganov of the Institute of Europe says the west has no reason for
concern at such manoeuvrings - 'almost nobody is interested in Serbia here,
but the opposition just plays it up to make things difficult for the
administration, and the administration has to bow to that,' he says. 'It
could just as easily be replaced tomorrow by another symbol.'
As for the extremists' slavophilia - 'the plan to build up a Slavophile
world is a dream. Nobody here is really thinking of it.'
Like others in the Moscow think-tanks, Mr Karaganov believes that the debate
on foreign policy is just another weapon in the battle for power. And it is
certainly true that the policy prescriptions of Mr Yeltsin's sworn enemies
do not stand up to a moment's serious inspection. Those like Vice-president
Alexander Rutskoi who advocate alliances with pariah states such as Iraq and
North Korea, for example, claim Russia could earn huge sums of money from
arms sales in the process - a patently ridiculous notion since neither has
the means to pay.
'Those who call for alliances with irresponsible states,' concludes Mr
Karaganov, 'are merely trying to provoke hostile reprisals from the west.
For it is only under those circumstances of isolation that they stand a
chance of coming to power. But actually, even most nationalists understand
that we need the outside world for its technology, its products, even its
culture.'
In that last sentence, perhaps, lies one of the two principal dangers for Mr
Yeltsin's current foreign policy course. For in tying itself so closely to
the west and its reforms so directly to prospective western financial
assistance, the government may eventually face a backlash if aid on a scale
sufficient to make a difference fails to materialise.
Public opinion has been disappointed on this count before, with less than
desirable political consequences. As Mr Karaganov puts it: 'People were
romantic about this aid. They were promised so much, and so little was
delivered. Then when they saw it was not coming, they instantly became more
nationalistic.'
The other big danger is that such tendencies could be fuelled by conflicts
in Russia's immediate neighbourhood, especially if Russia itself were
somehow to become militarily embroiled.
That is not a far-fetched notion, as western governments are uneasily aware.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930527

