FT933-5138

FT  04 SEP 93 / Food & Drink: Lo's life and times - A critical look at four
new food books


   By GILES MACDONOGH


CHINESE restaurateur and cookery book writer Kenneth Lo is 80 this month and
September also sees the publication of his autobiography: The Feast of My
Life (Doubleday, Pounds 16.99, 216 pages).
I was surprised to learn that Lo had had such a varied career before he
turned to the kitchen stove: scholar, tennis player and consular official.
This book contains some choice episodes from his life.
In particular I enjoyed his brief appearance at the Berlin Olympics in 1936
when he stayed at a Chinese restaurant in the Kanststrasse; the years of
poverty in Cambridge, where he learned to eat cheese, and the destruction of
the city's only Chinese restaurant by a direct hit from a German bomb; and
his work with Chinese sailors in Liverpool where he was able to quell a race
riot by sitting the local West Indians down to a Chinese meal. The passage
which touched me most, however, concerned Lo's return to China after 54
years to find his patrician family reduced to poverty by the cultural
revolution.
Lo has been poorly served by his editor. This book contains an intolerable
number of spelling mistakes and some nasty English.
Presentation is one of the strong points in Nigel Buxton's Walking in the
Wine Country (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, Pounds 20, 250 pages). The book is
filled with some ravishing photography by Glyn Williams and Buxton's writing
is often a joy.
For me it was more a book about walking than it was about wine: Buxton is a
hesitant wine writer and generally contents himself with citing his
favourite authorities on each area, rather like some medieval theologian
invoking the Fathers of the Church. He also falls into a French-sprung trap
about Alsace. Alsatian is not a French dialect as implied here, but a German
one, similar to Swiss German. Nor was Alsace annexed by 'the Prussians' in
1871, it became a Reichsland, ie part of the new German Empire.
I most enjoyed Buxton's descriptions of meals and, by the end, I had an
abiding vision of a man either relaxing beside a hotel fire with a large
glass of cognac in his hand, after a long hike, or sitting at the top of
some hill with a picnic lunch and a bottle of wine.
My complaint about this book is that it is misleading. I lived in France for
seven years and I think I know the people. The French do not understand
eccentricity and the sight of a lone man walking across private property
with a bottle in his hand is more likely to make them suspicious than to
excite feelings of hospitality.
If, on the other hand, you are a journalist with a story or even a book to
write, a French winemaker's attitude can be wonderfully expansive. The dogs
seem to speak the true voice of France in this book: 'hideous, unrestrained'
 -the Dobermann in Chagny. They never fail to bark and snarl at his
approach. So far as Buxton's sugar-sweet, French people are concerned: he
has either been unbelievably lucky or he is pulling our legs.
Antony Worrall Thompson is something of a walking publicity machine, so it
might come as a surprise that it has taken him so long to want to squash his
wisdom into covers hard or soft.
Now, with Malcolm Gluck of The Guardian newspaper, he has produced Supernosh
(Faber & Faber, Pounds 7.99, 221 pages), a collection of his favourite
dishes with notes on what wines to serve with them.
I must confess that I am not over-impressed by Worrall Thompson. I have
eaten a number of meals which he has cooked and even more which were served
in his restaurants. One of his signature dishes is a plate of lamb shanks
with mashed potatoes. At Bistrot 190 I had to send this back as I was unable
to get a fork into the lamb. Out of interest I tried the same concoction in
his newer, Del Ugo restaurant some time later and found the lamb equally
unappetising; but that was nothing to the mash, which had been liquidised
and had the consistency of glue.
I mentioned this second bad meal to his personal assistant who insisted I
come back; that the problem had been caused by staff problems etc. I had the
same dish and the PA was forced to admit that it suffered from identical
faults. I was obliged to console myself with one of Worrall Thompson's
'one-pot' dinners.
This book might have been excusable if it contained recipes, but it does
not. It is a collection of jottings containing advice on how to prepare the
sort of pseudo-Mediterranean food advocated by Worrall Thompson. In a number
of instances he implies that the dish is too difficult for readers to make
at home and that they should therefore simply go to one of his restaurants
and eat it there. Hmm: need I say more? Nor can I say I am wholly convinced
by the wine matches. There are a few useful rules about what wines to serve
with food and Gluck simply abandons them.
On the other hand, if you are buying wine at the supermarket some of Gluck's
recommendations will be of interest, for this is the field he has made his
own. In this case I suggest you buy his book Superplonk (also Faber).
In contrast to Supernosh, Good Pub Food by Susan Nowak (Camra Books, Pounds
9.95, 439 pages) is a really useful book. I was grateful to the author on a
recent visit to touristy Broadway in Worcestershire, for through her
guidance I found the Crown and Trumpet with its wholesome food, good beers
and friendly service. Anyone who gets out to the English countryside should
possess a copy.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

930904

