FT932-6591

FT  27 MAY 93 / Government Bonds: Renewed foreign interest boosts Pounds 3bn
gilt auction


   By JANE FULLER and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


THE UK government bond market gave a warm response to the Bank of England's
Pounds 3bn gilt auction yesterday, with stock in the auction area gaining
about  3/8 of a point.
At the average accepted price, the yield on the 7 3/4 per cent gilt due 2006
was 8.39 per cent, and the tail, the difference between the average and
highest accepted yield, was zero.
'The tail tells the story,' one economist said. It was a better sign of the
auction's success than the cover, which at 1.56 times was a little lower
than expectations of 1.6 to 1.7 times.
Partly because of the much more realistic expectations, this auction was
much better received than the last one, which was 1.77 times covered.
One of the positive factors was renewed foreign interest. Gilts'
underperformance of continental European markets, notably France, over the
past few weeks had creative an attractive yield differential.
The strengthening of the pound and less anxiety about inflation also
provided a much more favourable background.
The best performance came at the longer end, with 10-year stock and beyond
gaining about  3/8 points. The 'when issued' price on the new gilt went up
about  1/2 point. This was, however, the area of the market which had seen
the most underperformance ahead of the auction.
SOME puzzlement at the Spanish government bond market's lack of reaction to
the plummeting peseta raised concern that longer-dated stock might open
lower today.
One economist described the government bond market as being 'out of sync'
with currency movements and with pre-election talk of more interest rate
cuts.
GERMAN bunds lost much of the ground gained since Monday in late
profit-taking yesterday.
Initially, another mildly positive state inflation figure helped sentiment,
but it was not enough to prevent a correction to the sharp rise that
occurred earlier this week.
As expected, the Bundesbank left the repo rate unchanged at 7.60 per cent
and that had little effect on the market. However, the need to support the
D-Mark has weakened hopes that the council will cut key rates next week and
this exerted a more negative influence.
Z
NEWS of flat durable goods orders, a strong five-year auction and declining
metals and commodity prices combined to boost longer-dated US Treasury bond
prices sharply yesterday.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  31/32 at 102
3/8 , yielding 6.932 per cent. At the short end of the market, the two-year
note was slightly firmer, up  1/8 at 99 29/32 , to yield 4.158 per cent.
The day's economic news was bullish for bonds. It showed no change in
durable goods orders last month - analysts had been expecting a rise in
orders of up to 1 per cent.
The figures, which suggested that the economy continues to struggle to gain
meaningful momentum, buoyed bond prices at the long end of the market.
Later in the day, surprisingly strong demand for the Dollars 11bn five-year
auction provided prices with an extra lift, as did falling gold, silver and
commodity prices.
THE yen's rise to an all-time high against the dollar provided further
impetus to the Japanese government bond market.
The combination of the soaring currency and the success of Tuesday's 10-year
bond auction, which looked relatively cheap, provided bullish conditions in
spite of the rise in the Nikkei stock market index. Domestic institutions,
which had been sitting on their hands recently, sprung into life.
With the 10-year area attracting particular interest after the recent
sell-off, the yield curve flattened. Between three and 10-year stock, the
yield spread came down by half a dozen basis points.
In the cash market, the yield of the benchmark No 145 due 2002 came down
from 4.63 per cent to 4.575 per cent during Tokyo trading, while the price
of the September futures contract rose from 106.60 to 107.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

930527

