FT932-12

FT  30 JUN 93 / Deal close on electricity supply in east Germany


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BERLIN


A DECISION is close on a formula which would gradually introduce more
competition in the eastern German electricity industry. Only one local
council is holding out against a deal that would resolve the future of the
region's electricity supply and pave the way for limited foreign
involvement.
The compromise, which involves eastern Germany's 164 local councils, the
association of municipal utilities, the economics ministry, and west
Germany's utility companies, would give councils access to power generation.
It would also allow them to buy 30 per cent of their electricity needs
locally, or from a foreign supplier, and to form partnerships with
outsiders.
The compromise, which would end the uncertainty about who had the right to
generate power, also means that Vereinigte Enerkiwerke, or Veag, eastern
Germany's main utility which operates the region's high voltage grid, could
speed up its massive investment programme.
The deal results from opposition by eastern Germany's local councils to the
Stromvertrag, or electricity contract, signed in August 1990 between the two
Germanies.
Ostensibly it set out to modernise eastern Germany's power industry, but
with little room for competition. Not only were the east's local councils
denied the right to generate their own power, but the grid, sales, and
distribution of energy were monopolised by western Germany's eight utility
companies.
RWE Energie, PreussenElektra and Bayernwerk, the country's three largest
utilities, together obtained a 75 per cent stake in Veag. The rest was
divided among the five other utility companies. These eight companies were
also given majority stakes in eastern Germany's 15 regional distribution
networks.
In order to underwrite Veag's massive investment programme in eastern
Germany, the Stromvertrag stated that only 49 per cent of eastern Germany's
regional utilities could be owned by the local councils. The regional
operators had to buy 70 per cent of their power from Veag for the next 20
years; and the local councils in turn had to buy 70 per cent of their
electricity from the regional utilities.
However, the local councils, which opposed the emergence of a monopoly,
appealed to the constitutional court, arguing they had the right to claim
100 per cent of the regional utilities' assets because they had owned them
until 1952 before they were expropriated by the Communist regime. The court
upheld the Stromvertrag but suggested a compromise, accepted by all but one
council.
The councils will be allowed sell their 49 per cent stakes in the regional
utilities. Local cities and regional utilities are likely to have priority
over foreigners. At the same time, with the assets, the councils will be
free to meet 30 per cent of their energy needs from whatever source they
choose. However, they must still obtain 70 per cent of their electricity
needs from the regional utilities, which in turn must obtain 70 per cent of
their electricity from Veag.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930630

