FT932-3205

FT  15 JUN 93 / Survey of Retail Chain Management (1): Customers call the
tune - A new price-sensitive and more sophisticated consumer is emerging in
the 1990s. Faced also with increased competition from new shopping formats,
retailers are investing in sophisticated new distribution and sales analysis
systems


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


RETAILING might be the world's second-oldest profession, but it has become a
sophisticated business. As John Beaumont, chief executive of the UK's
Institute of Grocery Distribution, puts it: 'For the retailer, the business
is no longer about selling what you buy, but about buying what you sell.'
The days are gone when retailers did the best deals they could with
manufacturers, and then hoped customers would buy what they had to offer.
The wide choice of products now available - with too much floorspace chasing
too little business in many markets - means customers call the tune. If they
cannot get what they want at the price they want, accompanied by the level
of service they require, in one shop, they will take their business
somewhere else.
Customer-led retailing is one of the trends underpinning the way the sector
operates. But there is another important factor: many UK retailers believe a
new price sensitivity and sophistication among consumers will make the 1990s
a very different decade from the high-spending 1980s.
The increase in consumer awareness is said to result from the longest and
deepest recession experienced in Britain and much of the rest of Europe
since the second world war and has left some deep scars on consumers, now
more cautious and thrifty about what they buy and where they buy it. And the
more cautious consumer is expected to survive the recession.
Many retailers believe the pattern of shopping in Britain over Christmas and
New Year is evidence of this.
Shoppers last year left gift-buying to the last possible moment, hoping for
dramatic price reductions. Then in January they descended on the sales in
droves to make other purchases that they had delayed for months previous in
the pursuit of bargains.
All this is bad news for retailers. The recession has made recent years'
trading tough enough.
And a whole cadre of UK chains, including Asda, Burton, Storehouse, Next and
Laura Ashley, have additional problems of their own, brought about by
over-expansion, over-borrowing or other strategic mistakes during the
consumer boom of the late 1980s.
Even though these chains are now turning the corner, and the UK economy is
showing the first, faltering signs of recovery, the outlook for retailers is
tougher than they may have hoped.
'My view is the high margins that UK retailers have secured in the past are
not sustainable,' says Jim Hodkinson, international development director at
Kingfisher, one of the UK's largest retailing groups.
'The consumer still wants the choice, the range and the service, but at the
same time he wants to know when he goes into a store that he is going to get
a good price. He wants to shop with confidence.'
Moreover, the new price consciousness among consumers has coincided with,
and will be sharpened by, the rapid growth of the discount retailers.
Discounters aim to cut costs down to the bone, often by selling limited
product ranges from no-frills stores in secondary locations, and limiting
their investments in technology to the bare essentials. They compete by
keeping margins and prices as low as possible and make their money by
shifting large volumes of goods.
New discount formats from the US are now being imported into Europe, and Mr
Hodkinson believes they will threaten not just UK retailers' margins, but
even the lower margins common across continental Europe.
Europe has already witnessed a massive growth in discount food retailing,
with chains such as Germany's Aldi, Denmark's Netto and France's Ed all
successfully expanding outside their home markets.
But, as a recent report by Verdict, the UK retail market research company
predicts, discounting is likely to be a main force not just in the food
sector but in other retail sectors such as clothing, electricals and the
variety stores.
Hypermarkets, selling a wide range of goods at very low prices, are already
well-established throughout France and are spreading into other markets such
as Spain.
But they will soon be joined by the new arrivals from the US, which include
warehouse clubs selling between 3,000 and 4,000 lines from baked beans to
car tyres in no-frills environments from enormous sheds.
Then there are factory outlet complexes, which group together stores selling
manufacturers' excess production and end-of-season products at discount
prices. Another group is the so-called 'category killers', efficient
specialist retailers, selling from edge-of-town superstores. Category
killers aim to kill off the competition in their particular product sector
by offering greater choice and low prices.
Price competition with other formats poses a significant management
challenge to the large established retailers. If they are to continue to
offer the advantages of choice, quality, convenience, and a more amenable
shopping environment, while remaining competitive on price, they must
achieve the maximum efficiency at every point along the supply chain, and
squeeze the most out of their substantial investments in technology.
Many large chains have already set up centralised distribution networks,
where manufacturers deliver goods to regional warehouses rather than to
individual stores. Final distribution is carried out by the retailer or a
third party contractor. Retailers who have not taken this route will likely
follow suit to enhance their competitive edge.
Most large chains are now using scanning technology at the check-out. And
many link this system to computer systems which automatically re-order goods
as they are sold.
But it is finding other ways of exploiting to the full the potential of that
sales information that will be key to success.
One important application of the information is in direct product
profitability analysis - calculating the contribution to profitability of
each product in a store, taking into account transport and storage costs and
other overheads connected with that product.
The idea of DPP is to optimise the return on each product by determining its
space allocation according to its profitability.
Most retailers use DPP analysis in some way, but it is already being
replaced as the buzzword for the 1990s by 'category management'.
This involves dividing a store's products into different categories (a large
grocery superstore may have 400 or more categories) and managing each of
those categories like small businesses.
DPP, market research and other information is then used to decide the
correct mix of brands - and what shelf space to allot to each brand - on a
store-by-store basis. This process is said to maximise the profitability of
the overall category and at the same time meet customers' demands.
As Safeway, one UK grocery chain which is introducing category management,
puts it: 'The most important objective is to focus on customers at the store
level, which will yield improved financial results.'
A vital ingredient in category management is the sharing of information
between manufacturers and retailers - something which may alter the
relationship between the two during the 1990s.
But many manufacturers are still reluctant to give away too many of their
secrets to what they perceive as the 'other side'.
But getting the most out of category management means that the two must work
together, because the manufacturers still know more about their category
than the retailers do, and retailers know more about their stores and
customers.
Another major challenge for retailers, as their home markets become
increasingly competitive and approach saturation, will be to find new
opportunities, either through diversification, or by exporting their format
into a new market.
Despite the difficulties, the pace of cross-border expansion and the
formation of international retailing alliances is quickening.
Corporate Intelligence Group, the market researchers, says it has identified
more than 60 US retailers which are planning to expand into Europe, and the
movement is unlikely to be all one-way.
Large European retailers, meanwhile, are spending increasing amounts of time
investigating other European markets. The 1990s may be the decade when
retailing becomes a truly international business.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930615

