FT932-3420

FT  14 JUN 93 / Beijing predicts investment surge


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


FOREIGN investors will sign contracts with Chinese partners worth some
USDollars 80bn in 1993, according to a senior trade official in Beijing.
Mr Lin Kun, deputy director of foreign investment in China's trade ministry,
also said that China was planning further steps to open its markets to
overseas investors and these would be unveiled at a national symposium later
this year.
Hong Kong, Japan, the US, Taiwan and South Korea would spearhead the
continuing investment surge into China, Mr Lin told the English-language
Business Weekly: 'China's market is no longer potential, it's tangible.'
Official figures show that China signed agreements in 1992 involving Dollars
68.5bn in foreign capital, while foreign funds actually flowing into the
country last year totalled Dollars 11bn.
Mr Lin predicted that the main targets for investment this year would be the
automotive sector and onshore oil exploration. This latter was a reference
to the invitation to foreign companies to explore the Tarim basin prospect
in China's far west, described as one of the world's last great oil
frontiers.
China, facing energy and mineral shortages at home, is also conducting a
wide-ranging survey of investment prospects abroad, according to Mr Zhang
Hongren, vice minister of geology and mineral resources.
His ministry had launched preliminary studies of more than 20 countries in
Asia, the Americas and Africa, including Australia and Brazil, said Mr
Zhang.
Mr Lin said meanwhile that further steps to open China's automotive
industries to foreign participation would lead to a big jump in investment.
He noted that China had approved foreign involvement in only 10 domestic
automotive plants. 'These plants far from meet the soaring domestic demand
for automobiles.'
Mr Lin did not expect the continuing depreciation of the yuan - it fell 7
per cent to Yn10.7 to the dollar last week - would deter investors.
China's investment revolution, Page 2 Editorial Comment, Page 13

The Financial Times


International Page 1

930614

