FT933-12586

FT  23 JUL 93 / Chambers fear fall in sales to EC


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


GROWTH OF manufacturing exports slowed in the second quarter amid fears that
deepening recession in other European Community countries and a stronger
pound could threaten the UK's competitive advantage, according to a survey
published yesterday.
In an extensive survey covering 9,000 companies in the services and
manufacturing sectors, the British Chambers of Commerce reported that sales
and orders of manufacturing exports did not improve in the three months to
June. For the second consecutive quarter only one in five companies reported
higher export sales and orders.
The overall conclusion from the quarterly economic survey was that the
recovery re-mains broadly based and grad-ual, with domestic demand on a
steadily upwards trend.
Small companies continue to lag the bigger ones, with only one in 10 small
businesses enjoying growing order books.
The balance of manufacturing companies enjoying higher domestic sales
compared with the previous quarter rose from 5 per cent to 19 per cent.
There was a similar jump in performance of service-sector companies. A
balance of 27 per cent of companies reported higher quarter-on-quarter
sales, against only 13 per cent in the first three months of the year.
The chambers' main concern was export markets. 'Our ability to compete
internationally remains patchy,' said Mr Christopher Stewart-Smith,
president of the chambers.
While worries about inflation and interest-rate levels had eased, there was
concern that the UK's competitive edge which followed devaluation might be
eroded.
There was good news on investment. Manufacturing and service-sector
companies revised their investment plans upwards. The rise in sales in the
second quarter has also led to an increase in the number of firms working at
full capacity, with 22 per cent of manufacturers claiming no excess.
A regional breakdown shows the Home Counties and the Thames Valley at the
forefront of growth in the second quarter, with both regions experiencing
strong rises in export and domestic demand.
Although the improved performance by the manufacturing sector was fairly
evenly spread across the country, Scotland and Northern Ireland lagged
behind other regions.
Demand for exports in Scotland slowed and manufacturing confidence was poor.
In Northern Ireland the weakness was concentrated in domestic sales which
fell over the quarter, while manufacturing exporters improved on first
quarter growth.
In the service sector, export growth was fairly buoyant, with the southern
regions reporting strong performance. Even in London, sales growth in the
service sector was higher than the national average.
The chambers found the most worrying development in London was the sharp
fall in the rate of growth of manufacturing exports. In addition, employment
intentions in manufacturing industry were worse in the capital than anywhere
else in the country.
Growth in the east Midlands continued to be buoyant, with exporters
maintaining sales growth and increasing orders.
The economy in the north-east continued to perform well in manufacturing and
services, but growth in orders in both sectors slowed.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930723

