FT933-10196

FT  05 AUG 93 / Isle of Man may cut timeshare rights


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent


THE ISLE OF MAN, the legal jurisdiction for many European Community
timeshare contracts, is considering a law which will substantially shorten
the period during which buyers can cancel their contracts.
This could mean that many timeshare buyers throughout Europe will have a
lower level of consumer protection than the UK or the EC intends.
Government officials on the island favour a seven-day cooling-off period,
during which timeshare buyers can ask for their money back. This compares
with 14 days specified by UK law or the period of between 14 and 28 days
suggested for EC legislation.
More timeshare contracts in Europe are subject to Isle of Man law than any
other jurisdiction, according to Mr Norman Burden, chairman of the Timeshare
Council, which represents the reputable side of the industry in the UK, and
vice-president of the European Timeshare Federation.
He defended the seven-day period, saying most timeshare buyers who cancelled
did so within 72 hours.
Timeshare buyers purchase a number of weeks each year at a holiday resort.
The industry has suffered damage to its reputation because of high-pressure
sales tactics and other malpractices by some operators.
The Isle of Man completed consultation on the proposed law last weekend. The
legislation is expected to be introduced into the Manx parliament's next
session, beginning in October.
A consultative document prepared by an Isle of Man Treasury working group
and sent to industry representatives says: 'It has been suggested that if
legitimate timeshare business is to be encouraged to develop here, a shorter
cancellation period than exists in the UK would do much to impart a
marketing advantage to the Isle of Man.'
The document says that the island's Board of Consumer Affairs would have
liked to offer the same level of consumer protection as exists in the UK.
But it adds that the Timeshare Council and the European federation prefer a
seven-day cooling-off period.
The UK law, which came into effect last October, was regarded as providing
little protection to buyers as it did not apply where contracts were
concluded abroad. The Timeshare Council estimates that 75 per cent of UK
buyers enter into contracts abroad.
Proposed EC legislation suggested a 14-day cooling-off for contracts entered
into in the buyer's country of residence and 28 days for agreements signed
elsewhere in the EC. The European Parliament has recommended 21 days in both
cases. EC consumer affairs ministers are expected to discuss the issue in
October.
The Isle of Man is exempt from much EC legislation and will not be subject
to the directive.
An Isle of Man government official said yesterday that the proposed Manx
legislation was clearer than the UK law in that it specified that the
cancellation period should run from the date the agreement was signed.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930805

