FT934-11634

FT  30 OCT 93 / Sense and sensitivities: UK building societies' resistance
to mergers


   By JOHN GAPPER and ALISON SMITH


This has not been a happy week for Mr Michael Varney, general manager of the
tiny Bexhill-on-Sea Building Society. After 80 years gathering deposits and
lending mortgages from its single branch, his society is to disappear. Its
3,000 savers and 600 borrowers are throwing in their lot with the Bradford &
Bingley Building Society, which is 750 times larger in terms of assets.
Bexhill-on-Sea could hardly resist the might of Bradford & Bingley. But it
was a different matter for the two societies which this week disclosed the
failure of their attempt at merger. Leeds Permanent and National &
Provincial abandoned plans to create the third-largest UK society, having
found too wide a gulf in their management cultures.
The societies had settled contentious issues such as their future name and
chief executive - the society would have been called Leeds Permanent and
been headed by Mr David O'Brien, N&P's chief executive. But the senior
managers seem to have decided that it would be hard to combine Leeds's
traditional management hierarchy with N&P's emphasis on teamwork.
The failure saves the 1,600 staff who would have lost their jobs as
overlapping branches closed. But it raises questions over the apparently
inevitable process of consolidation among the 88 remaining societies, and
throws into further doubt the outcome of the struggle between banks,
societies and life insurers to sell financial products.
Mr Varney says the Bexhill-on-Sea gave up the ghost because of the growing
weight of regulation. He will now take early retirement after 40 years in
the industry. 'You reach the point where it is a crushing and expensive
burden for a small society, and you cannot go on any more,' he says.
Many of the tiny societies formed in the 18th and 19th centuries as mutually
owned savings clubs appear to have only a limited life. They are being
forced into mergers either because they have run into trouble through
ill-advised lending, or because they cannot compete with the marketing and
branch networks of the largest societies.
Until this week, the over-capacity in the retail financial services industry
which has led to big cuts in banks' branch networks also seemed to be
bearing down hard on medium-sized societies such as National & Provincial.
Fierce competition seemed to be forcing them to grow through merger, or risk
becoming also-rans to Halifax or Abbey National.
Many societies think that, in order to compete with banks, they will have to
offer a range of products including credit cards, insurance and cheque
books. An amalgamation between two societies that complement each other's
branches and products offers each a way of developing a full service at a
lower cost than doing so alone.
But the Leeds/N&P failure highlights a crucial weakness in this argument.
Because societies are mutually owned by their borrowers and savers, there is
little short-term pressure on them to merge. Indeed, the cost-cutting and
rationalisation which might attract shareholders of public companies can put
off savers who feel sympathetic to local branch staff.
The lack of external pressures on societies was one reason why the last big
amalgamation - between the Nationwide and Anglia societies in 1987  - took
several years to be a merger in anything but name. The societies preserved
their separate identities under the same banner, pushing up the Nationwide's
costs and producing limited benefits.
A study by Touche Ross management consultants last year concluded that
mergers between equal-sized societies causes more difficulty than
'takeovers' of small ones. 'You have got to have a senior partner, otherwise
there are three years of struggle to find compromises,' says Mr Donald
Kirkham, chief executive of Woolwich, the third-largest society.
This lesson has been reinforced just as several top 10 societies appear to
be struggling to find a direction. Bristol & West, the 10th-largest society,
which has suffered from poor lending in the south during 1989 and 1990, has
said that it is looking for a merger after the departure last month of chief
executive Mr Tony FitzSimons.
Mr Mike Blackburn, chief executive of Halifax, argues that there is 'clear
over-capacity' in retail financial services. 'How many personal financial
services providers of national stature is there room for?' he asks. Mr Peter
White, chief executive of Alliance & Leicester, says that large mergers
remain inevit-able for this reason.
But the internal obstacles to society mergers - in spite of the general
pressure to consolidate - have prompted questions over whether there is an
alternative. The most obvious would be the takeover of a medium-sized
society by a bank. Most speculation has focused on Lloyds, which tried to
take over Midland last year to reduce industry over-capacity.
Other clearing banks have also cast covetous eyes on some societies. The
chief executive of one high-street bank says that he has examined at least
three societies. He says that the advantages would be access to cheap retail
deposits, and an immediate share of mortgage lending.
Yet banks cannot simply launch hostile bids for societies. There are two
obstacles. One is that societies can only merge if their members -
consisting of their savers and borrowers - vote for it. The second is that
the industry is regulated by the Building Societies Commission, which is
widely seen as hostile to the notion of banks acquiring societies because of
the complications it would create for supervision.
All this raises the prospect of a stalemate among banks and societies.
Nearly all agree that there are too many suppliers of retail financial
services, but the short-term pressures on societies may not be strong enough
to force them to overcome the obstacles to big mergers. The issue will only
come to a head when over-capacity has cut profits substantially.
For societies such as Bristol & West, it is not a happy prospect. They face
struggling on in a difficult market, with no prospect of escape through a
large merger. The Leeds/N&P failure has not put off forever the
consolidation of societies, but it has shown there could be a painful wait
for it to happen.
 ------------------------------------------------
TOP 10 UK BUIDING SOCIETIES
by total assets in 1992 (bn)
 ------------------------------------------------
Halifax                      62.76
Nationwide                   34.97
Woolwich                     23.26
Alliance & Leicester         20.53
Leeds Permanent              18.32
Cheltenham & Gloucester      16.07
Bradford & Bingley           13.05
National & Provincial        12.04
Britannia                    10.52
Bristol & West                7.73
 ------------------------------------------------
Source: UBS
 ------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931030

