FT934-11437

FT  01 NOV 93 / Clarke dismisses need for further interest rate cut


   By EMMA TUCKER


MR KENNETH CLARKE, the chancellor, said yesterday that he was not persuaded
of the need for another cut in interest rates.
He said in a television interview that he agreed with Mr Eddie George,
governor of the Bank of England, that current economic conditions 'have not
justified reducing interest rates any further'.
He said, however, that even though the UK was in a better position than any
other continental European country, its economic recovery was 'not strong
enough yet'. Bolstering the recovery had to be the government's aim for next
year.
Mr Clarke told the BBC's Breakfast with Frost programme: 'It surprised
everybody when we began to have recovery in the spring and summer of this
year. People say it has gone off a little bit. I do not think so.'
But he added that he did not try to talk up the recovery or sound as if all
economic problems were over 'because far too many people earning a living in
business still tell me it is very tough out there, and patchy'.
Mr Clarke said he would like to reduce the amount the government spends as a
proportion of gross domestic product to less than 40 per cent. The
proportion is now more than 45 per cent.
Mr Clarke said that - although he wanted a society with the entrepreneurial
verve of the US - he did not wish to see 'a society where we abandon the
European tradition of welfare, which is strongest in Britain'.
An article from the Bank of England's Quarterly Bulletin, released ahead of
publication tomorrow, points out that low inflation rates have contributed
to the highest public sector deficit - adjusted for the effect of inflation
on outstanding debt - since the end of the second world war.
The article says that, in previous times of markedly high government
borrowing, the increase in net debt relative to nominal output was less
because high rates of inflation eroded its value.
Last year the net debt of the public sector and market holdings of the
national debt registered their sharpest rises for more than 20 years. In
relation to GDP, these measures increased by 5 and 6.2 percentage points
respectively to 32.9 per cent and 36 per cent.
Mr Clarke said in his BBC interview that the decision not to announce
compensation for the imposition of value added tax on domestic fuel at the
time of the last Budget - a move he agreed with - had allowed the
government's opponents to make mayhem.
'If we had given the compensation package then, nobody would be talking
about it in November 1993,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931101

