FT932-7002

FT  26 MAY 93 / Arts: Horvarth's 'Oktoberfest' - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Odon von Horvath was born in 1901, in what was then the Austro-Hungarian
Empire, later Yugoslavia. And, though he died in 1938, his plays express
with brilliant humanity and vision the break-up of old Europe, the ills of
nationalism, the class system, unemployment, poverty, and police rule. Tales
from the Vienna Woods, Don Juan Comes Back from the War and Figaro Gets
Divorced have been shown here to great effect. Figaro Gets Divorced, in
fact, is a modernist classic that should be widely performed.
Now one of our fringe companies, ACTreact (formed in 1990) brings us the
British premiere of Horvath's 1931 Kasimir und Karoline - or, in this
version, Oktoberfest. Munich's annual Oktoberfest - a fun fair, market and
showground - is the locale; and the play turns out to be a German
counterpart to the Rodgers-Hammerstein Carousel. The dominant image is the
funfair's helter-skelter, and, as in Carousel, unemployment, theft, murder,
sex and violence are disturbing presences behind the festival. Unlike
Carousel, there is here no moral uplift; at the Oktoberfest you may well
walk alone.
Kasimir has just become unemployed. He demands of his girlfriend Karoline
that she show him the same loyalty as before, but she insists that she can
no longer commit herself to him so unquestioningly. His jealousy, and her
need to be independent and to do better for herself are both acutely,
painfully, depicted. She wants to keep riding the helterskelter; he can't
afford it. They break up, and he finds himself with pals who try to draw him
into crime, while she gets caught up with rich old men.
Kasimir and Karoline are the flotsam and jetsam of this harsh world. When
they meet again, at the play's end, they are both more vulnerable, both
shocked by all they have seen - but it is too late for them to start again.
And theirs are just two stories among several. The play shows us equally
clearly the lives of the people with whom they get swept up, and it shows us
a society shaped by economic depression. You remember a whorl of remarks
like 'Any intelligent person would be a pessimist,' 'There's no such thing
as a bad person,' 'Unemployment is to blame,' 'People are so nervous
nowadays,' 'I thought that I could see a better future' without remembering
who said each one.
The ACTreact staging, directed and designed by Kevin Knight, gives you the
play (though Knight's translation with Hans Rausch has a few obscenities
that sound mighty anachronistic). The revolving set makes a rather slow
helterskelter, but it occupies so high a proportion of the stage space and
revolves so frequently that the wheeling motion becomes an unmissable
metaphor, and makes Horvath's Oktoberfest as memorable an image of life as
Thackeray's Vanity Fair.
The acting and pacing are too muted; and (as in Carousel) there are several
too many Eloquent Silences. But the large cast (15) nonetheless make the
play absorbing, and catch the tender humanity that underlies Horvath's bleak
and acute view of things were in 1931; and are again today.
At the Lyric Studio, Hammermith, until May 29

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930526

