FT933-12454

FT  23 JUL 93 / World Stock Markets: Devaluation move speeds Karachi bourse
recovery - An eventful week in Pakistan


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


Yesterday's rupee devaluation of just over 6 per cent by the caretaker
government of Pakistan brought fresh impetus to the recent recovery on the
Karachi stock exchange, after a bear market extending back to the first
quarter of 1992.
The KSE-100 index closed 34.46, or 2.6 per cent, higher yesterday at
1,354.95, up 6.8 per cent over the week so far. This week's surge also came
in response to Sunday's resignations by Mr Ghulam Ishaq Khan, Pakistan's
president, and Mr Nawaz Sharif, its prime minister. The KSE-100 index is now
24.9 per cent above its nadir of April 26.
Many brokers believe that the country's period of economic and political
turmoil may have come to a conclusion. Mr Wasim Sajjad has taken over as
acting president until the November presidential elections and Mr Moeen
Qureshi, a former vice-president of the World Bank and a respected
international economist, has been appointed interim prime minister.
'The market is rising because short term uncertainties are over,' says Mr
Nasir Ali Shah Bukhari, a leading broker and chief executive of Khadim Ali
Shah Bukhari & Co. The new prime minister gave assurances last Monday that
the economic direction of the country will remain unchanged, laying to rest
fears that Mr Sharif's programme of reforms might be reversed. 'The thing
that kills investments is uncertainty; now that is over,' says another
leading broker, Mr Yasin Lakhani.
Many investors hope that Mr Qureshi's credentials will help Pakistan to seek
fresh assistance at the Aid to Pakistan donors' consortium, due to meet in
Paris this September. Islamabad is expected to request up to Dollars 2.5bn
in fresh assistance.
Pakistan is also currently negotiating a Dollars 1bn loan from the
International Monetary Fund under the extended structural adjustment
facility. 'People expect that the interim prime minister, having been part
of the IBRD (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, a core
unit of the World Bank), will be more successful at the consortium,' adds Mr
Lakhani.
Although the political crisis may have ended for now, some brokers are still
concerned about the possibility of a heated election campaign, which could
raise fresh fears among investors. That could mean pressure on share prices
in the month leading up to the October 6 national elections, prior to the
prospect of recovery when a new government is sworn into office.
'The campaign would bring out charges and counter-charges, which might
create fears over the future,' says one broker. However, he adds, recent
assurances from powerful army generals that they will ensure free and fair
elections mean that the setback should only be temporary.
But yesterday's devaluation reflected continuing concerns over the economy.
Pakistan has just completed a budgetary year with a record deficit of Rp95bn
(Dollars 3.6bn), compared with a target of Rp65bn.
Last year's economic growth rate came out at 3 per cent, down from an
earlier target of more than 6 per cent.
The heavily weighted textile sector had gains in the market of between 7 and
13 per cent yesterday, Saif Textile advancing by Rp2.50 to Rp35.50 and
Gulshan Spinning by Rp3 to Rp26. The industry has been continuing to suffer
from large-scale losses, especially in the spinning sector; and almost
one-third of the 643 companies listed on the KSE are textile units.
The losses were a result of last year's floods, which left behind damage
estimated at Rp50bn to infrastructure and the cotton crop. This year's
cotton crop output fell from an expected 12m bales to just under 9m.
Recent monsoon rains have once again caused floods in the past two to three
weeks. The cotton crop has not been affected so far but, says a broker, 'the
monsoon season is still not over'.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

930723

