FT934-11233

FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of The Slovak Republic (3): Comecon's unhelpful
legacy - Economy has a weak base


   By PATRICK BLUM and ANTHONY ROBINSON


THE economic basis for Slovakian independence is shaky.
Czechoslovakia as a whole was deeply integrated into the Comecon and Warsaw
pact system, but Slovakia with its concentration of heavy engineering and
arms plants as well as large scale shoe, textile and other consumer goods
factories, was much more orientated towards the east than the more
variegated Czech economy. Slovakia therefore suffered more from the break-up
of the old Comecon trade links and the collapse in military orders which
followed the end of the Cold War and Prague's post 'velvet revolution'
dictum about the immorality of the arms trade.
Slovakia's historical development as a supplier of steel and semi-finished
components for finishing and sale in the Czech republic has also made it
more vulnerable to the collapse in bilateral trade which followed the
division of the country and the disintegration of the 74 year-old
Czechoslovak economy. The Czechs, with their geographical proximity to
western Europe and experience in selling finished products, have found it
much easier to switch to EC markets, especially Germany.
Coping with these two severe shocks - the loss of the Comecon and then much
of the Czech market - in quick succession has been traumatic. A return to
economic growth is not likely before 1995.
The scale of the problems is illustrated by a single statistic - since 1989,
Slovakia's gross domestic product has declined by 30-40 per cent. The arms
industry has been decimated; agriculture, accounting for about 20 per cent
of GDP, has been severely disrupted; and service industries such as tourism
have also suffered from the inadequacy of the existing facilities to cater
for western tastes.
In the first six months of the new state's existence Slovak GDP fell by a
further 6.2 per cent compared to the same period in 1992 while unemployment
rose to 12.5 per cent of the workforce. Inflation rose to 14.2 per cent.
Officials say the introduction of value added tax last January added about 9
percentage points to inflation, while a 10 per cent devaluation in July, and
additional tax increases introduced during the summer, will have a further
negative impact on the consumer price index. Inflation is now forecast to
rise to around 25 per cent on an annual basis by the end of the year. Over
the whole year GDP could fall by 8 per cent.
Next year the government hopes to reduce inflation to around 10-15 per cent,
but expects the economy to continue to contract. The GDP is expected to fall
by a further 3-4 per cent in 1994 while unemployment will rise further to
around 20 per cent. A resumption in growth is not expected until 1995.
On the positive side, imports and exports are now roughly balanced at an
overall lower level, and the current account is expected to show only a
small deficit this year of around 1-1.5 per cent of GDP, according to Mr
Marian Jusko, deputy governor of the National Bank of Slovakia. Foreign debt
 -both public and private - stands at a relatively low Dollars 2.78bn, due
partly to a successful Dollars 240m bond issue raised in September and
Dollars 90m borrowed from from the International Monetary Fund as the first
tranche of a Dollars 180m structural transformation facility agreed in the
summer.
Thanks to foreign borrowing and balanced external accounts the National
Bank's foreign exchange reserves, which fell to below Dollars 140m in
February when the currency union with the Czech Republic came to an abrupt
end, rose to Dollars 566m by mid-September. Total foreign assets held by
commercial banks and the National Bank, including gold, rose to Dollars
1.67bn. The long expected devaluation of the Slovak Koruna in July has
helped.
Officials say there is no need for further devaluations, but independent
analysts say this will depend on maintaining tight monetary control. The
authorities are aware of this. The national bank is keeping a sharp daily
watch on government revenues and expenditures to ensure that the government
keeps to its July agreement with the IMF to keep the deficit to within a
SK14bn-16bn range, representing about 5 per cent of GDP.
But with revenues slashed by the recession, insufficient manpower to collect
taxes, and rising expenditure on unemployment benefits, the authorities will
be hard put to keep to the target. The size of the social security budget is
a particularly onerous constraint. About one third of this year's SK158bn
budget will be spent on unemployment benefits, health and other social
benefits, compared with an OECD average of 9/10 per cent. Reducing this
burden is politically difficult.
Officials believe the government will manage to keep to this year's deficit
target, and will be able to decrease it next year as national insurance is
taken off-budget as part of a broader reform of government finances and
improvements in tax collection. Higher income from privatisation, to be
accelerated next year, should also help boost revenue.
There are still many potential pitfalls, however. Bankruptcies are expected
to rise next year under the impact of a new bankruptcy law which aims to
clear an estimated SK 80bn in inter-company debt. Privatisation has been
prone to delays, and the private sector still only accounts for about 10 per
cent of GDP, though the proportion is growing 'from month to month', says Mr
Jaroslav Kubecka, economy minister.
Restructuring the still largely state-run economy into a viable market
economy will need substantial amounts of capital investment, the bulk of
which can only be provided by foreign investors who have been deterred by
fears of political instability.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

931102

