FT932-6799

FT  27 MAY 93 / World Trade News: Small case, loud implications - An
anti-dumping claim sounds a sour note


   By LISA BRANSTEN


THE Italian feud between the Prestinis and the Pisonis, being waged on US
shores, is not, they insist, about love or revenge.
It is instead a protracted trade dispute over access to the US market for
the tiny leather or synthetic pads which cushion the movement of keys on
woodwind and brass instruments.
The case is small in every way. It involves unit price differences of less
than one cent, and the Dollars 200,000 (Pounds 130,000) market for keypads
is the smallest ever to be disputed before a US trade body, according to one
lawyer.
Mr Giuseppe Prestini, who makes keypads in Nogales, Arizona, has been
claiming for the last decade that Mr Luciano Pisoni exported keypads from
his factory in Trento, Italy, for less than fair market value, a practice
known as 'dumping' in trade parlance. Mr Prestini says his rival is trying
to drive him out of business by claiming the one small portion of the US
market which he still supplies.
In 1976 Mr Prestini's family closed its Italian factory in Trento and set up
shop in Arizona. Several years later Mr Pisoni, who was the tool and dye
maker in Mr Prestini's plant, set up his own shop, exporting keypads from
Italy.
By 1983 exports were booming for Mr Pisoni, while sales dropped for his
former boss in the US. So Mr Prestini took his troubles to the US
government, asking it to find Mr Pisoni in violation of US anti-dumping
regulations.
The Commerce Department ruled in 1984 that Mr Pisoni had sold keypads in the
US for 1.16 per cent below fair market value. The finding was later
overturned after Mr Pisoni's lawyer, free trade crusader Mr Larry Klayman,
argued that the discrepancy was due to exchange rate fluctuations.
Now for the second time in a decade Mr Prestini is charging Mr Pisoni with
dumping in the US market.
The department last week issued a preliminary finding that Mr Pisoni sold
keypads in the US for 1.26 per cent below fair market value, a margin of
less than a cent, since the price for keypads ranges from 12 cents each for
clarinets to 78 cents for saxophones.
The department must make a final determination by August 2, and then the
International Trade Commission must find that the dumping caused the US
maker injury before the duties may be imposed.
Mr Klayman claims the new case is harassment. 'The US government is being
used again as a stooge to accomplish what Mr Prestini cannot do in the
market place,' Mr Klayman said.
Mr William Perry, representing Mr Prestini, believes Mr Prestini lost in
1984 only because he could not afford an attorney, while Mr Klayman
represented Mr Pisoni pro bono - without a fee.
He concedes that the trade law is sometimes used for protectionist ends and
admits that 'congress has created a Frankenstein'. However, he said, small
companies should have equal access to such measures.
Small cases like this are becoming increasingly common now that the ITC has
a Trade Remedy Assistance Office to help small businesses with such
proceedings. Mr Klayman says the office's existence is a conflict of
interest because the ITC acts as judge and adviser in disputes.
Ms Mary Davis, a TRAO attorney, denies the charge and says there is no
contact between the ITC commissioners and her office.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930527

