FT932-3346

FT  15 JUN 93 / Nissan UK chief 'part of breathtaking fraud'


THE MANAGING director of Nissan UK, the former importer and distributor of
the Japanese cars, was part of a fraud of 'breathtaking proportions', a jury
was told yesterday.
It was clear on 'overwhelming evidence' that Mr Michael Hunt swindled the
Inland Revenue out of nearly Pounds 100m over a 17-year period, Mr Peter
Rook QC, summing up for the prosecution, told Southwark Crown Court sitting
at Chichester Rents in central London.
He said it was a fraud carried out against the Revenue involving unpaid
corporation tax and not, as the defence had claimed, a swindle perpetrated
abroad by others against Japanese tax authorities.
Mr Hunt, of Hove, East Sussex, denies two counts of conspiracy to cheat and
two charges of conspiracy to make use of false accounting documents between
October 1975 and December 1991. He has not given or called any evidence.
When the case opened nearly two months ago Mr Rook, for the Serious Fraud
Office, told the jury the fraud involved the secret syphoning off of Pounds
219m from the company's profits.
He claimed that Mr Hunt, with other 'sophisticated fraudsters', including
Swiss bankers, laundered a huge amount through Geneva bank accounts,
covering their tracks with a 'morass of false documentation' as well as sham
shipping agents in Holland and Norway. Mr Rook said the 'prime mover' behind
the swindle was Mr Octav Botnar, the former head of Nissan UK, who is
believed to be in Switzerland. A warrant has been issued for his arrest.
Recalling weeks of evidence from prosecution witnesses flown in from around
the world, Mr Rook said: 'You have been listening to an extraordinary story
. . . a story of a massive fraud perpetrated over many years, a fraud
perpetrated on the UK Revenue who were cheated of more than Pounds 97m of
corporation tax, and that is without looking at the interest.'
He said that bearing in mind some of the figures dated back to 1976 and
1977, the fraud, involving allegedly inflated freight charges, was of
'breath-taking proportions'.
Mr Rook recalled that in the opening speech for the defence, Mr Michael
Sherrard QC, for Mr Hunt, had told the court there was a 'significant,
serious and credible alternative' to the prosecution's claims - a fraud
against the Japanese tax authorities.
'If that were the case then for all those years, 1976 right through to 1991,
Mr Botnar and Mr Hunt would have been innocent dupes,' said Mr Rook.
While jurors had to give that possibility serious consideration, they might
think the defence had tried to give 'sinister connotations' to any piece of
evidence relating to the Japanese.
The trial was adjourned until today.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930615

