FT933-10252

FT  05 AUG 93 / Brown urges check-off for Labour fees


   By DAVID OWEN


EMPLOYERS SHOULD be asked to deduct Labour party membership fees from
employees' wages, in the same way as many union dues are collected, Mr
Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, said yesterday.
'Trade unions should be encouraged to negotiate a check-off arrangement for
party subs with individual companies,' Mr Brown said. 'Anyone seriously
interested in broadening our membership must start with the union movement.'
In a pamphlet published a week after the party agreed rule changes designed
to increase its membership, Mr Brown argued that cost should not be a
barrier to joining the Labour party. 'Spiralling membership fees as a means
of solving the party's financial problems is fool's gold,' he said.
The party is running an experiment in a small number of constituencies where
members may pay greatly reduced fees if the constituency continues to raise
guaranteed income for the national party. Mr Brown urged expansion of the
experiment to at least 100 constituencies.
The party agreed last week to cut its full membership fee from Pounds 18 to
Pounds 15, reversing a trend which had seen fees rise from Pounds 10 in just
two years. It also agreed to allow trade union political levy payers to join
the party for Pounds 3.
Mr Brown's proposals for extending check-off to party membership fees are
likely to prove controversial, coming after several large employers have
threatened to withdraw from similar arrangements for deducting union dues.
Unions in many industries have come to rely on check-off arrangements, under
which employers collect union dues for them, as a cheap and efficient method
of collection.
The government this year moved to tighten the law governing such schemes,
passing a bill requiring employers and unions to seek employees' agreement
to check-off at least every three years.
Increasing individual membership is seen by Labour modernisers as the key to
further diluting the power of the trade union block vote.
Making Mass Membership Work. Gordon Brown MP, House of Commons, London SW1A
0AA. Free.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930805

