FT932-3153

FT  16 JUN 93 / Clarke puts stress on growth and living standards:
Chancellor tells of abiding respect for those engaged in 'the difficult
business of commerce'


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


MR KENNETH CLARKE put his stamp on economic policy last night by identifying
himself with commerce and saying he wanted to be remembered 'as a chancellor
under whom the British businessman and woman and their workforce were able
to earn a better living'.
In an anxiously awaited speech to the City of London, the new chancellor
made no changes of substance to economic policy. But, setting a new tone, he
emphasised that his goal was to raise living standards, and he stressed the
importance of growth as well as low inflation.
Observing that 'we cannot rely on recovery alone to bring borrowing back
towards balance', he made clear that he would take a tough line on public
spending and would not shrink from further measures to reduce Britain's
Pounds 50bn annual budget deficit.
He recalled that the government had already taken steps to reduce the
deficit by controlling spending and increasing tax revenue. 'But if I judge
that further action is necessary, I shall not hesitate to take it,' he
added.
Speaking after a day that brought news of a further strengthening of
manufacturing output and steady if unspectacular growth in retail sales, Mr
Clarke gave a moderately upbeat assessment of the UK economy.
Britain was more fortunate than many of its EC neighbours, he said. While
signs of recovery were 'mixed and in some cases muted', he declared 'the
momentum for growth is clearly there'.
Mr Clarke set three objectives for economic policy that could have been
taken from any recent speech of his predecessor, Mr Norman Lamont. He
promised:
To keep inflation in its target range of 1 per cent to 4 per cent, bringing
it within the lower half of the range by the end of the parliament.
To restore the public finances to better health and towards balance 'over
the medium term'.
To sustain the recovery and ensure that it lasts.
Those aims were given a special spin that reflected his life 'in the
industrial Midlands', where, he said, 'I have acquired a deep and abiding
respect for all those engaged in the difficult business of commerce.'
'It is commerce alone which generates the prosperity which enables
government to raise the living standards and hopes of all the British
people. That is the key principle which will guide my hand as chancellor,'
he said.
While underlining that low inflation was 'necessary - absolutely necessary',
Mr Clarke emphasised that it could not be the sole end of economic policy.
'Growth, employment and a better standard of living are the ultimate goals
to which every aspect of economic policy must contribute,' he said.
In giving a broad outline of policy in his first Mansion House speech, Mr
Clarke broke with the recent practice of Tory chancellors who have used the
occasion to talk in detail on monetary policy. After referring to himself as
a 'pro-European', he made clear 'it would be quite some time' before it
would be right for the UK to return to the European exchange rate mechanism.
On fiscal policy, his 'own instincts are tax-cutting instincts' but he said
a tight rein on public spending would be essential if the level of tax were
to be kept down.
Recovery alone will not restore borrowing balance, Page 9
Output figures, Page 10
Editorial Comment, Page 19
Observer, Page 19
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930616

