FT932-6904

FT  26 MAY 93 / International Company News: Nippon Housing suffers Y45bn
loss


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


NIPPON Housing Loan, the ailing Japanese property finance company, yesterday
reported a pre-tax loss of Y45.4bn (Dollars 413m), highlighting the need for
its recent rescue by the founding banks, which have slashed interest rates
on their loans to the institution.
The loss is the first since Nippon Housing was listed in 1984, when it was
lending primarily to new home-buyers.
However, in the late 1980s, the institution ventured into high-risk property
developments, leaving an estimated Y1,200bn in non-performing loans out of a
total portfolio of Y2,140bn.
Nippon Housing reported a net loss of Y55.6bn, compared with a loss of
Y6.5bn in the previous year ending in March, while its operating revenue
fell 40 per cent to Y131.3bn. The difference between its loan receipts and
repayment commitments was Y18.7bn, while it set aside Y27.1bn in loan-loss
reserves.
The company, which did not produce a forecast for the current year, is one
of eight troubled Japanese housing loan companies established by banks and
brokers when the leading banks were concentrating on corporate clients. All
were ambitious lenders during the late 1980s, when the banks became more
interested in home finance and they were forced to find new customers.
Two other housing loan companies, Sogo Jukin and Juso, which was formed by
seven trust banks in 1971, are likely to be weighed down for the next decade
by their non-performing loans even though their founding banks have agreed
to accept virtually no interest repayments on loans to the institutions.
The 65 founding banks at Sogo Jukin are expected to reduce their interest
rates to zero, while agricultural institutions, big lenders to the housing
loan companies, will take a less severe cut from about 6 per cent to 4.5 per
cent, essentially because of their political influence.
Nippon Housing, listed on the Tokyo exchange, is the only one of the eight
companies that is required to produce a full statement of accounts, but its
figures are likely to be fairly typical of the group.
Cash on hand was down 44 per cent on the year, while it sold half of its
investment stocks during the year and is showing a book loss of Y23bn on the
remaining stocks.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930526

