FT932-6712

FT  27 MAY 93 / Technology: Making lessons Crystal clear - A school in Devon
is using knowledge-based software in subjects from geography to English to
help students think more deeply and objectively / Software at work


   By CLAIRE GOODING


Next term, some of the youngest consultants in the country will come out of
their classrooms. Students from Westlands Upper School in Torquay, Devon
will be talking to businesses in the surrounding Torbay area, armed with a
computerised expert system called Pharos that gives advice on trading in
Europe.
The students seek a first-hand understanding of economics, in which the
computer system is a useful tool. If the plan works, the dialogue that takes
place should benefit students and businesses alike.
Pharos belongs to National Westminster Bank, which has been advertising its
services on television as an aid to business. For Westlands pupils, the
knowledge-based technology on which Pharos is based - a software product
called Crystal - is a familiar classroom tool. The pupils have used it for
18 months as an integral part of the work and in line with the requirements
of the National Curriculum.
Crystal is widely used in commerce and higher education to create expert
systems, but Westlands is the only school in the country to have licensed a
copy. Its existence there is largely due to the head of computing, Geoff
White, whose enthusiasm has led Westlands to set up Cress, the Centre for
Research into the use of Expert Systems in Schools. White developed an
interest in expert systems while taking a Dip. Ed and M. Ed in educational
computing. He has experimented with several generations of systems,
including the knowledge-based tools Linx and Adex.
Crystal, he discovered, was the only product with the power to provide
interactivity beyond the simple yes and no choices usually displayed. A
powerful 'expert system shell', Crystal allows for measurements,
calculations and other interactive information on which it bases its
decisions.
The verdicts delivered by the system are based on pre-programmed rules, the
common principle of all expert systems. White programs these rules into
systems designed as teaching aids for geography, history, science and other
subjects.
An early use for Crystal was to help pupils define and find likely sites for
Anglo-Saxon settlements. 'You don't have to spend as much time as you'd
expect teaching computing, because they do it intuitively,' White says.
One of White's Crystal programs, Facsite, is used to combine geography and
map-reading with information technology.
Class 10G is the first to use the new, purpose-built computer centre at
Westlands. The class, a mixed-ability group of 15 fourth formers - year 10
under the new educational grouping - is using Facsite as a follow-up to a
more conventional geography lesson. The task is to find a good site for a
new factory, starting with a map. The one handed out first is of Tamworth,
West Midlands and district.
The pupils sit in clusters of two or three at the screens, each group
sharing an Ordnance Survey map. As well as being a a practical exercise in
map-reading skills, Facsite deals with questions involving everything from
geology to local demography which come into play when siting a factory. It
raises questions about the relief of the land, the nature of its surface and
drainage, population and transport services, land prices, unemployment
levels and planning permission. Each screen displays a question and asks for
some input, such as a measure of the local population, giving an equation
based on land area. Pupils calculate the answers and feed them into the
system. Then, unless Facsite's answer rules out the site, it is on to the
next question. 'The first thing I look for is flat land, but it mustn't be
marshy,' explains 15-year-old Mark Walker. 'Then we look at the roads. We've
done this before on paper, but it's much more interesting using the
computer.'
Class 10G's teacher, John Birch, is head of humanities and geography at
Westlands. After 20 minutes going from group to group, he calls the class to
attention to explain a question of geology in one of the maps. Teaching with
Facsite is an interactive process and Birch sees the computer system as a
valuable motivator. 'Anything that's visual helps lower-ability pupils, but
the classes must be small,' he says.
Birch has to keep an eye on fulfilling the National Curriculum checklist of
114 'statements of attainment' (including IT) in his subject. 'This sort of
lesson takes longer, but they are finding the answers for themselves.'
That, says White, is what makes Crystal so valuable. 'It's the interactivity
that punches the message home. In the paper exercise it is easy to write 'it
must be near a railway station'. But the system makes them quantify and
question: how near? . . . It makes them think objectively and a lot more
deeply if they use an expert system, or even better, write their own.'
Writing an expert system is a matter of developing and defining the rules
inherent in decision-making. Crystal provides the framework, or 'shell',
with screen windows and help screens ordering and refining the process.
White believes this has given pupils an understanding of issues - for
instance in another Crystal exercise, the crisis a nomadic tribe might face
if it stays in one area too long.
'It makes them see the consequences more clearly because they decide on the
input,' White says. The teaching of computing is currently in flux, with
current courses being scrapped in September 1993. IT and computer studies
used to be a GCSE, a largely theoretical course. CLAIT, Computer Literacy
and Information Technology is a more practical course, embracing database,
spreadsheets, videotext and desktop publishing.
The new courses are on IT (resembling CLAIT), and Information Systems, a
more broadly based course, of which White approves. 'It's much more tuned to
giving an understanding of IT in business, dealing with the communication
and handling of information.' The new courses will include modelling with
spreadsheets, educational games, measurement and control and applications
and effects of computers in modern society.
It is the job of David Bowles, senior teacher in charge of the curriculum,
IT and technology, to oversee the introduction of the National Curriculum
courses. He has seen the teaching of computing progress from an O-level in
1980 - which involved five weeks of computing history and a remote link to a
mainframe - to the new package-based teaching. 'In the big world outside
people use IT to solve a problem, not for the sake of it. It makes sense to
teach it the same way.'
'Children get blase very quickly about new technologies such as videos.
Computing might go the same way unless we use it wisely, which is to develop
computing as a cross-curricular subject. They learn their IT in geography,
history, English, science and mathematics, almost all subjects. Geoff does
more cross-curricular teaching than anyone else.'
Taking IT for granted is part of modern education. When the pupils go out
armed with Pharos, their confidence at the screen might be as important as
any knowledge about trading in the single market.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930527

