FT934-8664

FT  13 NOV 93 / Tory and CBI clash over Europe grows


   By ROLAND RUDD and TONY JACKSON


THE GOVERNMENT was on the defensive yesterday over its European policy after
Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the Confederation of British Industry,
warned it not to close off the option of a single currency.
Mr John Major insisted that Britain was not 'remotely ready' for a single
currency. The prime minister added that he believed businesspeople were
'very much behind the government's approach'.
Speaking on a visit to Ealing, west London, the prime minister claimed that
Mr Davies's views on Europe had been misrepresented in an inter-view
published in The Guardian newspaper on Thursday.
Mr Major, pressed for his view on a single currency, said it 'certainly
isn't going to happen in this decade'.
In an interview with BBC radio yesterday, Mr Davies appeared to broaden his
attack. He said: 'What we are slightly concerned about is a feeling that the
government is prepared to dismiss the prospect of a single currency in the
longer run, or exchange-rate stability, which we think are, in the
long-term, of interest to the business community. The arguments which
brought us into the ERM in the first place still have some force.
'What I think concerns us is that the government's rhetoric on EMU has
become very negative indeed. We would like to stop that getting too far.'
The CBI fears the government is closing off its long-term options in Europe.
A survey of business leaders, commissioned by the CBI and to be published
tomorrow, shows many in business in favour of a single currency.
Last night a CBI official stressed that there was 'no question' of Mr Davies
having criticised the government's policy on Europe.
'What he criticised was the attitude of some politicians who were opposed to
Britain's greater involvement,' he said. 'The business community cannot
afford to be excluded from a Europe which is moving to a single currency
while Britain is left outside.'
Commenting on the CBI's poll of businesspeople, he said: 'The bulk of
replies favour the return of Britain to a single currency in the longer
term.'
Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, appeared to distance
himself from some anti-European remarks by some colleagues at last month's
Tory party conference.
He said: 'We have taken historic decisions to move to a single market. That
process is bound to create difficulties and short-term controversies.'
While Mr Davies knew 'perfectly well that today's circumstances' had upset
the assumptions on which yesterday's discussions had taken place, Mr
Heseltine said it did not mean that circumstances would not change.
Later in the evening Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, urged the party to
stop debating Europe in terms of Euro-sceptic versus Euro-enthusiast.
At a meeting of the Conservative Group for Europe Mr Clarke said: 'We must
fight the real battle which is between the right and the left in Europe,
between British Conservatives and John Smith's Euro-socialist Labour party.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931113

