FT934-8897

FT  12 NOV 93 / International Capital Markets: Reuters attacks its partners
in Globex system


   By LAURIE MORSE


REUTERS has accused its two partners in Globex, the after-hours electronic
futures trading system, of breaching their obligations under their joint
venture agreement.
Under the existing deal, the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange, which jointly developed Globex with Reuters at an
estimated cost of Dollars 80m, have control of the day-to-day running of the
system.
In a letter to the Chicago Board of Trade dated Friday, Mr Simon Yencken,
Reuters' general counsel, chides the exchange for promoting its own
home-grown computer trading system, Project A, at the expense of Globex, and
for failing to list its agricultural futures contracts on the Globex system,
as promised more than a year ago.
'As a result of its actions, the CBoT has put the Globex Joint Venture in
breach of material obligations under the 1992 Globex Agreement,' Mr Yencken
wrote to CBoT chairman Mr Patrick Arbor.
Mr Bob Crooke, at Reuters in New York, said the company was reluctant to
comment on what it considered to be 'private and confidential'
correspondence. He said Reuters was awaiting a reply from the CBoT.
The letter, which was released anonymously to Chicago media in an escalation
of the dispute, underscores the uncertainty over the future management of
the system.
Reuters is the primary investor in Globex, which has disappointed its
developers since its launch 16 months ago, with the two Chicago giants
generating less than 15 per cent of Globex volume. Fearing competitive
disadvantage, other world exchanges have been slow to sign on to the system
and put themselves under Chicago's control.
Reuters is widely expected to restructure the Globex agreement early next
year, giving some management powers to the Paris futures exchange, Matif,
which generates 85 per cent of Globex's volume. Reuters is also negotiating
separately with Liffe, and is expected to give it a voice in governance if
it agrees to join Globex.
Reuters needs to add Liffe products and to distribute terminals in Asia in
an effort to make Globex profitable.
Although Mr Yencken's letter singles out the CBoT, both the CME and the CBoT
continue to operate after-hours trading mechanisms that compete with Globex
and limit its effectiveness.
Mr Arbor said he had not seen the Reuters letter. However, he said Globex
was in need of an overhaul: 'I've just come from New York and the situation
is not good. Globex is not being used, there is no demand, (companies) are
having trouble staffing for the product, and I saw machines in people's
closets.
'Globex is in the 'Kitty Hawk' stage. It will work, eventually there will be
a use for it, but right now the governance needs to be addressed.'

The Financial Times


London Page 27

931112

