FT933-12670

FT  23 JUL 93 / 'Model patient' Morocco keeps medicine down: The signs are
that persisting with its textbook reforms is having the desired effect


   By FRANCIS GHILES


IT IS no accident that Mr Edouard Balladur, the French prime minister, has
chosen Morocco as the first non-western country to visit since he came to
power.
As he meets King Hassan and members of his government over the next few
days, he will be lending public support to the country's economic reforms
and to its strategy of tying itself ever more closely to the European
Community, at a time when both policies are showing conspicuous signs of
bearing fruit.
On the economic front, gross domestic product is set to grow again this
year, by 2-3 per cent, after a 3 per cent drop in 1992, in spite of a severe
drought at home and the continuing downturn in western Europe, its main
export market.
What is significant, while Morocco's economic performance remains vulnerable
to climatic changes (farming represents roughly a fifth of GDP), is that the
renewed confidence is attributable mainly to a rise in manufacturing exports
and increased foreign investment - both direct results of 10 years of
reform.
Foreign observers are now speaking of Morocco as a model for other patients
of the international financial institutions to follow. It stands 'where the
IMF would like countries like Egypt to be', says Mr Miles Moreland, of
Blakeney Management, an investment adviser.
International investors have shown they agree: foreign investment has risen
fourfold since 1988 to an estimated Dollars 500m (Pounds 333m) last year -
spurred in part by government plans to privatise 112 companies worth an
estimated Dollars 2.2bn by the end of 1995. The privatisation programme is
expected to bring Dollars 250m worth of foreign exchange receipts in 1993.
The minister of industry and privatisation, Mr Moulay Zine Zahidi, likes to
point out that in 1992 external financing in the form of foreign direct
investment covered the whole of the Dollars 500m current account deficit.
This is a marked change from 10 years ago, when Morocco was forced to
reschedule its foreign debt. While the burden of the Dollars 21.5bn foreign
debt remains significant, with total external debt at 80 per cent of GDP,
the debt service ratio (debt principal and interest payments as a proportion
of export earnings)has been halved to about 34 per cent - helped by Saudi
Arabia's forgiveness of nearly Dollars 3bn worth of loans to thank King
Hassan for support during the Gulf war.
Official reserves increased from virtually nil to Dollars 3.4bn, the
equivalent of more than four months' imports.
As important have been the government's textbook economic reforms. Since
1983 taxes, tariffs and subsidies have been cut. Maximum tariff levels are
down from 400 per cent to 35 per cent and Morocco has become a member of
Gatt. Earlier this year, the dirham became convertible for current account
operations.
A budget deficit which was running at 12 per cent of GDP 10 years ago was
cut to 1.7 per cent in 1992. This has been at the price of a sharp reduction
in state investment but also higher tax receipts and a more efficient tax
system.
Real GDP growth averaged 4.5 per cent between 1985 and 1991 while inflation
was at 5.6 per cent over the same period.
Positive change has been evident in Morocco's relations with the EC. Six
years ago, King Hassan's declared intention of applying for Community
membership was greeted in Brussels with a mixture of incredulity and scorn.
Last winter, however, the EC agreed to a Moroccan request to negotiate later
this year what promises to be one of the closest partnership treaties
covering free trade and political co-operation between the Community and a
non-EC country.
European countries (as well as the US) have also been heartened by the
king's decision to act forcefully on illegal immigration and drug smuggling.
This has secured Morocco commitments of Dollars 1bn for the development of
the kingdom's northern region - the main centre of cannabis cultivation.
All this is not to say that the path of reform, however strongly the
government may be politically committed to it, is problem-free. A recent
report from Citicorp, the US-based banking group, cautioned: 'It remains to
be seen whether the Moroccan administration will succeed in balancing
continuing economic adjustment with the risk of increased social instability
as the unemployment rate remains high, at an estimated 20 per cent in 1992.'
The reforms enacted since 1983 have increased already large income
disparities and all agree that a 55 per cent illiteracy rate among men and
the resulting low labour qualifications constitute a serious handicap for
the expanding export sector.
A confidential World Bank study recently noted: 'There has been no
significant expansion (of overall manufacturing) relative to GDP since 1980.
Although recent manufacturing growth has been better than average for lower
middle-income countries, out-turns are less impressive when compared with
several developing countries that are Morocco's international competitors.'
Moroccan manufacturing faces three further challenges. The first is to move
up the technology ladder faster. There are encouraging signs. In the last
five years, the export of value-added products has doubled, moving from 22
to 30 per cent of the total.
The second is to spread export activity beyond the traditional
Casablanca-Rabat corridor. The country's trade performance remains
critically dependent on France which accounts for nearly a third of all
exports.
The third is to diversify the sources of foreign investment. Here the most
notable fact is the fast rise of Spain, which is consolidating its recently
won position as the kingdom's second largest trade partner and source of
foreign investment after France.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930723

