FT932-3094

FT  16 JUN 93 / Building societies warned on rates


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Correspondent


BUILDING SOCIETIES were warned yesterday not to offer unfair rates of
interest after a case in which a society was forced to pay compensation of
up Pounds 1,400 each to 30 investors who were offered comparatively low
returns.
The warning was issued by the Building Society Ombudsman Scheme following a
judgment in which the ombudsman decided that a society had acted unfairly
towards investors in a two-year bond that offered less than other products.
The scheme did not name the society.
This is the first time a society has been found to have acted unfairly in
offering a particular rate of return on one product even though investors
were aware that other products were offering higher returns.
The society was judged to have acted unfairly because investors were
attracted by the initial offer of a higher rate of return, but were unable
to move their money later when other products of the society started
offering more.
The judgment was disclosed in the annual report of the three building
societies ombudsmen. It said that the number of complaints against societies
had dropped slightly to 9,402 for the year to March, compared with 9,525 the
previous year.
The number of complaints this year 'certainly does not reflect badly' on the
87 societies who are members of the scheme, said Mr Stephen Edell, one of
the ombudsmen.
However, the ombudsmen said that a change in the charging structure, which
gave an incentive to societies that provoked large numbers of complaints to
settle before they went to the ombudsmen, probably curtailed the numbers.
The number of cases considered by the ombudsmen increased by 29 per cent to
1,382, and there was a 60 per cent increase in the number of formal
judgments to 630. Complaints about savers' interest rates fell by 37 per
cent to 809.
Building Societies Ombudsmen Scheme; Annual Report 1992-1993. 35-37
Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1X 7AW. Free.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930616

