FT932-48

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (4): Perilous times for big city mayors -
Municipalities have suffered from a trio of ills


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


FEW JOBS are less enviable than mayor of a big Italian city. Prestige, staff
and an office in the most splendid palazzo in town are there aplenty, but
occupational hazards include high blood pressure and the risk of an early
grave.
Municipal administration has suffered from a growing trio of ills in recent
years. Coalitions have engendered problems in administration;
belt-tightening by the state has caused growing financial difficulties;
while law and order has been an increasing concern, notably in the south.
Eroding party allegiances have turned a mayor's job increasingly from chief
administrator to umpire between heterogeneous, and sometimes volcanic,
coalitions. Like the referee on Italy's fractious football fields, mayoral
authority is not always respected, and can often be questioned by all.
The need for urban coalitions stems from the traditional voting system,
based on proportional representation. That has traditionally returned a
rainbow of parties to council chambers. With one, or even a small group, of
parties seldom able to muster a majority, ill-disciplined coalitions have
become the norm.
Matters were exacerbated by an institutional system which required even
minor decisions, such as contracts to cut the grass in parks, to be approved
by the full chamber. The system left city administrations as hostages to the
whims of coalition members, who might withdraw support unless granted their
wishes on some special platform.
Matters should change following this year's introduction of new rules to
relieve the paralysis which has afflicted almost every council chamber in
Italy's big cities.
The new laws allow for the direct election of mayor, the reduction in size
of local assemblies and adoption of a guaranteed majority for the party
winning the most votes over a certain trigger level. Together, reformists
believe the changes will revolutionise urban politics by reinforcing the
mayor, who will also be able to nominate many members of the civic
administration independently of political parties.
Direct election means the mayor will be distanced from the party apparatus,
theoretically creating a more secure position, in which parties will depend
on the mayor rather than vice versa.
Stability should also be improved by making the mayoral term four years,
which can only be terminated prematurely by a vote by the entire municipal
assembly. As that will trigger automatic new elections, it may contribute to
greater restraint among trigger-happy councillors ready to bring down an
administration if their wishes are not met.
The changes will overturn the way in which big Italian cities have been
governed, says Piero Bassetti, chairman of Milan's chamber of commerce and
an unsuccessful candidate for mayor in this month's elections. 'This is
bound to foster greater stability'.
Giampiero Borghini, the former mayor and another unsuccessful contender this
month, is less sanguine. 'The impact of the new law will depend very much on
the candidates,' he says.
Mr Borghini believes a candidate backed by one powerful party, such as the
Lombard League, which has won commanding positions in many big towns in
Italy's richest region, should have the moral and institutional clout to
create strong urban administrations.
But he is less certain that will be the case in towns where the new
administration comprises broader coalitions. In such cases, the mayor could
still face the traditional problems of inching through the minefield of
coalition politics rather than reforming urban government.
If arbitrating between ill-fitting coalitions were not enough, many city
mayors also have to grapple with tragic finances. Italy's biggest cities are
deeply in debt as spending has increasingly outweighed receipts from central
government and local taxes.
The need to boost local revenues has increased as financial constraints on
the national budget have led to cuts in direct transfers from the state to
local coffers.
Milan's debts now total about L6,000bn compared with an annual income of
L3,500bn. That means about one third of council spending goes on debt
servicing. In Naples, matters grew so acute earlier this year that the city
declared itself bankrupt.
The downturn in central funding has combined with the impact of Italy's
corruption scandal to create a new emphasis on accountability and
transparency in local government.
A stream of candidates in this month's administrative elections stressed the
need for costs and benefits to be evaluated much more carefully than in the
past, when the steady flows of cash from Rome led to a much less
budget-conscious approach in local government. The emphasis now is on saving
money.
The change is accompanied by a new stress on 'de-politicising' many local
government functions following the revelations of the corruption scandal.
Investigations in Milan, Rome and Naples have already uncovered countless
cases of urban enterprises, such as the energy authority, being used as milk
sows by the governing parties.
Reforming municipal finances and cleaning up city administrations featured
prominently on the agenda of many local politicians in this month's polls.
In Milan, Marco Formentini, the candidate for the Lombard League, went so
far as to propose local bonds to finance communal services. The bonds,
issued to investors in the city, would improve transparency and indirectly
reflect the quality of the services being provided, he claimed.
The bond idea may be politically appealing but impractical. By contrast,
local politicians are now regularly emphasising privatisation as a way to
raise revenues and cut debts.
Municipally-owned companies play a remarkably big role in the economies of
many cities. Big Italian municipalities control a range of services,
including fresh milk, pharmacies, energy and transportation.
While some, such as public transport, are usually loss-makers, others are
highly profitable. So far, only a handful of big cities have sold their milk
operations.
While administration and finance are common themes across the country, law
and order tends to split Italy between north and south.
In the rich north and much of the centre, the problem is principally drug
abuse and petty crime. In the south, however, the issue of law and order
means combatting powerful and entrenched criminal organisations such as
Sicily's Cosa Nostra or the Neapolitan Camorra.
Some southern councils have been so severely infiltrated, or even taken
over, by criminal organisations that special administrators have had to be
imposed by the interior ministry. Combatting crime in the south is a complex
problem, as in some cases it requires a cultural change among inhabitants
sceptical about the state, cynical about public services and accustomed to a
code of silence.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

930630

