FT932-3421

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (15): Business guide


   By FRANCIS GHILES


THE COUNTRY AND CLIMATE
Tunisia lies on the north-east corner of the Maghrib, less than three hours
from London. For more than 2,500 years, since Queen Dido arrived from Tyre
to found Carthage, which today is the residential suburb of the capital,
Tunis.
The climate is hot in summer (often up to 40 degrees C in Tunis, with higher
temperatures inland and in the south), temperate in spring and autumn. The
north is often windy and wet in winter, the climate more Continental as the
visitor travels inland towards the Algerian frontier. The deep south of the
country is true desert climate, more pleasant to visit in the winter and
spring than in summer.
The Tunisians remain very much as Thomas Shaw, the British traveller, wrote
of then in the early 18th Century: 'The most civilised people who inhabit
the coast of the Mediterranean. They addict themselves to trade and
commerce, which induces them to cultivate the friendship of Christians.'
GETTING THERE
Most leading Western airlines fly to Tunisia. GB Airways and Tunis Air have
direct flights from Heathrow or Gatwick six days a week. Visas are not
required for UK and most other western European and American visitors. The
dinar currency cannot be bought outside Tunisia.
BUSINESS HOURS
Government offices work a six-day week closing on Friday and Saturday
afternoons and Sunday. Banks and private companies work a five-day week.
Tunis is virtually closed down during August.
CAR HIRE
Cars are easy to hire at principal airports and hotels but are expensive. Do
not expect them to be in perfect condition. Tunisian roads are being
improved but local driving is, at best, erratic.
HOTELS
In general they are cheap and easy to find. The state has sold off virtually
all its hotels. Tunisia essentially attracts package holidaymakers. Some
hotels offer good service - the Abou Nawas, Africa and Hilton in Tunis, the
Abou Nawas in Gammarth, and the Syphax in Sfax. The Jerba Menzel on the
island of Jerba and the outstanding Tamerza Palace in the desert mountain
oasis of Tamerza offer excellent service and food and, for the latter, an
extraordinary setting.
EATING OUT
'Tunis is a land of liberty,' wrote Chevalier d'Arvieux, the French
diplomat, three centuries ago. 'Religion disturbs no one; they pray God when
they must, fast when they cannot do otherwise, drink wine when they have
money, get drunk when they drink too much and no-one finds any harm in it.'
Tunisians love good food and drink and the choice of restaurants is large.
In Tunis, L'Astragale and La Closerie are top of the range; the Dar Jeld
offers traditional Tunisian dishes such as 'couscous' in a tastefully
restored traditional house in the old medina. Chez Slah and Le Cafe Vert in
the suburb of La Goulette serve excellent fish; the Cercle Italien and
Paradiso good Italian and Tunisian food; Cesar, Chez Nous and Le Strasbourg
reasonable French food. In nearby Sidi Bou Said, L'Atlantide is good.
Further north, in Gammarth, Le Golfe is pleasant. On the corniche in the
port of Bizerta, 60 kilometres north of Tunis, L'Eden offers good food in
pleasant surroundings. In the deep south, the food at the Tamerza Palace is
outstanding.
Arts and craftsThe variety of good traditional crafts in Tunisia is limited.
The Office de l'Artisanat, Avenue Mohammed Cinq, offers the best choice to
those who are not specialists and do not wish to bargain for hours.
Tunisian carpets (Mergoum or Kairouan weaves) remain attractive, well made
and very reasonably priced. Old silver jewellery is difficult to locate but
can be found in the old medina of Tunis.
For those interested in Muslim architecture, the Association de Sauvegarde
de la Medina will be happy to show visitors around some of the old houses
and shrines of the city. The Bardo museum has the finest collection of Roman
mosaics to be found anywhere. One of the palaces of the former rulers, the
beys, at Ksar Said, has just been renovated and opened as a museum.
There are many private art galleries in a country which boasts some fine
modern painting. Among the best are Cherif Fine Arts and Ammar Fine Arts in
Sidi Bou Said, Gorgi Gallery in Mutuelleville, the Medina Gallery near the
Dar Jeld restaurant in the old medina, Chiyem Gallery and the Arts Gallery,
both in the new district known as El Menzah Six.
ECONOMICS
For economic information about Tunisia, there is little outside specialised
publications such as the Conjoncturte Review, edited monthly by the ministry
of economic affairs. Despite recent publications such as L'Economiste,
information in the local media is usually mediocre and often inaccurate.
BOOKS TO READ
All principal guide series have a volume devoted to Tunisia. For a lively
account of the country's recent political history, Aziz Krichen's Le
Syndrome Bourguiba published by Ceres Productions in Tunis is useful.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930614

