FT934-11465

FT  01 NOV 93 / Delors may not stand for Elysee


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


MR JACQUES Delors, European Commission president, yesterday gave the
clearest hint to date that he might not stand in the 1995 French
presidential election.
Mr Delors, 68, said in an interview with the Journal du Dimanche that he had
no intention of quitting his job in Brussels before the end of his final
term in January 1995. 'I'm going to serve to the end,' he said.
Mr Delors' suggestion that he might bury ambitions to enter the Elysee
defies his continuing strong showing in French opinion polls. But it appears
driven by an unwillingness to risk splitting the French Socialist party
which has just rallied around Mr Michel Rocard, a certain candidate in the
spring 1995 election.
A second factor seems to be a desire to end his 10-year career as Commission
president on a high note after the traumatic but ultimately successful
ratification of the Maastricht treaty which enters into force today.
Mr Delors has told friends he accepts he has lost the battle for faster
European political and monetary integration; but he remains determined that
his forthcoming White Paper on competitiveness will prod leaders to tackle
mass unemployment and restore economic growth.
In the interview, Mr Delors spoke of a New Deal for Europe and expressed
satisfaction with the outcome of last Friday's special EC summit in
Brussels, whose most significant decision was to locate the European
Monetary Institute - forerunner of the future EC central bank  - in
Frankfurt.
EC leaders agreed to wider the scope of an Ecu8bn (Pounds 6.2bn) European
Investment Bank lending facility to include energy, environmental and inner
city projects rather than simply transport-related areas. This should speed
up disbursement of funds from the present level of Ecu3.3bn, an EC official
said.
The summit did not tackle the unemployment crisis, preferring to await the
presentation of the Delors White Paper at the regular summit at the end of
the Belgian presidency in December.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931101

