FT933-12716

FT  22 JUL 93 / London Stock Exchange: Economic data little help for shares


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


GOOD NEWS on the domestic economy was barely enough to sustain the London
stock market yesterday in the face of disturbing money supply figures from
Germany. UK stocks gave ground again ahead of today's important Maastricht
debate in the British parliament, and next week's important by-election test
for Mr Major's government.
However, the market bounced successfully from the Footsie 2,800 area.
Equities closed well above the worst of the day as investors took an
increasingly favourable view of the strong rise in domestic retail sales in
June and a significant improvement in the non-EC trade deficit.
The fresh round of good news on the UK economy, taken in tandem with a sharp
rise in annualised M3 money supply in Germany, had, once again, the perverse
effect of damping down hopes for an early cut in UK base rates. This
counter-balanced yesterday's firmness in sterling which was unhelpful for
British exporting firms.
After opening a shade firmer, equities drifted easier, brushing off the news
of a cut in repurchase rates in Germany, a prospect identified a week ago.
London stocks gave ground as sterling rose sharply after the disclosure that
UK retail sales had risen by 1.3 per cent in June, much stronger than
expected, and without restraining an excellent non-EC exports performance.
The day's low point saw the FT-SE 100 Index down by 22.1 at 2,801.8, but the
threat to the Footsie 2,800 mark brought buyers in. By the close the market
had rallied to a final reading on the FT-SE 100 of 2,814.1, leaving a loss
on the day of 9.8 points and a total fall of nearly 29 points over the past
two sessions.
Although market turnover remained relatively high, with Seaq volume of 554m
shares comparing with 604.9m on Tuesday, strategists doubted whether the
institutions had participated in the late rally. This week has, according to
analysts at several major firms, brought signs of increased selling by the
investment funds.
In the previous session, retail business was worth Pounds 1.46bn, a further
advance on last week when daily customer business jumped to Pounds 1.33bn
from Pounds 1.1bn a week earlier, according to statistics from NatWest
Securities.
This rise in investment activity in equities by genuine investment sources
at a time when shares have been falling has raised fresh concern over the
near-term outlook in a UK equity market which now appears to have reacted
too quickly earlier this year to expectations of economic recovery.
Yesterday's economic data indicated very favourable news on the domestic
economy, commented Mr Ian Harnett at Strauss Turnbull. However, he added
that in the continued uncertainty over the recovery in corporate profits,
sector analysts are likely to hold enthusiasm in check.
Thus, although store and retail issues were firm yesterday, queries were
raised in the stock market over the possible trend of retail profit margins
in this highly competitive sector.
The stock market was also held back by continued pressure on the
pharmaceutical issues from across the Atlantic and by weakness in the banks,
where fears that the sector is overvalued prompted a wave of profit-taking.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

930722

