FT933-10148

FT  05 AUG 93 / International Company News: Sprint in link with Canadian
telecoms group


   By NIKKI TAIT


   NEW YORK


SPRINT, the third-largest long-distance carrier in the US, is linking with
Toronto-based Call-Net Enterprises, and acquiring a 25 per cent equity stake
in the Canadian telecommunications group. Sprint suggested yesterday the
deal's value stood at more than CDollars 160m (USDollars 125m).
The alliance is aimed at giving Sprint increased access to the long-distance
telephone market in Canada, while Call-Net will have access to Sprint's
technical capabilities.
Under the 10-year deal, Call-Net will issue about 3.1m non-voting shares to
Sprint, giving the US company a 25 per cent equity interest.
Call-Net will then pay royalties equal to the lesser of 2 per cent of future
incremental Call-Net revenue or pre-tax earnings. These royalty payments
cannot exceed CDollars 10m for the first three years, or CDollars 15m a year
after that.
The value of the equity stake is put at around CDollars 60m, while the
royalty portion of the agreement is reckoned to be worth over CDollars 100m
over the 10-year period.
Sprint will also obtain three board seats - on an expanded nine-man board -
as part of the transaction.
Call-Net, which started operations in 1986 and expects revenues of around
CDollars 200m in 1993, also announced plans yesterday to raise a further
CDollars 100m via the issue of new shares. Sprint will take up its
proportionate share of the issue.
The Canadian company plans to use the money for computer and switching
equipment, for the installation of further fibre-optic transmission
facilities, the deployment of Sprint-based technology and for working
capital.
Call-Net is the second-largest long-distance carrier in the markets which it
serves - Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia - and the fourth-largest in
Canada overall.
It serves around 17,000 customers in 16 metropolitan centres. Earlier this
year, it acquired the Canadian long-distance telephone business of Cable &
Wireless for around CDollars 35m - an operation which encompassed about
7,000 customers, mostly small and mid-sized businesses.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930805

