FT934-8723

FT  13 NOV 93 / Travel: Hue, serene survivor of an older Asia - Nicholas
Woodsworth climbs the pass of the ocean clouds and survives a drenching in
year-old fish sauce to reach and ancient city slowly recovering from the
horrors of war


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


IS FOREIGN travel always the rewarding and worthwhile thing it is made out
to be? There are moments when one cannot help asking the question.
I am usually willing to put up with all sorts of discomfort and indignity
provided the final goal is worth it. There are other times, though, when I
wonder what in God's name travel is all about. Such a moment came some 30
miles from the old Vietnamese imperial city of Hue when buckets of fermented
fish sauce began flying in through the window.
I had not paid much attention to the cargo loaded on the roof of the bus I
boarded one sticky morning in the coastal town of Danang. When 35 people are
squashed into a rusty vehicle the size of a milk float, they have other
concerns.
I worried about the furnace heat inside; about the unnatural appearance of
my left leg, twisted between a set of bony Vietnamese knees and a metal
bench support; about the competence of the driver on the steep roads of the
Hai Van pass that lay ahead. Nouc mam was furthest from my mind.
Nouc mam is one of the world's stranger concoctions. It is made by cutting
raw fish into chunks, pressing its juices, adding large quantities of sea
salt and then letting the whole mess ferment in ceramic jars for a year. The
result, a highly pungent brown liquid, is offensive to most foreigners. But
it is an essential of Indochinese life, and no meal in Vietnam is complete
without a good sprinkling of it.
Nor, it seemed, was this bus trip complete without a good sprinkling of it.
All was well as we trundled along north of Danang on a flat seaside plain of
leafy banana trees and electric-green paddy fields. It was when we began
climbing the Hai Van - in Vietnamese, the 'pass of the ocean clouds' - that
things became undone.
As the bus tilted skywards, the nouc mam in the jerry cans above our heads
also tilted. The make-shift seals on the cans' tops - plastic bags with
rubber bands around them - were no match for the brew sloshing around
inside. Within minutes, streams of reeking brown liquid were washing down
over the roof of the bus and into its open windows.
The beauty of the mountains, the aquamarine tint of the sea far below, the
bright confusion of verbena growing by the roadside, the sweet smell of the
pass's pine forests - all were lost on me. Sluiced in the stuff, the bus
stank. My fellow passengers stank. I stank.
When I could stand it no longer I crawled out of the bus's rear doors and
stood on the wide bumper beside a conductor who grinned happily through it
all. Three hours later, when we had crossed the pass and arrived in the
gracious city of Hue, I was shaken, spattered and smelt appalling under the
thick white dust that coated me.
THERE ARE few cities in the world that could entice me to travel the nouc
mam route again. A bath of fish sauce is a kick to the shins of dignity, a
serious damper on general enthusiasm for life. Hue, though, is a city for
which I would do it all again.
Other cities in the region may be roaring aggressively into a brave new
Asian century of high-tech competition. Hue, blithely indifferent, presents
another face. It is tranquil, smiling, slow and gentle. It is the serene
Asia that Asians these days only dream about. It is the ideal place to
recover from the chance circumstance of travel.
Immediately, Hue set about smoothing my ruffled feathers, seducing me with
100 subtle lures. Even the lovely, bamboo-fringed river on which it sits,
the Perfume, seemed to be named to soothe me into forgetfulness. Scrubbed
and changed, I walked out of the waterside Huong Giang hotel, across the
long bridge over the river and through the massive Quang Duc gates of the
citadel on the other bank. As I did so, I realised I was also walking into a
Vietnam far older, more mannered and less hurried than I had seen elsewhere.
Hue at sunset might be an opium eater's vision. Around the citadel's
six-mile perimeter of tall brick ramparts, the water in its moats took on
the purple and orange glow of the sky overhead. Above the imperial enclosure
 -a royal citadel-within-a-citadel - bats fluttered around the Ngo Mon gate,
an eastern fantasy of green and yellow tiles. Lush fruit trees grew against
walls black with age. Statues guarded arched doorways while carved stone
dragons looked down from gables of delicate ceramic work.
The nine holy canon; the nine holy urns; the palace of supreme peace; the
hall of the mandarins; the forbidden purple city - here were buildings and
objects with names that might be thought overblown even in an oriental theme
park. What Disney could never add, though, is Hue's air of peaceful
reflection. If the 13 emperors of the Nguyen dynasty lacked any aid to
asethetic contemplation among these pavilions, pleasure gardens, ceremonial
pools, ornamental gates and temples, I couldn't imagine what it was.
The citadel is not a dead city inhabited only by the past, though. Many of
Hue's 200,000 people live within its fortifications. Beside high palace
walls, I watched peasants in their limpet-shaped hats watering
meticulously-tended lettuce gardens. On fields where imperial horses and
elephants once paraded, small boys ran and kicked balls. Girls with dark
hair cascading down their backs drifted by elegantly on bicycles; as people
here will tell you, proudly, the women of Hue are reputed to be the most
beautiful in Vietnam.
Hue's inhabitants, it seemed to me, are also the country's friendliest.
Everywhere, I was greeted with gentle smiles and shy attempts at my own
language.
Young men in cafes, women on motor scooters, students walking home with
books in hand - all seemed genuinely glad to share their tranquil world with
the none-too-tranquil world of tourism that has breached its gates.
If the city today is remarkable for its serenity and peace, it is because
such qualites have been sought and denied so often in the past. Since its
founding in the 17th century, Hue has interspersed periods of calm with
violent and bloody episodes. It has been fought over by feudal warlords,
stormed and taken by rebel armies. From 1802 until 1945 it was the seat of
the Nguyen emperors' nominal control of all Vietnam.
Imperial oppression was matched only by colonial ferocity in maintaining
genuine control over the country. In 1885 the French attacked and sacked the
citadel: it took three entire days to burn the contents of Hue's imperial
library. But Hue's greatest cataclysm took place only a generation ago.
When North Vientnam launched its Tet offensive in 1968, Hue became the scene
of some of the bloodiest battles of the Vietnam war. Taken by the communists
and contested in brutal house-to-house fighting for 25 days, the citadel was
pounded by the South Vietnamese air force, American artillery and Viet Cong
rockets.
Much of it was levelled and more than 10,000 people, most of them civilians,
died. Of these, 3,000 were merchants, landowners, Buddhist monks, Catholic
priests and suspect intellectuals executed summarily by the Viet Cong. Many
who survived spent years in 're-education' camps assimilating an alien
ideology.
Such wounds heal slowly. Only today, with Vietnam's recent relaxation and
opening to the outside world, is Hue beginning to bloom again. If foreigners
are welcomed warmly by the people, it is because they are a sign of some
return to normality. When Hue smiles at a tourist, it is smiling at a
lifeline to happier times.
LIKE MOST of the small but growing number of visitors to Hue, I cycled to
the tombs of the emperors in the pine-forested hills that rise behind the
city. I visited the seven-story Thien Mu pagoda, one of the most celebrated
Bhuddist temples in the country. And, in the mist early one morning, I
drifted in a boat down the Perfume river, past shrines and bamboo thickets
and temple-studded islands towards the sea. Nowhere else does one get such a
sense of Vietnam's past.
In the end, though, it was not the palaces and pagodas, the hazy dreams of
the past that attracted me most, but the brighter ones of the future.
Number Six, Dinh Tien Hoang Street, is a simple restaurant with a few wooden
tables and a smoky charcoal fire, operated by a co-operative of seven deaf
mutes. The street outside is over-run by ragged street children.
Armless war veterans drop in to beg for hand-outs. It is not the kind of
place, you might think, where you would find much expression of joy or
optimism. But ask any of the young back-packers who spend their evenings
eating there. It is an extremely happy place.
Scuffed-up travellers with modest budgets are not always given a warm,
smiling welcome in the restaurants where they collect. But in Hue they are.
And the travellers reciprocate. The first evening I spent there I saw scenes
I have seen nowhere else - diners sharing jokes with beggars; small street
kids sitting on laps and knees learning simple English songs; whole
conversations about families and jobs and futures mimed in free-form sign
language.
Hue made me happy. Happy enough, after a few evenings, to put me in a
travelling mood again. Happy enough, even, for the first time in days, to
sprinkle a few cautious drops of that remarkable sauce, nouc mam, on my
dinner.
Nicholas Woodsworth travelled via British Airways to Bangkok. For those with
the courage to fly Vietnamese Airlines - it has a fearsome reputation - Hue
is approached most easily from Saigon or Hanoi.
Cars with drivers may be hired through Vietnam's state-owned tourist
organisations for a moderate sum, with Hue included on a country circuit
lasting several days.
Travel in Vietnam has been complicated by restrictions on certain areas and
the need for internal travel documents. In the past two years, however,
Vietnam has made progress in catering to growing numbers of visitors, and
the restrictions may disappear in due course.
Hue has two decent hotels, both on the banks of the Perfume river. The
smaller and older of them, the Huong Giang, is the more pleasant. River
excursions and tours to the tombs of the emperors are organised easily.
Information about travel to Vietnam can be obtained from Vietnam Tourism,
39b Licoll Street, London NW10 (tel. 081-961 0117).

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

931113

