FT934-11220

FT  02 NOV 93 / Management (The Growing Business): Happy to be cut down to
size


   By LISA WOOD


Sean Titterington confides that his friends thought him adventurous, if not
foolhardy, when he joined a small, impecunious company after 19 years with a
UK clearing bank. When he opted for redundancy from the Royal Bank of
Scotland, rather than relocate, he had been looking for an employer of a
similar size.
Titterington, a marketing manager, assumed his temperament and experience
would be better suited to a big company.
One hundred failed applications later he welcomed the opportunity to join
Laser Grafix, a small Hertfordshire-based company employing 16 people. Today
he admits those previous assumptions were incorrect ones. Although he gets
frustrated at times, particularly over the lack of formal structure, he
enjoys the challenge of a business that has to respond quickly to changing
customer tastes.
Titterington is one of the thousands of managers who have successfully moved
from a big company to a much smaller one. But according to Oliver Johnston,
national campaign leader for economic development at the Industrial Society,
most people making the transition can benefit from professional training.
There are many sources of such expertise - business schools, for example -
but one of the most recent is a scheme called Connect for Growth funded by
London's Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) and run by Enterprise
Partnership, a London-based training and management consultancy.
The scheme matches the skills of professionals and managers who have been
unemployed for six months with the needs of small companies. After two weeks
of training, managers are hired on short-term contracts and may be offered
full-time employment at the end of the placement. Previous courses have had
success rates of over 50 per cent.
Linda Stoker, managing director of Dow-Stoker, a small business which
provides training courses including ones for redundant executives, says:
'I've hired a few people who had worked in big companies and some have
failed. They have not been able to roll up their sleeves. We had one person
who when we moved to new offices over a weekend was conspicuous by her
absence. She was also very status conscious and suggested that all the
parking spaces in the new offices went to managers. We don't do that sort of
thing.'
Managers making the move should be prepared to leave behind not only the
perks but also many of the qualities that made them successful in a big
company, according to the Industrial Society. 'An individual may have had up
to a 10-year time-frame for planning and been good at it,' observes Johnson.
'In a small business decisions may have to be taken in 10 minutes.'
Some managers, meanwhile, feel insecure in organisations where there may not
be formal performance assessment. Geoffrey Burn, a former director of
information systems with a large retailing organisation, says: 'In my old
company I knew exactly where I was. We had clearly defined objectives and
formal systems of appraisal. In my new company we have none of that. One can
feel insecure.'
The suspicion may be mutual. Owner-managers are often alarmed by
professional managers, says Mike Anyon, who now works as sales director with
RS Colour, a Manchester-based printing company employing 70 people. He used
to work for Du Pont and Philips Electronics. 'It has to be a two-way
learning process. But I am getting a lot of satisfaction from teaching a
very enthusiastic sales force the best practice in the business.'

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931102

