FT932-13413

FT  23 APR 93 / Arts: Bheki Mseleku - Jazz


   By GARRY BOOTH


Poor Bheki Mseleku - everybody so wants him to be The New Thing in jazz. A
co-winner of the Mercury Music Award for album of the year in 1992 with his
much acclaimed Celebration, the gentle South African pianist and sometime
tenor player is the reluctant successor to the Abdullah Ibrahim award for
the cape's most exciting musical export.
Ibrahim, aka Dollar Brand, is firmly established as a stimulating soloist
and an inspiring leader. But Mseleku, a captivating personality who has his
own absorbed sound, seems not yet to have a grip on the wide open spaces of
solo performance. He showed he could lead with the Celebration team but on
Monday's showing, alone in the unforgiving Queen Elizabeth Hall, he offered
little musical relief.
The concert began with promise, a burning joss stick set behind the piano (a
habit of Ibrahim's) before Mseleku walked on breathing rusty melancholia
through the tenor as he did so. After some minor piano chords answered by
Mseleku's grainy and nasal utterances were replaced by flurried notes, the
tone of the long set was cast, however. Perhaps Mseleku, a gentle soul who
dedicates his performances to 'all the masters of spiritual enlightenment
and the great avatars' and an exile from apartheid, was disturbed by the
hideous events unfolding at home on that day, but this was all too flat, for
too long.
At other times, and in a group, the ragged technique which draws as much on
Ellington as it does on the townships, works up waves of ideas which tumble
out poetically. Alone on the South Bank, Mseleku seemed to struggle with
initially interesting arpeggio runs which collided rather than ran together.
Four movements of pre-occupied, superficially soothing improvisation later
and Mseleku was still having trouble shaping ideas. Deliciously tender
cadenzas sliding off the right hand side of the piano and the player's own
quavering vibrato barely made up for the too naive art which went before.
Eventually the addition of Tunde Jegende's kora for the last number added
some depth to the delicate impro.
Monday's meanderings may not have been a good advertisement for the new solo
album, Meditations (Samadhi SA CD 001), and will not prevent Mseleku from
drawing eager crowds to his quartet's UK tour, but it does show that these
are yet early days for this talented musician.
Bheki Mseleku, Marvin 'Smitty' Smith, Michael Bowie and Denys Baptiste UK
tour: June 24, Cheltenham; June 25, Glastonbury Festival; June 26 Bradford
Festival; June 27 Cambridge; June 28, Warwick University; June 29,
Blackheath

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930423

