FT934-8834

FT  13 NOV 93 / Salvation Army starts fraud action


   By ANDREW JACK and JIMMY BURNS


THE SALVATION ARMY has started overseas civil action to recover the Dollars
8.7m (Pounds 5.76m) of which it was defrauded last year.
New information has triggered action to recover assets in California and the
Netherlands. Sources at the charity said yesterday they had identified the
destination of nearly all the money which was passed over for legitimate
investment in letters of credit but was dissipated around the world.
It has emerged that new investigations have been triggered connected to the
fraud - including inquiries by the US Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
Dutch police and the US Securities and Exchange Commission. UK detectives
plan to widen their inquiries soon - to the US and the Netherlands. They may
also visit Argentina.
Of the Dollars 10m originally handed over by the charity in May last year to
ASLK-CGER Bank in Antwerp, Dollars 8.7m was transferred to Banque
Continentale du Luxembourg (BCL) and then on to London, the Netherlands and
the US. Dollars 500,000 remains frozen in the BCL account.
A further Dollars 500,000 of the original money was paid from the ASLK-CGER
account to the Salvation Army to give the appearance of profits on
investment activities, although no such profits had been generated.
Investigators believe Dollars 3.3m was transferred from BCL back to the UK -
Dollars 200,000 to an account in the name of Tilen SA created by Mr Stuart
Ford, a Birmingham businessman; Dollars 2.5m to Edge & Ellison, Mr Ford's
solicitors; and Dollars 600,000 - less substantial fees for Mr Ford - as a
loan secured against worthless German inter-war bonds to Phoenix Airways.
No criminal charges have been brought, although Mr Ford and Mr Robert Adey,
a solicitor with Edge & Ellison, were separately arrested, questioned and
released on bail. They denied any wrongdoing.
The remaining Dollars 4.35m of the charity's money was transferred to Cregem
Bank International and then on to Kansallis International, two other banks
based in Luxembourg.
From here, more than Dollars 3.2m was transferred to Mr Harold Glantz of
Continental Capital Markets of New York, where much of it was spent on
houses in Malibu and Santa Monica.
The remaining Dollars 1m held by Kansallis was transferred to Dutch accounts
of ABN-AMRO in the Hague and Rabobank in Utrecht, and has been linked to Mr
Guido Haak of Delta Management, a company based in the Netherlands.
The charity believes it will recover between Dollars 2m and Dollars 3m
directly from assets on which its money was spent, and the rest by civil
actions.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931113

