FT934-8501

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Texas (3): Sector is an engine of growth -
High-tech industries


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


IT would have been quite a contrast, had it happened. At ground level, 35
miles due south of Dallas, life in the picture postcard town of Waxahachie
would have continued in much the same tranquil way as ever. But beneath the
surface, scientists would have been carrying out the world's biggest
atom-smashing experiment.
The plan was to spend Dollars 11bn on the construction of a supercolliding
superconductor under Waxahachie. The town would be completely encircled by a
54-mile tunnel lined with magnets. Physicists would fire protons through the
tunnel and accelerate them to just below the speed of light before crashing
them into one another.
With a bit of luck, the result would be to produce even smaller particles,
which might resolve some basic questions about the nature of matter.
In the end, Congress decided that the cash-strapped nation could no longer
afford to indulge the scientists' curiosity, and last month it pulled the
plug on the already part-built project.
To most other states, the cancellation of such a large high-technology
project would have come as a resounding blow. But it says something about
the development of high tech in Texas that the state seems relatively
unconcerned about the effects the decision might have on its economy.
The reason is that the high-tech sector in Texas has grown to a size where
the cancellation of a single project is only a minor setback. Where once
cattle and cotton were the state's booming industries, and later oil, now
the high tech sector has become an engine of growth.
Organisations include the vast and the tiny; the public sector and the
private; the home-grown and the new arrivals: and their fields of activity
range from biotechnology to space exploration.
Some specialities have tended to cluster geographically: for example, Dallas
claims to have the world's highest concentration of telecommunications
equipment manufacturers, with 360 companies occupying a telecoms corridor in
the northern suburb of Richardson.
Houston is probably best known outside Texas for the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration space centre, presently working on the development
of a space station. But it is also home to Compaq, the computer giant; and
the Texas Medical Centre in Houston, said to be the world's largest medical
complex, has spawned thousands of jobs in medical research and
biotechnology.
San Antonio is also strong on biotechnology and biomedicine, hosting the
South Texas Medical Center, the University of Texas Health Science Center,
the University of Texas Institute of Biotechnology, and the Southwest
Foundation for Biomedical Research.
But perhaps the jewel in the Texas high-tech crown is Austin, the state
capital. Here, about 55,000 people are employed by 450 high-tech enterprises
 -among them, the home-grown Dell Computer and CompuAdd - while two
consortiums, Sematech and the Microelectronics and Computer Technology
Corporation, design the next generation of semiconductors and computers.
Although not quite yet on a par with California's Silicon Valley, the city
and its surrounding area have already been dubbed Silicon Hills.
The result of this activity is that Texas now claims to have more scientists
and engineers within its borders than any state except New York and
California. It also expects the growth to continue: high-tech industries
will provide almost half the new manufacturing jobs in the state over the
next 35 years, it believes.
According to Mr Michael Klonsinski, programme director at the Texas
Department of Commerce's office of advanced technology, the beginnings of
these inroads into high technology date back to the 1960s when Texas set out
to prove that it was more than just a roughneck ranching and oil state.
The oil money helped - for example, financing an excellent academic
infrastructure and bankrolling high-tech entrepreneurs. So did the state's
considerable political and business influence, which helped bring big
high-tech projects and contracts to the state. And an unusual alliance
between state and local government, the private sector and the academic
world has been a powerful force in building up the high-tech industry.
The number of people employed in Texas high-tech industries has grown by 20
per cent to 331,000 in the past five years. One reason is that Texas now
offers all the high-technology infrastructure that businesses require -
universities, research institutions, manufacturers and suppliers. Employers
are also attracted by the fact that Texas is one of only two states in the
US with a growing youth population (the other is Oklahoma). And the low cost
of living is attractive to employers and employees alike.
Mr Joel Kocher, worldwide sales president at Austin-based Dell Computer,
says the cost of living has become particularly important in the computer
industry because of the 'commoditisation' of the market. As computer
technology has converged and products have become increasingly similar,
customers have started to buy on price, putting manufacturers under pressure
to examine their costs as never before.
Small wonder that Silicon Valley is moving to Silicon Hills, he says.
'Silicon Valley is probably the most expensive area you could locate a
company in today except for New York City,' says Mr Kocher. 'The cost of
living there is outrageous. The median cost of housing in San Franciso is
probably twice what it is here.'
Yet can Texas hold on to its lead? Is there not a danger that other states
will jump on the bandwagon and lure companies away with even lower costs?
Possibly, Mr Kocher says. 'In this country, success breeds competition, so
there is no doubt other states will try.'
Even so, he believes the Texas high-tech sector will continue to thrive
because so few places can match it for its infrastructure and its low-cost,
highly educated labour pool.
'You go to Wyoming, and you are going to have a very difficult time
attracting talent.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

931115

