FT933-12625

FT  23 JUL 93 / Proportion of 'very satisfied' bank customers halved in 10
years


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Correspondent


THE proportion of customers who are very satisfied with the service they
receive from their banks has nearly halved in the past decade, according to
a poll carried out for the National Consumer Council.
The poll, commissioned for its submission to the committee reviewing the
banking code of practice, found that the proportion of 'very satisfied'
customers has fallen from 62 per cent in 1983 to 34 per cent this year.
Although the proportion of fairly satisfied customers rose from 30 per cent
to 52 per cent, this means that the overall figure for fairly or very
satisfied customers has dropped by 6 per cent to 86 per cent.
The poll, carried out by the MORI research organisation, found that 20 per
cent of customers had experienced a problem in the previous 12 months such
as an error in a bank statement, or standing order.
Some 10 per cent said they had experienced a problem with a cash dispensing
machine that was not their fault. Those with an income of more than Pounds
25,000 were more likely to report a bank error.
The highest proportion of errors among the 1,570 current account customers
surveyed was among those aged 35 to 44, of whom 31 per cent had experienced
a problem. By contrast, only 16 per cent of those aged 55 to 64 reported a
problem.
Lady Wilcox, council chairman, said the code of practice was flawed because
banks were not required to give prior notification of charges, controls on
confidential information were too vague, and there was little guidance on
complaints procedures.
The council recommends that the committee reviewing the code - which was
introduced in March last year - should tighten up banks' compliance and
response to complaints.
It recommends that customers' express consent should be sought before names
are used for marketing purposes. This consent should be sought when
customers open accounts, and at regular intervals after that.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930723

