FT932-7111

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (7): Even a little
means a lot - US expansion should not be underrated


   By ANDREW BAXTER


The US market for power generating equipment tends to be ignored by the
media in all the excitement about Asian prospects, but even a modest growth
rate in percentage terms can provide a healthy business if built on a big
enough base.
The forecasts for the next decade by General Electric and Westinghouse, the
two dominant US suppliers, differ slightly in numerical terms but agree on a
key point - that the US remains an attractive market, worth at least Dollars
5bn a year for the next decade.
Westinghouse forecasts a peak power demand growth rate of 2.2 per cent over
the next decade, equating to total orders exceeding 141GW, more than 20 per
cent of the existing US generating base. Of this, about 15GW will be
replacing existing capacity.
The Orlando-based supplier says utility investments in existing capacity
will also help meet rising demand. By the end of the decade, says
Westinghouse, about 25 per cent of the installed thermal capacity in the US
will be more than 30 years old, and candidates for life extension,
modernisation, uprating and repowering programmes.
GE, based at Schenectady, forecasts total capacity additions of 105GW for
the US market over the same period from 1993-2002, and believes that
required resources will start to outpace committed resources shortly. The
forecast is almost double the 46GW which GE sees being added in Japan over
the same period, although it is surpassed by the 180GW predicted for the
Asia Pacific region.
It forecasts total US orders for power plant at 154GW for the decade, which
includes equipment that will not come into service until after 2002.
About 12-15 per cent of the market will be equipment for repowering existing
power stations, and the rest will be for greenfield sites or for additions
to existing sites, says Mr Del Williamson, vice-president for sales at GE
Industrial & Power Systems.
GE's projections for the US assume a load growth of 2.5 per cent a year, a
20 per cent reserve margin - the gap between the utilities capacity and the
power load - 2GW of Canadian imports and 2GW of net retirements.
The national average of 2.5 per cent annual load growth, coupled with a
declining reserve margin, produces a forecast growth in capacity of 1.9 per
cent a year. The most important region by far is predicted to be the
south-east, where GE forecasts uncommitted needs of 30GW and total orders of
44GW.
Predictions for the types of power equipment to be sold also coincide
broadly, with combustion or gas turbines clearly dominant. Of GE's forecast
for 105GW of total capacity additions, 64GW is combined cycle, 25GW is gas
turbines, 12GW is steam turbines, 3GW will come from hydro-electricity and
renewables and just one GW from nuclear power.
Westinghouse's forecasts for the type of new power plants are shown in the
accompanying chart, which also shows graphically why combustion turbines are
predicted to take some two-thirds of the market.
Apart from the fact that gas has become the fuel of choice, combustion
turbines are particularly suited to the independent power producers which
want new capacity on stream fast, and which, it is predicted, will account
for more than 50 per cent of the power generation market. Almost all the IPP
orders are for baseload combined-cycle stations, says Mr Williamson.
Mr Frank Bakos, vice-president and general manager of Westinghouse's power
generation business unit, says the traditional utilities are also finding
combined cycle power attractive. And Mr Randy Zwirn, general manager of the
unit's power generation projects division, notes a trend for power producers
to start with a simple or open cycle combustion turbine, which can be
completed in a matter of months, and leave room for a subsequent conversion
to combined cycle.
Coal-fired generating equipment looks like accounting for no more than about
15 per cent of the US market over the next decade, but could become less
'traditional' in equipment terms as clean coal technologies such as
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) take hold.
At present, says Mr Williamson, the extra capital cost and fuel prices are
restraining interest in IGCC.
The market for new nuclear plants, in contrast, is now firmly closed, but
there are signs that the door could be at least slightly ajar by the end of
the century.
Last month, Westinghouse and a group of 16 US utilities signed a contract to
invest Dollars 158m over the next five years in the detailed engineering
needed to build the Westinghouse AP600, a standardised 600MW pressurised
water reactor design.
The investment is supported by the US Department of Energy, and is important
not only for Westinghouse but as an indicator of an eventual future for new
nuclear plants in the US. GE won a similar competition for a large advanced
boiling water (ABW) design, but neither supplier is exactly holding its
breath for new business.
As with most countries that have a developed power equipment industry,
domestic producers dominate the market. That is not to say, however, that
the market is closed - it has historically been one of the most open.
Westinghouse and GE have about 70-75 per cent of the gas turbine market and
80 per cent of the steam turbine market. These figures have not changed much
in recent years but both ABB and Siemens are trying to expand their presence
in the US power equipment market.
ABB already has significant manufacturing facilities in the US and recent
successes include the boiler and other equipment for a Dollars 300m
coal-fired cogeneration project in Maryland and a Dollars 130m order from
two Kentucky utilities for six gas turbines.
Siemens is stepping up its interest in the US, which it sees as an important
growth market. By the end of the 1990s, it plans for 20 per cent of its
entire KWU business to be in the US - already, the US accounts for 20 per
cent of foreign business.
The German company has been spurred by factors including modernisation and
service life extension of thermal and hydroelectric plant, demand for new
thermal power plants, and topping and repowering of existing steam power
plants.
In particular, says Mr Hans Bohm, vice-president of Siemens and a member of
the KWU group executive management, 'we have stepped up our activity on the
gas turbine side.' Two years ago, Siemens bought A-C Equipment Services, the
former service division of Allis-Chalmers, in Milwaukee, where it is now
making gas turbines for the US and other markets that use the same 60 Hz
frequency.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930525

