FT934-8369

FT  16 NOV 93 / Leading Article: China shuffles on


IT IS tempting to interpret the result of this weekend's secret Central
Committee meeting as a victory for reform. The commitment by the Chinese
communist party's senior policy-making body to deepen market-based reforms,
and continue to build the 'socialist market economy' which Deng Xiaoping
began 15 years ago, should guarantee that the 89-year-old elder statesman
will leave a lasting legacy. Meanwhile, vice-premier and central bank
governor Zhu Rongji appears successfully to have traded an easing of
monetary policy for a commitment to implement his reforms.
But appearances can deceive. Even if a conservative leader were to emerge
from the inevitable struggle that will follow Mr Deng's death, there is
little prospect of a return to a planned economy. But the outcome of the
weekend plenum does not suggest that the next round of reforms is assured.
The communique, which emerged late on Sunday night, was disappointingly
bland. It promised 'a programme of action to restructure the economy in the
1990s', including commercialisation of the state enterprises and
rationalisation of the financial system. But the promised 50-article
manifesto, detailing these reforms, was notably absent.
How will China commercialise a state enterprise sector, at least a third of
which is loss-making, without the widespread bankruptcies that officials
reject? How, without the end of subsidies to these enterprises, can the
banking sector run along commercial lines or the central bank run a
market-based monetary policy? Or will the subsidies be paid through the
budget, in which case how does Beijing propose to raise taxes from unwilling
provinces? Only if China's communist party can provide detailed answers to
these and other questions will the commitment to further reforms be more
than just words.
The reality is that woolly commitments from public or party officials to
market-based reforms, or economic liberalisation, are two-a-penny in today's
China. What has been lacking, and remains so if the communique reflects the
consensus view, is a willingness by central and regional officials to allow
enterprises to go bankrupt, to accept that richer provinces must pay higher
taxes, and to obey central bank directives.
Of course, the communique reflects, not a consensus, but a failure to agree.
Not only are the next steps difficult, but the need to agree to take them
comes at a time when state enterprises and local officials are complaining
bitterly about the painful consequences of the government's stabilisation
measures. It was to soften these blows that Mr Zhu risked easing the credit
squeeze too early. But the quid pro quo from provincial leaders must be an
agreement now to implement reforms which will prevent another boom-bust
cycle. They have yet to deliver.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931116

