FT932-3142

FT  16 JUN 93 / SPD leaders ready to support sale of Telekom


   By ARIANE GENILLARD


   BONN


THE leadership of Germany's opposition Social Democrats intends to support a
government plan to privatise Deutsche Telekom, the state-owned telecoms
monopoly, and circumvent opponents within its own party ranks.
Mr Hans Bernrath, leader of the party's team which negotiated the
privatisation plan with the government two weeks ago, said SPD members of
parliament would not vote on the plan, but would simply be canvassed on the
issue.
SPD politicians favouring the privatisation fear that a formal vote could
result in the parliamentary party rejecting the plan by a narrow majority.
The planned informal poll will enable the government to start drafting the
bill, which it is intended to put before parliament by October.
The decision follows intense negotiations among SPD parliamentarians over a
privatisation agreement signed between representatives of the SPD and the
government on May 28, after a year of difficult negotiations. The government
needs opposition support in order to change the constitution to pave the way
for privatisation.
The plan is to create a state holding company under which three independent
joint stock companies would operate: Deutsche Telekom, the telecoms
monopoly, the Post Office and the Postal Bank.
However, it has yet to gain support among many SPD parliamentarians, some of
whom fiercely oppose the outright privatisation of Deutsche Telekom and of
the postal services.
As with other privatisation projects in Germany, the future of Deutsche
Telekom now depends on the ability of the SPD parliamentarians to overcome
their internal divisions. A large number of them oppose privatising Deutsche
Telekom on the grounds that a private company would no longer fulfil its
obligations towards poorer and less populated regions. They are also
representing the views of the post and telecoms union which fears losing
members.
The telecoms ministry, for Its part, has offered to keep a 50 per
cent-plus-one share stake in Deutsche Telekom, ensuring the state some say
over its management. The government also argues that creating a holding
company will ensure maintenance of union power.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930616

