FT932-3314

FT  15 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Oil tax threat leads to withdrawals


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


THE OIL industry withdrew applications for seven North Sea exploration
blocks in response to the government's proposed changes to Petroleum Revenue
Tax. But Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, said the withdrawals had not
significantly affected the success of the latest offshore licensing round,
which was the largest for 20 years.
The government yesterday awarded 110 blocks for offshore oil exploration out
of the 484 put on offer as part of the largest range of offerings since
1972. Oil companies showed much interest in important new areas for
exploration such as the area west of the Shetland Isles, and Cardigan Bay
off the Welsh coast.
Mr Eggar said he had particularly strong hopes for the area west of
Shetland. 'I think we are on the verge of proving up a major new province
which will be very significant for the future of the industry and UK oil
production,' he said.
But oil companies have been protesting about the government's proposed
changes to North Sea taxes. Mr Eggar said that, with the seven withdrawals,
some companies had altered their original work programmes in response to the
tax change.
The PRT reforms would reduce the rate of tax paid on existing fields but
abolish tax relief for exploration work.
Companies had committed themselves to drill 93 wells, but this was lower
than had been expected before the tax changes, Mr Eggar said.
The Department of Trade and Industry has imposed stringent new environmental
requirements on many companies which have been awarded blocks close to the
coast. This affected 35 blocks and Mr Eggar announced measures to monitor
closely companies' adherence to their environmental plans.
Greenpeace, the environmental group, said it was alarmed by Mr Eggar's
announcements yesterday. It said the UK was in the process of implementing a
directive from the EC to protect natural habitats which could ban industrial
activity in some coastal waters.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930615

