FT934-10196

FT  06 NOV 93 / London Stock Exchange: Guinness sold


International drinks group Guinness was one of the worst performing FT-SE
stock yesterday as the market digested a mixed trading statement and
analysts reported back from an overseas meeting with the company management.
There was a variety of opinions entertained in the market as the detail of
the early morning statement met the conclusions of analysts and fund
managers telephoning from the two-day presentation in Athens. 'There's
something for the bears and the bulls,' commented one dealer. 'And today the
market wants to hear the downside.'
Guinness shares had rallied in recent sessions as the depression caused by
September's results and anxiety over the group's relations with LVMH were
considered overdone. But yesterday's statement, in which Guinness stressed
the longer-term development of its spirits business, with cautious reports
from some analysts in Athens, led to conclusions that the stock was in for a
dull time, particularly in the short-term.
'It's another case of jam tomorrow,' was the comment from one drinks
specialist. Kleinwort Benson was among those reiterating its 'weak hold'
stance. However, NatWest Securities, which two weeks ago launched a Guinness
warrant, again pointed out the longer-term potential of the group's
strategy. The shares ended the day 24 down at 408p in turnover of 6.6m.
The drinks sector was said also to be buffeted by the effects of the fallout
from the supermarket price war and worries over brands. Whitbread declined
10 to 492p, Scottish and Newcastle 8 to 474p and Wolverhampton and Dudley 7
to 478p. Allied Lyons, down 10 at 553p, and Grand Metropolitan, off 15 at
389p, were said to be also undermined by cautious comments on the US spirits
market by an American drinks group. Greene King slipped a penny to 569p as
it announced an extention to its debt portfolio.
Conversely, food manufacturers and retailers held up well in the weak
market, having taken a pasting in the previous two sessions. However, J
Sainsbury, off 10 at 366p, and Argyll Group, down 9 at 260p, continued to
suffer.
British Aerospace denied reports that the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation had
proposed the cancellation of plans for the co-production of the RJ regional
passenger jet. BAe shares retreated 15 to 444p.
Motor stocks held up on yield considerations. Lucas Industries gained 4 to
175p amid talk also that the appointment of a new chief executive was
imminent. GKN stayed level at 465p.
Another of the market's best performing sectors was insurance brokers, which
finished the day 0.3 per cent up. Willis Corroon pushed up 2 to 223p. Most
of the others managed to hold unchanged or relinquish only one or two pence.
One analyst put the performance down to the companies' income - largely tied
to dollars - which would therefore appreciate if US interest rates rose.
After a strong performance the previous session on the back of well-received
results, BP fell victim to weak sentiment in the oil sector. This, together
with a move by Merrill Lynch from a buy to a hold on the stock, helped knock
6 from the price to 350 1/2 p in strong turnover of 21m.
Shell, which has results due next week, was unable to resist the market's
downward plunge and fell back 8 1/2 to 715p.
New price rises at British Steel helped the shares add a penny to 126 1/2 p.
A new plan for Globex, the electronic futures system, shook the shares of
Reuters, joint developer of the system. The price fell back 49 to 1632p with
2m shares traded.
News group shares weakened on renewed VAT fears, taking 18 from News
International to 275p and 6 from United Newspapers at 539p.
The water and electricity stocks continued to nurse a hangover from the
Ofwat report on Thursday, with the regional electricity companies
particuarly badly hit. Among these, Manweb tumbled 24 to 633p, Eastern 14 to
589p, South Wales 18 to 642p.
US selling exacerbated the declines in the telecoms sector, with Cable and
Wireless, off 16 at 464p, and Vodafone, down 20 at 549p, the worst affected.
A new proposal to rescue Greycoat, the indebted property group, appeared to
have received a wider welcome among investors than its predecessor and
property analysts said it stood a good chance of acceptance. Under the new
plan, preference share holders and coupon holders receive less dilution in
return for a having a larger rights issue. The shares added 1 1/2 to 25 1/2
p.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931106

