FT933-5180

FT  04 SEP 93 / Thomas Cook to end holiday discounts war: Truce declared
after 10% cut lifts bookings


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent


THOMAS COOK, the travel agents chain that last month threatened a price war,
is today to declare a truce by ending its 10 per cent discount on all
holidays.
Thomas Cook said yesterday that although it would still offer some
discounts, the 10 per cent cut on all holidays had served its purpose. The
chain said its bookings for summer 1994 were 700 per cent up on last year,
although it would not provide any figures.
Thomas Cook's 10 per cent discounts were followed by similar offers from
rival chains Lunn Poly and Pickfords Travel. Lunn Poly said yesterday that
its 10 per cent offer was due to continue for another week, after which it
would be reviewed.
Mr Hugh Collinson, managing director of Airtours, which owns Pickfords,
would not say whether the chain would continue to offer 10 per cent cuts,
but added: 'We were not the ones who started this.'
The travel agents' cuts have been accompanied by keen price competition
among tour operators, who have also tempted holidaymakers with offers of
free places for children.
Thomson, the largest tour operator, said it had already sold 400,000
holidays for summer 1994. Last year, the company took until Christmas to
sell the same number of holidays.
Thomson attributes this year's strong start only partly to lower prices,
with holidays in Spain costing 10 per cent less than last year. Other
factors, it said, were rising consumer confidence and the UK's poor summer,
which had prompted many to book next year's holidays early.
Mr Collinson, however, said he regarded the price flurries of the past month
as a phoney war. He said that early bookers tended to be those with
children. Couples tended to book during the Christmas and new year period.
Although another price-cutting campaign is possible later in the year, most
of the large operators believe the rush of early bookings so far will enable
them to maintain prices until next summer. The large operators say they have
become more skilled at matching holiday capacity with demand.
The absence of a late price war for summer 1993 holidays has meant fewer and
smaller discounts for the large numbers of late bookers.
The purchase of travel agents' chains by the leading operators over the
years has given the largest companies greater control of the market,
allowing them to exclude smaller rivals.
Thomson has owned Lunn Poly for two decades, Airtours recently acquired
Pickfords and Hogg Robinson, and Thomas Cook has financial links with Owners
Abroad. Small operators have complained that their brochures are
increasingly excluded from retail chains' shelves.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930904

