FT933-5263

FT  04 SEP 93 / How the secret deal was hatched: Only Peres' private coterie
knew of talks with PLO


   By JULIAN OZANNE


THE clandestine Israeli-Palestine Liberation Organisation dialogue which
hatched the draft peace agreement in Norway was kept so secret that even
Israel's leading negotiator with the Palestinians was in the dark.
Mr Elyarkim Rubenstein, Israel's hawkish cabinet secretary and chief
negotiator with the Palestinians, was yesterday still considering his
resignation. He said he was outraged at being frozen out of the
negotiations.
Foreign ministry officials in Jerusalem have said that only a tiny bunch of
officials loyal to Mr Shimon Peres, the foreign minister, were in on the
talks. Known in Jerusalem as 'The Blazers' because of their penchant for
dark blue jackets, they include Mr Yossi Beilin, the dovish deputy foreign
minister, Mr Uri Savir, the director-general of the ministry and Mr Yoel
Singer, the ministry's legal adviser who was brought in to the talks three
weeks ago to help in the delicate drafting of a peace agreement.
Mr Nimrod Novic, a special personal adviser to Mr Peres was also involved.
All of them have long been closely associated with the 'Peres Camp' and one
senior official described them yesterday as 'an exclusive club of people'.
Israeli officials say the critical input from the PLO was provided by Mr
Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) head of the PLO's pan-Arab and international
section, a key moderate and a close adviser to Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO
chairman. Another vital PLO official involved was Mr Abu Ala, head of the
PLO economics section, an Arafat loyalist and designer of a huge investment
plan for the West Bank and Gaza Strip after peace.
The Israelis and Palestinians were assisted by a five-strong Norwegian team
led by Mr Johan Joergan Holst, foreign minister. In all 14 meetings took
place on Norwegian farms and in private homes between January and August and
the Norwegians played a critical role travelling to PLO headquarters in
Tunis to meet Mr Arafat. According to Israeli officials Mr Peres only
stepped into the talks when a document was all but ready to be initialled
last week.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, was aware of the secret dialogue
but his government continued to deny it was happening. Prime ministerial
aides said Mr Rabin believed the dialogue was worth pursuing but he did not
expect it to yield results and continued pressing forward with talks with
Palestinian negotiators from the occupied territories who, like their
Israeli counterparts, were kept in the dark.
A turning point came after the collapse of the tenth round of talks in June.
Mr Rabin, aides said, began to realise that the negotiators from the PLO in
Tunis might be more moderate and willing to strike a deal than the
negotiators from the territories. Mr Rabin, however, continued to keep the
talks under cover in case they failed and were exposed so that he could
plausibly deny any involvement.
Men in the news, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930904

