FT932-13275

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance - Survey of
Investment Trusts (21): Education is needed if a few mishaps are not to
taint the sector - Since new trust launches these days are either
geographical specialists or have a split-capital structure, the worry is
that small investors may buy without fully realising what they are getting


   By PHILIP COGGAN


INVESTMENT TRUSTS are enjoying a revival. For too long, they were the
neglected smaller brother of unit trusts. But press publicity about their
merits, a marketing drive that belied their fusty image and some helpful tax
changes have enabled them to be rediscovered.
But there are some who worry that, in the process of attracting the private
investor, the industry has had to sell part of its soul. Rather than the
good old-fashioned international general fund, new trust launches these days
are either geographical specialists or have a split-capital structure.
The problem is the discount. Shares in most investment trusts trade at a
discount to their net asset values. There is little point, therefore, in
buying shares in a new issue at a price which, after costs, will stand at a
premium to net asset value, if existing trusts are available at a discount.
This factor makes it difficult to launch a trust in a field which is already
well supplied, such as the general trust.
But institutional investors do not have the in-house expertise to cover all
the world's stock markets. Thus they will be willing to subscribe to a fund
based in, say, Taiwan where the manager can offer added value. And as such
funds are often the only way of investing in such markets, they can
sometimes stand at a premium to assets.
Private investors are willing to buy shares in a split-capital trust,
because the different securities can have tax advantages (zero-dividend
preference shares are taxed on a capital-gains, rather than an income,
basis, for example). Because of the demand created, many split funds stand
at a premium to assets.
The potential problem is that, while both geographical and split funds can
be highly attractive, they have a different risk profile from the
traditional investment trust.
Income shares, for example, come in three different flavours. Some have a
set (although not guaranteed) repayment value; some have a repayment value
which will vary in line with the manager's success in growing the assets of
the trust; and others will have no repayment value at all.
Each type of share will have its attractions, depending on the investor's
need for income, tax position, attitude to risk, and so on. The worry is
that small investors might invest in such shares without being fully aware
of what they are buying. This problem was highlighted when two fund
management groups wrote to investors to warn them of the dangers of
reinvesting the income from income shares.
Unless the industry works hard to educate the public, the danger is that a
few examples of unhappy investors might turn into bad publicity for the
industry as a whole.
A further problem for split-capital investors is that the different classes
can be subject to fashion. A good example was the launch of the Schroder
Split fund, where the managers were swamped with demand for the income
shares but had to buy up hefty chunks of the zero and capital shares to
maintain the integrity of the structure.
Thus investors could find that, although the stock market is rising, their
particular class of security is falling in price because of a change in
sentiment. Again, this could lead to disillusionment and a reaction against
the whole sector.
One final point, made by investment trust analyst Robin Angus of NatWest
Securities Ltd, is that the needs of the various classes of investors may
restrict the manager's ability to take advantage of market opportunities.
'Conventionally-structured trusts are investment-driven, while split-capital
trusts are structure-driven,' he says.
Geographical specialist trusts also have their dangers for small investors,
because many are highly volatile. In addition, trusts can slip from a
premium to a discount as the particular market falls from fashion; and there
is also a currency risk if sterling rises against the currency of the
country concerned.
The international general trusts, such as Foreign & Colonial and Scottish
Mortgage, are not, of course, without risk, but they do avoid some of the
dangers revealed above. They have a wide geographical spread, which protects
them against a sharp fall in any one market - and they have a simple capital
structure. Over the years, many have produced excellent records of capital
and dividend growth.
Given that the Budget restricted the tax credit on personal equity plans to
20 per cent - and given that many investment trust Peps impose additional
charges - it may well be that, for a basic-rate taxpayer, a conventional
savings scheme into an international general trust is just as good as some
Peps.
If a trust yields 4 per cent, then the income tax saving to a basic-rate
taxpayer who invests the full Pounds 6,000 in a Pep is Pounds 45 in the
first year (few basic-rate taxpayers are likely to pay capital gains tax).
That can easily be eaten up by charges. Higher rate taxpayers should still
find the Pep an advantageous investment.
Some international trusts have had a lot of success in promoting themselves
via savings schemes, and the discount has narrowed. But while split-capital
trusts may be the fashion of the moment, there is still work for the
industry to do. By singing the praises of those trusts which still stand at
a discount, the industry can serve both the small investor and the trusts'
existing shareholders.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

930423

