FT932-52

FT  30 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Alcoa shows the way with
aluminium cuts - An attempt to forestall EC protectionism


   By KENNETH GOODING and LAURIE MORSE


MR PAUL O'NEILL, the idiosyncratic chairman of the Aluminium Company of
America, believes aluminium production cuts are urgently needed to forestall
protectionist action by the European Community against the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
And who better to show the way than Alcoa, the world's biggest aluminium
producer? So, with all the drama he could muster, Mr O'Neill announced late
on Monday that Alcoa was to cut its annual primary aluminium production in
the US by 268,000 tonnes or nearly 25 per cent and lay off 750 people in
five states.
This action had to be taken because of 'a lack of any mechanism to deal with
the economic consequences of the dissolution of the former Soviet Union', he
said. Alcoa had opted to make the cuts rather than to seek protectionist
action by the US government.
Mr O'Neill believes in banging the drum hard when he has something important
to say. The production cuts are deep - the deepest taken by any group since
the aluminium market descended into turmoil in 1991 when it was engulfed by
a huge surge in imports from the CIS. But more cuts are needed and it is
clear that one reason Mr O'Neill made so much noise is that he hopes other
western producers will follow Alcoa's example.
He also hopes the European Commission will get the message - that rather
than resort to protectionism, the western aluminium industry must learn to
live with the unpredictable and uncontrolled flood of CIS exports which have
been boosting stocks and depressing world aluminium prices to their lowest
level in real terms.
Until now Alcoa has made only marginal production capacity cuts and Mr
O'Neill has argued that the western world's high-cost smelters, most of them
in Europe, should close rather than Alcoa's, which are among those with the
lowest costs.
Now he has changed his tune because the US producers face a new threat: the
European Commission, using regulations that allow it to 'safeguard' European
industry, might impose draconian quotas on aluminium imports from the CIS.
The European Aluminium Association says CIS aluminium exports to Europe, the
nearest big consuming market, rose from 123,457 tonnes in 1990 to 361,185
tonnes the following year and reached 582,000 tonnes in 1992. This has
completely destabilised a market which last year consumed 4.76m tonnes of
the metal.
The association suggests that modern EC smelters might be forced to close to
make way for metal from polluting CIS plants. It has delivered a study to
the commission which indicates the CIS aluminium industry's emission of
hazardous substances is eight to ten times higher than European regulations
permit.
'While we do not deny that the CIS has a place in our market, it is the
abnormal quantities and the effect on prices that make some action
necessary,' said Mr Dick Dermer, the EAA president, yesterday.
Mr Bernard Legrand, who heads the aluminium activities of Pechiney of
France, Europe's biggest producer, has suggested in the past that Europe has
played its part in cutting high-cost capacity. Between 1982 and the end of
1992 some 665,000 tonnes of capacity was permanently shut in the EC area. In
contrast, those North American so-called Lazarus smelters, which closed
during the last recession, have come back into production. Last year
Pechiney played its part by cutting 20 per cent from output at its smelters
in France and the Netherlands.
If the European Commission was to impose quotas, the CIS metal would simply
flow elsewhere, mainly to the US and Japan, the two other big consuming
markets. Mr O'Neill is obviously concerned that this might lead to even
lower prices in Alcoa's domestic market.
This is one of the arguments being used by the CIS aluminium industry in a
written submission to the commission this week. Its new trade organisation,
Intercomalum, also pointed out that any drop in CIS income would make it
even more difficult for the aluminium industry to carry out
environmentally-necessary work at its smelters. There would also be less
money for downstream joint ventures with western groups for such things as
aluminium can production plants, which would absorb more CIS metal
domestically.
Mr O'Neill said Alcoa will complete its production cuts at Badin, North
Carolina; Rockdale, Texas; Warrick County, Indiana; and Wentachee,
Washington in three weeks. It would make up for the shortfall in output by
buying in the market. Mr O'Neill said that if Alcoa's production cuts helped
to reduce world aluminium stocks and brought higher prices, this would more
than offset the cost of the cuts. The industry needed prices of between 80
to 85 cents a lb to cover its full costs and invest in new capacity,
compared with about 56 cents yesterday. The industry would continue to 'eat
its capital' until prices went back to these levels and an industry that did
not cover not only its operating costs but also its replacement costs was
'going out of business'.
Mr O'Neill pointed out that the aluminium industry was not alone in
suffering from a flood of CIS exports. He predicted that eventually the
problem would affect the west's high-technology sectors such as aerospace.
London Metal Exchange traders had been expecting news of substantial
aluminium production cuts for some weeks and prices have been buoyed up by
these expectations. So, after an early upward burst yesterday following the
Alcoa announcement, profit-taking sent the price for aluminium for delivery
in three months tumbling back to end the day at Dollars 1,228.25 a tonne,
down Dollars 12.50.
Analysts said more production cuts were needed, of at least the same size as
Alcoa's, if any big impact was to be made on LME stocks, now at a record of
nearly 2m tonnes. There is also a huge quantity of CIS aluminium unsuitable
for the LME also in western stockpiles.
Reynolds Metals, the second-largest US aluminium producer, would not comment
on rumours that it would follow Alcoa's lead.
Mr Angus MacMillan, research manager at Billiton-Enthoven Metals, part of
the Royal Dutch/Shell group, estimated that the Alcoa cuts would still leave
the western aluminium market with a supply surplus of 150,000 tonnes this
year compared with one of 421,000 tonnes in 1992. He thought consumption
would rise from 15.47m tonnes to 15.6m while production in the west would
fall from 14.89m to 14.85m tonnes. He put CIS imports at at 900,000 tonnes
compared with 1m last year.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
       TEMPORARY CUTS IN ALUMINIUM PRODUCTION (TONNES A YEAR)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Location        Plant                    Owner         Capacity
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
US              Troutdale                  Reynolds       121,000
                Ferndale                     Alumax        64,000
                Four smelters                 Alcoa       310,000
                Goldendale            Columbia Alum.       36,000
France          Three smelters             Pechiney        42,000
Canada          Five smelters                 Alcan       143,500
Germany         Essen                Alusisse-Lonza        90,000
                Delfzijl/Voerde           Hoogovens        18,000
                Norf/Toging                     VAW       138,000
Netherlands     Vlissingen                 Pechiney        35,000
                Columbia Falls       Columbia Falls        49,000
Norway          Four smelters           Norsk Hydro        45,000
                Mead/Tacoma                  Kaiser        68,000
Sweden          Sundsvall                   Granges        20,000
                The Dalles           Northwest Alum.        5,400
Argentina       Puerto Madryn                 ALUAR        15,300
                Mt Holly                     Alumax        36,000
Mexico          Vera Cruz                     Alcoa       100,000
Indonesia       Asahan                    PT Inalum        12,000
Brazil          Aratu                         Alcan        27,000
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Billiton-Enthoven Metals
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930630

