FT931-3927

FT  13 MAR 93 / Pounds 900m plan for west coast rail upgrade


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


THREE of Britain's biggest engineering companies have proposed a Pounds 900m
scheme to raise private finance for much-needed improvements to the main
west coast railway line between London and Glasgow.
GEC Alsthom, Trafalgar House and Balfour Beatty, the construction arm of
BICC, would recoup their costs by charging train operators a fee for using
the upgraded track.
The consortium would not own the track but would charge fees under a
concession which would run for an agreed number of years. This would be
similar to concessions granted to operators of the Channel tunnel and the
new toll bridge across the River Thames at Dartford.
The proposal has been submitted to Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary,
who is currently considering the privatisation of British Rail. The
government plans that track ownership would be transferred to a new
state-owned body called Railtrack. This would still leave the problem of how
to raise cash to pay for track, signalling and rolling stock improvements
when the government is trying to restrain growth in public-sector spending.
British Rail InterCity last year asked for punctuality standards, under the
Passenger's Charter, to be lowered on the 400-mile west coast main line
because lack of investment was making services unreliable.
Under the consortium's plan, private finance would be raised to pay for
track replacement, improved electrical and signalling systems, realignment
of some curved sections of track to allow faster train speeds, and
replacement of some bridges.
Included in the Pounds 900m bill is Pounds 250m-Pounds 300m for new rolling
stock to be provided by GEC Alsthom. The proposals include improved links
from the main line to Birmingham, Stoke-on-Trent, Liverpool and Manchester.
Balfour Beatty provided the overhead systems for the Pounds 515m public
sector electrification of the east coast main line between London and
Edinburgh. Trafalgar House is a member of the private sector consortium
which built the Dartford Bridge and a member of a consortium which has won a
concession to build a privately financed toll road around part of
Birmingham.
The government has been trying to encourage private sector investors to take
advantage of Treasury rule changes which should make it easier to raise
private finance for infrastructure projects.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930313

