FT933-5348

FT  03 SEP 93 / International Company News: Rhone-Poulenc net slides by 11%


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


RHONE-POULENC, the French chemicals group which will be among the companies
to spearhead the government's privatisation campaign, yesterday announced an
11 per cent fall in first-half net profits and warned of reduced earnings
for the year as a whole.
Mr Jean-Rene Fourtou, the group's chairman, said that 'unless trading
conditions encountered in the first half of the year improve in the second
half, it is likely that results for the full year will be lower than in
1992'.
The net profits for the first six months of 1993 announced yesterday fell to
FFr1.37bn (Dollars 230m) compared with FFr1.55bn in the same period last
year. This is in line with a warning issued last month. Sales were
FFr40.03bn, about 6 per cent less than the same period in 1992.
Mr Fourtou blamed the downturn on the depressed conditions in Europe,
particularly in Germany, and the fall in demand for chemicals. He said that
the international chemicals market was in its worst ever condition and that
he saw no signs of improvement at least until the end of the year.
He was much more sanguine about the prospects for the sale of the
government's 43 per cent stake in the company. The sale, which will follow
that of Banque Nationale de Paris as part of the government's plans to
privatise 21 state controlled groups, is expected by the end of the autumn.
'The government has asked us to be ready, and we are ready,' said Mr
Fourtou. He said he did not expect problems in forming a core of stable
shareholders to replace the state and that privatisation would allow the
group to raise capital and reduce its debt.
But despite his relaxed approach to the sale of the government's stake, Mr
Fourtou expressed surprise at the rise in the Paris stock market and the
company's share price over recent months. 'I don't see an economic jump next
year to pull the chemicals industry out of the doldrums.' Following
yesterday's results, however, the company's share price fell from FFr161.5
to FFr158.
With the exception of the group's healthcare division, all of the group's
activities suffered falls in profits during the period. The company's
organic and inorganic intermediate chemicals, used in plastics and other
industrial inputs, saw operating profits fall to FFr13m from FFr478m.
The fibres and polymers division suffered a fall in operating profits from
FFr418m in the first half of 1992 to FFr36m in the same period this year.
The agricultural division fell from operating profits of FFr854m to FFr629m.
Health, the one bright spot, raised operating profits from FFr2.15bn to
FFr2.76bn. But the company said the rate of expansion would slow in the
second half of the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930903

