FT933-5281

FT  04 SEP 93 / UN warns over shelter for Bosnians


   By LAURA SILBER and GILLIAN TETT


   GENEVA, LONDON


THE United Nations yesterday warned that almost 3m people would need shelter
in Bosnia this winter if the warring sides failed to reach a peace
settlement to end the 17-month war.
There are now 1m more displaced refugees and affected people in Bosnia than
this time last year, Mr Santiago Romero Perez, UN High Commissioner for
Refugees spokesman said yesterday.
Although 2.28m people in Bosnia are now dependent on food aid, the UNHCR
only managed to deliver 53 per cent of requirements during the first seven
months this year, he added.
His comments come as UN officials warned there could be an upsurge in
fighting in Bosnia following the collapse on Wednesday of the latest round
of Geneva peace talks. But as the three sides in the conflict pondered their
next moves yesterday, the UN protection force in Zagreb reported that Bosnia
remained relatively quiet.
With the international mediators insisting the three sides had been very
close to a settlement, hopes remain that the parties will eventually be
persuaded to return to talks.
One US official yesterday said: 'If you look at the details they are much
closer than they have been before - these are quite small bits of land they
are talking about.'
Since the talks broke down, western governments, led by the US, have stepped
up pressure on Serb and Croat leaders to give in to Moslem demands for
further territory.
The key sticking points are the Moslem demands for a sea outlet to the
Adriatic at Neum, an enlargement of the northern Moslem enclave of Bihac,
and a land link between Sarajevo and the eastern Moslem enclaves.
Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic is anxious to reach a settlement to win
the lifting of sanctions imposed 15 months ago to punish Serbia for its
violent division of Bosnia. However Mr Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian Serb
leader, yesterday brushed aside a US warning that Nato could intervene with
air strikes if fighting escalated.
US and British officials have threatened to impose sanctions on Croatia for
Bosnia's partition. But Mr Franjo Tudjman, Croatian president, on Thursday
appeared intransigent when his Council for Defence and National Security
rejected the Moslem demand for access through the Croat mini-state to Neum,
a fishing village on Bosnia's patch of Adriatic coast.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930904

