FT934-11170

FT  02 NOV 93 / Personal View: Nuclear answers need right questions


   By IAN FELLS and NIGEL LUCAS


The government review of the UK nuclear industry, scheduled for 1994 and
then brought forward to 1993, is getting off to a slow start. The Treasury,
the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of the Environment
disagree about the scope of the terms of reference and discussions are
stalled awaiting the decision on whether the Thorp reprocessing plant is to
go ahead.
The terms of reference could be narrow, as Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister,
hinted in June, when he identified the central question as: 'Would new
nuclear power stations be commercially viable in the UK . . . without any
subsidy from government or taxpayer.' A narrow review is unlikely to do more
than conclude that the industry may build new plant if it can find private
capital. With such terms of reference the review will be futile.
None the less, this is apparently the route that government would like to
take, because it is consistent with the market-led energy policy, stoutly
reaffirmed in the White Paper, The Prospects for Coal. The danger of a
market-led policy is that it is at the mercy of market distortions. These
distoritons are serious in the energy sector, and have led to the perverse
closure of viable coal mines and power stations while gas-fired plant are
opened at higher costs. Taking the same approach to the nuclear industry is
likely to have the same effect.
The situation is pressing. The ageing and obsolescent Magnox plant and, very
soon, the first of the advanced gas-cooled reactors must be replaced if the
nuclear industry is to have a future, and if it is to continue to make the
20 per cent contribution to UK electricity supply wisely proposed by the
then energy secretary, Cecil Parkinson, when he designed the privatisation
of the electricity supply industry.
Many advantages of nuclear power are not expressed in the marketplace.
Supply is secure compared with natural gas, which in the next few decades
will have to be brought from ever-more remote areas. Nuclear electricity is
one of the few energy forms which pays its environmental costs. If the idea
of climate change arising from the greenhouse effect is taken seriously,
then it is important to be able to express this benefit in decision-making.
In the US, Congress has written into the 1992 Energy Policy Act the idea of
integrated resource planning, which will provide the means to measure the
social impact of energy planning. Something similar is needed in the UK. The
review offers the opportunity to develop acceptable means of incorporating
non-market factors into decision-making to establish a balanced portfolio of
cost-effective, clean and secure energy sources.
It is one thing to establish what should go into this portfolio; it is
another to achieve it in a sector that is largely privatised and
market-oriented. The City would not buy nuclear generators the first time
round. In the event, Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear performed well,
with output per employee rising by more than 50 per cent in three years, and
costs falling and profits rising rapidly.
But the fundamental obstacles to privatisation remain; the perception of
possible liabilities from decommissioning, fuel reprocessing and waste
disposal are intimidating for private investors. There is still uncertainty
about the cost of electricity from any new nuclear plant. We believe that
electricity from a Sizewell C can be competitive with gas, but it is a
question of convincing prospective investors. The main economic advantage of
nuclear is that, once built, the fuel costs are low and stable and,
therefore, so is the price of electricity.
A new nuclear plant is unlikely without government support. Government must
find mechanisms that are coherent with Brussels' competition policy.
Instruments are available. Funding could be by issuing hypothecated
government-backed bonds; access to markets could be facilitated by obliging
regional electricity companies to contract part of their requirement over,
say, 30 years; licences for construction of power stations could be
auctioned, with conditions specifying fuel choice, giving government
influence over the type of fuel burnt, while maintaining competition.
But the best answers will not be found without asking the right questions.
The first step is a broad review seeking the methods of measuring the social
impact of energy choices and then the means of implementing the desirable
choices.
The authors are, respectively, professor of energy conversion, University of
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and professor of energy policy, Imperial College of
Science, Technology and Medicine

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931102

