FT933-9872

FT  07 AUG 93 / Clinton battles for support in Senate budget bill vote


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton last night faced a decisive vote in the US Senate
that will make or break his compromise bill to slash the US budget deficit
by Dollars 496bn (Pounds 332.8bn) over the next five years.
Democrat leaders feared yesterday the Senate outcome might need the
tie-breaking vote of Vice President Al Gore.
Hours earlier, the bill scraped through the House of Representatives with a
majority of only two votes. Democrats said the vote last night might be even
closer. The bill must be passed by both the House and Senate.
As the final speeches began, party managers were still not totally confident
of victory.
The result in the House the night before had been in doubt with Mr Clinton
making a vital telephone call to a wavering congresswoman only 15 minutes
before the vote.
Mrs Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky, who had said she would vote against the
bill, then switched sides and to Democrat applause gave Mr Clinton his
majority, 218-216. Had she stuck to her original intention, the bill would
have been a vote short of the required 218 and Mr Clinton's presidency would
have suffered its single most serious reverse.
Mr Clinton has campaigned intensively for the bill which will raise Dollars
241bn in revenue, largely by raising income tax for the wealthiest
Americans, and imposing Dollars 255bn in spending cuts, to fall heavily on
the military.
However, the president has failed to convince many Americans that his
proposals will not damage the living standards of middle-income families, as
asserted by Republicans who have unanimously opposed the bill in both
houses, describing it as the biggest tax increase in US history.
Mr Clinton has also faced opposition within the conservative wing of his own
party which wants deeper spending cuts to achieve a more substantial deficit
reduction. On Thursday night in the House, 41 Democrats opposed the
compromise bill compared with 38 when the first version of the legislation
was passed.
It was a Democrat, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who yesterday appeared to
hold the key to the Senate vote. With 49 votes apparently assured for the
bill, a 'yes' from Mr Kerrey would tie the vote and give Mr Gore the
opportunity to pass the measure.
Mr Kerrey, a former candidate for the presidential nomination, is well known
for the length of time he takes to reach important decisions, earning him
the nick-name of 'Cosmic Bob'. He was called to the White House to see Mr
Clinton yesterday and discuss what further assurances he required on future
spending cuts in order to support the bill.
After the meeting Senator Kerrey declined to explain why he was delaying a
decision. 'It does not serve me very well, or the public, to get into a
discussion of what my internal thought processes are,' he declared.
Mr Clinton said after the House vote: 'I will continue to fight for this
economic package with everything I have.' He added: 'The margin was close
but the mandate clear.' With a positive Senate vote the country would 'enter
a new era of growth'.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930807

