FT933-12527

FT  23 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Lex forms joint venture to import Hyundai
cars


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS and PAUL TAYLOR


LEX SERVICE, the UK's largest car distribution and leasing company, is
re-entering the car import business by acquiring a controlling interest in a
joint venture company which will be responsible for importing, distributing
and marketing Hyundai cars and parts in the UK.
Under the terms of the deal, Lex will acquire a 50.1 per cent stake in
Hyundai Car (UK), a new joint venture company with IM Group, which will have
an exclusive rolling three-year contract to import Hyundai cars from the
start of September.
IM Group, run by Mr Bob Edmiston, is the largest private motor import
business in the UK, and has held the Hyundai import franchise since 1982.
Last year, on a pro-forma basis, the Hyundai importership reported a Pounds
4m profit before interest and tax.
The joint venture will be funded by a cash payment of about Pounds 2m from
Lex to IM Group - roughly equal to the net assets of the business being
acquired - and bank loans of Pounds 7m to replace existing inter-company
loans.
IM Group and Lex will have put and call options respectively over IM Group's
share of the business, exercisable at the end of 1997 with a Pounds 22m
ceiling on the value of any payment.
The deal will re-establish Lex as a car importer following the decision of
Volvo, the Swedish car maker, to end its exclusive UK import agreement with
Lex last year, four years early.
Sir Trevor Chinn, Lex chairman, said yesterday, 'The acquisition of the
Hyundai importership is a significant step towards Lex's ambition of being
the leader in automotive distribution and leasing'.
Hyundai Motor, South Korea's largest single manufacturing entity with 40,000
employees, is undergoing turbulent times. It has been in the front line of
nearly two months of strikes over pay and conditions which have affected the
whole of the shipbuilding and aerospace conglomerate.
Despite these problems, widely regarded as short term, Hyundai has come to
be recognised by its motor industry rivals as potentially one of the more
dynamic emerging forces in world car markets.
It sold 110,000 cars in 13 European countries last year, making Europe its
biggest export market. The marque was first introduced in the UK in 1982,
when IM Group sold some 3,000 cars. Sales peaked in 1988 at 11,365, and held
at about 10,000 units last year despite a 30 per cent fall in the new car
market since 1989.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930723

