FT932-7209

FT  25 MAY 93 / Carlton TV breaks into profit in its third month on air


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


CARLTON TELEVISION, the new London ITV company, went into trading profit in
its third month on air, a better performance than expected.
The television company, which took over from Thames Television on January 1,
lost Pounds 4.2m in the first quarter compared with the Pounds 5m-Pounds 10m
forecast. With advertising revenues continuing to rise, the company is not
expected to slip into trading loss again. The Pounds 4.2m loss, which is
likely to be overturned in the full year, includes the bid money paid to the
government as well as interest on the Pounds 80m launch costs.
The first news on Carlton Television came yesterday as its parent, Carlton
Communications, announced a 16 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to
Pounds 55.1m for the six months to the end of March. Turnover rose 57 per
cent to Pounds 508m and earnings per share was up 14 per cent to 18.3p. The
interim dividend is up 10 per cent to 7.4p.
Mr Michael Green, chairman of the broadcasting and television services
group, said it still had net cash of Pounds 50m after the financing costs of
Carlton Television. 'The year has started well and Carlton is confident that
the outcome for the year as a whole will show continued progress,' Mr Green
said.
Carlton Communications' results were in line with market forecasts. Its
share price closed down 1p at 733p.
'A good set of results from a well managed company,' commented Mr Guy
Lamming, media analyst at James Capel, the stockbrokers. He is forecasting
earnings per share of 43.3p and pre-tax profits of Pounds 129m for the year
to September. 'The big question for the market is where Carlton is going to
get the growth from three years from now,' he said.
Carlton yesterday would not rule out takeovers, but said that growth would
increasingly be internal and from the launch of new companies. A new company
Technicolor Entertainment Services will distribute film release prints
direct to cinemas.
Carlton's video and audio production division had pre-tax profits of Pounds
30.8m compared with Pounds 20.4m last time although film and television
services were static on Pounds 13.2m.
Video and sound products increased pre-tax profit from Pounds 8m to Pounds
12m.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930525

