FT934-11508

FT  30 OCT 93 / Arts: All hail the high prince of horror - Nigel Andrews
pays tribute to the actor Vincent Price, who died this week aged 82


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


THE Tingler, The Pit And The Pendulum, The Raven, Theatre Of Blood . . .
Vincent Price, prince of darkness, is dead. Who can resist the ritualistic
mourning incantation? - 'Horror cinema will never be the same without him.'
But of course horror cinema was never the same with him. Never the same from
movie to movie - when would this gaunt actor-chameleon put on his
sepulchral-serious colours and when his self-spoofing motley? And never the
same, seen historically, in the post-war Price heyday as it was in the
earlier era of Lon Chaney or Boris Karloff.
Almost single-handedly Vincent Price created a new realm of Gothic cinema:
one where stomping monsters gave way to silken aristocrats, monochrome (and
often monotone) mayhem to a richly-coloured Romanticism sometimes curdling
into camp.
His best movies were the series of Poe-based films made with director Roger
Corman. Here the damask snarl of a voice - Missouri-southern mixed with
stage-trained Shakespearean elocution - gave us the beat of Poe's taunting,
haunting prose. And the patrician-bloodhound face summoned up all those Poe
aristos, marooned in their mansions as troublesome guests dropped by. 'That
noise, sir? Just my sister trying to emerge from her resting place. That
scream, sir . . . ?'
The only time I ever met Price, it was in his pink-washed villa halfway up
the Hollywood Hills. He already looked frail from long illness. But he
talked for an hour; showed me round his art collection (he has written books
on painting and was once reported to be the highest-paid art lecturer in
America); and rolled out his career history for me like a red carpet.
He was a living half-century chronicle of Hollywood. After early stage
experience with, among others, Orson Welles's Mercury Theatre, he came to
screen fame in the late 1930s as Sir Walter Raleigh to Bette Davis's Queen
Elizabeth I. Then he spent the next two decades working for a connoisseur
series of Mad Directors, including Otto Preminger (Laura, 1943) and Cecil B
DeMille (The Ten Commandments, 1956). DeMille was his favourite: probably
because, like a good horror director, CB expected other people's imagination
to work along with his own.
'He never had a script,' says Price. 'He'd have a Bible on his desk and that
was the script]' The film's visuals were not always
quick-off-the-drawing-board either. 'In The Ten Commandments I had a line to
Sir Cedric Hardwicke, who was playing the Pharaoh and I said, 'Yonder lies
the city of Seti's glory]' And behind us there was this great blank
cyclorama which they'd superimpose the photograph on later. And DeMille
pulled me over and said, 'Vincent, you don't read that line with much
conviction.' And I said, 'Mr DeMille, I don't know what I'm talking about] I
look out there and all I see is a great blue screen.'
'He said, 'You're right, come with me to the studio.' And he showed me what
was going to be superimposed - temples, giant tombs and 13,000 slaves
walking up the Valley of the Kings pulling an obelisk] It was the most
extraordinary thing you ever saw in your life. I went back and read the line
a little more convincingly.'
But not - see the film today - all that convincingly. Price never seemed
wholly comfortable in either ancient or modern clothes. He was to find his
identity in between: in those fin de siecle, quasi-Victorian villains that
came his way after DeMille, multiplying like a benevolent plague in the 60s
and 70s.
'You've really made it in Hollywood when you're typecast,' he says. 'You
haven't made it until they say 'Oh he's the actor to play that kind of part,
let's hire him.' So they hired Price. Again and again. His novelty value was
that he was the suavest, most cultured 'heavy' in the history of screen
Gothic.
'I think Aristotle's theory of the villain is correct. He said the villain
should be a high-born, highly educated, very erudite man. Because if he has
to pay for his sins, we hoi polloi understand that we must pay for ours.
I've always tried to give my characters that kind of elegance.'
Different directors, though, had different uses for the Price charisma. For
years he was pulled two ways by two contrasting auteurs: William Castle, of
The Tingler and House On Haunted Hill, and Roger Corman.
'Bill Castle was a showman. He'd strew his movies, and his theatres, with
these outsize gimmicks. For The Tingler, he wired up the seats with little
buzzers so audiences would get shocked at key moments. And he sent the
actual tingler, which was like a kind of lobster, on a string round the
auditorium]'
Corman was ascetic by comparison. He steered Price through the incomparable
Poe films, poised between refined camp and psychoanalytic fable. 'Roger's a
very erudite man. He used to give Karloff and Peter Lorre and me directions
on how Jung would have approached this or Freud that, and he'd quote from a
book by Krafft-Ebing, and we'd say 'Yes, Roger, but how do we do the
scene?''
The Corman movies gave us the Price we know, and the Price we know gave us
hours of enjoyment screaming away in the darkened stalls. Did he think it is
innocent enjoyment?
'I've been asked a lot about this. You know, 'Is it harmful to our
children?' Well, it's not as harmful as the things that are harmful, which
we can see on every street corner. Horror is a kind of escape. It happens
when you're very young. Your favourite stories are Bluebeard and
Rumpelstiltskin, which are terrifying stories. We start early loving to be
frightened. 'Boo]' is probably the first word children react to, and they do
all their life.
'I've had people come up to me, people my age in their eighties, and say 'I
remember being frightened to death and holding hands with my boyfriend or
girlfriend.' And it's true: there's a kind of intimacy that's brought about
by adventure, and by adventures in evil.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931030

