FT933-10055

FT  06 AUG 93 / South African crisis talks end in stalemate


   By PHILIP GAWITH


PRESIDENT F W de Klerk of South Africa and Mr Nelson Mandela, the ANC
leader, failed to agree on ways to end the violence that has swept townships
east of Johannesburg, in a four-hour crisis meeting yesterday.
Government and African National Congress sources at the meeting said they
reached no agreement on the causes of the violence or the best way to end
it. Police Captain Wikus Weber said the death toll in six days of battles in
townships had risen to 137.
The meeting followed an announcement by Mr Mandela that arrangements were
being made for a joint tour of the East Rand townships by the ANC leader and
Mr Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the mainly Zulu Inkatha Freedom party. It
also came after the deployment of an extra 2,000 policemen, backed by the
Defence Force, in an effort to restore peace.
Before meeting Mr de Klerk, Mr Mandela had toured Katlehong, the township at
the heart of the violence, where he struggled to convey a message of peace
and reconciliation to angry supporters.
Addressing a crowd of about 8,000, Mr Mandela said: 'We are building a
nation. The answer has to be reconciliation, peace and political tolerance.'
His call was met, however, with repeated cries for weapons and the presence
of Umkhonto we Sizwe, the ANC's military wing.
Mr Mandela also accused the police and security forces of not caring about
black lives. 'To this government, to this police force, to the South African
Defence Force, the lives of black people are cheap. It is as if flies had
died.'
Mr Mandela apportioned some blame to the ANC, admitting that ANC supporters
had been involved in the violence. He said the violence was not only the
responsibility of the government. 'Real leaders do not just point fingers.'
This point is likely to be strongly argued by Mr de Klerk, who is also
likely to stress that a considerable onus rests on Mr Mandela and on Chief
Buthelezi to end the violence.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930806

