FT933-12647

FT  23 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: A sharp reminder of fight to come


   By DAVID OWEN


IT WAS the shortest contribution of the day by a Euro-sceptic. But it was
one of the most effective.
Sir Peter Tapsell rose straight-backed from his seat directly behind Mr
Major and icily congratulated the prime minister on 'his latest convert'.
Coming straight after two of his Euro-sceptic colleagues - Mr Michael Lord
and Mr John Carlisle - had confirmed they intended to side with the
government in the coming vote, the MP for Lindsey East's barbed remark was a
sharp reminder Mr Major had a fight on his hands.
Mrs Teresa Gorman, the MP for Billericay, offered a catalogue of British
industries which had suffered at the hands of EC regulations.
The determined Mrs Gorman had been the first Euro-sceptic of the day to
preach defiance, during a predictably rowdy session of prime minister's
questions.
She characteristically pulled no punches in labelling the social chapter a
'red herring'.
If Britain signed up to Maastricht the European courts would have the power
to impose the conditions enshrined in the chapter anyway, she argued. It
followed that MPs who did not want that to happen should be 'voting tonight
to try and prevent ratification'.
Mr Major's curt response that his backbench colleague was 'entirely wrong'
and should 'reconsider her position before 10 o'clock' was almost drowned
out by Labour cheering.
'The Lady is not for turning,' shouted Mr Denis Skinner, the left-wing
Labour MP for Bolsover, appreciatively.
With opportunities to speak in the six-hour debate strictly limited, several
Euro-sceptics had to be content with brief interventions in the prime
minister's speech.
Mr Nicholas Winterton, the MP for Macclesfield, said he was 'greatly
encouraged' by what Mr Major had to say but asked for an assurance that
sterling would not return to the EC exchange rate mechanism while he was
prime minister.
Mr Carlisle said the decision of a manufacturing company in his Luton North
constituency to consider closing down its European interests because of the
costs imposed by the social chapter had prompted him to change his mind and
vote with the govern-ment.
Later Sir Teddy Taylor, the Euro-sceptic Tory MP for Southend East, made an
impassioned appeal for MPs to support Labour's amendment.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930723

