FT933-10268

FT  05 AUG 93 / Printers set face against family firm: Roland Adburgham on a
bitter pay dispute set to cause repercussions in the industry


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM


THE SIX official pickets outside the gates of JW Arrowsmith in Bristol,
clutching golf umbrellas to ward off the summer rain, are sacked employees
with 70 years of service at the printing company between them. For the past
three months their only service has been on the picket line.
They and 116 colleagues were dismissed on April 26 when, after a ballot,
they took industrial action as part of a national campaign for a pay rise of
Pounds 6.50 a week. They were offered re-engagement with personal contracts,
a pay freeze and derecognition of their union, the GPMU print union. Only a
handful have returned to work.
Labour MPs have protested at the dismissals as an attack on workers' rights.
The company's business is badly hit but the management is unmoved. It says
it could not afford the pay claim, unofficial action had affected overtime
working since January, and it would not recognise a union that supported
disruption. It has obtained a High Court injunction to limit the number of
pickets to six.
The Arrowsmith dispute has become a test of will. On one side is a union
which claims 280,000 members, 80,000 of them in general printing, where it
is seeking to maintain its strength. It is led by Mr Tony Dubbins, formerly
general secretary of the National Graphical Union which merged with Sogat to
form the GPMU. On the other side is a family business established in the
19th century and headed by Miss Victoria Arrowsmith-Brown, a descendant of
the founder.
The dispute is being watched throughout the industry, where for the first
time since 1980 there has been no national pay agreement with the British
Printing Industry Federation, representing 2,400 companies and groups.
The federation offered Pounds 2.92 compared with a revised GPMU claim of
Pounds 6.50 a week plus an extra day's holiday, equivalent to 3.8 per cent.
'The key word is affordability,' said Mr Andrew Brown of the federation.
'There is only a very slow and painful process for the industry out of
recession.'
Since negotiations broke down, the union has sought individual deals on the
same basis. Some 88 companies have been affected by industrial action,
according to the federation, which says 1,060 of its members have reached a
settlement, nearly two-thirds for less than the claim.
Mr Tony Burke, deputy general-secretary of the GPMU, argues that the
federation's figures are 'all over the place' and the campaign has been 'an
outstanding success' with 1,600 companies meeting the claim. He said: 'What
has been remarkable has been the way our members have been prepared to stand
up and be prepared to ballot to get a decent pay increase.'
He does not accept that some companies cannot afford it. 'During the
recession commercial printing has not been affected in the same way that the
rest of manufacturing industry has been.'
Two other companies where there have been dismissals after industrial action
are also being picketed: Revell & George of Salford, Manchester, and Harvest
Printers of Macclesfield, Derbyshire. Neither company is as big as JW
Arrowsmith, which employed 162 people before the dispute, and is the only
one where derecognition is an issue.
It seems an unlikely company to be enmeshed in an intractable dispute. It
published Diary of a Nobody and Three Men in a Boat, and its reputation
today rests on technical typesetting for scientific journals such as Nature.
Its skilled workforce was not noted for its militancy. Until recent times,
Miss Arrowsmith-Brown was addressed as Miss Victoria.
Industrial relations deteriorated after the withdrawal of a bonus scheme in
1988. Mr Geoff Collard, branch secretary of the GPMU, says: 'After 1988 it
was never the same. Miss Arrowsmith-Brown's reputation as a boss suffered
badly. The national wage campaign of 1993 was a trigger that would have been
pulled anyway.'
On the picket line, the sacked workers agree. 'The dispute is purely about
events within the firm,' said Mr Brian Willcox, who had been with Arrowsmith
for 33 years. The workers believe the dispute was exploited by the company
to reduce its workforce - partly because of technological changes - without
incurring heavy redundancy costs.
Miss Arrowsmith-Brown, in her spartan office, says the company has been
reduced in size but that is a consequence of the dispute and not a planned
management conspiracy. 'Really the issue is about pay, and our inability to
meet a pay claim, and that for us is the beginning and end of it,' she says.
'But there is a tendency to want to make it an issue of derecognition.'
She says the company was badly hit last year and made a trading loss of
Pounds 210,000 on a turnover of Pounds 4.6m. The total pay bill in 1992 was
11 per cent higher than the previous year, and the company calculated that
it could achieve break-even this year - but only with a pay freeze.
Since the dismissals, she has had one meeting with Mr Dubbins, but there
were no negotiations. Miss Arrowsmith-Brown says: 'I think naturally people
are watching to see what happens, but most firms wouldn't have been prepared
to do what we did, which was to sacrifice business accounts.
'We are probably doing about half the business we were before the dispute.
But we think we can survive - there is no reason why we cannot operate at a
reduced rate successfully.'
A defeat for the GPMU at Arrowsmith might encourage erosion of its power in
general printing, where it has avoided the fate of its predecessors in the
national newspaper industry. A consequence already of the failure to reach a
national settlement is that the federation will consult its members this
autumn on whether they want to negotiate a settlement next year.
Mr Burke says there has been 'a great deal of partnership' in the past and
the national agreement had given the industry stability.
Mr Clive Fricker, the federation's south-west regional director, says:
'There is no orchestrated plan to oust the union from general printing.
We've had very positive relations with the GPMU which have stood the test of
many problems.
'But there is a question over the worth of the national agreement which has
to be debated. The jury is out.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930805

