FT934-10109

FT  06 NOV 93 / Arts: Previn and Shostakovich


   By JOHN ALLISON


Two of Shostakovich's most significant works, the First Cello Concerto and
Fifth Symphony, formed the core of Wednesday's Barbican Hall concert by the
London Symphony Orchestra. Both pieces stand as peaks of the 20th-century
repertory; they also transcend the Socialist Realism genre to which they
belong.
Although over 20 years separate them (the symphony came first, in 1937),
they were conceived in similar circumstances - under the menacing eye of
Soviet cultural apparatchiks - and represent triumph over adversity. Each is
deeply ironic, with every limitation turned to advantage.
In the current assessment of orchestral provision for London, the LSO - its
future at the Barbican guaranteed - is the only one of the four major bands
not under threat from the Arts Council apparatchiks; and its performance of
the Cello Concerto gave the impression of minds unconcentrated by the
absence of worry. Ensemble was precarious. Andre Previn, the orchestra's
Conductor Laureate, seemed uninvolved; Yo-Yo Ma's solo playing was
thoughtful in the melancholy slow movement, but mechanical elsewhere,
thwarted by the idiosyncrasies of Previn's beat.
Fortunately, Previn found his form for the Scherzo of the symphony, in which
he disclosed real instinct for the Landler rhythms. The introspective Largo
was deeply felt, wonderfully bleak and desolate, with admirably sustained
string playing and piquant contributions from the woodwind Previn conducted
a blazing, boisterous finale.
The evening had opened with the first British performance of Previn's own
Cello Sonata, premiered in Amsterdam in March. For a contemporary chamber
work it had the rare benefit of a captive, packed Barbican audience. The
idiom is uncontemporary: a pale blend of Shostakovich and Copland with mild
infusions of modern jazz. Its three rambling movements lasted a long
half-hour. Yo-Yo Ma, accompanied by the composer at the piano, played as if
it meant something to him, but Ma's programme note - 'He is not trying to
write a great work' - sounded apologetic.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931106

