FT933-9891

FT  06 AUG 93 / World Stock Markets: Conflicting equity signals emanate from
Malaysia - The market is at a peak


   By KIERAN COOKE


The Kuala Lumpur equity market is putting out conflicting signals.
Since the beginning of the year the composite index has surged by more than
22 per cent. On most recent days the market has been reaching new highs,
closing yesterday at 785.49.
Yet brokers describe the market as lethargic. 'The index might still be
going up, but there is not much excitement about,' said one.
Brokers are a hard group to satisfy. Earlier this year dealers were
complaining of fatigue as frenzied activity took daily trading volume in
Kuala Lumpur to levels well above those of Tokyo or New York. On one day in
April more than 1bn units valued at nearly MDollars 2.5bn (Dollars 1bn) were
traded.
Most of that activity was focused on secondary stocks: rumours of impending
government contracts and license awards, for instance, drove some relatively
unknown stocks up by as much as 300 per cent.
'That was a real gamblers' market - almost completely rumour driven,' said a
broker. 'Now people have settled down. It is the institutions and foreign
funds that are now taking a more measured look at the fundamentals. They are
opting for the quality, blue chip stocks.'
Most large companies are performing well against the background of continued
buoyant economic growth. In each of the past five years Malaysia's GDP has
risen by more than 8 per cent. Earlier predictions that growth would slow as
the country felt the full effects of recession in its main export markets
seem ill-founded: most analysts forecast growth once again above the 8 per
cent level this year.
The pattern of market activity, as compared to April, has completely
reversed. Then, there were high volumes traded, but there was only a slight
rise in the market. Now volumes are low, around an average of little more
than 2m shares, but the index has kept on rising.
A handful of companies account for more than 50 per cent of total market
capitalisation. Relatively slim trading in their stocks can quickly change
the market's direction.
Tenaga, the partially privatised electricity utility, and Telekom, the
telecommunications company, which together account for over 30 per cent of
total market capitalisation, have been performing well, trading near or at
their highs for the year. Their shares closed yesterday at MDollars 11.10
and MDollars 15.70 respectively.
Banking stocks, led by Maybank, the country's largest financial institution,
have been performing particularly well recently. Maybank's full year
figures, due soon, are expected to show the kind of growth for which many
western bankers would give up their board room chairs: in the six months to
December 31 1992 Maybank's pre-tax profits rose by 27 per cent to MDollars
346.53m (Dollars 135m).
Gaming-related stocks, long a favourite on the Malaysian market, have also
been climbing. Like skilful gamblers, some companies have been playing the
China card - letting it be known that they are likely to win substantial
gaming licenses in various Chinese cities. As a consequence their stock
prices have climbed.
The stock exchange authorities have stepped in to try to separate rumour
from reality: some companies have been reprimanded for being less than
candid about the exact status of their China projects.
Politics have also been influencing market behaviour. There has been a
considerable amount of corporate restructuring over recent months. Analysts
say that much of this is due to important elections within the dominant
United Malays National Organisation in November.
A closely fought contest is under way for UMNO vice-president, the outcome
of which is likely to determine who succeeds Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the prime
minister.
Another focus of attention is the 1994 budget, due to be presented to
parliament later this year. There are hopes of a reduction in the 34 per
cent corporate tax rate and other cuts in personal taxes.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930806

