FT934-11301

FT  02 NOV 93 / Norway may cut oilfield tax breaks


   By KAREN FOSSLI and REUTER


   OSLO


NORWAY is considering reducing tax concessions to oil companies that retain
high levels of debt, in an effort to stabilise government revenues from the
North Sea.
The measure would seek to offset revenue losses suffered after special tax
concessions were introduced last year, Mr Arne Oeien, permanent finance
ministry secretary, said yesterday.
The new rules had led to higher dividend payments and profit repatriations,
Mr Oeien told a petroleum tax conference in Oslo.
The measure being considered would affect both domestic and foreign oil
companies operating in the North Sea.
'We are currently considering different measures to avoid substantial
revenue losses as a consequence of the increase in dividend payments and
profit repatriations after the introduction of the new (petroleum) tax and
accounting rules in 1992,' Mr Oeien said.
Last year Norway introduced important tax reforms in the energy sector in
which it substantially increased the so-called special income tax rate, and
abolished a production allowance, together with petroleum royalty payments
on natural gas.
Mr Oeien said that as a result of these changes the reserve fund
requirements and dividend taxation rules were no longer effective in terms
of binding capital in the Norwegian petroleum tax jurisdiction, which mean
dividends are no longer taxed under under Norwegian petroleum law.
'As a result we foresee that the companies will increase the value of their
debt substantially, one effect being large (tax) revenue losses,' Mr Oeien
said. The Finance Ministry was reviewing ways of discouraging high debt
levels.
Mr Oeien said Norway actively used income tax to ensure the state a larger
share of total (petroleum) revenue when the oil price increased, and to
avoid a serious worsening of the working climate for the oil companies in
times of lower pre-tax incomes.
Options being considered were an increase in the so-called special income
tax and changing the regulations so that companies would be discouraged from
maintaining high debt levels as a way of increasing tax allowances.
Norway's current account surplus jumped to NKr15.37bn (Pounds 1.4bn) in
January-August from NKr10.63bn in the same period a year ago, the Central
Bureau of Statistics said, Reuter reports from Oslo.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931102

