FT932-6977

FT  26 MAY 93 / MacGregor guarantees future of discount rail fares


   By RALPH ATKINS


THE THREAT of Tory revolts yesterday forced a series of government
concessions on British Rail privatisation - including legal protection for
discount fares for the elderly and young, and extra measures to protect
against big fare rises.
As ministers won Commons approval with a majority of 15 for the
privatisation bill, the government also pledged to help ensure the survival
of the London travelcard.
However two Conservative MPs voted against the government on a proposal to
allow BR itself to bid for franchises - a move again rejected by Mr John
MacGregor, transport secretary.
The climbdowns, which were more extensive than expected, came after two days
of talks between Mr MacGregor and Conservative MPs worried about the impact
of BR privatisation on voters in their constituencies.
Under an amendment to be made in the House of Lords, private companies
bidding for franchises will now have to continue the discount fare schemes
for the old and young - although not for families - offered by British Rail.
The bill already required franchise operators to give discounts to the
disabled.
Mr MacGregor said he would also tell the new director of franchises that
private rail operators should be required to continue travelcards that cover
other transport systems, as well as rail in London and other cities.
Under another amendment to be made in the Lords the director of franchises
will have the power to judge what are reasonable fares - a concession
described by Mr Brian Wilson, Labour's transport spokesman, as a
'spectacular reversal' that would mean the franchise director, not markets,
setting ticket prices.
Mr MacGregor said that current discounts for the elderly and young people
were not statutory but were regarded by BR as 'primarily marketing
incentives'. They were likely to continue and expand after BR privatisation.
Sir Keith Speed, the Tory MP for Ashford who led the revolt, said he was
'totally content' with Mr MacGregor's announcement on concessionary fares.
Mr MacGregor was later forced on the defensive as he sought to block a
Labour amendment to allow BR to bid for franchises.
Some Tory rebels were satisfied, however, with an assurance that guidelines
for awarding franchises will be rewritten to put more emphasis on motivating
BR managers.
Further slight comfort for BR managers came as Mr MacGregor said they would,
in effect, be able to compete with private bidders by improving their
performance, so no bid was regarded as better value.
Bidder attacks climbdown, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930526

