FT932-7001

FT  26 MAY 93 / Arts: The Golden Palm is torn in two - No one can argue with
this year's winners at Cannes


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


It has been quite a Cannes. Changeable weather brought scattered showers,
sunny intervals and billowing white soap-suds. These last cascaded from the
Palais roof in honour of Sylvester Stallone's arrival with his Alpine action
thriller Cliffhanger. Havoc was created on the Croisette as the
pseudo-snowflakes gradually turned to sudsy slush. But Cannes always turns
to sudsy slush at the close. The old celebrities are wheeled out to to
donate Golden Palms; the winners respond with arias of pretend surprise; and
crocodile tears are wept by all at the end of another tiring and frequently
tiresome junket.
But wait. This year everyone did seem to enjoy Cannes. The competition was
as lively as I can remember. No four-hour Greek movies about alienated
beekeepers: the worst ordeal was bumping into Splitting Heirs again and
watching it turn on a slow spit of condemnation by the world's press. So
much for Eric Idle's remark about 'snotty British critics'.
As for the prizes, who could quarrel with a Golden Palm torn in two and
handed to Jane Campion's The Piano and Chen Kaige's Farewell To My
Concubine? The Australian film is a dazzling tale of passion and puritanism
at violent odds in an Edenic wilderness. The Chinese film brings 50 years of
traumatic national history to life and gives the pageant a human pulse in
its story of two love-crossed Peking Opera performers.
Meanwhile Britain's Naked won a Best Director and Best Actor prize for,
respectively, Mike Leigh and David Thewlis. Wim Wenders won Special Jury
Prize for his long, ambitious and ever so slightly cuckoo Faraway, So Close.
And the only major injustice was that Kenneth Branagh's Much Ado About
Nothing went prizeless, though it probably gave more people at Cannes more
pleasure than anything since the invention of alcohol.
Back in the viewing-rooms the final days were the usual rush of movies,
cross-cut like a Keystone comedy by the accelerated viewing schedule. (Must
catch all those grapevine recommendations.) So one came out of Canada's I
Love A Man In Uniform, all about a TV actor who dresses as a cop and shoots
up Toronto, only to run straight into Hollywood's Falling Down, in which
Michael Douglas dresses as a yuppie and shoots up Los Angeles. One laughed
happily at Desperate Remedies, a camp New Zealand melodrama crossing the
costumes of The Wicked Lady with the winking excess of Strictly Ballroom,
only to have the smile steam-ironed off one's face by Australia's
stultifying Broken Highway (Down Under attempt to do Tarkovsky).
Next one experienced gentle catatonia at the new Hou Hsiao-Hsien from
Taiwan, an austere epic of family life and political history called The
Puppetmaster, followed by the jangling overkill of Elaine Proctor's Friends.
This last, a British-co-funded production about three ex-university female
pals in South Africa, is notable mainly for the performance as a white
radical hellraiser of Australia's Kerry Fox (An Angel At My Table). Fox
smashes us straight in the face early on with her neurotic power, but then
just goes on smashing. 'Once more, darling, with less feeling' should have
been the director's advice to his star.
Finally we saw two movies that stayed rather than melted in the mind or
caused superficial mayhem there. One was Ken Loach's Raining Stones, a
recession comedy set in a North England racked by daft entrepreneurialism
and doleful wit. (More when it comes to England.) The other was Tian
Zhuangzhuang's Blue Kite from China, shown out-of-competition in the
Directors Fortnight.
This is another Eastern film playing private lives against public history.
But its plainspun pathos is more touching than The Puppetmaster, the
tensions it depicts between political events and family emotions more subtle
than Farewell To My Concubine. As an unseen narrator's voice recalls his
boyhood, we watch three generations of parents and step-parents, aunts and
uncles, friends and enemies traversing 30 years of purgatorial Maoism. They
struggle to keep happiness intact in an age of political informers,
Communist 'consciousness-raising', rural exile and dawn raids by Red Army
thought-police. The movie seldom leaves the domestic arena - kitchens,
bedrooms, meal-tables - yet an entire social-political history is written
into the minutiae of setting and behaviour.
For making this document about life under Mao, Tian Zhuangzhuang was denied
a visa to attend the Cannes festival. More, even before Cannes the movie had
to be completed and edited in Japan by others under the detained Tian's
remote-control instructions. For those who doubt the beneficial role of
international film festivals, here is one radiant reason why we need them.
Would this brave movie otherwise have been seen by anyone - let alone by
critics, distributors and fellow film-makers from every part of the world?

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930526

