FT934-11257

FT  02 NOV 93 / Unionist party welcomes peace moves


   By TIM COONE and DAVID OWEN


MEMBERS of the Ulster Unionist party yesterday welcomed the announcement
that the British government would put forward its own proposals for bringing
about a lasting peace in Northern Ireland.
But they poured cold water on the notion that round-table talks were the
right format for discussing the proposals. The UUP's preferred structure
would be bilateral meetings between the UK government and the province's
constitutional parties.
Mr Ken Maginnis, UUP deputy leader and security spokesman, said the party
would not sit with Mr John Hume, the leader of the Social Democratic and
Labour party, as long as the latter continued his talks with Mr Gerry Adams,
the Sinn Fein leader.
Mr Maginnis called on Downing Street to take a firmer line on terrorism if
it expected to get unionists back to the negotiating table.
In the wake of one of the worst weeks of sectarian violence in Northern
Ireland for two decades, 'the greatest danger now is in doing nothing about
terrorism, not doing nothing about talks', he said.
Speaking from Peru, where he is official UK observer to the constitutional
referendum, Mr Maginnis warned Mr John Major not to be 'panicked into new
political measures'.
He rejected the Dublin government's six-point plan, announced by Mr Dick
Spring, the Irish foreign minister, last week, as a basis for resuming
negotiations.
'The Irish government will try to seize the initiative, and if we move
forward solely on the basis of the Spring principles, this opens the door to
all sorts of interpretations and which will only increase the level of
violence,' he said.
A long-time advocate of selective internment of key paramilitary cadres, he
said that if internment measures were taken to 'disrupt the command and
control structures of the paramilitary organisations, the government would
get a very positive response from unionists'.
Mr Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist party, made no direct
reference to the possible resumption of round-table talks in Commons remarks
that were interpreted as surprisingly conciliatory. But he said many in
Ulster were 'alarmed' by some of the Spring plan's contents.
Mr John Taylor, UUP Europe spokesman, welcomed Downing Street's intention to
bring forward its own proposals but described round-table talks as 'a
mistaken formula'.
Pressure for such talks to resume was 'misplaced', Mr Taylor argued, calling
for new British proposals to be discussed instead in bilateral meetings
between Downing Street and the province's constitutional parties.
Mr William Ross, UUP chief whip, said the time for talks was past and action
was now needed. He joined Mr Maginnis in calling for the government to give
'careful consideration' to selective internment. The aim should be to
'behead' terrorist organisations of their command and control centres, he
said. Enough of the terrorist 'godfathers' were identifiable to make a
difference.
Sir James Kilfedder, the Ulster Popular Unionist MP, said it would be
'sensible and desirable' for talks between the province's constitutional
parties to resume as soon as possible. He also called for unequivocal
support for the security forces.
Mr James Molyneaux, the UUP leader, has so far refrained from commenting in
public on the increased pressure on his party to join round-table talks.
According to his office he will not do so until Wednesday at the earliest.
The party's nine Westminster MPs plan to hold their weekly meeting on
Thursday as usual.
In Dublin, the foreign ministry expressed disappointment at the unionist
reaction to its proposals, but said: 'We must wait for Mr Molyneaux to
respond.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931102

