FT932-3219

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Company News: Deutsche Bank combines US
securities units


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


DEUTSCHE Bank, Germany's biggest banking group, announced yesterday it was
combining its US securities activities into a single subsidiary, Deutsche
Bank Securities.
Previously, Deutsche Bank's securities operations in the US were divided
between three units: the Wall Street equity research and brokerage firm CJ
Lawrence, the international securities and asset management businesses of
Deutsche Bank Capital, and the Treasury market primary dealership Deutsche
Bank Government Securities.
Under US banking and securities industry regulations, the businesses of CJ
Lawrence and Deutsche Bank Capital were kept strictly apart, preventing the
German bank from co-ordinating its activities between the two units, and
hindering the overall development of its securities business in the US.
The new subsidiary, however, will operate under Section 20 of the
Glass-Steagall Act, which allows banks to engage in corporate securities
dealing and underwriting activities if revenues from these activities do not
exceed 10 per cent of the company's gross US-based revenues.
Mr John Rolls, Deutsche Bank's chief executive officer in North America,
said the reorganisation was to ensure that a co-ordinated strategy for its
US securities operations could be developed under one roof. He said the
regulatory restrictions involved in having two key units, DBCC and CJ
Lawrence, operate under separate banking and securities laws had been
burdensome.
He said: 'The brick wall between DBCC and CJ Lawrence was becoming
untenable.'
The newly-united Deutsche Bank Securities will take aim at the rapidly
expanding market in cross-border securities, underwriting, broking and
dealing. It hopes to help feed the growing appetite of US investors for
European securities, and benefit from the growing interest in US stocks
among European investors.
Mr Rolls said the US operations of Morgan Grenfell, the UK investment bank
100 per cent-owned by Deutsche Bank, would not be affected by the
reorganisation.
Deutsche Bank Securities will be based in New York, with about 500 staff. It
will be run by Mr James Moltz, currently chairman and chief executive of CJ
Lawrence, and Mr Horst Risse, head of DBCC.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930615

