FT931-3966

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (14): Prague continues to set
the pace - With its road links to other big European cities and its
population of 1.2m the city is likely to remain the most important market in
the two republics / Czech and Slovak Republics


   By ANNE STEADMAN


IT is clearly too early to assess the longer-term prospects of the very
recent partition of Czechoslovakia into the separate Czech and Slovak
republics. Observers are cautiously optimistic. And so far it appears to be
a case of a 'velvet' divorce following the 'velvet revolution' of 1989.
Bratislava has been elevated to the capital city of the new Slovakia. But
Prague, with its road links to other big European cities, its heritage and
its population of 1.2m is likely to remain the most important property
market in either of the two republics.
The former Czechoslovakia took the decision to attempt to restore land to
its pre-1948 owners instead of offering compensation - the favoured option
in other former Eastern bloc countries. And, despite considerable scepticism
in a country where red tape can reach nightmare proportions, the restitution
programme is generally perceived to have gone reasonably well.
Aengevelt, Hillier Parker's German associate, has just published a detailed
research report on 10 eastern European cities. It says that nearly 70 per
cent of buildings in Prague city centre have been restored to their previous
owners. And it adds that properties for sale are not only coming onto the
market through privatisation tenders for former state enterprises, but
increasingly from private individuals whose properties have been restored to
them.
There is, however, a continuing acute shortage of good standard office space
in Prague. And there are many hurdles which would-be developers need to
clear. For a start, Prague is an exceptionally beautiful city and planning
is rigidly controlled. Prague's 'Listed Building Trust' extends to some
750ha and is, according to Aengevelt, the largest such area in the world.
Mr Chris Barrow of Debenham Jean Thouard Zadelhoff estimates that Prague's
existing office stock is in the range of 1.2m-1.6m sq m. However, although
many - if not the majority - of the buildings are architectural gems, most
were left to deteriorate under the previous regime and as much as 90 per
cent is in need of considerable restoration to bring it up to acceptable
western European standards.
Partly because of planning difficulties and the extreme unlikeliness of any
demolition of existing buildings, new development has largely been confined
to a few refurbishments. Jones Lang Wootton estimates that the stock of such
offices amounts to about 30,000 sq m.
However, the European Business Centre, close to the city centre, was a
totally new building, completed in Prague last year. Developed by European
Property Developments of Vienna, it provides a total of 2,990 sq m on seven
levels behind a replica facade.
Tenants include Philip Morris, Jacobs Suchard and RWE Konrad Adenauer
Stiftung. Rents, quoted in Swiss francs and payable in Czech korunas, vary
from SFr55 a sq m a month to SFr 60 a sq m a month.
New supply in 1993 is likely to be dominated by the 24,000 sq m
International Business Centre immediately behind the new Atrium Hotel. The
complex will be the first truly modern office building in Prague. The
developer is the French construction company CBC with the mighty French fund
Caisse des Depots et Consignations. Jones Lang Wootton is quoting rents of
between DM52 a sq m a month and DM60 sq m a month - again payable in local
currency.
Caisse des Depots is also involved with the prominent Myslbek site, one of
the few prime available sites in the favoured first district. The plan is to
build 20,000 sq m of offices and 10,000 sq m of new shopping space. Now at
detailed design stage, a start on site should be made this year says Mr
Angus Mcintosh of Healey & Baker.
As part of the deal, the site owner, the City of Prague, will receive
slightly more than DM53m for a 99-year lease, DM12.8m of which will take the
form of a 20 per cent stake in a joint venture between Caisse des Depots and
the City.
Despite Prague's clear need and unsated demand for new office space,
relatively high rents and little prospect of oversupply, some investors are
holding back. For example, the European Plaza development on the main access
route to Prague airport, due to start in spring last year, is still stalled
on the starting blocks.
The project is planned to total 18,000 sq m and be built in three phases.
However, despite backing from a consortium of Austrian and Swiss banks and
various assorted others, nothing has yet happened. Now the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development has conditionally agreed to come on board and
there just may be some action, say joint agents Healey & Baker and Rydens.
There are quite a few other projects where much talk a year or so ago has
not been translated into visible activity. For example, the Wilson railway
station site with which AMEC has been associated and the Bubny site where
there is apparently a possible 1m sq m of new space, and the US property
developers Edward Callam Interests are involved, are cases in point.
However, in the context of the highly nervous state of most western
economies it seems that few financial institutions or other potential
sources of finance will be keen to rush in to support such large, long-term,
expensive and highly risky propositions. It will no doubt be several years
before these highly ambitious plans have any real chance of being taken
forward.
Bratislava has historic experience as a capital city - it was first so
designated in 1536 when it became the capital of the Hapsburg portion of
Hungary. However, realistically, with its population of a mere 441,500 and a
fair representation of the concrete block style of architecture among its
buildings, it has some way to go. In fact, when comparing the starting
positions of both new republics it appears that Slovakia will have the more
difficult transition to economic independence in most respects.
There is very little office space available in Bratislava's city centre.
Aengevely reckons that already there is un-met demand for at least 10,000 sq
m. This amount will clearly increase as the city's new role evolves.
Office rents in city locations are now standing at between DM14 a sq m a
month and DM32 sq m a month - and up to DM9.50 a sq m a month in areas
within 15 to 20 minutes' travelling time.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

930312

