FT934-8701

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (13):
If the ski boot fits, wear it - David Goldsmith helps you pick a vital
accessory


   By DAVID GOLDSMITH


SKI BOOTS are probably the heaviest, most formidable and most alien footwear
one can encounter in life, so individual experiences of them tend to be
memorable.
When I was working as a ski instructor in Cairngorm in Scotland 19 years ago
I owned a pair of uncompromising jet-black boots, later viewed as classics.
They were Lange Worldbeaters and they were as stiff and as strong as tanks.
Lange was about the only piste-credible ski boot brand of that era. Only a
few years earlier Lange had been the first mass-producers of plastic ski
boots, while the world still thought and worked in leather.
That memory sprang back last spring at the Munich sports fair, where the
world's equipment makers show off their gear for the year to come. I sat at
Lange's glitzy stand and clipped on a pair of 1993/4 racing boots. The cosy
liner bore no comparison to the punishment I had endured in my 1974 boots
but the shell remained an unmistakable Lange, with its angular lines and
micro-adjustable clips.
The colour, however, had mutated into a weird shade of metallic lilac.
'There was a mix-up in the colour mixing department and they decided they
liked the mistake,' said Gordon Fraser, the young and enthusiastic Scotsman
who imports Lange boots into the UK.
Deja vu and colours aside, the experience brought home the extraordinary
revival of traditional clipped boots this winter. Manufacturers and skiers
are increasingly reverting to traditional four-clip boots; shells have
reverted to conventional overlaps with a tongue you pull out. The rear-entry
boot, with all its advantages of easy walking to ski lifts, easy putting-on
and taking-off, and often blissful comfort, is being swept aside.
The current turmoil in the market is as much to do with a fashion revival as
it is to a lack of common sense. The ski industry is led by an elite -
racers and instructors - whose opinions tend to colour the better judgment
of the salesman in the ski shop.
Ski boots are very personal things. In a lifetime you can count yourself
fortunate if you score two or three really successful (as distinct to
memorable) purchases. The rear-entry revolution of the 1980s was very much
led by consumer demand for more comfortable and practical footwear. The
elite, however, designed the performance out of them by filling their shells
with ridiculously soft and sloppy padding.
Currently, ski boots are available with every kind of entry - rear, mid or
front. However, the skiing performance of a boot relates very little to how
you enter it. A ski boot's primary function is to encase your foot in a firm
close-fitting environment, with a shell that does not allow too much wobble
of the lower leg.
Classic boots - those that excel against the criteria of comfort, control
and convenience - tend to be a better bet than the untested experiments that
flood the market every year. One or two of the following should be worth a
try, but remember that fit is a personal thing. Best buys do not really
exist in ski boots.
BOOTS TO LOOK AT
Salomon rear-entry: Nine years on from the classic Salomon SX91 of 1984, the
direct derivatives are still superbly designed and practical boots. Models
73 (fine for a beginner or intermediate) through to 93 (advanced/expert) are
particularly recommended. The advantages of these boots are instant entry,
memory of tightness, easy walking and the best flex control on the market.
Tecnica TNT AVS: A bright orange, head-turning expert boot with a good shell
design and superbly constructed inner boot. Has an anti-vibration sole.
Raichle Flexon Slalom: A comprehensive re-design of a classic racing boot.
Fine inner boot and interesting new clips which can be opened but re-locked
at the same tightness.
Lange Mid/Rossignol Mid: Similar designs (Rossignol owns Lange). One of the
better mid-entry designs, with a clever system that automatically locks the
forward lean for skiing when the second (of four) clip is tightened. Overlap
shell. Good intermediate's boot.
Nordica Vertech: A new variant of a traditional four-clip boot. Easy entry,
because of a translucent soft overleaf of plastic under the clips which is
fused to the main shell. Good intermediate/expert boot.
Salomon Evolution: One of three new design strategies of Salomon (the others
are the Integral and Optima) with novel features. The Evolution is the
closest to a conventional front-entry boot, but has an easily turned dial at
the back which releases the back for comfortable walking. Intermediate to
expert model options.
MAKING THEM COMFORTABLE
The most miserable thing you can face on a skiing holiday is not bad weather
but a painful pair of ski boots. 'Ski boot pain enters a different dimension
of suffering,' says David Allsop, in The Bluffer's Guide to Skiing. 'Chafed
calves, bloodless toes, suppurating blisters, mind-numbing cramps, bruises
on bruises and toenails which curl up like poppadums. If you invest in only
one item of ski wear equipment, make sure it is a ski boot which fits.'
This is indeed no bluff, but there are many ways to remedy ill-purchased ski
boots. The best ski shops are equipped with heat-stretching devices, clamps
and grinding equipment. Foam padding and custom-moulded insoles can be used
to relieve the pressure and muscular points that cause hell.
The experts in this field include a French company called Sidas, which makes
custom-fitted ski boot insoles, among other things. In Britain its equipment
and materials are deployed at a number of ski shops; Europa Sport
(0539-724740) has information.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

931113

