FT932-6784

FT  27 MAY 93 / Yen soars to record high against Dollars


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


JAPANESE officials were yesterday at pains to damp speculation on foreign
exchange markets about US support for a higher yen as the Japanese currency
surged to a record Y108.65 to the US dollar.
Japanese government bond prices moved sharply higher. But the stock market's
Nikkei average closed only 264.23 points up at 20,895.99.
The yen's renewed appreciation in Tokyo followed strong dollar selling in
New York on Tuesday triggered by a US Treasury Department report to Congress
stating that a higher yen could help reverse Japan's huge trade surplus.
The report said that while the administration believed exchange rates should
reflect economic fundamentals, a decline of the dollar against the yen could
be seen as a reflection of forces tending to limit and ultimately reverse
Japan's widening trade surplus. The currency markets took it as indicating
US support for a higher yen to reduce Japan's Dollars 111bn (Pounds 72bn)
trade surplus, a view which has been fuelled by comments from US officials
earlier this year.
Yesterday's market reaction to the Treasury report is likely to have
irritated Japanese officials, increasingly concerned that the yen's 12 per
cent appreciation against the dollar since the beginning of the year could
hold back the country's economic recovery, widely expected later this year.
Japanese officials said the market was overreacting and moved quickly to
counter suggestions that it was US policy to guide the yen higher.
The Japanese authorities were joined in their attempts to damp speculation
by Mr Lawrence Summers, US undersecretary of the treasury, who said in
Washington that the report did not aim to outline US policy but simply
stated a fact.
In April, President Bill Clinton's remark that a stronger yen could reduce
Japan's trade surplus led to a bout of dollar selling.
While US officials attempted to play down those remarks, more recently Mr
Ron Brown, US secretary of commerce, triggered a similar dollar sell-off by
stating that market-driven exchange rate movements could correct the
US-Japan trade imbalance.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930527

