FT934-11344

FT  01 NOV 93 / UK Gilts: Bank report likely to prop prices


   By PETER MARSH


PROSPECTS for inflation in the UK over the next few months will occupy the
minds of gilt specialists with the publication tomorrow of the Bank of
England's latest report on price pressures. This is expected to paint a
picture of inflationary forces throughout the economy being fairly weak and
give another push to the generally downward drift in gilt yields of the past
few weeks.
This trend received a jolt last week when gilt prices fell sharply on
Wednesday soon after a successful Pounds 3.5bn auction by the Bank of
five-year benchmark bonds. The decline in gilt prices, which stabilised by
the end of the week, was due mainly to a concentrated effort by hedge fund
managers in the US to sell European bonds including French and German
securities.
However, the Bank's quarterly inflation report tomorrow is likely to put a
floor under gilt prices by commenting on the generally favourable trends in
inflation of recent weeks. With the Bank's economics department trying to
set new standards in thinking of new ways to measure inflation, attention
has been focused particularly on its new definition of core inflation -
categorised as the year-on-year change in the retail prices index, excluding
both mortgage interest payments and indirect taxes covering VAT, excise
duties and local authority tax.
In the Bank's last inflation report in August, its economists were fairly
bullish about this core inflation figure. They reckoned this would stay at
about 3 per cent during the rest of this year and next year. This optimism
might have seemed somewhat misplaced in view of the larger than expected
September figures for the year-on-year change in the RPI and in RPI
excluding mortgage payments - the latter being the Treasury's official
measure of underlying inflation - which came out at 1.8 per cent and 3.3 per
cent respectively.
However, many gilt analysts go along with the Bank's general line on
inflation as expressed in the August report. They say the blip upwards in
the year-on-year figures for September was largely a result of changes in
retail prices a year ago and should not distract attention from the flat
picture for inflation over the past few months. According to economists at
Morgan Grenfell, the October figures for the RPI and the Treasury's measure
of underlying inflation - due to be released by the Central Statistical
Office next week - will be relatively low at a year-on-year 1.7 per cent and
3.2 per cent respectively.
The general absence of worries about price pressures in the economy was
behind the signs of latent demand for gilts in the financial markets towards
the end of last week. 'After the sell off in gilts in the middle of the week
it was noticeable that as soon as the yield difference between gilts and
German government bonds crept up to anything just over 100 basis points,
buyers for the UK securities entered the market on the grounds that the
instruments looked cheap,' said a bond specialist.
Over the week, the yield for the benchmark Treasury 9 per cent bond maturing
in 2008 crept up 13 basis points, being quoted on Friday night at 7.2 per
cent after 7.07 per cent the previous week. Its price on Friday was 116 1/4
, a fall on the week.
The yield increase for short-dated gilts was slightly higher for the week,
with some investors moving out of these instruments on Friday after comments
from Mr Eddie George, Bank governor, indicating that an early cut in
interest rates was unlikely.
In spite of these comments many traders expect Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, to bring down bank base rates from 6 per cent at around the time
of the Budget on November 30.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931101

