FT931-4067

FT  12 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Institutional influence holds the balance -
The bid for Owners Abroad


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


RARELY HAS a takeover battle gone so close to the wire or its outcome been
so dependent on one shareholder than in Airtours' Pounds 289m bid for rival
holiday group, Owners Abroad.
As the offer approaches its closing date next Tuesday, Mercury Asset
Management, a 14.2 per cent shareholder, seems to hold the key.
But even if, as seems likely, MAM decides to back Airtours, the outcome of
the bid is finely balanced.
Owners Abroad's directors, combined with loyal shareholders who always stick
with the prey, control enough to make even the smallest institutional vote
count.
Yesterday's purchase by Airtours of 4 per cent of Owners Abroad shares in
the market was less than it wanted and will not be enough to secure the bid.
Perhaps the most tantalising factor that might swing shareholders behind
Airtours, is the prospect of a re-rating of the sector.
Such has been the ease of entry into the holiday business, the alacrity with
which market leader Thomson has unleashed price wars and the disloyalty of
price-conscious consumers that the stock market has rarely granted the
sector a price earnings rating in double figures.
But an enlarged Airtours could have sales of Pounds 1.2bn, net assets of
more than 140m, a huge chest of cash and pre-tax profits of Pounds 100m.
Against such a force, Thomson might initiate an immediate noisy skirmish,
but could well give up trying to remain double the size of its nearest
competitor, settling down instead to enjoy the spoils of shared market
domination.
That could bring greater stability and predictability of earnings. After
numerous holiday company failures in recent years, this prospect might have
figured large in Mr Michael Heseltine's decision not to refer the bid to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission. Airtours could then rise to the heady
heights of an average market rating.
Certainly Mr David Crossland, Airtours' chairman, has displayed his
deal-making instincts and been less than generous. If he wins, Owners
shareholders will have been taken out on an exit multiple of 10 times
prospective earnings. But that should not necessarily be a reason to let
Owners Abroad off the hook.
Mr Howard Klein, Owners Abroad's chairman, says Owners made one mistake in
the pricing of its first summer 1992 brochure, Owners' share price suffered
and Airtours pounced.
While this is partly true, there are fundamental differences in the way in
which the companies operate which suggests that Owners could have been more
tightly run.
Owners' 1992 profit margin at less than half that of AIrtours may be
explained by the pricing error. But according to stockbrokers Hoare Govett,
Airtours has a considerably lower fixed cost base and more productive
employees.
Owners has also failed to convince some institutions that it has adopted the
right philosophy for what is, undoubtedly, a respected charter airline, Air
2000.
Owners has built a large airline and sells its spare capacity in the market.
By contrast Airtours, like Thomson, has chosen to have a fleet size dictated
by the maximum winter requirement. It has, as Mr Crossland says, 'kept the
kerosene away from the veins' and kept the airline as a transport division
of the holiday company.
Even Owners Abroad's strongest card - its proposed commercial link up with
Thomas Cook, the travel agency and its German sister company, the tour
operator LTU - has failed to excite some of the larger shareholders.
Owners claims the benefits would be substantial. But Thomas Cook's
conditional tender offer for 12.5 per cent of the shares at 150p each, 6p
below the current value of Airtours' share offer, probably weakened Owners'
defence by appearing so diffident.
So does Mr Crossland lead a team that could manage the integration? He has
shown an unparallelled market instinct in building Airtours almost entirely
through organic growth. Putting the two companies together would require
different skills.
Owners shareholders that accept the offer are making a leap of faith. A
considerable springboard for that leap comes from the skewed nature of
holiday company profits.
Nobody will be fooled by the sharp jump in earnings that will follow
Airtours absorbing all of Owners 1993 summer profits, but none of its winter
1992-93 losses.
But next year, Airtours has scope to reduce Owners aircraft fleet - or more
importantly excess winter capacity - thereby attacking the source of
greatest potential losses.
And Owners Abroad's point that Airtours might in two years' time have
started to find it increasingly tough to achieve organic growth is not the
issue now for Owners shareholders.
With the Airtours share price consistently rising, the market appears to be
saying that the bid will succeed. If it does, Airtours' new shareholders
must steel themselves.
Almost the first thing they will see splashed across the newspapers, is an
announcement of the annual summer holiday price war. To many this might seem
that the management of their company is being remarkably cavalier with their
precious profit margins. They have to decide whether to risk this bumpy
ride.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930312

