FT931-4178

FT  12 MAR 93 / Wrangle over Hong Kong talks reaches climax


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


BRITAIN and China's month-long contest over the terms of Hong Kong talks
reaches its climax today when Governor Chris Patten addresses the
Legislative Council (LegCo), the colony's law-making body.
Late last night Mr Patten told China that he will today publish legislation,
which provides for greater democracy in the colony, unless Beijing has
agreed to negotiations without preconditions.
Mr Patten was prepared yesterday to announce publication of the bill, but
two hours before he was due to do so China indicated a softening of its
position sufficient for him to stay his hand another 24 hours. He cancelled
a planned address to LegCo.
The the day's developments were mirrored in the performance of the Hong Kong
stock market. The Hang Seng Index, the market's indicator of the performance
of blue chip stocks, fell by nearly 190 points when news of Mr Patten's
decision to publish his bill swept the market. It recovered to end the day
116.62 lower at 6,371.84 when he postponed his appearance before LegCo.
The expectation in Hong Kong last night was that China would drop its
outstanding demands and that Mr Patten would be able to announce talks
today. Both sides were, however, engaged in brinkmanship of a high order.
Mr Patten has given himself maximum room to manoeuvre. He has ordered that
the publication of the entire Hong Kong government gazette be delayed until
he speaks to LegCo. If China has not committed itself to talks by then he is
expected to gazette the bill.
Britain and China agreed nearly two weeks ago to the principles upon which
their talks would be based. Since then, China has attempted to determine the
membership of Britain's negotiating team and refused to set a date for
talks.
On Tuesday, Mr Ma Yuzhen, China's ambassador in London, was called to the
Foreign Office and told that Mr Patten would announce publication of his
bill yesterday if Beijing had not dropped these conditions to talks. China
replied early yesterday afternoon, indicating that talks could begin this
month, although no precise date was indicated. It is also understood that
Beijing was still arguing about the way in which Hong Kong government
officials would be described in the communique the two sides were drafting.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930312

