FT934-10050

FT  08 NOV 93 / BT calls up a Pounds 2bn-a-year vision of the future: A
system to supply television via the telephone


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR KEVIN Foster's neat detached house in Suffolk is unique in the UK. It is
the first home to be able to receive television pictures down an ordinary
telephone line using British Telecommunication's latest video-on-demand
technology.
The subject matter on the screen is not exactly riveting - a succession of
BT television advertisements. But the transmission of the pictures marks the
first time that the BT technology has moved outside the laboratory.
Mr Foster is a senior BT engineer working on the video-on-demand project at
the company's laboratories at Martlesham Heath near Ipswich. Two things are
remarkable about the images on the TV set in Mr Foster's living room. The
pictures, although a little grainy, appear well up to video recorder
standard. And they have come down an ordinary line from the nearest
telephone exchange - at Kesgrave three miles away.
BT believes the success at Mr Foster's house means that it should be able to
deliver television services into about 90 per cent of the 23m homes linked
to the BT telephone network.
'We have definitely proved the technology,' said Mr Nigel Cole, leader of
the team that worked for more than two years on taking the 'noise' out of
the system and ensuring that the digital signal could travel more than three
miles down the line. His colleague, Mr Gordon Hathaway, leads a team which
has developed the methods of squeezing the digital pictures by factors of
100 to one to send them down conventional copper telephone wires.
This week the system moves to the BT boardroom for a decision on its future.
BT is thought likely to give the go-ahead for a series of trials, probably
in the Colchester area. To start with the trials would involve about 15 to
20 homes but could be extended to 5,000 homes towards the end of next year.
This stage of the development could involve investment of between Pounds 10m
to Pounds 20m. The next step would be a 250,000 home experiment in 1995
before taking the system nationally, which would involve investment of
several billion pounds.
Mr Steve Maine, BT director of visual and broadcast services, believes a
wide range of services could be provided apart from the obvious
video-on-demand feature films.
BT has already developed elegant ways of displaying and ordering the
available choices. Using infra-red channel selectors the consumer could
simply point at icons on the TV screen for everything from movies to comedy,
documentaries or sport. If movies are chosen the choice continues to broaden
via screen-based menus. Under the likely regulatory regime live
transmissions would be forbidden.
Unlike live television, the video-on-demand, viewers could rewind or scroll
forward.
But Mr Maine believes it will be possible to request, for example, Nick
Faldo's winning shots from the US Open and see them from a number of angles
seconds after they have happened. Other possibilities would include allowing
viewers to call up an episode of a serial or soap they have missed for a
small charge or look at a series of travel videos and actually purchase the
holiday using the screens.
BT is talking to a number of potential programme and information providers
including the BBC, Kingfisher and Pearson, owner of the Financial Times.
Mr John Tysoe, telecommunications analyst at Societe Generale Equities
believes BT has high hopes for the system.
He said: 'Sources inside BT are suggesting that video-on-demand could be
worth Pounds 2bn in revenue and perhaps Pounds 500m to Pounds 600m in profit
annually by the end of the century.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931108

