FT932-3270

FT  15 JUN 93 / Leading Article: Clipping the banks' wings


IN THE present economic cycle much of the world economy has suffered from
asset price inflation, followed by falling asset prices, stress in the
banking system and worries about the capacity of banks to finance economic
recovery. The price of such instability, in the shape of lost output and
jobs, is all too apparent, especially in the English-speaking economies, in
Scandinavia and in Japan. Hence the topicality of the question raised in the
annual report of the Bank for International Settlements: can a recurrence be
prevented?
The answer clearly hinges on the extent to which this was an exceptional
occurrence relating to one-off changes in the financial system. And at first
sight it is tempting to attribute the present problems to specific upheavals
in the workings of the financial markets.
In most developed countries, banks in the 1980s were subjected to a host of
deregulatory shocks, ranging from the abolition of exchange controls to the
lifting of quantitative controls on bank lending. This agenda, which
embodied the growing conviction on the part of policymakers that banks
should behave more like profit-maximising firms than socially conscious
utilities, was an exceptionally potent formula for racking up bad debts,
especially against a background of sharply rising share and property values.
The problems were compounded by moral hazard. Deposit insurance gave little
incentive for depositors to assess the creditworthiness of banks.
Re-regulation
It seems unlikely that such a tidal wave of regulatory change will be
repeated in short order. The current trend is anyway towards re-regulation,
not least in the form of the BIS's own capital adequacy rules. But there are
nonetheless grounds for thinking that a repeat performance cannot ultimately
be ruled out, the most important of which relates to the the central banks'
activities as lenders of last resort.
The readiness of central banks to provide liquidity to markets and
institutions helps ensure that there is no repeat of the depression of the
1930s. But it also introduces a generalised form of moral hazard by
socialising risk and facilitating speculative financing. At a more basic
level, the concessionary financing that accompanies bank support operations
is not without wider cost. While it insulates the bank creditors from loss,
it further weakens discipline.
Low inflation
At the macro-economic level, the remedy is a firm anti-inflation commitment.
But as the BIS itself points out, this can pose difficulties for the
authorities. In Japan in the late 1980s speculative excess co-existed with
low inflation. It could not have been curbed without an unwelcome
contraction in the real economy.
That leaves prudential supervision as a counterweight to a more competitive
financial environment. But while theoretically appealing, the practice is
more difficult. There is, for example, a tendency for supervisors to act
pro-cyclically, instead of counter-cyclically - witness how the BIS's
capital requirements were introduced just in time to encourage a credit
crunch. And innovation tends to wrong-foot the watchdogs.
But if instability in banking is endemic, there remain obvious priorities
when it comes to cleaning up the mess. The most pressing one now is a rapid
recapitalisation of the banking systems where the capacity to extend credit
has been impaired. In the UK and the US this is being achieved with the help
of a steep yield curve, whereby banks can borrow at low short-term interest
rates to invest in longer-term higher-yielding paper, including government
IOUs. In Scandinavia it has been achieved with the help of more direct
government support.
But in Japan, where the gap between short and long interest rates is narrow,
the authorities have been slow to impose the requisite balance sheet
restructuring. Given the size of the Japanese economy, that is a growing
worry for the rest of the world as well as the Japanese themselves.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930615

