FT932-3105

FT  16 JUN 93 / Amec wins Pounds 55m North Sea order


   By CHRIS TIGHE


PHILLIPS Petroleum UK has awarded Tyneside-based Amec Offshore a Pounds 55m
contract for fabrication of a 9,800-tonne integrated deck for the Judy
platform in the North Sea.
The deck will be part of the Pounds 765m Judy/Joanne oil and gas field
development.
Phillips said Amec clinched the contract against stiff international
competition.
Amec, whose Tyneside payroll has dropped from its 4,000 peak a year ago to
1,500, welcomed the order as a 'breathing space', allowing it to retain its
present shape and size while competing for more work, cutting costs and
improving performance.
The company said the Phillips order had safeguarded 500 blue-collar and 250
white-collar jobs, as well as 250 sub-contractors' posts.
Amec also announced it had won its first contract in mainland China. It will
build two accommodation modules for Phillips' Xijiang field in the South
China Sea. The contract, worth Dollars 15m (Pounds 9.8m), is a joint venture
with the Chinese Offshore Industrial Corporation, and fabrication will be
carried out at Dalian New Shipyard in north-east China.
Amec sees its China breakthrough as an important part of its drive to sell
its offshore expertise worldwide. Offshore fabricators are fighting a fierce
international battle for orders as work in the UK sector of the North Sea
dwindles, leaving large fabrication facilities under-used or empty.
Mr Arthur McQuillan, general manager of Amec Process and Energy
Construction, said the company's Tyneside facilities could cope with every
single piece of fabrication expected to come to the marketplace in the
coming year from the UK sector.
Even with the Judy order and two contracts worth a total of Pounds 100m,
which Amec won last October, the company's Tyneside yards will be running
below 50 per cent capacity. Mr Alan Scott, general manager of Amec Offshore,
said it needed to win two more significant orders this year to maintain
present workforce levels beyond the second quarter of 1994.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930616

