FT932-7146

FT  25 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Struggle to fix EC farm price
deal


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


EUROPEAN COMMUNITY agriculture ministers will today attempt to forge a
compromise on this year's farm price package, against a formidable list of
concessions demanded by France, and opposition among several member states
to increases in milk quota for Italy.
The European Commission fears the demands could break the EC farm budget and
risk unravelling last year's painstakingly negotiated reform of the Common
Agricultural Policy.
'It is not so much that the demands are massive,' one Commission official
said, 'but that the budget is so tight now that any increase could be fatal.
Plus (increases in) aid risks disrupting CAP reform.'
The farm budget, expected to come in at around Ecus35bn this year, is under
growing strain because of the currency turmoil of the past nine months.
The price package put forward by Brussels is, on the face of it, anodyne, in
that it derives almost wholly from the decisions on CAP reform taken last
year. But the attempts to chip away at it could turn into a challenge to the
the reform itself. France wants a 50 per cent increase in the amount of
compensation paid to oilseed producers for the land they take out of
production.
And in response to the CAP reform's injunction to oilseeds and cereals
producers to set aside 15 per cent of their land on a five-year rotational
basis, Paris wants the period of rotation cut to two years. The Commission
recently raised the set aside percentage to 20 per cent for land which is
not rotated, to prevent farmers from maximising production by leaving only
their least fertile land fallow.
Senior Commission officials concede that France, in the end, will be allowed
to pay its farmers additional national - rather than EC - subsidies for set
aside. But limiting the quantity will be vital if the new CAP is not to be
undermined, especially if there is a knock-on effect through other member
states.
France also wants to loosen the new limits on buying in surplus beef to the
EC's growing meat stockpiles; a reduction in the proposed 5 per cent cut in
butter prices; and a restoration of the 4.7 per cent cut in EC milk quota
made in 1989, although this was thereafter fully compensated.
The milk demand, to help farmers in France's mountain areas, got backing
from Ireland, which wants to buttress its smaller dairy (and beef) farmers.
But it further complicated the row over Italian milk quotas. Italy, in
principle, is to get an extra 900,000 tonnes of milk quota, if it can
demonstrate that it is cutting 1.6m tonness of its now 2.5m tonnes over
quota output. The Benelux countries and the UK remain to be convinced that
it is on target - unlike Spain and Greece which negotiated similar
concessions in exchange for reducing the overproduction.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930525

