FT934-11103

FT  02 NOV 93 / International Company News: Transamerica sells TIG stake


   By RICHARD WATERS and ROBERT GIBBENS


   NEW YORK, MONTREAL


TRANSAMERICA, the San Francisco-based insurer, is close to leaving the
property/casualty business with the sale of its remaining 27 per cent stake
in TIG Holdings.
Based on yesterday's share price, the sale of 17.3m TIG shares would be
worth Dollars 417m.
The insurer floated TIG as a separate company on the New York Stock Exchange
earlier this year as part of a move to concentrate on life insurance and
financial services.
Ahead of the flotation, it was expected to retain a substantial stake in TIG
for some time before being able to complete the disposal at a favourable
price.
However, a turn in the property/casualty underwriting cycle has led to
higher premiums in some parts of the market, bolstering profits in recent
months and adding to investors' interest in insurance companies.
TIG, which was floated at Dollars 22 5/8 a share, closed yesterday at
Dollars 24, up Dollars  1/8 , after the news.
'We had indicated at the time (of the flotation) that we had intended to
reduce our holding of the common stock as promptly as possible,'
Transamerica said yesterday.
The insurer has exercised an option under an agreement made at the time of
the flotation to sell its remaining shares.
A registration statement for the sale is expected to be filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission within the next two weeks, TIG said.
Transamerica's share price rose by Dollars  5/8 on the announcement to close
at Dollars 57 5/8 .
Edper Enterprises, a key company controlled by the Peter and Edward Bronfman
interests of Toronto, plans a convertible preferred share issue to be
distributed by way of rights, writes Robert Gibbens in Montreal.
Edper Enterprises is minority-held by the public and senior managers of the
Edper-Hees group.
It controls Brascan, a financial services holding company; Hees
International Bankcorp, a holding company; and Carena Development, a
property group.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

931102

