FT932-13434

FT  23 APR 93 / The Property Market: Hammer falls on the last of the old
school - Vanessa Houlder on the departure of Sydney Mason after more than
four decades at Hammerson


   By VANESSA HOULDER


When Mr Sydney Mason, the autocratic 72 year-old chairman of Hammerson,
retires this summer, it will be the end of an era for the property company
he has dominated for the past 34 years.
Mr Mason has been virtually synonymous with the group since he took over as
chairman from Lew Hammerson in 1958. Although he relinquished the post of
managing director in 1988, the company is still perceived as his personal
fiefdom.
His retirement will also mark the end of an era for the industry. Mr Mason
is the last surviving member of the postwar generation of property tycoons,
the last of the men of the old school.
Mr Mason's retirement is widely seen as long overdue. Nonetheless his
colleagues talk reverently of his 'gut feeling' for property, his
instinctive ability to size up the value of a deal. 'He has a nose for
property; he can smell a deal,' says Mr John Parry, Hammerson's managing
director. 'He is street wise.'
Much of this nous comes from experience, a matter of knowing the finer
details of every deal in the market. Mr Mason expects the same standards
from his advisers. When he travels abroad to inspect a building, agents are
well advised to memorise the details of every building on the route from the
airport to the city.
For his part, Mr Mason credits the group's growth to 'good luck' and
'location'. The advantages of sticking to central, prime locations has been
at the heart of the group's philosophy. He is scathing about the foolishness
of venturing into areas like the London Docklands. 'Every British developer
could have done the docklands at any point over the past 20 years,' he says.
Mr Mason claims that it was comparatively simple to build up a property
group in a period when properties could be financed without relying on
rising rent reviews. 'We started in a modest way and grew by internal
growth. It was relatively easy.'
But Hammerson's evolution was not a passive affair. Much of the skill behind
its growth came in piecing together development sites without alerting
potential sellers and forcing up land prices. The company put together 12
different sites for Woolgate House in the City of London, and assembled five
sites for a retail complex at Brent Cross, the UK's first out-of-town
shopping centre, which took 17 years to bring together.
Likewise Hammerson became noted for its ventures abroad. It developed
properties and acquired companies in continental Europe, Canada, Australasia
and the US, making it the most international of the large UK groups.
Mr Mason has described his early years in the business as one of 'pirates
and buccaneers'. But in the second half of the 1980s, the group was
increasingly criticised for being too cautious and failing to exploit rising
property values.
When in 1988 Rodamco, a Dutch investment group, made a bid for Hammerson, it
said: 'During a period of buoyant growth in the UK property sector,
Hammerson has lost its way and has failed to take full and profitable
advantage of an active market.'
Rodamco's Pounds 1.3bn bid was foiled when Standard Life, the Scottish
insurance group, came to Hammerson's rescue. Standard increased its stake in
Hammerson from 17.8 per cent to 29 per cent by paying Pounds 11 a share for
its ordinary shares. Standard's loyalty has so far been poorly rewarded: the
ordinary shares yesterday stood at Pounds 3.20.
But for all Hammerson's conservatism, the company has not been immune from
investment disasters. In October 1991, it had to write off Pounds 90m
against a single property in New York. It has recently made a Pounds 12.9m
provision against land at Mississauga in Canada.
Hammerson's international spread of businesses has also served it badly. It
has been exposed to currency fluctuations while the simultaneous decline of
most of the world's property markets has meant that it has reaped few
benefits from its policy of diversification.
The group's net asset values and earnings per share have also fallen below
the level of a decade ago. It is no longer the UK's third largest property
company; both British Land and Slough Estates have larger market
capitalisations. This week Hammerson announced it was to reduce by more than
half its dividend, from 20.5p to 10p.
Its gearing of 114 per cent is acknowledged by the company to be too high,
although Hammerson plays down its need to raise more cash. 'You don't want
to reduce your gearing too much at the bottom of the cycle,' says Mr Parry.
Nonetheless, nothing can be ruled out until Hammerson's new management has
got its feet under the desk. A rights issue may still be on the cards,
perhaps to the tune of Pounds 200m. That would stem the need to sell more
assets, which does little for the group's cash flow since income from
property would broadly equal interest costs. A rights issue would even allow
the company to turn from seller to buyer.
The company's new chairman will be Mr Geoffrey Maitland Smith, chairman of
Sears. The new chief executive will be Mr Ron Spinney, a former managing
director of Greycoat, who will replace Mr Parry, who also retires this
summer.
Mr Maitland Smith promises 'evolution not revolution'. One of the
management's first tasks will be to conduct a review of Hammerson's
strategy: This will examine:
the constraints imposed by Hammerson's policy of owning a relatively small
number of big properties around the world;
the company's management structure and its perceived failure to bring in
young talent;
and the geographical and sectoral balance of its portfolio.
For the first time since 1949 when he joined the group, Mr Mason will not be
playing a part in the group's strategy. He is clearly disappointed at
stepping down at one of the lowest points in the group's fortunes. 'After 40
years during which we have had sustained growth in value, dividends and
share prices, to go out at the bottom is sad,' he said.
Although Mr Mason will maintain a link with the company as life president
and a non-executive director, he will no longer exercise any real influence.
'I won't be breathing down Ron Spinney's neck,' he promises.
He is cautiously optimistic about Hammerson's future, playing tribute to Mr
Spinney's background and knowledge. He says 'time will tell' what the change
of management will do for the company. 'I can only hope it will be a highly
successful decision,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930423

