FT932-3193

FT  15 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: US wins round in Canadian hog
war


   By LISA BRANSTEN


   WASHINGTON


FOR THE first time in three attempts US pork producers last week won a round
in their ongoing fight for tariffs on hogs from Canada, but they continue to
criticise the dispute settlement process established by the US-Canada Free
Trade Agreement.
A binational panel last week upheld duties imposed on Canadian hogs after
the US International Trade Commission found that Canadian subsidies to its
hog farmers injured US producers.
The panel found that the subsidies did injure US producers during the period
from April 1, 1989 to March 31, 1990.
Mr Charles Harness, a spokesman for the US National Pork Producers Council,
said he was pleased with the decision, but that his organisation continues
to have problems with the process.
'We think the (dispute settlement) process needs some reworking so a panel
cannot overrule US law,' Mr Harness said.
In 1989 a panel reversed tariffs imposed on pork products entering the US on
the grounds there was not substantial evidence that the imports were causing
injury to US pork producers.
In 1992 another binational panel ruled there was not substantial evidence to
uphold tariffs on live hogs for a period from 1988 to 1989.
Canadian pork producers said they will probably not challenge the decision.
'While we do not agree with the result we will live with it in this case,'
said Mr Tom Smith, president of the Canadian Pork Council.
Mr Smith said the period under investigation was a particularly hard one for
Canadian pig farmers and therefore they did receive relatively large
subsidies.
He said the subsidies are much lower and a panel reviewing later periods
would be unlikely to find that US pork producers were injured by Canadian
subsidies.
Generally Canadian producers are satisfied with the existing dispute
settlement process, but the panel had strong criticism for the warring
parties.
It chastised all involved for failing to comply with their obligation to
file the correct documents promptly.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930615

