FT934-10278

FT  06 NOV 93 / Ozawa says his political donations were legal


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


MR Ichiro Ozawa, the most powerful man behind Japan's coalition government,
yesterday admitted to receiving millions of yen from a disgraced
construction company but said this was legal.
Mr Ozawa, co-leader of the Japan Renewal party, second largest partner in
the seven-party coalition, admitted he had received donations from Kajima,
one of Japan's top construction companies, whose vice president was arrested
last month on charges of bribing local politicians for contracts.
Even if, as is likely, the donations received by Mr Ozawa were technically
legal, this will embarrass the government, as it attempts to pass laws to
reform the scandal-ridden political system.
Coalition and LDP negotiators yesterday held a first meeting to seek a
compromise on political reform plans, on which Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime
minister, has staked his job.
This episode will also hamper Mr Ozawa's attempts to acquire a clean public
image, a condition for his re-entry into national politics.
Mr Ozawa, joint leader of the former LDP faction that brought down the last
government, was instrumental in the formation of the coalition, but
preferred to remain behind the scenes to prepare his next move. He also
needed to give the public time to forget his links to former LDP political
godfather Shin Kanemaru, Mr Ozawa's mentor, who is on trial for tax evasion.
Mr Shinji Kiyoyama, a senior vice president of Kajima, told prosecutors he
gave Mr Ozawa Y5m (Pounds 31,200) every six months for the past two to three
years, according to the Asahi Shimbun daily newspaper.
Under current law, individual politicians are entitled to receive Y1.5m per
year from a single donor. Political groups may receive Y100m. Mr Ozawa's
denial implies that the cash was destined for the LDP, not him, and
therefore was legal.
More than 20 executives from six leading companies and four local
politicians have been arrested during an eight-month inquiry into corruption
in the construction industry, a big source of political funds. But so far
public prosecutors have stopped short of charging national politicians or
officials.
However, public prosecution officials did let it be known last week that Mr
Kiyoyama also handed cash to Mr Noboru Takeshita, a former LDP prime
minister. Mr Kanemaru also received money from the company, say Japanese
press reports.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931106

