FT934-11365

FT  01 NOV 93 / Card wars set to enter a new battle phase / A look behind a
management change at Visa International


   By RICHARD WATERS


Credit card adverts in the US are full of bemused consumers. In one, a man
stands immersed in a mound of rival plastic cards (he's lucky, he's picked
the best one out of the heap). In another, cards littering a lawn are sucked
up by a vacuum (only one is left at the end). The message in them all is the
same: in a market awash with credit and charge cards, how do consumers
choose - and which of the many issuers are going to come out on top?
The ripples from this US credit card war have spread outward in recent
months, in the process hastening a reshaping of the management which leads
Visa International, the world's pre-eminent payment organisation.
The US may no longer dominate the credit card world in the way it once did -
the US share of the world's credit card transaction volume fell below a half
at the beginning of the decade. But the US still accounted for around 47 per
cent of the Dollars 884bn (Pounds 585bn) charged to general purpose credit
cards last year, and the US banks remain the most powerful force in the Visa
organisation (Visa, like its rival Mastercard, is owned by the banks around
the world which issue its cards).
Also, industry executives know that what happens in the US, where the credit
card industry was born and matured first, will eventually be mirrored
elsewhere.
At the end of August Mr Robert Heller, head of Visa in the US, resigned
under a cloud as the payment organisation's US market share took a rare dip.
From a 45.4 per cent share of credit card volume in 1991, Visa slipped to
44.9 per cent in the first six months of this year: hardly dramatic, but
notable after the organisation's previous steady advance. Mastercard, on the
other hand, lifted its share by 1.5 percentage points to 27.6 per cent.
The reason: 'co-branded' cards launched by AT&T and General Motors, which
give users discounts on those company's products, were issued under the
Mastercard umbrella. Co-branding has become the most effective weapon in the
battle to encourage consumers to use cards.
Last week Mr Charles Russell, the man who over the past 10 years has given
Visa International, the parent organisation, its clear lead in the plastic
card business, said he will retire next summer. He will yield the chief
executive's job earlier, in January, to Mr Edmund Jensen, an outsider who
joins Visa from west-coast based US Bancorp.
Mr Russell had said many times before that he planned to retire. In a 1988
interview, he said he would go after three years. In 1991, it was one more
year. Finally, it seems, the banks that sit on Visa's board decided to take
him at his word.
'It's time, after 10 years. Chuck has done a great job,' says Mr Jim Bailey,
head of Citibank's US retail banking operations. He adds, though, that it
was Mr Russell who approached the board over the timing of his retirement,
rather than the other way round.
Other banks in the US, while also paying tribute to Mr Russell's
achievements, murmur that Visa has become too bureaucratic. The organisation
wasn't being managed 'to the bottom line,' said one.
If it was time for Mr Russell to go, he at least had some influence over the
new management team. Mr Carl Pascarella, who now heads Visa in the US, was
Mr Russell's chosen successor to Mr Heller. And, according to reports from
some industry executives, Mr Russell also chose Mr Jensen as his own
successor.
Despite Visa's little wobble in the US, Mr Russell leaves it the world's
most powerful plastic card brand. From a 40 per cent share of worldwide
credit card business in 1980, Visa advanced to nearly 52 per cent last year,
with 304m cards in issue. 'What he did for Visa on a worldwide basis is
prodigious,' says Mr David Robertson, president of the Nilson Report, a
credit card industry newsletter.
It is the US, though, which still sets the pattern for the industry - and
there, the toughest battles in the credit card war have yet to be fought.
Despite lower interest rates, cuts in fees and the introduction of
incentives, credit cards remain one of the most profitable products for most
banks. Rock-bottom US interest rates make it possible for banks to prosper
even in such a competitive market - helping to bring more new issuers into
the business.
RepublicBank of New York, for instance, entered the market only at the start
of this year: its 13.9 per cent interest rate is at the bottom end of the
range for standard bank cards, yet is more than 10 percentage points over
current money market interest rates.
Interest margins like this have helped to support the many incentives which
card issuers now offer. RepublicBank gives holders a cash rebate of up to
Dollars 250 a year on their credit card purchases, a trend started in the
late 1980s by the Discover card, then owned by Sears but now part of the
independent Dean Witter Discover. That card's cash-back incentive has
attracted 38m cardholders since its launch in 1987, giving it more cards
even than American Express (though its share of transaction volume is far
smaller).
When US interest rates eventually turn up again, the rush to offer
incentives is likely to slow. 'Margins are still pretty good,' says Mr
Bailey of Citibank. '(But) in this immensely competitive market, we haven't
yet had to contend with rising interest rates.'
When that happens, the American consumer could really see war break out.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931101

