FT932-13507

FT  23 APR 93 / The Bundesbank springs another interest rates surprise


   By DAVID WALLER and QUENTIN PEEL


   FRANKFURT, BONN


THE Bundesbank proved once again yesterday that it likes nothing better than
to be the master of the unexpected.
On Wednesday, the bank published poor money supply figures, and Mr Theo
Waigel, the finance minister, issued a dire prognosis about the state of
public finances.
Neither development was thought likely to encourage further loosening of
German monetary policy and economists and bond traders had resigned
themselves to a quiet Thursday afternoon contemplating the German central
bank's profit figures - the reason given in advance for yesterday's press
conference.
The Bundesbank was almost predictably unpredictable yesterday, wrong-footing
observers with cuts in official rates. The Lombard rate was cut 0.5 per cent
to 8.5 per cent and the discount rate by 0.25 per cent to 7.25 per cent -
the first cuts in official rates since March 18.
In the weeks since the last cut, the market's attentions had been focused on
the Bundesbank's weekly activities in the money markets. Week by week
throughout April, the German central bank tantalised observers by making a
series of minuscule cuts in the rate at which it provides wholesale funds to
the banking community.
This created the psychological climate where markets were prepared to
continue being disappointed - and found themselves pleasantly surprised
yesterday - even though the cuts in themselves were hardly going to reverse
Germany's increasingly severe recession.
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, Bundesbank president, made little direct reference to
the real economy yesterday, saying the decision was justified because money
supply for all the short-term disappointment of Wednesday's figure - was
again under control.
However, economists are convinced the Bundesbank is increasingly tailoring
monetary policy to developments in the real economy. The gravity of the
recession was underscored by figures from Bonn on Wednesday showing the
economy had further deteriorated since March.
And Mr Waigel's forecast that his central government budget deficit could
reach DM70bn (Pounds 28.4bn), compared with an earlier forecast of just
DM54bn, has shaken business confidence. The main factors in the increase are
the costs of higher unemployment, a shortfall in tax revenues, and the
burden of subsidising eastern Germany.
Inflation is still running at over 4 per cent in the west of Germany - more
than twice the central bank's long-term target of 2 per cent. In this
context the rate cut shows the Bundesbank's recognition of the severity of
the downturn, economists said.
Yesterday's cuts have already set off expectations of further reductions
soon. June 17 is already being touted as the date for the next cut in
official rates.
The Bundesbank, however much it may now be committed to bringing rates down
further, is likely to do this only in a way which continues to maintain the
element of uncertainty. It is eager to avoid the danger that the D-Mark will
weaken as investors make the assumption that German interest rates are set
to plunge rapidly and quickly.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930423

