FT932-6994

FT  26 MAY 93 / Letter: Single institution is no answer for engineers (365)


   From Mr T J EVANS


Sir, Andrew Baxter's report, 'Professionals who want manufacturing taken
seriously' (May 11), builds a hypothesis on the foundation that UK
manufacturing industry is undervalued and that the engineering profession is
both underrated and underesteemed. It goes on to explore whether a single
engineering institution and a centralised system to accredit courses would
sharpen the image of engineering and then improve UK industrial performance.
Through a structured and representative attitude survey, chemical engineers
have recently taken a view on the features they wish to see in a unified
profession. Less than 5 per cent of chemical engineers support, as a
preferred option, either a single engineering institution or a
centralisation of authority in the new relationship between a reformed
Engineering Council and the institutions.
We want real partnership with a central body which would then act primarily
as a public relations focus for the profession as a whole. This is, in fact,
the very proposal which was put forward by the presidents of the civils,
mechanicals, electricals and chemicals in their November 1992 input to the
Fairclough inquiry on the unification of the engineering profession. It
remains an attractive alternative to the vision presented in the Fairclough
Report, 'Engineering into the Millennium'.
Much has been made of the need for more 'interdisciplinary' abilities in
engineering. Success in interdisciplinary areas is not about training each
individual with some kind of multidisciplinary tool kit, but rather about a
high level of disciplinary specialisation. What we need are first-rate
groups of specialists able to appreciate each other's contributions and make
effective contributions as a team.
Further, it is simplistic to see different branches of engineering as being
any more closely related than are the science disciplines of physics,
chemistry and biology on which engineering builds. We hear no corresponding
call for a single science institution, nor do we find a single institution
representing engineering in, say, the US or Japan. Indeed, as in the UK,
these nations enjoy flourishing individual societies of chemical engineers.
T J Evans,
general secretary,
Institution of Chemical
Engineers,
Dovis Building,
165-171 Railway Terrace,
Rugby CV71 3HQ

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930526

