FT932-6850

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (12): Cassandra of the Greenback
 -Profile of SBC's Jim O'Neill


   By JAMES BLITZ


MOST CURRENCY forecasters puzzle endlessly these days over whether the US
economic recovery will sustain its recent pace,and whether the US dollar
will go up or down.
But Mr Jim O'Neill, the 37-year-old head of currency research at Swiss
Banking Corporation in London, has never expressed much doubt about the US
currency's long-term future: 'I am still looking for the dollar to reach new
historic lows against the D-Mark. The only question is whether it will
happen this year or in the next three years.'
Mr O'Neill might well merit the title 'Cassandra of the Greenback'. He is
one of the most outspoken among a minority of analysts who believe that the
US currency has a strong downside.
After the US currency plunged to a historic low of DM1.3860 against the
D-Mark last September, many analysts became overnight dollar bulls. The year
1993 was dubbed 'the year of the dollar,' with a few forecasters suggesting
that it would top DM1.85 against the D-Mark this year.
The US currency's recent inability to break the DM1.67 level has taken more
than a few investors by surprise.
But Mr O'Neill believes that its performance fits his bearish outlook on the
currency.
The tall Mancunian with a no-nonsense manner says that he became a true
dollar bear five years ago, when he returned to the UK after a long period
working in the US.
He came away believing that, after several decades as the world's greatest
power, the US had been pushed into a long-term decline by the massive
increase in the US budget deficit in the 1980s.
'For a country that loves consuming rather than saving, President Reagan's
policies made things worse by increasing the deficit,' he says. 'And it will
be an increasingly difficult problem to solve now because of interest
payments.'
President Bill Clinton's difficulties getting a budget deficit reduction
package through Congress underline Mr O'Neill's long-term pessimism. 'The
idea that a democratically elected president can cut the deficit by reducing
spending is nonsense,' he says.
Compounding his view is a belief that the Federal Reserve will cut interest
rates again to stimulate economic growth. 'Growth may be stronger in the US
than in Europe,' he says. 'But it is weak compared to the experience of
Americans. They are used to GDP of 4 per cent at least.' Mr O'Neill admits
that it is not easy to take such a tough position on the world's major
currency, especially on days when the dollar performs well. 'Quite a few of
our customers phone me up from time to time and say: 'Will you ever be
bullish for the dollar?''
Nor is it a position he relishes taking. Despite being an obsessive
Manchester United supporter, he does not tend to hold very passionate views.
He has a great fondness for the US and appreciates its advantages over
England. He says: 'We moved from the US with our young son and I fear that,
when he's 15, he'll suddenly say: 'Why aren't we living in the US instead of
England.' But although he admits to being a maverick among forecasters, Mr
O'Neill believes that the problem is not with his judgment but with the
market's.
'I have never known an environment where so many investors have had the same
view - that the US is going up and that Europe is going down. The scope for
disappointment is very great.'

The Financial Times


London Page V

930526

