FT934-11511

FT  30 OCT 93 / Arts: Yesterday's crooner - Radio


   By B A YOUNG


RADIO 2 is generous to yesterday's favourites. We have Dusty Springfield
this week and also a more interesting one, Michael Holliday, 'Britain's Bing
Crosby', who committed suicide aged 38 some 30 years ago. Dennis Lotis
presented a survey on Tuesday, but did not reach the conclusions I did.
Holliday had a lovely voice and wrongly spent his life challenging Crosby
instead of an opera star like Thomas Allen.
He gave his rich, deep baritone impeccable intonation, faultless breathing,
as much understanding as possible of the shallow songs, and no accent. He
left school at 14, served in the Merchant Navy and the Royal Navy, and
learnt to play the guitar. What musical future for him except as a popular
singer? He was not good-looking and was too unpunctual and forgetful to be
cast in a musical (sometimes he had to invent new words as he sang). A sad
loss of talent.
Mike Harris' Dark Messiah (Radio 4, Monday) takes an unusually strong line
against missionaries. It is set in a Methodist mission in Kikuyu territory
in Kenya in 1929 and its theme is female circumcision. This was common when
I was in Africa in the 1940s: indeed a doctor in Nairobi showed me a film he
had made of the procedure, a purely routine affair, he said. These
missionaries think it un-Christian. When 12-year-old convert Susan (Viviene
Rochester) has to be done to marry convert Benjamin, a chief's son, there is
bound to be trouble - especially as Benjamin's grandmother is against the
conversion of decent Kikuyu girls.
There is interesting detail about the mission even if the missionaries are
dull. Their leader (John Church) has to mediate between the government and
the Kikuyu Christian Association, whose activities grow increasingly Kikuyu.
There is a resident assistant (Gudrun Ure), dealing with African girl
converts. 'Girl-catcher', the Africans call her, and in the dreadful
conclusion that caps the fuss over Susan's decision to go along with tribal
custom, she is held in the sickbed where she is dying of fever and forcibly
circumcised.
Howling at the Moon (Radio 4, last Saturday) was an informed programme on
werewolves, with references to such sources as Petronius and John Webster.
It traced the habit of turning into wolves to the envy of primitive men, who
would dress up as wolves, those exemplary hunters. In the 16th and 17th
centuries there were many cases against people accused of lycanthropy, which
was associated with witchcraft. In eastern Europe the transference took
another line and gave birth to vampires.
Humans turn into horrible creatures in fairy-tales - consider Red Riding
Hood - and such stories go on, mostly for children. So what did we find on
Radio 5 last night but the tale of Eloise, in Joe Turner's Twentieth Century
Vampire, a checkout girl at the Co-op with a vampire Aunty Lucretia. At a
party at Lucretia's suburban castle, she hopes to try her teeth out on Wayne
from the meat-counter. It goes on for six parts, just like any old legend
from France or Hungary, only more outspoken.
If you go for legends, Radio 3 on Tuesday gave a new version of Dante's
Inferno. Peter Howell rewrote it as if Dante (Alec McCowen, excellent)
conducted a bus-load of visitors around the infernal regions. These were
seen afresh in the light of our modern world, and if it seemed cinematic,
that is how it should have seemed. There was ultra-cinematic music from the
BBC Radiophonic Workshop, performed by Serenata Notturna and Singcircle.
First heard in 1983, it was much better than the example they gave us last
week.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931030

