FT932-7000

FT  26 MAY 93 / Arts: La Boheme - Opera


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


After almost 20 years of pretty well constant use this production of La
Boheme has survived remarkably intact. The scene outside the gates of Paris
is as evocative as ever, although the sudden downpour of snowflakes as the
lovers start upon their parting duet is rather abrupt  - one imagines
stagehands in the wings shouting 'Cue snow]'.
Casts good and bad, Italian and otherwise, have passed through it. This one
was not bad, but definitely otherwise; there was not an Italian to be heard.
In an opera which entered the international repertoire virtually as soon as
it was written, this might not seem to matter, but there was an above
average proportion of accents hard to understand and vocal mannerisms that
tried to sound Italianate, but failed.
The tenor is Jerry Hadley (except the last performance). He is a very fine
singer, the voice firm, well-produced, clean and clear. But I did not
believe in his Rodolfo for a moment. His first earnest glare into Mim's eyes
would surely have been an off-putting start to a relationship and the fussy
acting did not ring true. The voice is not large enough, juicy or emotional.
It is not his best role.
His Mim is the Australian soprano Deborah Riedel, who is not very
individual, but makes one feel that she means what she sings. Her portrayal
is honest, each phrase given just the right colour, including a special
limpid softness that can bring a tear to the eye.
There is no question of her competing as a personality with Karita Mattila,
who provides a class act as Musetta. This is no low-grade tart, but a
sharp-witted girl-on-the-make, who has learnt a thing or two from draping
herself on rich lovers' arms, not least how to sniff out an expensive wine.
She sang her music confidently, with lots of panache. Anthony Michaels-Moore
is again a warm-hearted Marcello. Peter Sidhom is the Schaunard, and Mark
Beesley the Colline.
A slowish tempo at curtain-up announced a conductor with ideas of his own,
confirmed when the second act shot off at such a speed that the chorus was
hard put to keep pace. Daniel Oren, a well-known figure in Italian
opera-houses, was making his Royal Opera debut and did so to highly
energised orchestral playing. At first his dynamism seemed invigorating. By
the end, the many extremes of tempo and abrupt reversals of direction merely
tried one's patience.
Further performances until June 18

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930526

