FT932-3134

FT  16 JUN 93 / Owen seeks changes in Bosnia peace plan: Geneva talks to
push for an end to deadlock


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS and PATRICK BLUM


   GENEVA, VIENNA AND AGENCIES


INTERNATIONAL mediators for former Yugoslavia meet leaders of the warring
parties today in Geneva in an increasingly desperate search for workable
political solutions that will end the violence in Bosnia.
Lord Owen, the European Community mediator, ack-nowledged yesterday that
there was no alternative to the Vance-Owen peace plan for Bosnia on the
table, though it was clear there would have to be 'adjustments'.
Lord Owen, and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, for the United Nations, said they
expected the Geneva meetings to pave the way for a reconvened international
conference on former Yugoslavia, probably in the Swiss city, which would
bring together the participants in last August's high-level London
conference.
However, in Vienna, the Bosnian president, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, said his
beleaguered government would refuse to take part in any further big
conferences on Bosnia and urged the international community to let Moslems
defend themselves against Serbs.
Mr Izetbegovic, who was attending the UN World Conference on Human Rights,
said: 'We will ask the Security Council to accept the Vance-Owen plan as an
international document. We will not accept any more theatres of
negotiations.'
As the main representatives of the parties to the Bosnian conflict arrived
for their fresh round of talks in Geneva, Lord Owen denied that the former
Yugoslav republic was about to be 'carved up' between Serbia and Croatia.
'As far as a carve-up, the world community will not accept this. Whatever
changes take place and whatever adjustments there are, there has to be a
fair solution for all three constituent peoples - and that includes, very
importantly, the largest single grouping which is the Moslem population,' he
said.
First to arrive in Geneva were the presidents of Croatia and Serbia, Mr
Franjo Tudjman and Mr Slobodan Milosevic, bringing with them Mr Mate Boban
and Mr Radovan Karadzic, the leaders of Bosnia's Croats and Serbs
respectively. UN officials said they did not think Mr Izetbegovic would be
arriving from the Vienna human rights meeting until today.
During a news conference in the Austrian capital, Mr Izetbegovic said that
the international community had tied the hands of the Bosnian Moslems by
refusing to supply them with arms.
In Washington, President Bill Clinton said again yesterday that lifting the
arms embargo against the Bosnian Moslems may be the only way to bring a
permanent end to the war.
Mr Clinton said that the option of lifting the arms embargo was still on the
table even though Russia, France and Britain had rejected his earlier
proposal to do so.
The Vienna human rights conference unanimously endorsed an impassioned
appeal by Mr Haris Silajdzic, the Bosnian foreign minister, for immediate
action by the UN to end atrocities in Bosnia.
He called on the conference 'to stop the genocide in at least one town'. He
was referring to the Moslem enclave of Gorazde, which has been declared a
'safe area' by the UN but which is besieged by Serb forces.
Another speaker at the Vienna gathering yesterday was Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the
Russian foreign minister. He said Moscow was willing to send troops to
protect Moslem enclaves in Bosnia provided there was a clear framework and
mandate from the UN Security Council. Russian troops, however, would not be
sent to 'besieged fortresses under fire'.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary general, has recommended the
deployment of at least another 7,500 troops to join the 9,000 assigned to
protecting aid convoys.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930616

