FT934-8370

FT  16 NOV 93 / Confidence may do the trick: Has the German economy hit
bottom and will the recovery arrive next year? / A look at the uncertainties


   By QUENTIN PEEL


Germany's so-called five wise men, the government's council of independent
economic advisers, are not providing much good cheer for the coming
Christmas season.
Zero growth in west Germany next year is about the best they can offer, and
even then they are not quite convinced that the worst is over. Last year
they forecast zero growth for 1993, and the outcome was a sharp decline of
minus 2 per cent, so they do not want to make the same mistake again.
They are slightly more hopeful for east Germany, predicting a continued
recovery of 7.5 per cent in gross domestic product, compared with 6.5 per
cent this year, but even that is from a desperately low economic base. The
downturn in the west has undoubtedly slowed the entire investment drive in
the east.
An increase in unemployment from 3.5m today to 4.02m next year is decidedly
grim tidings for the German workforce, already seeing their real wages and
traditional fringe benefits withering in the cold blast of recession.
It is not good news for the German government, facing a mammoth re-election
year in 1994, with no fewer than 19 national, state, and European polls in
the offing. Chancellor Helmut Kohl is in need of a few green shoots of
recovery to bolster his re-election chances next October.
The five wise men are certainly more pessimistic than five of the six
leading German economic institutes, which less than a month ago forecast a
west German economic recovery next year to the tune of modest 1 per cent
growth. They are slightly more optimistic than the Keynesian economists at
Berlin's Deutsches Institut fur Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW), who fear a
further downturn of 0.5 per cent in 1994.
They are also decidedly more pessimistic than the Frankfurt stock exchange,
where the DAX index of 30 leading shares has shot through the 2,000 mark in
recent weeks, from 1,545 at the start of the year.
On the other hand, the forecasts of the five wise men are closely in line
with those of the business and industrial community itself. The German
association of chambers of commerce and industry (DIHT) recently said there
was no sign of recovery, even if the downturn had slowed. Mr Franz Schoser,
chief executive of the DIHT, backed the DIW in its forecast of minus 0.5 per
cent for next year. He said there were simply 'signs of stabilisation at a
low level'.
So who has got it right, and when will the turnround come? Has the sharpest
downturn in the German economy since the post-war economic miracle hit
bottom, or is there a real danger of a double-dip recession, or at least a
prolonged period of stagnation?
The wise men - five leading economists from Germany's universities and
economic institutes, headed by Professor Herbert Hax, of the Institut fur
Mittelstandsforschung, the small business research institute in Bonn - are
certainly erring on the side of caution. Will there be an economic recovery
in 1994? 'We cannot answer the question at the present time with adequate
assurance, either yes or no,' they say. 'We see chances of turning the
corner, but whether they will be realised in the near future is highly
uncertain.'
That is scarcely helpful to the government or to the other economic
analysts. And yet there is perhaps reason in their indecision, and method in
their pessimism. For they are clearly convinced that their repeated words of
warning in recent years to all levels of government in Germany - the federal
government in Bonn, the 16 state governments, and all the local authorities
 -on the need for drastic control of public spending, continue to fall on
deaf ears.
First they set out what went wrong in 1993. A year of stagnation in 1992 was
clearly not enough to cool down the overheating in the economy which
coincided with German unification: public money was poured into east Germany
to revive the collapsed economy, and wage deals were pushed up far beyond
the rise in productivity, both in the east and the west.
Capacity utilisation in west German industry in 1991 was higher than in any
year since 1970. When pressure began to ease in 1992, demand fell and spare
capacity became available but inflation remained stubbornly high. The German
Bundesbank was determined to abide by its counter-inflationary duty, and
pushed up short-term interest rates to almost 10 per cent.
The trouble was that the downturn in the German economy coincided with a
continued decline in German exports - partly a reflection of the sluggish
world economy (and the sluggish European economy held hostage not least by
the high German interest rates), and partly a result of falling German
competitiveness. Hopes for an export-led revival evaporated.
Foreign sales were not helped by the effective revaluation of the D-Mark,
particularly in western Europe. In 1993 there was a 12 per cent drop in
exports, with Germany's traditional sales of investment goods particularly
hard hit.
The wise men are not prepared to blame the Bundesbank for its tight monetary
policy. Rather, they pin the blame first on the trade unions, for excessive
wage demands, and above all, on the political establishment, for failing to
bring spending under control, to cope with the unique challenge of
unification.
It was the failure of the politicians, they believe, to give clear signals
on controlling government spending, which particularly undermined the
confidence of both industry and consumers.
The public sector deficit in the current year they estimate at DM160bn,
including central, state and local governments, and including borrowing for
the German unity fund, but excluding the Treuhand privatisation agency.
'On the one hand, the high level of public sector deficits will have helped
stimulate demand, although a large part of the DM160bn deficit was merely
making up for recession-related declines in revenues, and therefore cannot
be seen as an active expansionary measure,' they say.
'On the other hand, and it seems far more important, the increasingly
swollen budget deficits contributed to the general insecurity about the
economic perspectives . . . which contributed to the restraint of both
investors and consumers, and therefore aggravated the recession.'
The professors remain profoundly sceptical about the government's
much-trumpeted success this year in agreeing first on a 'federal
consolidation programme', and second on a modest savings package - above all
focused on cuts in social benefits - in bringing public spending under
lasting control.
Some private sector analysts believe the wise men have erred on the side of
pessimism, precisely in order to hammer home their policy prescriptions to
the government.
'I am surprised to see the council take quite such a cautious view on what
will happen next year,' says Mr Thomas Mayer, senior economist at Goldman
Sachs in Frankfurt. 'The latest data actually indicate that the economy is
not doing too badly. So the council must assume that there will be renewed
weakness.
'They have a rather pessimistic view on government deficits over and above
what the government is prepared to acknowledge. Perhaps they feel that if
there are doubts, it is better to err on the side of pessimism to get the
message across to the policy makers, that adjustment really has to be made
now.
Again and again, the wise men stress the need for a 'convincing' course of
budget cuts, and the link between a reliable public sector spending
programme, and confidence in the private sector.
They gave the government more support for its efforts to promote greater
deregulation, and more privatisation, as part of its campaign to make
Germany more competitive. But they still think present proposals do not go
far enough.
The debate on shop opening-hours is a case in point. The restrictive
legislation enforcing early evening and weekend closing should be
liberalised, the wise men believe, but there are already signs that
Chancellor Kohl is going back on the liberalising plans of his government
colleagues.
As for privatisation, the greatest potential is at the level of the states
and local government. Yet they have done practically nothing to privatise
the properties and services they control. As for the privatisation of
Deutsche Telekom, the telecommunications company, the wise men warn that the
plan to maintain a state holding company could undermine the whole venture.
'In that way Telekom could see itself subordinated to political influences
which will collide head on with its private-sector goals,' they say.
Their other main theme is the crisis in the labour market. They admit that
there is a clear increase in the incidence of long-term, structural
unemployment within the overall recession-related rise in joblessness. But
they are decidedly sceptical about the new trade union panacea of
introducing shorter working hours, even a four-day working week, to tackle
joblessness.
'Shorter working hours are certainly not any general recipe to cure
unemployment,' Professor Hax said yesterday. 'They will simply lead to
further cost increases if there is no comparable cut in incomes.'
Rather, he said, the present system of industry-wide wage agreements must be
opened to 'individual enterprise solutions'.
Professor Juergen Donges of Cologne University, one of the wise men,
dismissed the argument that 'there is not enough work to go round, and
therefore it must be more fairly divided. The truth is work is not short.
Work is in short supply at the current wage rates,' he said. 'We must make
sure that we do not price ourselves out of the world markets.'
The truth is that the five wise men are again proposing familiar
prescriptions to familiar problems. They say in effect that Germany has for
too long been living beyond its means.
Cost-cutting and deregulation in the public sector, as in the private, is
the main prescription. But there is a clear feeling that the private sector
has done far more than government to put its house in order.
All agree that it is crucial to revive private sector investment, which saw
a dramatic slump this year - down by no less than 15.5 per cent as far as
investment in plant and equipment is concerned. The wise men fear that it
will still decline by a further 2 per cent in the coming year, and
government policy must focus on turning it round.
One proposal they make is for a clear programme of corporate tax reform to
be put in hand immediately, even if real tax cuts are only realistic once
the economy has recovered - possibly not before 1997. Mr Theo Waigel, the
finance minister, seized upon the idea yesterday and promised proposals
before next year's elections.
Yet it is uncertainty about what will revive the confidence of the private
sector which is at the heart of the differences between the forecasters over
the speed and timing of the German economic recovery.
The pessimists at the DIW, and in the opposition Social Democratic Party
(SPD) are convinced that an upswing must be primed by a public spending
programme, even if that means a short-term increase in the deficit. Mr
Rudolf Scharping, the SPD leader, has called for a revival of 'concerted
action' between industry, labour, government and opposition, to draw up a
common approach.
The trouble is, it is almost certainly politically too late for such
co-operation. For the elections are almost here - the first local poll is in
Brandenburg next month, followed by Lower Saxony next March - and economic
consensus looks likely to be the first casualty.
That means the private sector will have to rediscover its confidence on its
own, and even the wise men do not know when that will be.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
              DEVELOPMENT OF THE GERMAN LABOUR MARKET
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
                                          1992       93      94
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
Economically active (m)                   38.8     38.5    38.4
Registered unemployed (m)                  3.0      3.4     4.0
Unemployment rate (Percent)                7.7      9.0    10.3
Disguised unemployment (000s)
Workers on job creation schemes            466      307     370
Full-time training                         798      699     670
Early retirement                           850      874     625
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Council of economic advisors
 ---------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931116

