FT934-10116

FT  06 NOV 93 / Collecting: The fair comes to Harrods / A look at a new
development on the winter antiques circuit


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


THE HEART sinks at the prospect of yet another big antiques fair joining the
circuit. We know why they happen. Dealers are bored sitting in their shops
waiting for customers, and have been conditioned into thinking that, during
the recession, they must market themselves better. Some of the biggest
names, such as Leslie Waddington and Richard Green, are in almost perpetual
motion at fairs around the world. They offer an encouraging example.
At fairs you meet hundreds of potential new customers; you get the chance to
pick over the goods of competitors; you catch up with gossip and the latest
ideas. You are doing something. Even if you sell relatively few objects on
the spot there are countless examples of buyers coming into your shop months
or years later, following up a contact made at the fair.
So when Mohamed Al Fayed, the chairman of Harrods in London and a keen
collector, approached Brian and Anna Haughton and asked them to hold a
pre-Christmas antiques fair in his department store there was little
hesitation. The Haughtons began as ceramics dealers. They still are: but to
stimulate sales they organised an annual ceramics fair in London. They added
a silver and jewellery fair; then went to New York which, surprisingly, had
no carefully vetted fair, and set up an annual show at the Armory. It so
impressed Al Fayed that he made his call, and a new, six-day, fair opens on
Friday.
Given the pulling power of the Harrods name the Haughtons had little trouble
in attracting more than 80 dealers, including such London heavies as picture
dealers Harari and Johns and Johnny Van Haeften (who is unveiling a little
known painting of 'The Flemish proverbs' by Pieter Brueghel the Younger with
a Pounds 1m price tag); furniture dealers Apter Fredericks and David
Pettifer; as well as Wartski, Spink, Hancocks & Co. and some big names from
the US and Germany.
The idea is that the fair offers a further incentive for the international
rich to do their Christmas shopping at Harrods. With the store attracting
around 100,000 visitors a day at this time of year, the Haughtons need just
a couple of thousand to venture to the third floor and pay Pounds 10 for
some high class browsing to justify their enthusiasm. Harrods hopes they
will to call in at other departments during the visit. For its part it is
opening for the first time on a Sunday to satisfy the anticipated demand.
Fairs only flourish because dealers are prepared to pay up to Pounds 10,000
for the most prestigious sites. Most rentals are, of course, much less
expensive. The Kensington Antiques Fair, one of the oldest in the land, open
this weekend at the Town Hall, is aimed at the more modest collector, for
whom spending Pounds 1,000 is a serious matter. Bridging Harrods and
Kensington from November 17 is the winter Olympia Fine and Antique Fair.
This began two years ago to meet the needs of those dealers who depend on
the mammoth May Olympia to boost their summer trade and who wanted a similar
fillip later in the year. It was a success and this year almost 200
exhibitors will be selling antiques priced between Pounds 25 and Pounds
200,000.
An attractive sideshow at Olympia is the loan exhibition of Old Master
portraits from Dulwich Picture Gallery. Visitors can do more than admire:
they can adopt three of the paintings. Dulwich, which has no public funding,
fights an annual deficit of around Pounds 200,000. Among its money raising
initiatives is an 'Adopt an Old Master' scheme. So for Pounds 2,500 you can
assume responsibility for Van Dyck's portrait of Lord George Digby. You
cannot take him home, but he will be refurbished in your name, and will
carry it in perpetuity. You can also personally exploit his image - what a
grand, and status enhancing Christmas card it would make.
Dealers are taking space in fairs because fairs work, and seem to be working
better now than a year ago. The October Armory fair in New York saw a
Japanese 17th century gilt screen sell for Dollars 1.75m, (Pounds 1.15m)
while Mallett's of Bond Street, a first time exhibitor, disposed of the Duke
of Bolton's console tables, made in 1761 by John Vardy, for around Pounds
875,000. Other London dealers like Spink, Jeremy, and Asprey, also had a
profitable trip.
Back in London the City Antiques and Fine Art Fair, held for the first time
at the Business Design Centre in Islington, had an increased attendance of
13,500, and among the items sold were 12 Regency mahogany dining chairs, for
around Pounds 30,000 (from Cook of Marlborough).
Fairs are one way of seeking new business. Another is to take part in the
75th anniversary celebrations of the British Antique Dealers Association.
This has encouraged leading dealers to mount special exhibitions. For
example from Thursday Norman Adams is unveiling 'The Importance of Patina on
18th century English furniture' at his Hans Road shop, just opposite the
Harrods Fair; all month at Witney Antiques is 'An A-Z of 18th and 19th
century British samplers'; from Monday at Country Seat, near Henley, an
unusual offering of 'Truncheons and Law and Order'; and so it goes on.
Typically, this is a modestly priced collecting field. The market is picking
up, but slowly, and in the philistine UK, mainly at the lower price levels.
Dealers are accepting the new facts of life and are arranging their stock
accordingly. Agnews, which has probably more Pounds 1m paintings in its
vaults than any other London dealer, has just completed a promotion in which
all the works on display on its walls were priced at under Pounds 10,000. It
made sales worth around Pounds 120,000. Also in Bond Street Christopher Wood
is mounting a show, closing today, of paintings priced well below his usual
level.
And, of course, at Smith's Galleries in Covent Garden this weekend you can
just catch the annual Contemporary Art Society supermarket at which
thousands of works of art, many by recognisable names, are offered at knock
down prices, to the benefit of the CAS, and sharp eyed buyers. The show
attracted a queue before it opened on Tuesday but the walls are constantly
replenished with very affordable art.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931106

