FT932-137

FT  30 JUN 93 / No long-term gain without pain: India's economic reformers
have baulked at radical restructuring


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


When India embarked on economic reform two years ago there was much talk of
the country imitating China's rapid economic take-off. But that prospect now
appears more remote.
Political, social and economic developments have combined to persuade Mr P V
Narasimha Rao, the prime minister, and Mr Manmohan Singh, his finance
minister, to allow the momentum of reform to slow.
Their performance will come under scrutiny this week at the annual meeting
in Paris between India and its international aid donors, led by the World
Bank. They will get credit for shrugging off almost 40 years of
socialist-inclined central planning as they have liberalised trade rules,
reduced the public deficit and introduced a market-based exchange rate. But
the Paris meeting will note that the government in Delhi has shied away from
politically difficult decisions.
The government's reluctance to close state enterprises means India has not
seen the drastic declines in output experienced in other economic
restructurings, for example those in eastern Europe. Instead, the Indian
economy grew by 1.2 per cent in the year to March 1992, the difficult first
year of reform, by about 4.5 per cent in 1992-93, and is forecast to reach 5
per cent for 1993-94.
'India has seen growth despite readjustment,' says Mr C Rangarajan, the
governor of the Reserve Bank of India, the central bank. 'We have something
to show off.'
But critics say too little real restructuring is taking place. 'India has
not been through the public and private sector shake-out which is necessary
to create a good basis for long-term growth,' comments an economist working
for an international aid agency
Ministers have had political cause to go slow this year. Last year's Rs40bn
(Pounds 836.8m) scandal in the Bombay securities market shook their
confidence. Banks and stockbrokers circumvented rules to channel money
illegally into the stock market in the scandal which was widely, though
wrongly, perceived to have resulted from liberalisation. The government was
also distracted by violence following the destruction by Hindu militants of
the Ayodhya mosque.
There is, however, a more fundamental reason reform has lost momentum: a
lack of popular support for radical change.
About 30m of the country's 880m have jobs in the so-called organised sector
 -that is, in large public and private units which cover all main areas of
the economy from the civil service to railways and steel. They, with their
families, form the majority of India's 150m-strong urban middle class. Some
in this class would benefit from opportunities created by liberalisation.
But many fear they would not, and so resist the changes. The first
demonstration after the reforms started in mid-1991 was, for example,
mounted by clerks at over-staffed state-owned banks, insisting
liberalisation should not endanger their jobs.
The main beneficiaries of reform would be the country's remaining 700m-plus
people, who are excluded from the benefits enjoyed by those in the organised
sector, such as guaranteed jobs. Under the old system, many of these poor
have benefited from food price subsidies and similar hand-outs. But they
have been disadvantaged through being restricted to high-priced, low-quality
goods produced by protected Indian industries and through limited access to
basic services such as education.
These people have expressed few strong preferences about the reforms. But
poverty and ignorance prevent most from developing a political voice.
India's policymakers often say they cannot proceed with reform as fast as
China because, as a democracy, India must consider conflicting interests.
The truth could be that India might proceed faster with economic reforms if
the interests of these poor were better voiced.
Even so, the changes India has made so far have been fundamental. After
pursuing economic self-reliance for 40 years, India is opening up to the
world by cutting import duties, reforming the exchange rate and promoting
exports and inward foreign investment. The 'licence raj', a panoply of
industrial controls, has mostly been dismantled. Despite the securities
scandal, financial deregulation has gone ahead, including liberalisation of
foreign institutional investment.
Businessmen have responded by proposing an unprecedented number of new
projects, many involving foreign technology. These include power stations,
electronics plants and textile mills. Foreign companies have, since
mid-1991, pledged to invest more than USDollars 2bn. Mr B K Modi, head of
the Modi group, an industrial combine, says: 'Indian industry is already
getting ready for international competition.'
But the willingness to plan has not - so far - always been matched by actual
investment. Foreign investors have committed only about 20 per cent of the
funds promised. Mr S K Khanna, senior partner in India of Arthur Andersen,
the accountancy firm, says: 'We don't see a great rush to invest.'
This caution has held back growth. A rise in exports, without which India
cannot earn the foreign exchange to fund its investment needs, was just 3.6
per cent in the year to March, against a target of over 15 per cent.
Industrial production grew in the same period by only 3.8 per cent, with 6
to 7 per cent forecast for this year. These growth rates accord with India's
past experience but fall well short of those achieved in the high-growth
economies of east Asia, whose example India seeks to follow.
Large-scale investments take time to come to fruition. But a more basic
reason for sluggish growth is that many Indian factories still produce goods
uncompetitive by world standards. A sharp increase in output, particularly
exports, can come only if these plants are rigorously restructured.
Reform-minded sceptics also need convincing that bureaucratic fingers really
are being lifted from the economy. While many controls have gone, officials'
desire to exercise economic power has not. For example, the
telecommunications ministry has been deliberating for almost a year on the
award of licences for India's first cellular telephone network.
Reform of India's labour laws is no less important to promoting growth.
These laws, which place tight restrictions on employers' rights to dismiss
workers, are among the most important obstacles to reform state-owned
enterprises. The government wants to privatise sound enterprises and to
restructure the rest, using the proceeds of privatisation. But investors
show little appetite for shares in the state companies, which account for
about two-thirds of workers in large-scale employment, because of the
government's unwillingness to press ahead with job cuts. Ministers retreated
from reform of labour legislation late last year.
Another critical issue is further financial reform - especially the
restructuring of nationalised banks. For too long, these banks have
channelled low-cost funds to state-owned enterprises and other politically
approved borrowers, such as farmers, who were often under no pressure to
repay. The government is injecting funds to help the banks write off Rs100bn
(Pounds 2.14bn) in bad debts. It is also slowly liberalising lending rules
to make banks more commercially minded - but much more slowly than critics
want.
Carrying out the necessary measures would bring pain to many but would also
release resources to tackle India's other deep-seated economic weaknesses:
shortages of electricity and transport as well as inadequate education and
population control programmes. Besides helping the poor, such investments
would eventually assist economic growth.
This week's meeting in Paris will set the tone for decisions by donors over
the next year on aid totalling about Dollars 7bn. Donors are unlikely to
withhold money, but they would give with better grace if the pace of reform
was faster. Indian officials will argue very hard that they have done more
than enough to promote reform. By the standards of their own country's past,
they have indeed moved with surprising speed. But by the standards required
to satisfy India's aspirations, the pace is much more sedate.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930630

