FT934-8703

FT  13 NOV 93 / Property: Deadline near for council tax appeals - Cadogan's
Place


   By GERALD CADOGAN


HURRY, IF YOU have been thinking of appealing against the banding for
council tax that your home was given earlier this year. November 30 is the
deadline for submitting an appeal to your local authority, which will pass
it on to the Inland Revenue's district valuer.
Eventually, he will examine the home, compare it with others in the
neighbourhood and decide on the right band after discussion with you or your
surveyor.
The Revenue hopes to settle most cases without tribunal hearings. That is
sensible, as the sums involved (the Pounds 50 or Pounds 100 difference
between the bands on the council tax bills) do not justify expensive
proceedings. But it will take time. Up to the end of September, 700,000
appeals had been lodged in England and Wales and there is certain to be a
final flurry in the next fortnight. Appeals submitted in April and May have
often not progressed beyond an initial acknowledgement.
The number of appeals looks smaller, however, if compared with the
more-than-21m abodes that have to pay the tax. Most home-owners must be
satisfied - or, at least, are prepared to acquiesce in the rough justice of
the new system which makes those who live in larger properties pay more.
There have not been any revolts against paying similar to those after the
poll tax began its short and troubled life.
Council tax is a simplified form of the old rates, based on a notional
capital value in April 1991 rather than a notional rental value, as rates
were. The task given the valuers (which were commercial firms) was to divide
the country's homes into eight bands, from A (less than Pounds 40,000) to H
(more than Pounds 320,000). The valuers were not allowed to go inside and,
as their fees per property were not large, had an incentive to be quick. But
they could consult the rating records (with details of square footage,
bathrooms, lavatories, etc).
If you wish to appeal because you think your home is in the wrong band,
telephone your local authority to find out its procedures, or go to a
chartered surveyor who handles these cases. One such is Paul Lester, of
estate agent (and surveyor) August & Lester in Banbury, Oxfordshire. He
says: 'After 30 years of looking at houses, I can say at once if it is worth
appealing.' If so, the fee ranges between Pounds 50-125 plus VAT, depending
on the size of the property.
In discussion with the district valuer, the bandings of similar houses in
the same street or nearby are the telling argument. Appeals are more likely
in the lower bands, as they are narrower and so give more scope for
misplacing a property. The biggest problem Lester finds, though, is
explaining that the imputed April 1991 values are no more than that. They do
not indicate what the house would fetch if sold now.
Some owners of larger houses have worried they are in too low a band, rather
than the usual complaint of being too high. They fear this will affect the
re-sale value of their property. Is there any substance to this? 'No,' says
John Lowe, of Savills in Banbury. 'Nobody in their right mind would buy a
house based on its banding.' If the band is less than you expected, that is
your good luck.
Appeal if the band seems too high and if it is worth the cost but do not
worry if it seems too low - that is the agents' message.
* * *
NOVEMBER 30 is also the day of the first autumn Budget. It is hard to
predict how it will affect the property market, which has not advanced as
fast as many agents expected in the summer except for very expensive houses.
There have been some premium prices for them because the supply is still
short, as a market survey from Lane Fox reports. Buyers fear that if they do
not secure a place now, it will be some time before an alternative is
available.
Such attitudes should encourage more potential vendors to chance the market.
And it could help those who have to move for family or job reasons, and have
the worry of possible negative equity, not to think so much in terms of
pounds and pence but of bricks and mortar. They may receive less for their
house - but the new one will cost less. Currency is not an absolute
criterion.
If you need to move but feel hamstrung, discuss the matter with your
mortgage provider; there might well be a solution. With the present level of
demand, good houses are selling quickly. Why you have to move, and where you
want to go, are quite as important as what your present place will fetch.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

931113

