FT932-13343

FT  23 APR 93 / International Company News: Peugeot down 39% to FFr3.37bn


   By DAVID BUCHAN


PSA PEUGEOT-CITROEN, the French car group, yesterday reported a 39 per cent
fall in profits to FFr3.37bn (Dollars 608m) last year, down from FFr5.5bn
the year before.
Mr Jacques Calvet, the group president, said the prospects for European
sales this year were 'detestable', with a likely overall drop of at least 10
per cent over last year.
The first quarter had shown a 17 per cent decline, and April seemed no
better, he said.
Weaker demand had led to a 3 per cent decline in Peugeot's sales to 2m cars,
producing a turnover figure of FFr155.4bn and squeezed operating margins.
But the Peugeot group had held on to its position of number three in the
European market, behind Volkswagen and General Motors. Mr Calvet says it
remains one of the most profitable carmakers.
But competitive conditions on the European market would worsen further this
year, Mr Calvet said, due to over-capacity among producers, the drop in
demand and 'the successive surrenders' to Japan by the European Commission.
Japanese carmakers were not abiding by the terms of their 1991
'pseudo-accord' with Brussels to share with their European competitors the
burden of any fall in the EC market, said Mr Calvet, who congratulated the
new French government for taking up this matter in Brussels.
Peugeot's results had not suffered from the franc's effective appreciation
by 8 to 9 per cent against other European currencies since last summer,
because it had always hedged its currency risks, Mr Calvet said. But he
called on European carmakers 'to compensate speedily' for devaluations in
the UK, Italy and Spain 'by significant price increases in these three
countries' to maintain profit margins.
Reflecting the reduction in its cash-flow from FFr15.5bn in 1991 to
FFr13.7bn last year, the Peugeot group scaled down its investment by roughly
the same amount, as well as shedding another 6,000 workers.
Peugeot yesterday an-nounced a dividend of FFr10 against FFr13.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930423

