FT932-115

FT  30 JUN 93 / Granada pays premium to increase its stake in LWT


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


GRANADA Group yesterday surprised the ITV sector by paying Pounds 67m for a
14.99 per cent stake in London Weekend Television, the maximum possible
under present rules.
Granada paid a considerable premium - 500p a share compared with Monday's
price of 375p. Yesterday LWT's share price rose from 375p to 466p.
The move is a clear indication that Granada - which also has interests in
leisure, TV rental and computer services - plans to expand in the television
market.
Earlier this year the company, which holds the north west England franchise
and is famous for programmes such as Coronation Street and World in Action,
was beaten to a stake in Yorkshire Television by LWT.
Yesterday Mr Gerry Robinson, chief executive of Granada, insisted that the
deal was 'a stand-alone investment' rather than a gamble that the rules on
ownership of ITV companies will be relaxed.
Current legislation says that the nine largest ITV companies cannot take
each other over because of fears about concentration of ownership.
The government has made it clear that it is prepared to consider relaxing
the rules.
Mr Guy Lamming, media analyst at stockbrokers James Capel, said yesterday:
'Granada has almost certainly done this in the hope that the rules will
change. It would be too much to pay for a trade investment.'
The shares of companies which are seen as attractive takeover targets -
particularly Central and Scottish, which pay only Pounds 2,000 a year for
their franchises, and Anglia - are expected to rise.
The Granada purchase gives the company two options. If the rules change, it
could make a full bid for LWT. An alternative would be to use the LWT stake
as a counter in a bid for Yorkshire-Tyne Tees.
Sir Christopher Bland, LWT chairman, yesterday described himself as
'neutral' on the deal, but an admirer of the way Mr Robinson was managing
Granada.
The deal is likely to make more than 40 LWT managers richer. If the LWT
share price is above 278p in September the managers will get four ordinary
shares for every management share. When the share price stood at 385p the
management shares were worth a total of Pounds 55m.
The managers are now likely to share Pounds 65m.
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930630

