FT932-6549

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (5): Mass privatisation in practice -
Edward Balls and Gillian Tett meet the new breed of entrepreneur


   By EDWARD BALLS and GILLIAN TETT


THE RUSSIAN city of Volgograd, 600 miles south of Moscow, is at the
forefront of the government's privatisation drive. Close co-operation
between the regional branch of the privatisation ministry and the local
parliament controlled state property fund, with advice from the
International Finance Corporation - the private sector investment arm of the
World Bank - have enabled the region to privatise 336 small-scale state
enterprises.
Since mass voucher privatisation began in Volgograd in the beginning of
February, 50 medium and large-scale enterprises have been sold, ranging in
size from a few hundred to 26,000 employees. But although all of them claim
to be moving towards market reforms, 'privatisation' often means very
different things to Russia's new entrepreneurs.
So what does privatisation really amount to for managers, workers and
shareholders in a selection of newly privatised enterprises in the city of
Volgograd and the surrounding countryside?
THE DRESS-MAKER - A NEW-STYLE ENTREPRENEUR
BACK in the days of Soviet state planning, Mrs Lilia Tataleyeva's Volgograd
dress shop used to sell two designs of Russian raincoat - one for summer,
and one for winter. Today the newly privatised shop is undergoing a fashion
revolution.
As in many privatisation success stories, the main factor in the turnabout
has been the entrepreneurial energy of one individual.
A forceful woman who dresses with elegance, Mrs Tataleyeva spent five years
working as the frustrated director of the state-owned shop under the control
of the local ministry - 'before, we had to send all our designs to the state
sewing factory. By the time they were ready, fashion had changed,' she says.
Eighteen months ago, Mrs Tataleyeva along with 17 colleagues launched a bid
for the enterprise. The collective beat three other bids with an offer of
2.5m roubles, subsequently reduced to 1.7m roubles in accordance with state
regulations which favours bids from worker collectives by offering a 30 per
cent discount.
'Now that seems a very low price. But then it was a very high price,' says
Mrs Tataleyeva, who has succeeded in paying off 1m roubles of the credit
they took at 60 per cent annual interest.
With the new dress shop making a monthly turnover of about 800,000 roubles,
she is confident she will soon pay off the rest of the loan, although the
galloping inflation that has reduced the value of the loan is also making a
mockery of her attempts at financial planning.
But Mrs Tataleyeva revels in her new responsibilities: 'We are currently
making a summer collection and these days I cannot blame anyone else because
it is up to me if it fails,' she says, adding cheerfully. 'Most people do
not understand about privatisation. The others who work here get their
monthly wages and do not worry. But I do this all for myself. It is all me.'
THE WHOLESALER - BUILDING A RETAIL EMPIRE
THEY call her 'the iron lady of Volgograd.' With blue-rinsed hair, carefully
applied make-up and the compulsory fax machine on her desk, Mrs Tamara
Sitnikova, the 47-year-old executive director of the 'Boots and Shoes'
retail store, is typical of the modern Russian executive women, of which
there are a surprisingly large number.
Mrs Sitnikova must be one of the first Russian managers to be head-hunted.
Previously the manager of a state wholesale distributor, she was invited by
the five other shareholders to become a shareholder and manager of 'Boots
and Shoes', previously a state boots shop, when it was privatised last
summer.
Her experience in the state system means that 'Boots and Shoes' is tackling
one of small-scale privatisation's biggest deficiencies - the lack of a
reliable and competitive wholesale network. Mrs Sitnikova has tried to fill
this the gap by buying two lorries which she can use to distribute goods to
companies which cannot themselves buy store goods in bulk. In time, she
hopes to create a new and bigger company by taking over some of the small
shops she supplies.
The store has retained all its original 23 staff, two thirds of whom are
contract workers, but it has been forced to diversify away from footwear as
demand dwindled and now also sells food, cakes and pop-corn. Freedom from
direct bureaucratic control has advantages but also new problems. 'Taxes,
taxes, taxes' are Mrs Sitnikova biggest worry. She complains that 80 per
cent of the store's profits go to pay eighteen different types of taxes.
Mrs Sitnikova openly admits that she models herself on Mrs Margaret
Thatcher, the former British prime minister. 'People tell me that we are
pretty much alike both in character and in our leadership styles,' she says
with a smile. Her speech also has a Thatcherite tinge. 'The key to
privatisation is ownership,' she says. 'If you own a shop or have shares in
a company, you feel you really are somebody.'
Does she have any other personal ambitions? 'There are not many women who
are number one in Russia,' she replies. 'But my view is that only a woman
can save our country. Maybe we do need a woman as president too.'
MIXED VIEWS AT THE SWEET FACTORY
IN a country where factory directors have long been used to diligently
fulfilling state orders and plans - or at least, to make a show of doing so
 -it is rare to find directors in Volgograd who are prepared to speak out
openly against the government's privatisation plans. But at the newly
privatised Lenin Volgograd Sweet factory, the directors are less than
enthusiastic about privatisation.
'All this privatisation is a bit like a new state plan - a new five-year
plan,' says Mr Valentin Makhonin, the managing director, who admits that
faced with a choice between market anarchy and state-planning stability he
favours the latter.
The motive behind the Lenin sweet factory's move to the market was not an
ideological conviction or a new-found market, but instead a weary obedience
to this new state directive. Under instructions from local government
officials, the directors transformed the enterprise into a shareholding
company and 'sold' 51 per cent of the shares to the workers.
So far, Mr Makhonin claims the exercise has had only a limited impact on the
way the factory is run. 'The factory works as before. We sell the sweets to
the same places, and receive the orders from the same places - nothing has
really changed very much in the way we make sweets.'
But the plant has been hard hit by the breakdown in inter-republican trading
links. It lost its main supply of sugar from the Ukraine and suffered a 40
per cent fall in output, forcing a lay off of 200 of its 1,000-strong
workforce. Another 200 workers are expected to lose their jobs later this
year.
ENTHUSIASM AT THE WASHING MACHINE PLANT
MR Anatoly Tyulpin, managing director of Volgograd's 'Red Dawn' washing
machine factory, can hardly wait for his enterprise to be privatised.
Fifty-one per cent of the shares in the enterprise, which produces 190,000
washing machines a year and employs 700 workers, will be owned by the
workers and directors. But Mr Tyulpin is confident he will retain control.
Mass privatisation may be laying the foundations for the eventual emergence
of a thriving western-style stock market which would allow badly managed
companies to be taken over, but, for now, it is consolidating the power of
incumbent managers.
Red Dawn will be run by a management committee of the director and three
others, but Mr Tyulpin says he will have two votes.
Deciding what to make and how many people to employ will be the management's
perogative.
'Of course people would like to stay working here,' he says, 'but it will be
up to the management of the factory to decide who to fire.'
Mr Tyulpin plans to expand production by making metal-cutting machine tools
and expects to shed 150 workers. Surprisingly, the shop-floor workers at Red
Dawn appear to accept the management's right to manage.
'People are expecting lay-offs,' says Uri, a 30-year-old engineer. 'But the
first people to be fired will be the drunks, the ill-disciplined and the
lazy-bones.'
THE FARMERS - ONCE BITTEN, TWICE SHY
WHILE government officials in the city of Volgograd are trumpeting the
merits of the revolutionary new privatisation programme, out in the rural
village of Gorodizhe, 30km outside the city, the propaganda is being greeted
with a distinct sense of de ja vu.
Eighteen months ago, the village's state farm set itself up as a
shareholding company - an experiment which ended after only a year, when the
villagers decided they were fed up with the new 'share' system.
The reason for the villagers' disillusionment lie partly in local politics
and partly in the problems of delivering on the exuberant promises being
made for the new market system.
The man who was behind the farm's original decision to turn itself into a
shareholding company was its energetic, entrepreneurial director, the
52-year-old Mr Anatoly Chibatkov.
Believing that privatisation would allow the farm greater freedom in
economic decision making, 18 months ago he decided to set the 7000 hectare
farm up as a shareholding company.
Shares were distributed and sold to all farm workers, promises were made
about future dividends and profits, and Mr Chibatkov set about trying to
make the farm profitable.
But after a year the farm workers had received few dividends, and production
continued to fall.
Reaping the popular discontent, Mr Chibatkov's rival political faction in
the village pushed him out of office, bought back all the shares, and turned
the farm back into a 'collective' again.
'They gave us all these bits of paper and they were worthless,' said
Antonina, a 71-year-old pensioner, echoing a widespread cynicism over the
affair, although most villagers still say they will use their recently
received privatisation vouchers.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930527

