FT932-13269

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance - Survey of
Investment Trusts (27): Small companies are still tempting - The cycle
points to a few more good years before they peak / The US Market


   By JOHN AUTHERS


THE EARLIEST investment trusts turned their gaze across the Atlantic. Most
of them have now evolved into large international general trusts, but
several investment trusts still aim to provide a specialist vehicle for
investing in the US.
Such vehicles are now in demand. When Foreign & Colonial launched a new US
Smaller Companies investment trust last month, it was oversubscribed by 13
per cent. F&C's arrival brought the number of US specialist trusts to six.
What had sparked interest in the sector?
As ever, an element of this is a reaction to recent performance. Over the
past two years, the US has performed strongly, particularly in the smaller
companies sector. Analysts believed that the US, having led the world into
the economic recession, would lead the way out of it again - an assumption
which looks plausible - and Wall Street's recent performance has been
founded on this assumption.
Currency has provided an extra plus for British investment trust investors,
following the sharp post-Black Wednesday strengthening of the dollar against
sterling. In the six months from the beginning of September last year, the
average increase for North American investment trusts was 71.12 per cent,
according to Micropal. Over 1992 as a whole, this effect was less marked,
but the S&P 500 still rose by 29.1 per cent in sterling terms, compared with
only 4.5 per cent in dollar terms.
Most of the dollar's rise now seems to be in the past, although some
analysts believe there may be a slight further appreciation. The sector's
out-performance was also helped by an erosion of discounts - for example,
that of Fleming American fell from 11.8 per cent to 7.1 per cent during
1992. That erosion may have been caused by investors piling in during August
and September, buying the trusts as an easy form of exposure to the
undervalued dollar.
That suggests that the recent performance is not quite the strong 'sell'
indicator that it at first appears. Technical factors concerning moves in
exchange rates and discounts are unlikely to be repeated, but the chances of
a rise fuelled by underlying value of the trusts' net assets seem strong.
In which US sectors should the funds be investing? The out-performance of
smaller companies last year was marked. According to Robert Fleming, the S&P
500, measuring Wall Street's largest stocks by market capitalisation, rose
by only 4.5 per cent last year, while the Frank Russell 2000 Index, covering
companies ranked from 1001 down to 3000 in market capitalisation, rose a
much stronger 24.6 per cent.
Analysts point out that indices have been pushed by outstanding performances
from a handful of companies - for example, in the computer world, the giant
IBM, one of the biggest companies in the US, has fallen sharply, while two
'small' companies, Microsoft and Intel, have risen very strongly.
But interest still centres on smaller companies. According to James Findlay,
fund manager of F&C's new trust: 'We expect the US smaller companies sector
to out-perform in the future because of low valuations compared to US larger
companies. The dollar is getting stronger, and the US domestic economy is
improving, while international economies are getting weaker.'
He points to the chances of out-performance which the vast range of smaller
companies in the US always represents.
With so many to choose from, the big Wall Street firms allow many to remain
under-researched and so under-valued. This assists F&C's approach, which is
strictly 'value'-orientated, seeking stocks which look cheap in proportion
to their earnings prospects.
A similar line comes from Fleming American, which has made a heavy strategic
shift into smaller capitalisation stocks. Smaller companies now make up 28
per cent of the trust's portfolio.
Part of the reason for this is cyclical. Smaller companies' prices have
moved in a seven-year cycle, according to John Haynes, Fleming American's
fund manager. Seven years of smaller company under-performance of larger
companies ended only two years ago. Smaller companies' added volatility, and
troubles of America's corporate giants, should mean that the run on smaller
stocks should have a while to go. As the chart shows, smaller companies look
as though they could have a few more years of outperformance before peaking.
If all this confuses you, then you are not alone. America's economy had been
in turmoil, anyway, before President Clinton arrived and promised to shake
everything up further. But the judgment of Ian Macfarlane, manager of EFM's
American Investment Trust, the biggest in the sector, gives food for
thought. 'We've been trying to look at operating profits to try to make some
sense of what's going on, and the main story is that corporate America is
recovering.'
Hopes are now high that Clinton's drastic stimulation and budget reduction
programme will nudge America's newly strengthened companies into
full-blooded recovery. Those who agree may well be tempted by the
speculative opportunities available in the US - particularly those in
smaller companies. But such investments should not be made the bedrock of a
portfolio.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

930423

