FT932-6884

FT  26 MAY 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar weakens against yen


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE DOLLAR dropped close to its historic low against the yen yesterday as
dealers took the view that the US would be looking for a stronger Japanese
currency at this week's trade talks between Tokyo and Washington, writes
James Blitz.
The US currency has been under pressure against the yen after last week's
higher than expected trade deficit raised speculation that US officials were
seeking a depreciation of the dollar.
The yen received a further boost yesterday after Mr Lawrence Summers, the US
Treasury Undersecretary, was reported as saying that a stronger Japanese
currency could help to reduce Tokyo's trade surplus.
These comments helped to push the dollar down from Y110.60 at the start of
European trading to a close of Y109.50, within a shade of its all-time low
of Y109.15. In New York it ended at Y109.40.
The dollar's weakness against the yen was also mirrored in its exchange rate
to the D-Mark during European trading yesterday.
A common factor pushing the dollar down against both currencies was a
surprisingly large 6.1 percentage-point fall in the US consumer confidence
index to 61.5 in May. A slight dip to 66.2 had been forecast.
The figure helped to dampen recent speculation that last week's meeting of
the Federal Reserve's open market committee has mandated Mr Alan Greenspan,
the Fed chairman, to raise US interest rates by 50 basis points if he so
wished.
A second factor weakening the dollar against the D-Mark was a growing belief
that the Bundesbank will not ease its repo rate at its weekly money market
intervention today.
The Bundesbank yesterday announced a 14-day securities repurchase tender at
variable rates, but few expect the current lowest rate of 7.60 per cent to
fall. That is partly because Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank
president, and Mr Otmar Issing, the Bundesbank chief economist, have
recently underlined new caution on German rates because of the D-Mark's
recent weakness.
These factors helped to push the dollar down nearly a pfennig against the
D-Mark to a close of DM1.6285. It finished in New York at DM1.6305.
However, the D-Mark enjoyed little new strength against European currencies.
The Swiss franc appreciated against the D-Mark after Swiss National Bank
said it would be taking a closer look at monetary growth in the setting of
interest rate policy.
Switzerland's short term interest dates are currently around 5 per cent, and
yesterday's announcement raised speculation that the Swiss might be cautious
before cutting them again. The Swiss franc ended at SFr0.895 per D-Mark, up
from SFr0.899.
Sterling gained some ground against the D-Mark following a slight upward
revision in the UK's first-quarter GDP figures. It later slipped back to
close unchanged at DM2.5125.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930526

