FT931-4243

FT  11 MAR 93 / Arts: With spring in their steps / Review of young dancers
at the Paris Opera


   By CLEMENT CRISP


A dancer's life is short, and youthful promise has a nasty habit of fading
away, either by reason of neglect or because of the pressures within a
ballet company. The golden gift we saw at graduation - or thought we saw -
turns to some baser material as time passes, and occasional soloist roles
are the reward for what once seemed a talent to storm the heights. The Paris
Opera Ballet has in latter years set aside evenings in the Palais Garnier to
celebrate the potential of its youngest dancers, so that the Paris public
(always very partisan) may judge the gifted young, and the gifted young may
have moments of glory as a reward for talent, and a taste of greater rewards
to come.
The evenings are tremendously exciting. A clue to the Opera's dance style
lies in display, in assured prowess, in the assertion of 'moi'. Some years
ago, in Natalia Makarova's Ballerina series for BBC TV, shots of class at
the Opera superb Ballet School found the teacher urging her girls to show
plus de chic; beaucoup plus de chic. It is a phrase which sums up a lot
about attitudes at the school and in the company. Technique, the
presentation of the dance, is glossy, and has that wit which is an essential
component of chic. Russian young can look soulful (though sublime) by
comparison. Americans may appear hard-driven in attack; the English somewhat
demure. Most of the young French, if not all - as I saw on Saturday night -
take the stage with an allure that speaks of confidence and a clear sense of
their identity. At worst they are over-vivacious: at best they are
world-beaters.
The programme, given on three successive evenings, comprised pas de deux and
extracts from the repertory. All may not have been for the best all the time
 -a version of the Fairy variations from the Sleeping Beauty prologue did no
justice to Petipa, for the Russian classics lie outside the Opera's
traditions; Agon is not for the inexperienced - but the sum effect was of a
company (and a teaching tradition) marvellously rich.
There were several exceptional talents. A duet from Le Papillon with
Isabelle Ciavara (aged 20) and Emmanuel Thibault (just 18) was
heart-touching. Mlle Ciavara is slight, enchantingly pretty, and delights in
the intricacies of quick, clear, tiny steps: the old Russian ballerinas used
to call such choreography 'weaving lace with your feet'. Mlle Ciavara turns,
holds a floating pose, is sweetly true in this reconstruction of a mid-19th
century spectacle. M Thibault is of medium height - Baryshnikov, Julio
Bocca, his models - and already possessor of a beautifully rounded
technique. Marvels are easily done, but more enthralling is his ability to
devour space, to race and soar, and seem a meteor. Like Mlle Ciaravola, his
manner is still innocent; I long to see them both in Coppelia.
A grand contrast came with Aurelie Dupont in Balanchine's Tchaikovsky pas de
deux. Winner of the junior gold medal in last year's Varna Ballet
Competition, she has an all-conquering skill, but it is allied to a
lusciousness of pose (her back, torso, have a fluidity and power more
Russian than French) and to an innate musical sensibility. Her manner is
serious - if she flirts with anything, it is with the phrasing of the dance,
and that she does divinely - and I hope the world will be hers, for she
seems destined for great things. She had as companion the young but already
established, and splendid, Nicolas Le Riche, hero of the recent house
revival of Le Train Bleu. The pas de deux was radiant.
Ghislaine Fallou is another exceptional talent. She, too, revealed a dignity
of presence, a lovely clarity of pose and grace of phrasing. She needed all
these to redeem Ben Stevenson's Three Preludes in which she was trapped with
her partner, the elegant Yann Bridart. The dance amounts to hollow emotings
to Rakhmaninov - it is a faked choreographic orgasm - but these devoted
artists gave the movement a sincerity which redounds enormously to their
credit. Another rescue operation was performed by Delphine Baey and Emmanuel
Hoff in the duet from William Forsythe's In the middle. Mlle Baey produced
the dead-pan force, the far-flung limbs and the general air of aggressive
boredom that the piece demands. I would love to see her in a ballet: she is
a physically dramatic dancer, excellently matched by M. Hoff.
There were other young performers on view, their moments of glory well
merited. How good to see a great national troupe able and willing to salute
its next generation. It is worth urging any visitor to Paris to the Matisse
show at the Beaubourg, where you can see the Petersburg version of La Danse,
as thrilling as the activities of the apprentice angels at the Palais
Garnier.
The Paris Opera Ballet will be on tour at the Kennedy Center, Washington,
March 18-28. Sponsored by AROP, the Florence Gould Foundation, American
Friends of the Paris Opera, and Air France

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930311

