FT932-7044

FT  26 MAY 93 / Climbdown on railcards worries bidder


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


ONE OF the companies considering bidding for passenger service franchises
said last night that some rail travellers could be left worse off by the
government's turnabout on the sensitive issue of railcards for the young and
old.
Badger Rail, a newly formed subsidiary of the Badgerline group of bus
companies, said that many companies might have wished to offer bigger
discounts to certain groups than those available under existing railcard
schemes, but would no longer have the freedom to do so.
But Mr Philip Snowden, Badger Rail's managing director, said would-be train
operators were unlikely to be deterred from taking part in the privatisation
process as a result of the government's turnabout on railcards.
He said: 'The idea that railcards were somehow under threat was always
ill-founded. Commercial operators would almost certainly have carried on
with the same sort of offers that these cards represent because it would
have been in their commercial interests to do so.'
Badger Rail is considering bids for several rail franchises including
InterCity's Great Western Main Line and Regional Railways' South Wales and
West Region.
Mr Snowden said that one advantage of preserving the national railcard
schemes was that his company would not have to enter long negotiations with
other franchisees about what sort of cards should be offered.
However, Mr Snowden said if the government insisted that the cards were
offered to passengers on terms that were uncommercial, the potential losses
to rail operators would be reflected in the size of their bids for the
franchises - so the cost would ultimately rebound on the government.
At present there are about 750,000 holders of senior citizen's railcards and
750,000 holders of young person's cards. Members of both groups pay Pounds
16 a year for their cards. In return, they are entitled to a 33 per cent
reduction in the cost of virtually all tickets except Apex and excursion
fares.
British Rail introduced both types of cards in the early 1970s as a
marketing tool rather than a concession, with the aim of filling seats that
would otherwise have remained empty. But the calculation is difficult: the
danger is always that the value of new business fails to outweigh the
discounts claimed by existing passengers.
One estimate is that the net effect of railcards is to boost British Rail
revenues by Pounds 20m a year. But the contributions of the different types
of card is very uneven: the young person's card contributes most, the senior
citizen's much less, and the family railcard very little. The disabled
person's card makes a loss, but British Rail regards that card as a social
obligation and picks up the bill.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930526

