FT932-6845

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(14): The user-friendly service - Client-server computing


   By MICHAEL DEMPSEY


THE Abbey National is a building society turned bank with 700 branches and
12,000 PCs. The branches service a wide variety of customer needs, and the
PC network is the route that Abbey National uses to meet those needs.
Since 1987, Abbey National has invested Pounds 100m a year in IT, with the
aim of bringing all its computer resources to bear on that network. Its
strategy is client-server computing. Using powerful host computers to back
up rings of PCs, each branch offers Abbey National counter staff a variety
of programs with a common interface.
Staff learn only how to work with one system. Whatever new function they
move to within the branch the software remains familiar. This leaves them
ready to cope with any request from a customer.
Mr Mac Millington is director of retail banking systems at Abbey National.
He believes that the key to client-server computing lies in the ability of
software to bundle together different functions. His PCs are linked through
the local host computer to the entire national network. So the ultimate
hosts are a bewildering array of large mainframe processors.
Mr Millington emphasises that in the client-server scheme of things these
systems are no more than large servers. 'True client-server computing comes
about when it all looks the same to the end-user. Most cashiers wouldn't
know which mainframe the data is on - and they don't need to. That's the job
of our IT people.'
He relies on Olivetti for the thousands of PCs and the software that binds
those terminals to the hosts and the bank's entire network. 'The key is to
glue all the applications together so what the user sees is one homogeneous
system. That's why we chose this Personal for Banking suite of software.
Olivetti understands the key is to make the whole structure transparent to
the user.'
becomes apparent as Mr Millington reels off the list of mainframe and core
system suppliers that Abbey National uses.
Large systems from Unisys, IBM, Amdahl, Stratus and Teradata all feature in
the bank's IT arsenal. These can store and transmit huge quantities of data,
but if the communications link between central computer sites and the
branches fails, the local operations can continue relying on branch hosts.
Each branch server has a link to 'foreign' hosts, providing external data
feeds such as Prestel services.
Mr Millington regards this durability as a critical aspect of client-server
operations. 'This allows us to give the service we want. If the host line is
down the branch can still keep up with customer queries because the client
software is at the front end.'
The arrival of the powerful 386-based PCs that Abbey National uses was
crucial to the client-server philosophy. Networks of dumb terminals,
providing whatever programs a mid-sized 32-bit processor or large mainframe
could store and transmit, were the standard manner of distributing an
institution's data. This set-up became obsolete as the PC began to outstrip
the old generation of mid-range computers. Once technology could offer local
intelligence, the client level of the operation took on a new value.
Abbey National staff no longer have to sign off and on when moving from
mortgages to personal banking. The common interface generated by the PB
software and supported by the processing power of the client PC keeps every
service in the one environment. The applications reside on the client PC
while the server, again a PC but dedicated to one task, holds all the branch
data.
In the old, mainframe-driven view of the world, the end-user was out on the
edge. Now client-server computing has brought the user and his applications
into the centre of things, with every other device, right up to mainframes,
regarded as a necessary peripheral. With software development focused on
aiding counter staff, client-server computing should give the consumer a
quicker and cleaner service.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930526

