FT934-8646

FT  15 NOV 93 / Many Tory MPs want deeper spending cuts


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


DEEP divisions among Conservative MPs over whether taxes must rise to reduce
the government's Pounds 50bn a year borrowing requirement have highlighted
the dangerous political balancing act faced by Mr Kenneth Clarke in his
Budget on November 30.
A Financial Times survey of opinion on the Tory backbenches at Westminster
reveals that a large majority wants the burden of cutting the government's
indebtedness to fall more heavily on public spending.
Over two-thirds argue that the chancellor should reduce further the
Whitehall spending targets already agreed for the next three years. An even
larger majority (80 per cent) want an early cut in interest rates to
underpin the currently hesitant pace of economic recovery. The survey, based
on written responses from 75 Conservative MPs during the past three weeks,
exposes their deep unease about the planned imposition of value added tax on
domestic fuel.
Some 57 per cent of those polled believe it is too late now to reverse the
plan announced by Mr Norman Lamont, the former chancellor, but 48 per cent
say household heating bills should not be subject to the full 17.5 per cent
VAT rate.
That figure points up the serious risk of a backbench rebellion against the
tax unless Mr Clarke unveils a compensation package which includes generous
help for those on low incomes just above the state benefit levels. As Mr
Clarke prepares to put the final touches to his Budget, his cabinet
colleagues are convinced he has decided on a further package of tax
increases.
Senior ministers say the chancellor's commitment to a faster reduction in
public borrowing will be impossible to meet without additional revenue. One
cabinet member said last night that abandoning that commitment would 'tear
up' the Treasury's credibility in financial markets.
The survey shows that 52 per cent of Tory MPs would support higher taxes.
But a large minority - 45 per cent - say he should not add to the tax
increases already put in place by Mr Lamont. Those measures will raise an
additional Pounds 6bn in 1994-95 and Pounds 10bn in 1995-96.
The deep ambivalence on the backbenches over the twin needs to nurture
recovery and reduce borrowing is reflected also in their assessment of Mr
Clarke's first priority. Some 56 per cent of those questioned say it should
be promoting the recovery but 31 per cent say lower borrowing should come
first.
Of the slightly more than half of MPs willing to put a figure on the
acceptable scale of higher taxation an overwhelming majority are convinced
Mr Clarke should err on the side of political caution. Some 32 per cent of
the respondents suggest any increases should be limited to between Pounds
1bn and Pounds 2bn in annual terms while 20 per cent are ready to
contemplate an additional Pounds 3bn to Pounds 4bn. But only 5 per cent are
ready to consider the possibility the chancellor might seek an extra Pounds
5bn or more.
The MPs are also clear that if taxes are to go up, the increases must be
carefully targeted. More than half believe the best way to raise additional
revenue would be through non-indexation of income tax allowances, while 60
per cent see scope for a further squeeze on mortgage interest relief. Some
53 per cent are also prepared to see VAT levied on newspapers and books.
The concern to strengthen recovery is reflected also in the 73 per cent who
want special measures to help industry and boost exports and investment.
One last chance to get it right, Page 10
Tax 'flaw' may trip chancellor, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931115

