FT932-6926

FT  26 MAY 93 / International Company News: SE Banken aid still under review


   By HUGH CARNEGY and CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   STOCKHOLM


THE Swedish government said yesterday negotiations on a rescue package for
loss-burdened Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken were continuing, despite market
speculation that the bank might not need state assistance following its
improved first-quarter result.
'They have handed in a formal application for support (last December) and
their application has not been withdrawn. That is where the issue stands,'
said Mr Stefan Ingves, director-general of the Bank Support Authority, the
state body set up to tackle the country's banking crisis.
The government announced in February it had concluded that SE Banken, which
suffered a SKr5.37bn (Dollars 735.6m) operating loss last year, required
state support. Mr Ingves said the situation had not changed as a result of
SE Banken's quarterly results, which showed a sharp cut in losses and a
shrinking of its portfolio of non-performing loans.
However, he declined to comment on the likely extent of the assistance, or
say when negotiations with the bank would be completed.
SE Banken's shares have risen more than five-fold in value since the
publication of its first-quarter figures at the end of April. Yesterday, the
most-traded A shares closed at SKr38.5, up SKr1 on the day. An important
factor fuelling the surge has been speculation that the requirement for
state aid would be limited, or even eliminated.
The bank repeated its own warning that its loan losses remained very high,
and that 'great uncertainty' continued to cloud the outlook for the full
year. Mr Bjorn Svedberg, chief executive, has said he hoped an outline
agreement on government support would be reached before the midsummer
holiday.
Mr Ingves said it was still to early to say what the banking crisis would
finally cost the government. So far, the state has put up SKr67.5bn in a
mixture of loans, guarantees and equity injections. It now owns Gotabank and
Nordbanken, two of the country's four principle banks.
He said it would take until the end of the year to strip out all the bad
loans - mostly to the commercial property sector - from Gotabank into a
legally separate 'bad bank', leaving the remainder to be re-privatised in
one piece or broken down into units. The government has already distributed
an investor memo for the sale of Gotabank, eliciting 20 expressions of
interest from Swedish and foreign investors.
Mr Ingves said Gotabank had used up about SKr6bn of the SKr10bn advanced to
it in guarantees. 'It is going to cost a lot of money,' he said. 'The
government is not going to get all its money back.'
He said he did not anticipate selling off Nordbanken at least until next
year. The bank support authority has already stripped out SKr50bn in bad
loans from the bank, allowing it to show a first-quarter operating profit
following a SKr16bn loss in 1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930526

