FT932-3204

FT  15 JUN 93 / Survey of Retail Chain Management (3): A fresh direction in
logistics - Distribution


   By PHILIP HASTINGS


DISTRIBUTION and the broader function of logistics are now firmly
established as a critical area of retail chain management.
In fact, claims Mr Angus Clark, systems and distribution director of food
retailer J Sainsbury, 'a policy for logistics is clearly a prerequisite for
building a retail business in any sector of the market today.' Retailer-led
logistics development over the past decade has, in turn, put great pressure
on manufacturers.
'To do business with retailers now, manufacturers not only have to have the
right product, best quality and competitive prices, they also have to be
able to respond quickly to customers' requirements and provide sound levels
of service,' says Mr Clark.
Many UK retail industry distribution systems, particularly in the food
retailing sector, are enormous operations. Sainsbury's, for example,
processes products from more than 1,000 suppliers through 20 depot
locations. Some 1,000 lorries distribute 11m cases a week to 335 stores.
Within this network, there are more than 17,000 commodities and more than
65,000 individual stocking points. 'The longest lead time for meeting orders
from the stores is 48 hours. But over 80 per cent of the volume is delivered
within 24 hours of it being ordered. The supply chain now operates 24 hours
a day, 364 days a year,' Mr Clark said at a recent seminar run by
distribution company Exel Logistics.
The biggest change in retail sector logistics over the past couple of
decades has been the move to centralised distribution centres. In the case
of food retail, those centres are often centres which can handle
temperature-controlled products and ambient temperature goods.
Previously, manufacturers tended to deliver direct to the local depots or
even the stores of their retail sector customers. Such operations were known
as 'push' systems - driven by the suppliers. Now, manufacturers' deliveries
are increasingly made into a central distribution point run by the retailer
or a contractor working on behalf of the retailer. The retailer, and the
contractor when employed, controls the final distribution through to the
stores.
The establishment of centralised distribution networks has involved heavy
investment by retailers and their distribution service contractors. Much of
that investment has been phased in but some companies have opted - or been
forced to opt - for more dramatic change. ASDA Stores, for example,
developed a centralised distribution system at the start of the 1990s
costing Pounds 170m over two years. Six fully composite centres were built
and commissioned, together with a slow moving ambient centre and a
transhipment operation.
Who is best-placed to run the retail industry's distribution systems is
still being debated.
Some retailers have opted to bring back in-house parts of those operations
which have for some time been contracted out to third party specialists.
Other retailers, though, are heading in the opposite direction and seeking
to establish closer, wider-ranging partnerships with distribution service
providers.
Such developments are confirmed by the Research Services Department of the
Institute of Grocery Distribution in a 1991 study focusing on the
involvement of third party specialists in the distribution operations of
leading multiple stores. According to IGD, third party penetration of
leading stores ranged from 35-45 per cent for ASDA, J Sainsbury and Tesco
and 60-65 per cent for CRS, Gateway and Safeway, to 85-95 per cent for
Iceland, Kwik Save and CWS, and 100 per cent for Wm Low and Grandways.
While the debate continues on handling distribution in-house or contracting
out, retail industry observers agree other trends will continue to be
influential.
In the words of Mr Irving Nixon, managing director of Worldwide Chain Store
Systems International, in a paper presented at an IGD conference in London
earlier this year: 'Central distribution will continue, with fewer, larger
units delivering more frequently to stores with full vehicle loads. And
retailers' systems will continue to be further integrated to embrace all
products in the store, from the warehouse right back to the supplier.'

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930615

