FT934-11543

FT  30 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: When age does weary them - The
options for those needing help as they grow older / Health care


   By BETHAN HUTTON


BRITAIN'S population is ageing, like most of the developed world. Modern
medicine lets people live longer, but a growing number need expensive,
labour-intensive care and nursing in their final years. This could strain
both individual and national finances. A paper presented to the Institute of
Actuaries this week estimated that the demand for long-term care would rise
in real terms from Pounds 40bn a year now to Pounds 60bn in 40 years.
Demographic and social trends mean that the present heavy reliance on
informal care by relatives may no longer be feasible in future. The ratio of
retired people to the population of working age is set to rise, more women
are going out to work, family members live further apart, and rising divorce
rates mean there are more single elderly people - and fewer daughters-in-law
willing to perform traditional caring roles.
In coming decades, more people are likely to have to pay for care, but very
few are taking the logical step of planning for it. Many have the vague
feeling that the state will provide but the government has made clear that
it can no longer afford to take full responsibility for the elderly. Anyone
who has income, savings, or a home above certain limits must now pay for
care, as described in an article on these pages two weeks ago.
Within the past few years, a number of insurance companies have launched
products which aim to make paying for care easier. Sales are low as yet, and
insurers are still experimenting with product structure. One innovative
option devised by Cannon Lincoln, which packaged long-term care insurance as
part of a pension plan, was dropped after the Inland Revenue withdrew
approval.
Many insurers are hesitant to launch products while public awareness of the
need is still low, or are waiting for the government to come up with tax
incentives to kick-start the market. Bupa, the medical insurer, has been
eyeing the market for some time and could well launch a product next year.
Products available now take two main forms: insurance plans for people not
yet requiring care; and 'point of entry' plans for people who already need
to go into a nursing home but are worried about their money running out. A
few hybrid products combine an element of long-term care with life or
permanent disability insurance.
Long-term care insurance is based on a concept called 'activities of daily
living' (ADLs) - such as being continent, able to dress, wash, use the
toilet, get in and out of bed and feed yourself without assistance. Once a
person is no longer capable of a certain number of ADLs, the policy will pay
out. 'Cognitive impairment,' such as that caused by Alzheimer's disease,
will also usually act as a trigger.
Commercial Union and PPP Lifetime are the biggest players in this market,
offering similar plans at two levels. One pays out only on serious
incapacity (roughly, failing more than three ADLs), and one starts to pay at
a lower level when two ADLs are failed. As the payments are made to the care
providers - whether nursing homes or home nurses - they are tax-free. This
insurance is intended to be long term, like life assurance: the younger and
healthier you are when you start, the cheaper it will be all along. Premiums
can be paid monthly, annually or as a one-off lump sum, particularly on
retirement or when people move to a smaller home and have cash in hand.
Prime Health, a specialist health insurer, has two plans. One, called Home
Health Care, covers help in the person's own home while Home Health Care
Plus extends to nursing home care and some common inpatient surgery which
improves the quality of life, such as hip replacement operations. These are
more short-term policies, similar to private medical insurance, with
variable, annually renewable premiums.
Commercial Union is also a provider of 'point of need' plans along with
Eagle Star and Clerical Medical. The plans are all different, but have as a
common basis an enhanced annuity: anyone needing immediate nursing home care
is by definition in a poor state of health, with a correspondingly reduced
life expectancy, and so can get better than normal annuity rates.
The plans are bought with a lump sum (often from the sale of a house) and
then pay out a fixed or increasing sum every month or year for the rest of
the person's life. Often, the insurer makes an arrangement with the nursing
home that its fees will not rise more than a certain percentage a year, or
in line with a recognised index, so that no shortfall arises.
Clerical Medical's plan is rather different. It is for a fixed five-year
period and part of the lump sum goes to buy a temporary annuity. The rest is
invested in unit trusts or a Pep with the aim of replacing the capital used
to buy the annuity. After five years, another plan can be taken out or other
arrangements made.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

931030

