FT934-8521

FT  15 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Studies suggest SmithKline drug most
cost-effective


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


THREE studies presented yesterday suggest a SmithKline Beecham product is
more cost-effective than one of Glaxo's most important new drugs.
The studies, two independent and one sponsored by SmithKline Beecham, the
Anglo-American group, compare Glaxo's anti-nausea compound Zofran, with
Kytril.
The three trials, presented at the European conference on clinical oncology
and cancer nursing in Jerusalem yesterday, are the first ever comparing the
two drugs, used mainly to limit the side-effects of cancer treatments.
Zofran has been Glaxo's most significant launch over the past four years,
generating sales of Pounds 365m last financial year, and forecast by
analysts to reach Pounds 465m next year.
A Finnish trial of 161 women with breast cancer demonstrated that a 3mg dose
of Kytril was statistically more effective than a single 8mg dose of Zofran.
Complete control of vomiting was achieved in 84 per cent of patients on the
SmithKline Beecham drug, compared with 60.7 per cent on Zofran.
The trial also compared Kytril with a Sandoz product, tropisetron, which
prevented vomiting among 74.5 per cent of patients.
The study also showed only 2 per cent of patients taking Kytril vomited more
than twice, compared with 12.7 per cent on tropisetron and 18 per cent on
Zofran. About 41 per cent of patients expressed a preference for Kytril,
compared with 16.9 per cent for Zofran, and 15.4 per cent for tropisetron.
About 26 per cent expressed no preference.
Another trial in France, comparing the effect of a single 3mg intravenous
dose of Kytril with 10 8mg intravenous and oral doses of Zofran over three
days, suggested the two regimens had similar efficacy. SmithKline Beecham
says the Kytril dose costs Pounds 36 in the UK, compared with Pounds 99 for
Zofran over the three days.
The third trial, involving 359 patients, showed no difference in efficacy
between the two drugs, comparing a single dose of Kytril and three 8mg doses
of Zofran over five days.
'This data will give our marketing people something to get their teeth
into,' said Dr Paul Jenner, SmithKline Beecham pharmaceuticals director of
central nervous system medical affairs. 'In an increasingly cost-conscious
healthcare environment, this sort of data is extremely important.'
SmithKline Beecham has been disadvantaged in its commercial battle with
Glaxo because of its poor development record. Glaxo has launched Zofran in
nearly every world market, while Kytril has not even been licensed in the
US, the world's largest market.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931115

