FT934-8599

FT  15 NOV 93 / Tax 'flaw' may trip chancellor


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Correspondent


THE TREASURY may be being lulled into a false sense of complacency about the
impact of a Budget-day tax rise by a flaw in its computerised economic
model, a study being published this week says.
The study, from the Centre for Economics and Business Research, a
consultancy, says the model fails to take into account how a tax increase
would shock people into spending less. It consequently under-estimates the
impact on consumer spending by about half.
Professor Doug McWilliams, the centre's chief executive, has sent his study
to Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, with a warning that he might need to
treat the views of his officials with caution because of the problems with
the model.
The Treasury's model is a set of equations contained in computer software
which simulates how the economy works.
Economists use models to supplement their own intuition when trying to
predict the impact of policy changes.
The study comes as Mr Clarke finalises his views about the degree that a
fiscal tightening - which may be needed to curb the Pounds 50bn gap between
public spending and revenues - might harm the fragile recovery. He will
announce his strategy in the Budget statement on November 30.
The study is being published as the Treasury is examining whether it should
contract out to the private sector the job of updating its model to ensure
it works properly.
KPMG Peat Marwick, a consultancy hired by the Treasury, has sent a draft
report to the department on the feasibility of such a move. A decision is
expected about the end of the year. Some economists believe that privatising
the model might improve the quality of Treasury analysis and make the
government's forecasting process more open.
The centre analysed how tax changes have affected the economy in the past 14
years, and the record of economic models such as the Treasury's in
predicting the impact of shifts in taxation.
Prof McWilliams said most economic models, including the Treasury model,
consider the impact of a tax rise or fall by treating it in the same way as
any other adjustment to income - such as a wage change.
Prof McWilliams said, however, that tax changes involved a 'shock' which
affected consumer behaviour more profoundly.
He said: 'While people view a change in income tax or indirect taxation as
permanent, they tend to think adjustments to their wages are temporary. This
means the effect on spending - either positive or negative - is greater for
a tax change than what the models predict.'
According to the centre's research a rise of 1 percentage point in taxation
will lead to a fall of at least 0.25 per cent in consumer spending, which
accounts for about two-thirds of gross domestic product. Conventional models
indicate the likely fall in spending is about half this.
The Treasury said it did not want to comment until it had examined the
study.
Prof Ken Wallis, an expert on computer modelling at Warwick University, said
the problem of deciding the impact of tax changes was one to which the
modelling community needed 'to pay attention'.
Because of such difficulties economists often had to override the output
from models to gain a more realistic view about the likely impact of policy
changes.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931115

