FT932-210

FT  30 JUN 93 / World Trade News: France takes tough line on G7 summit


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


FRANCE yesterday hardened its opposition to next week's Group of Seven
summit reaching anything except a procedural agreement on the future of the
Gatt trade talks.
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said that Washington must first lift its
recently confirmed anti-dumping and anti-subsidy duties on steel imports
from France and other countries if there was to be 'a successful conclusion
by the G7 on trade agreements'.
Elysee officials confirmed this was the position that President Mitterrand
would take to the Tokyo summit of the G7 industrialised nations.
The officials also said France saw no sense in the timing of the July 6
eve-of-summit 'quadilateral' meeting of US, EC, Japanese and Canadian
negotiators on market access issues.
'Either this will end in failure, getting the summit off to a bad start  -
or if there is progress, there will be no time for EC negotiators to report
back on the results to the EC Council of Ministers,' an official said. That
would leave France, the three other EC countries, and President Jacques
Delors of the European Commission without a mandate to approve anything of
substance. Since last year's controversial draft US-EC farm accord, Paris
has insisted that Commission negotiators commit the Community to nothing
without prior Council approval.
Mr Balladur yesterday announced he would not join Mr Mitterrand at the Tokyo
summit since he and the president had no disagreements on foreign policy,
'notably on Gatt'.
The apparent calm with which the conservative prime minister seems ready to
let the Socialist president lead a French delegation that will also include
Mr Balladur's foreign and economy ministers stems not only from the memory
of the protocol fracas that occurred when a previous conservative prime
minister - Mr Jacques Chirac - insisted on accompanying President Mitterrand
to a G7 summit in Tokyo seven years ago, but also from the knowledge that
the president is committed to a hardline Gatt stance.
French foreign minister Alain Juppe yesterday affirmed his team's tough
stance, and said there was no question of France accepting a deal on market
access or lowering tariff barriers at the summit.
Paris is incensed at what one senior official yesterday termed Washington's
'fork-tongued hypocrisy' in calling for both sides of the Atlantic to reduce
their steel tariffs to zero, while at the same time imposing 'unilateral and
discriminatory' penalties on steel imports into the US.
Usinor, the French state-controlled steel company, said it would stop
exporting FFr1bn (Pounds 110m) a year of flat-rolled steel to the US after
the Commerce Department said these would be hit by anti-dumping and
anti-subsidy duties.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930630

