FT934-10183

FT  06 NOV 93 / Reform of insolvency law is sought to stem business failures


   By ANDREW JACK


THE BRITISH Chambers of Commerce is to call for a reform of insolvency law
after an unexpected rise in business failures in the third quarter of the
year.
It wants to consider the pressures exerted by the Inland Revenue and Customs
& Excise on companies and to examine the potential conflicts of interest
when accountants hired by banks to investigate companies are then appointed
receivers.
Seasonally-adjusted figures published by the chambers show 5,276 company
failures in the three months to September 30, 2 per cent more than in
April-June. They were down by 21 per cent on the same period last year.
Mr Richard Brown, deputy director-general, said: 'This is worrying and
should give a warning to the government on the way they treat business. It
rather casts doubts on the pace of economic recovery.'
Without seasonal adjustments, the number of corporate insolvencies fell from
5,318 to 4,356 between the second and third quarters, bringing the total for
the first nine months to 15,909, against 17,952 in the same period of 1992.
Mr Brown said the chambers had established a working party on insolvency
which was due to report to its council on December 9 in advance of a
submission to the government. It will consider measures including reforms to
the procedures for obtaining company voluntary arrangements under insolvency
law and improved funding for the government's insolvency service.
It was concerned at the influence on failures of demands to pay value added
tax and corporation tax and pressure from the banks and other secured
creditors. 'They may be acting a bit too quickly to get their money back,'
Mr Brown said.
The group will also discuss how to encourage company directors to seek
outside professional financial help before it became too late to save their
businesses.
The British Chambers of Commerce figures, based on filings with the
government insolvency service and Companies House, showed there were 56
administrators appointed and 80 company voluntary arrangements in the first
nine months of the year, against 105 and 64 respectively in the same period
last year.
The seasonally-adjusted number of individual insolvencies rose by 6 per cent
to 9,170 between the second and third quarters, but was down by 2 per cent
on the same period last year.
Separate figures released yesterday by the Lord Chancellor's office showed
an 8 per cent decline in the number of company winding-up petitions to 3,661
between the second and third quarters. That brought the total for the year
to 12,213, against 13,581 for the same period last year.
Insolvency figures leave vital questions unanswered, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931106

