FT934-11378

FT  01 NOV 93 / Focusing on grander horizons: Kodak's new chairman wants the
group to play a leading role in the information revolution


   By MARTIN DICKSON


It was one of those rare shifts of perspective that make the world suddenly
look a very different place.
It came courtesy of Mr George Fisher, one of America's most respected
managers, who caused some surprise last week by moving from the chairmanship
of high-flying electronics group Motorola to head Eastman Kodak, the
struggling photographic products giant which had ousted the previous
chairman, Mr Kay Whitmore, because of its lacklustre financial performance.
What, in addition to an extremely generous pay package, would prompt Mr
Fisher to exchange his comfortable job for such a bed of thorns and abandon
suburban Chicago for the stolid provincialism of Rochester, Kodak's home
town in rural upstate New York?
The 52-year-old Mr Fisher explained he had a vision of Kodak playing a
leading role in the 'information revolution' - shorthand for the convergence
of the communications, computer and information sectors into one giant
multi-media industry, tied together by their ability to transform data into
common, digital electronic form.
'I have lain awake for the past two nights thinking about the
possibilities,' he enthused, adding that while 90 per cent of his ideas
might not work, 10 per cent of them would be 'killers'.
On one level he was stating the obvious: Kodak, at heart a chemicals
company, knows its long-term prosperity depends on it mastering the
electronics revolution which is transforming photography, along with so many
other industries.
The company has, after all, poured vast sums of money into electronic
experiments over the past decade. And many of them have been failures - a
reminder that Mr Fisher's grand schemes may be devilishly hard to deliver.
The importance of his remarks was that he presented a snapshot of a bold,
aggressive and optimistic enterprise, riding the crest of a technological
wave - and the picture carried a degree of conviction, thanks to his
successful career so far on the cutting edge of the electronics industry.
That is a stark contrast to today's popular image of Kodak. For it is a
company, lacking any compelling vision, which has been defined for a decade
or more not so much by its possibilities as by its problems. Its stumbling
attempts to overcome them present a case study in the difficulties of
shaking up a rigid, corporate culture.
Ever since the 1970s, the company, which pioneered the mass-market
photography industry and remains the world's largest manufacturer of film,
has been haunted by two big threats.
One is electronics, which allows images to be created without the chemical
process which has characterised the photography industry since its birth -
the sensitivity to light of silver halide salts. Electronic cameras, ranging
from simple consumer camcorders to sophisticated still cameras, have been
nibbling away at the market for traditional film, although they do not yet
pose a serious threat to it and may not for many years. This is partly
because no-one has yet invented a cheap, high-quality, digital still camera
and partly because silver halide is still unrivalled as a medium for
capturing the sharpest, most subtle images.
The other threat to Kodak is more immediate. It faces increasing competition
in the film manufacturing business - the company's financial engine,
churning out a fabulous stream of cash flow - from manufacturers of rival
branded and own-label goods, sold at a discount to Kodak's product.
Its arch-rival is Japan's Fuji Photo Film, known for its bold colours and a
history of innovation, but others include Germany's Agfa and America's 3M.
The competition has been growing for several decades - a period when growth
in the western world's consumption of film has slowed from around 10 per
cent a year to a modest 4 per cent.
Despite years of competition, Kodak still commands well over half the global
film market and may even have been gaining share in some countries, as its
reputation for quality - its single most important asset - recovered from a
dip in the 1980s. It retains one of the world's most powerful brand names.
The trouble is that a combination of sluggish sales growth, loss of market
share and pressure on prices has held back its photography profits, while
the company has poured the cash from this business into lavish levels of
research, gold-plated capital investments and unsuccessful diversifications
which have failed to lift earnings.
To no avail it has also taken a succession of large charges against earnings
for restructurings over the past eight years and implemented two big changes
in management structure - the second to put right the flaws in the first.
'The frustration of many long-time shareholders is that the company seems to
have spent these vast sums of money. . .and there hasn't been an incremental
return on those investments,' says Mr Michael Ellmann, an analyst at brokers
Wertheim Schroder.
Indeed, Kodak's 1992 net income of Dollars 1.15bn (Pounds 821m), on sales of
some Dollars 20bn, was slightly lower than its income in 1982 and the
company is forecasting operating earnings this year no higher than last.
Many of the company's problems are personified in 61-year-old Mr Whitmore,
who became chairman in 1990. He is a cautious, kindly man who joined Kodak
as a film manufacturing engineer in 1957 and is steeped in the company's
paternalistic culture. Repeatedly prodded by shareholders and the board, he
started drawing up a plan of action this year to improve the company's
performance, including cuts in the research budget and the spinning off of
its bulk chemicals subsidiary as a separately quoted company.
But he seemed unwilling to take the tough action needed to boost earnings
from the current 5 per cent of sales to the board's 10 per cent target,
including severe job losses. And he appeared unable to articulate a clear
growth strategy.
Yet while Mr Whitmore has become the fall-guy, the roots of Kodak's problems
stretch back through at least two other chairmen - and arguably to the
origins of the company set up in Rochester in 1880 by George Eastman, a high
school drop-out.
Eastman, a marketing genius who sold the world's first simple camera under
the slogan 'you push the button, we do the rest,' built Kodak into the
dominant force in the industry, at one time commanding some 90 per cent of
the film market. He was also a pioneer in labour relations, lavishing
generous health care and retirement benefits on the workers of Rochester, a
city whose most striking landmark remains the solid, square tower of Kodak's
headquarters.
Kodak's extraordinary success, combined with the insularity of Rochester and
the company's dominance of the town, bred a mixture of complacency and
arrogance.
Kodak found Japanese rivals stealing a lead with easier to use cameras,
faster films, more efficient processing and marketing innovations such as
the disposable camera, which is thrown away after its pre-packed film is
processed.
Its arrogance was demonstrated most clearly in its reaction to Polaroid's
invention of the instant camera. Kodak first dismissed it as a fad, but
belatedly followed Polaroid's lead - only to be forced from the market by a
15-year patent infringement suit which cost it Dollars 925m in a 1991
settlement.
Even when Kodak began to realise its problems, its efforts to right matters
were often half-hearted, ill-focused, or just plain wrong.
In the film business, for example, it took an expensive gamble on disk
cameras - small cameras with film mounted on a disk - which it hailed in
1982 as the 'new engine which will drive amateur photography.' But consumers
favoured the simplified 35mm cameras pioneered by Japanese rivals, which
produced higher quality pictures. Kodak abandoned the disk five years ago.
It made an abortive foray into marketing Japanese-built camcorders and
squandered a lead over Xerox in photo copier design.
It diversified into a hodge-podge of businesses (many of them sold during
the past year), such as Atex, the newspaper copy processing system. The
spree culminated in 1988 with the Dollars 5.1bn purchase of Sterling Drug, a
pharmaceuticals and over-the-counter drugs company.
Kodak could advance a plausible rationale for a pharmaceuticals acquisition:
its chemicals expertise has given it a wealth of formulae which could be
useful to a drugs company. But it paid a fancy price for Sterling, a company
with a thin research pipeline which so far has failed to pay its way - while
landing Kodak with a vast debt burden.
However, the record is not universally dismal. In the electronics field,
Kodak and its Dutch partner Philips have scored a considerable coup with
their invention of the photo CD system, introduced last year. This involves
scanning ordinary silver halide photographs into digital form and then
storing them on discs, like compact records. Using a photo CD player, the
pictures can can then be displayed on television or computer screens.
But while increasingly popular with business users, this transitional
technology between the silver halide and digital worlds has failed to take
off in the important consumer market. 'It's not inexpensive, it tends to be
complicated for the average consumer and it's just not walking off the
shelves,' says Mr Eugene Fram, professor of marketing at the Rochester
Institute of Technology. In other words, it's not a profits blockbuster.
Kodak may have some significant digital inventions in the pipeline. One
rumour suggests it is near to unveiling a camera developed jointly with
computer company Apple. Yet some critics argue that the company has been
reluctant in the past to commit wholeheartedly to electronic photography,
for fear of the damage this could cause to the silver halide side.
To the extent that electronics needs a shot in the arm, it should get one
from Mr Fisher, whose whole career has been spent in this industry - first
at Bell Laboratories, the American Telephone & Telegraph research centre,
and since 1976 at Motorola, where he has played a central role in turning
the company into a leading manufacturer of mobile telephones and pagers and
the world's fourth largest semi-conductor manufacturer.
But his most immediate problems will be more prosaic and unpleasant. Despite
little experience in corporate retrenchment, he needs to cut costs quickly -
possibly with job losses above the 10,000 reluctantly announced by Mr
Whitmore in August - to increase cash flow and reduce Kodak's debt burden.
He may also sell peripheral assets. He intends to keep the healthcare
division as one of two 'pillars' of Kodak, alongside imaging, having been
pleasantly surprised by an independent report on the business prepared for
him by an investment bank. But analysts think the barely profitable photo
copier business might go and also the household products subsidiary.
No less important for the long-term will be rebuilding the management team -
a task at which Mr Fisher is said to excel - and instilling in it a greater
degree of marketing expertise than Kodak has displayed recently.
As a cure for myopia, Mr Fisher might also consider moving the headquarters
from Rochester. As it is, his first comments have raised Kodak's sights from
the humdrum, but necessary, task of restructuring to far grander horizons of
technological triumph.
Visions, of course, are two-a-penny, and it will be no easy matter to turn
this champion of the first industrial revolution into a winner in the next.
But at least it's a start.
EASTMAN KODAK the full picture
1992
IMAGING:
Sales Dollars 7.4bn.  Earnings Dollars 1.2bn.
Makes film for the consumer and professional
markets, cameras and photo CDs which allow
the electronic storage of images.
INFORMATION:
Sales: Dollars 4.1bn.  Losses Dollars 151m.
Makes office copiers and printing systems.
HEALTH:
Sales Dollars 5.1bn.  Earnings Dollars 588m.
Includes Sterling Winthorp, manufacturer of
pharmaceuticals and consumer health products;
clinical diagnostic business; x-ray film
business; L&F products, which makes household
cleaning products.
CHEMICALS:
Sales Dollars 3.9bn.  Earnings Dollars 494m.
In process of being spun off to shareholders
as a separately quoted business.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931101

