FT931-4138

FT  12 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Tories draw back from Maastricht
row


   By IVO DAWNAY and DAVID OWEN


A WIDELY expected confrontation between pro-Maastricht Conservative
backbenchers and the Euro-sceptic faction was defused at the 11th hour last
night on the orders of Mr Richard Ryder, the chief whip.
Instead a crowded meeting of the 1922 committee - the group that embraces
all Tory backbenchers - broke up after just five minutes when officers of
the group relayed the call for a public display of peace.
But before the brief meeting closed, Sir Marcus Fox, the committee's
chairman, admitted that he had received a letter signed by some 85
pro-Europeans. It cited past precedent to back the claim that the committee
was originally formulated to ensure support for the government whip. The
letter's aim is to renew pressure on some five Euro-sceptic members not to
oppose the government in crucial votes on the Maastricht bill.
Pro-Maastricht MPs described themselves as satisfied that their point had
been taken without a row. 'Discreet action is more effective than open
warfare,' one said.
Belying the spirit of the truce, one leading Euro-sceptic countered that
their opponents' failure to press home their attack represented another
victory for the rebels.
In spite of the public display of unity there were few in the Commons who
had any doubt that the trench warfare was continuing behind the scenes. As
government business managers tried to raise the numbers needed to extend
debate on the bill until after the normal closure of 10pm, the Euro-sceptics
could be seen conferring openly with Labour whips over whether such a move
could be defeated.
The Liberal Democrats, meanwhile, were reported to be divided over tactics -
split between those anxious to be seen to be aiding progress of the bill and
others not keen to help the government.
Earlier Mr John Major reiterated his determination at the weekly cabinet
meeting to see the legislation through. At question time the prime minister
attacked Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, and a Tory
backbencher for delaying the bill's progress.
However, Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, adopted what appears now to
be the government's official tone by offering a conciliatory speech on
subsidiarity to a Commons' chamber dominated by Euro-sceptics.
At business questions Mr Tony Newton, leader of the House, made clear that
slow progress on the bill could mean MPs might be forced to continue sitting
into August, normally the summer recess.
Unofficial calculations suggest that, almost without question, the
government is now reliant on support from minority parties to stave off
defeat on Labour's controversial social chapter amendment.
Although the government's law officers have taken the position that passage
of the amendment - which seeks to remove the protocol containing Britain's
social chapter opt-out - would still allow it to ratify the treaty, it would
take Britain into uncharted legal territory.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930312

