FT932-13293

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (2): Ten things to
do if it happens to you - The blow of losing a job is harsh, but steps can
be taken to protect your financial position. For instance, even executives
and professionals should not omit to sign on for state benefits / Redundancy


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


UP TO a quarter of the UK workforce has experienced unemployment since it
began to rise in early 1990, and half of the unemployed are homeowners.
These were among the findings of an FT analysis of government data,
published earlier this year.
Increasingly, those who lose their jobs are middle-class professionals and
executives. But many have found redundancy a mixed blessing, allowing them
to embark on new careers. The blow of redundancy is harsh, but financially
it may be one of the better ways of leaving work. Steps can be taken to
soften its impact, and to protect your financial position during what can be
a traumatic period.
There are a number of essential areas to address. Here are ten of them:
1. Your employment contract
Check the terms and conditions of your contract of employment, so that you
can be sure that your minimum pay-off terms agree with the contract. Look
for points to exploit as a negotiating tool with your employer. If your
contract does not mention outplacement services, see if your employer will
agree to pay for them, or at least for financial counselling.
Statutory redundancy pay is the legal minimum payment for employees who have
been made redundant. You must have been in in full-time work for two years
or part-time work for five years to qualify. The payment is calculated on
the length of service with the company and the salary received at the time
based on a maximum weekly wage.
Many professionals or executives will receive considerably more than the
statutory minimum, because their employer will give them a golden handshake.
2. Tax measures
Redundancy payments are tax-free up to a limit of Pounds 30,000, provided
your conditions of service do not say that you are entitled to them. Your
employer has to deduct tax under the pay-as-you-earn system on amounts above
this before paying it to you.
For this reason, it is tax-efficient to pay the excess into your company
pension scheme, subject to the allowable limit. Your employer has to do this
before you leave, so you should ask him whether this is possible when you
are informed that you are being made redundant.
If you are a higher-rate taxpayer and are being made redundant near the end
of the tax year, Peter Smith, of financial advisers Hill Martin, suggests
asking your employer to make your termination date fall into the next tax
year. Since your income is likely to be lower the following year, the excess
on Pounds 30,000 would be taxed at the lower rate.
Those who have worked overseas for their employer may be eligible for extra
tax exemption, and should seek advice about this.
If your employer asks you not to turn up for work during your notice period
and pays you instead, this payment is tax-free subject to the Pounds 30,000
maximum, as long as your contract does not state that payment in lieu of
notice is an alternative to serving the notice period. However, pay for
holiday owed is taxable.
Sometimes, an employer may want the employee to stay on to help with winding
up their area of work. The employer may offer a retention payment in
addition to any redundancy compensation. Although this will usually be taxed
as ordinary earnings, accountants Ernst & Young say that, in some cases, the
redundancy package may be structured in such a way that the payment falls
within it.
3. State benefits
Sign on for unemployment benefit immediately after leaving, to ensure that
National Insurance contributions are automatically credited to you. Claims
cannot be backdated.
You may also be entitled to income support, or to sickness benefit instead
of unemployment benefit. This is a complicated area, and you should contact
the Department of Social Security, or a financial adviser, to make sure you
are obtaining your full entitlements.
4. Draw up a budget
This should be based on a period of at least six months, and include all
financial commitments such as mortgage payments, insurance premiums and
living expenses. The cash flow is good discipline, but will also be needed
if you have to ask your bank manager for a loan or creditors to reschedule
debts.
5. Contact your creditors
Inform your bank manager, mortgage lender and any other creditors of your
changed financial circumstances. Be wary of their financial advice, because
it will most likely be given by agents tied to a single insurance company.
If you envisage difficulties meeting your mortgage payments, tell your
lender. The number of repossessions fell last year from their 1991 peak,
mainly because of a policy of 'forbearance' by lenders. The problem may be
eased in the case of a repayment mortgage by lengthening the term of the
mortgage or temporarily suspending capital repayments. Remember that
interest payments will mount up.
There is less flexibility with an endowment mortgage, and your lender may
suggest conversion to a repayment mortgage. Resist surrendering an endowment
policy, particularly in its early years, because you may get back less than
the premiums paid on it. If you have no choice, find out what the surrender
value would be and see if you can get a better deal at auction or by selling
it to a marketmaker. Another alternative is to make the policy 'paid up' by
paying no more and waiting for the amount invested to mature.
6. Reduce debts
Credit card bills are a needlessly expensive way of borrowing, especially if
you have been given a lump sum and can afford to pay off these bills. The
same applies to overdrafts. If you have a sizeable pay-off, consider
reducing the size of your mortgage.
7. Insurance
If life and medical insurance were provided by your company, you will need
new cover. Before you leave, ask whether you can retain membership of the
company's medical scheme. Some employers are also prepared to pay life
assurance for up to six months after redundancy.
8. Pensions
If you have a company scheme, the broad alternatives are to leave it with
your former employer or to transfer to a personal pension. If you expect to
be in employment again soon, another option is to transfer from your old
scheme to the new company.
These are important decisions which should not be made in haste. Begin by
asking your employer what the transfer value of the pension would be, and
check what the benefits are for leaving the pension with the company as a
'frozen' or 'deferred' pension, because some schemes are more generous than
others. If you have less than five years of service with the employer, you
may find that you cannot leave the pension with the company. Take
independent financial advice in this complicated area.
9. Investing the pay-off
Do not be hurried into any quick decisions about investments. Put your
redundancy pay in a high-interest instant access building society account
until you have a clearer idea of your future plans. It is not a good idea to
tie up such money for a long period in case you suddenly need it.
10. Seek financial advice
It is easy to think that you may not need financial help, but if you have
been given a lump sum and do not know what your long-term plans are,
financial planning, preferably with the help of a fee-based adviser, is
essential. If the amount paid to you is sizeable, you may want to invest it
to produce income or you may be able to afford to pay off your mortgage. The
decision will depend on your other sources of income and your tax status.
Names and addresses of fee-based advisers can be obtained from Money
Management magazine or from the Institute of Financial Planning, which both
keep registers of fee-based advisers.
Money Management Fee-based Adviser Register, Financial Times Business
Information, Greystoke Place, Fetter Lane, London EC4A 1ND.
Registry of Financial Planning at the Institute of Financial Planning, 0432
274 891.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930423

