FT934-10165

FT  06 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: High cost of home from home -
Scheherazade Daneshkhu finds that UK expatriates can face a mortgage problem


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


UK EXPATRIATES tempted to buy a home in Britain during the current slack
market may find it difficult to get a mortgage. Lenders are far less happy
to loan money to someone who is abroad than to someone who is an
owner-occupier.
When Ron MacDonald, a marine engineer, found that he could double his salary
by working in Canada, he and his wife left for Quebec in 1981. Several years
later, alarmed at the rise in UK property prices, they decided to buy a home
in England. 'It seemed at the time that if prices continued their upward
spiral we would not be able to return to England, so we bought the
property,' said MacDonald.
He took out a mortgage with The Mortgage Corporation, a centralised lender,
for 70 per cent of the value of the property and let it out.
This year MacDonald found he was paying 3.5 percentage points more than the
standard rate quoted by the Mortgage Corporation. He asked why and was told
that as a non-resident he was considered a bad risk and was therefore
subjected to a higher rate.
MacDonald thought this ridiculous given that he had never missed a monthly
payment. But he has found it impossible to transfer to a different lender
since his property has fallen in value.
Julian Palmer, head of marketing at The Mortgage Corporation, said that it
did not penalise homeowners letting out their property by charging them a
higher mortgage rate but that it did charge different rates for clients
depending on their risk profile.
Lenders are reluctant to enter the expatriate market because it is harder to
pursue someone living abroad for mortgage payments and, in the extreme, to
repossess the home. They also do not want to find that they are financing a
commercial venture.
The flexibility of lenders during the property recession has been further
constrained by the stricter criteria imposed by mortgage indemnity insurers.
Borrowers have to pay a mortgage indemnity premium, which protects the
lender against a mortgage default, if the loan exceeds a certain proportion
of the value of the property - usually 75 per cent.
For this reason, those lenders that are willing to extend a loan to an
expatriate tend to restrict it to a maximum of around 75 per cent.
Paul Atkinson of Nationwide, the second largest lender, said that in
general: 'Our primary focus is to provide a mortgage for people to buy a
home to live in. If someone was abroad and wanted to buy a property in the
UK and rent it to people other than relatives, we would treat that as an
investment property proposition and would take a decision regarding what the
appropriate lending rate would be.'
Cheltenham & Gloucester building society no longer offers mortgages to
expatriates. 'Generally, we have found that those who are not
owner-occupiers have more difficulty in meeting their mortgage payments.
Moreover, those who live abroad face a currency risk if they are paying
their mortgage in sterling, especially if the rental income is not
sufficient to meet monthly payments,' said Gill Colver of C&G.
However, some lenders are willing to take on expatriates, although most
stress that they look at customers on an individual basis. In all cases, the
property must be the principal or sole residence in the UK and the buyer
must show that they intend to return to it.
BNP, the UK mortgage lending arm of the French bank, has specialised in the
expatriate market for 10 years. It will lend to a maximum of 80 per cent of
the value of the property. A fee of Pounds 295 will be added to the loan.
The letting agreement must either be on an assured shorthold tenancy basis
or a corporate let.
Abbey National will ask potential buyers to fill in a letting questionnaire
and to return it with a cheque for Pounds 50. The maximum letting period it
will agree to is a renewable one-year contract. If the owner does not return
to the UK usually within three years, the bank may decide that the owner is
using the property as an investment vehicle and charge mortgage interest at
two percentage points above the standard variable rate.
Midland and National Westminster banks will lend up to 90 per cent of the
value of the property. Both would want the buyer to have a UK-based bank
account out of which mortgage payments would be made. Midland would insist
on taking first charge of the property, while NatWest would not lend unless
the expatriate is on a fixed term contract or unless satisfied that the
buyer intends to return to the UK within a year.
Lloyds will charge an administration fee of Pounds 175 and restrict lending
to 75 per cent of the value of the purchase. It would want to take first
charge over the mortgage. Barclays will charge up to 2.5 percentage points
over its standard variable rate and will lend a maximum of 80 per cent. John
Charcol, mortgage brokers, can also arrange expat mortgages.

The Financial Times


London Page V

931106

