FT934-8483

FT  15 NOV 93 / PepsiCo curtails Michael Jackson tour deal


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


PEPSICO, the US soft drinks group, said yesterday it was ending its
sponsorship of Michael Jackson's world tour following the singer's decision
to cancel its final leg because of his addiction to pain-killers.
Jackson pulled out of the tour in Mexico City on Friday, saying he would
seek treatment for his increasing dependency on the painkillers he had been
prescribed after scalp surgery for a burn he said he suffered while filming
a Pepsi commercial.
The 35-year-old performer said anguish over allegations that he had sexually
molested a 14-year-old boy had aggravated his addiction. Jackson denies the
allegations, but California police are continuing to investigate.
PepsiCo would not say how much money was involved in sponsorship, but when
it announced the deal in 1992 it called it the largest ever between a
company and an entertainer. At the time, industry analysts estimated it was
worth as much as Dollars 10m (Pounds 6.7m). It was unclear last night
whether Jackson would lose the sponsorship for part or all of the tour.
PepsiCo's relationship with Jackson dates back to 1984, when it sponsored a
tour by the singer and his brothers. Since then PepsiCo has sponsored two
world tours and run several series of television commercials broadcast
around the world. Jackson had not advertised Pepsi on television in the US,
however, since 1988.
The termination of the tour sponsorship is a blow to PepsiCo, which has
spent hundreds of millions of dollars in recent years promoting its main
Pepsi brand outside the US through the singer's concerts.
The company had described the deal as 'a key catalyst in the expansion of
our international business'. Jackson, with his appeal to young people around
the world, was seen as a powerful weapon for PepsiCo in its battle with arch
rival Coca-Cola.
The revelation that Jackson was addicted to painkillers, coming on top of
the sex abuse allegations, would have made it difficult for PepsiCo to
continue sponsoring the singer, but the company said it was Jackson's
decision to end the tour prematurely that led to the termination of its
sponsorship deal.
Mr Gary Hemphill, a spokesman for PepsiCo, said last night: 'Our agreement
with Michael Jackson was for the sponsorship of his international tour. Now
that the tour is over, there is nothing left to sponsor.' Mr Hemphill said
the deal would have ended at the planned conclusion of the tour in December.
Jackson has a long-term recording contract with Sony worth at least Dollars
65m.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

931115

