FT933-12808

FT  22 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Running Japan


FOUR DAYS after Japan's inconclusive election, the shape of the likely
ruling coalition has still not emerged. Nor is it clear whether the net
result of these political upheavals will be a shift in power towards the
politicians, away from the bureaucrats who have effectively governed the
country during the past decades of Liberal Democratic party hegemony. Little
wonder, with at least one political party suggesting that budget-drafting
should become the prerogative of elected officials, that these are nervous
days at the Ministry of Finance.
Surely, the bureaucrats say, we have enough to concern us without worrying
whether Japan's pork-barrel politicians are about to undo a decade of fiscal
aus-terity in a spree of tax cuts in the run-up to a second elec-tion.
Inconsistently perhaps, the bureaucrats are also worried by the weak
economy: recent data on retail sales and the monetary aggregates suggest
that confidence remains depressed, while industrial output is still falling.
Moreover, the politicians are already judged to have conceded too much to
the US by committing the ministry to take further action, if necessary, to
reduce the trade surplus. Worse still, US administration officials may soon
be back demanding that the agreement be supplemented with numerical targets.
The bureaucrats should act while they can. Now more than ever, given the
current confused state of Japanese politics, the Ministry of Finance is in
charge.
The obvious way to revive the economy, and thus pre-empt the risk of panic
measures later on, is to ease monetary policy now. Policy remains much too
tight, given the depressed state of bank lending, while underlying
inflationary pressures remain non-existent.
The best way to block US demands for numerical and sectoral trade targets is
to pre-empt the inevitable complaint that Japan has failed to live up to the
spirit of the agreement. That means taking steps now to revive demand for
imports.
A possible way to prevent politically motivated tax cuts later in the year
would be for the ministry to propose a substantial, but temporary, income
tax cut now.
The combination of an interest rate cut and a temporary tax cut would thus
kill three birds with one macro-economic stone. And it could only add to the
Ministry of Finance's reputation for far-sighted prudence and political
savvy. This would serve the bureaucrats well when the horse-trading over
governmental responsibilities really begins.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930722

