FT932-6901

FT  26 MAY 93 / International Company News: Shiseido's turnover keeps its
good looks


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


JAPANESE consumers' preoccupation with good looks was apparently little
affected by the economic slowdown in Japan.
Shiseido, the cosmetics group, posted a marginal increase in pre-tax profits
to Y32.4bn (Dollars 294.54m) on sales 3 per cent ahead at Y400.4bn despite
generally depressed consumer spending in Japan.
Shiseido saw strong demand for its toiletries in particular, which account
for more than 24 per cent of its revenues. The toiletries division, which
sells products ranging from shampoo to disposable nappies, is an area into
which the company has been putting a lot of effort.
Meanwhile, the cosmetics division, which accounts for nearly 70 per cent of
turnover, posted a 1.5 per cent increase in sales to Y278.8bn.
Although cosmetics was not immune from the fall in consumer spending,
Shiseido found that shoppers were on the whole loyal to its brands,
particularly in skincare products and to higher end cosmetics products
generally.
Consumers also took to the value-added products launched by the group, such
as its 'whiteness' cosmetics for use against freckles.
Shiseido is emphasising its pharmaceuticals business and is entering the
prescription drugs market with the launch of a medicine jointly developed
with a Japanese pharmaceutical company, which is used in cataract surgery
and cornea transplants.
The company says that this business, which will take it back to its roots as
a pharmaceuticals concern, is four times larger than the cosmetics industry.
Kanebo, the Japanese cosmetics and textiles manufacturer, reported a 48 per
cent fall in pre-tax profits for the year to March and a dividend cut.
Parent company taxable profits fell to Y4.49bn from Y8.63bn the year before.
Sales rose nearly 3 per cent to Y510bn.
Kanebo said cosmetics sales, which comprised about 30 per cent of overall
sales, rose 4 per cent but the gain was offset by a 6 per cent fall in
textile revenues.
The company warned that sales would fall further to Y480bn in the current
year while pre-tax profits would more than halve to Y2.3bn due to lower
income from sales of securities and property.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930526

