FT932-3293

FT  15 JUN 93 / Arts: Saved, but only by its Bacon - William Packer finds
the Venice Biennale an ill-assorted mess


   By WILLIAM PACKER


This, the 45th Venice Biennale, actually moved on an extra year this time to
get onto the odd numbers in readiness for its centenary in 1995, is larger
than ever, not only in its various manifestations at sites across the city
and out into the lagoon, but also in the scope of its critical ambition.
That is not to say it is any the better: indeed, it is overall an
ill-assorted, uncritical and self-indulgent mess.
In the days when the Biennale was more or less confined to its principal
site in the public gardens of the Castello in a huge central pavilion
surrounded by its satellite national pavilions beneath the trees, there was
always the chance at least of a certain concentration of attention, if only
for the sake of a reasonable comparative discrimination between the
particular contributions. Even the bringing of Aperto, the selective
international survey of younger artists' work, closer to hand at the
Corderie might once have been seen in this respect as the bringing of an
unruly offspring somewhat to heel.
But Aperto is irredeemably delinquent and unbiddable, devoid of talent or
interest, merely thrashing around in the playpen of late 20th-century
academic modernism, without even the possibility of some personal
development that the average playschool would offer up in modest
justification. And increasingly the Aperto seems to set the tone of
successive Biennales, the tail that wags the dog.
Achille Bonito Oliva, the new director of the Biennale, gives us 'the
cardinal points of art' as his curatorial theme, setting out 'to document
the transition within contemporary art from the concept of nomadism to that
of the journey, wherein art's search for orientation in this epoch of
epistemological crisis is conducted within its own points of reference'.
Well, we see what he means. Do your own thing and anything will do.
Installation is the universal convention, and if you have a video screen to
perk it up a bit, so much the better.
In any such jamboree, of course, there are bound to be beautiful and
interesting things and I shall return to the matter and substance of the
Biennale at the weekend. But of all the several features of the Biennale as
it has developed over recent years, one seems more and more to be positive,
useful and redeeming. The Omaggio, a tribute paid by the Biennale to a
senior and distinguished artist, is given this time to Francis Bacon, who
died a little over a year ago. David Sylvester, who himself has been given a
Golden Lion at this Biennale for his life's work as a critic and curator - a
unique award in that he is not an artist - was asked to select the work, and
worked with the British Council on its presentation.
Thank goodness for small mercies. The result is quite simply the outstanding
exhibition of this Biennale, as indeed it would have been at a Biennale far
better than this. It is by no means large, a mere 32 works in all, but it
carries an enormous punch. For Sylvester managed to obtain the greater part
of his desired selection and has included a significant number of the large
triptychs. It is beautifully presented in the Museo Correr, in the Piazza
San Marco, quite rightly centre stage. As a celebration of the achievements
of a particular artist it holds its own not just in the context of the
Biennale but in this, the city of the greatest painting.
More to the point, it is a show that effectively modifies, or rather shifts
one's view of Bacon and his work. I had always felt that his standing as one
of the truly great painters of the later 20th century rested upon his work
of the first 20 years or so of his career, from the first small triptych of
1944, of figures at the base of a crucifixion, to the first Tate
retrospective of 1964, of which Sylvester again was the curator. What
followed was impressive and consistent enough to sustain his reputation, but
did not exactly take it further. It was as though the range of his attention
had narrowed - no more animals, popes, Van Goghs - the colour become more
predictable, even decorative, the space curiously conventional and
repetitive, the handling and description of his distorted and rising figures
oddly safe and unadventurous. In short, the work had become formulaic to a
certain degree.
This show has made me think again, not so much to revise that view
altogether but at least to recognise that in certain aspects of the later
work the qualities of those first two great decades, the simple dark
strength of the organisation of the pictorial space, and in particular its
severe and essentially frontal presentation remained. And there are still to
be found the simple authority of the imagery, and the raw energy of the
painted self in its handling across the surface of the canvas. 'Much has
changed', as it were, 'but much remains', the work still charged and
developing under the hand of manifestly the same creative sensibility.
However, nothing has changed the extraordinary authority or the power to
shock of those early works, represented here in remarkable force by a clutch
 -I use the word advisedly - of gaping, disembodied mouths, teeth bared and
rearing all but physically out of the very stuff of the paint itself. There
has surely been no painting since Soutine in which the image and the fabric
of the work are so bound in to each other - Van Gogh, Goya, Rembrandt,
Titian: it is a long and great tradition.
Bacon did not declare himself as a great artist until he was 35. He was in
his pomp thereafter for nearly 50 years more, and was 83 when he died. He
stood supreme in our time, yet curiously isolated as the last true
surrealist, expressionist and, in his own peculiar way, romantic. There
could be no better summary of his achievements than this exhibition.
Francis Bacon. Museo Correr, Piazza San Marco, until October 10: sponsored
by Seat Automobile. The 45th Venice Biennale throughout the city also until
October 10

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930615

