FT932-6868

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (2): Can the politicians make Emu
fly? - Monetary union is threatened by diverging European economies


   By LIONEL BARBER


A SPECTRE is haunting the European Community, the spectre of the 1930s.
Rising unemployment, a deeper-than-expected recession and a resurgence of
'go-it-alone' national economic policies have cast doubt on EC plans for
European Monetary Union.
What once seemed a logical progression from the successful project to create
a Single European Market by 1992 now looks questionable. European economies
are diverging, not converging. The recent realignments by Spain and
Portugal, on the very day that the Bank of France made its sixth
interest-rate cut since the election of a new government, underlined the
emergence of a two-tier monetary Europe.
Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president, frets that such
competitive devaluations will destroy the single market and sew mistrust
among member states. He is also worried that the UK economic recovery, based
on a floating exchange rate, may tempt other EC members states to pursue
economic growth outside the constraints of the exchange rate mechanism, the
designated vehicle for Emu.
The central question facing policy-makers is how the Emu project can regain
credibility. To an extent, the answer depends on the fate of the Maastricht
treaty, of which the plans for monetary union were by far the most
important.
Mr Henning Christophersen, the jovial Danish EC economics commissioner,
likes to point out that, once the Maastricht treaty is ratified, confidence
in Emu will return. According to his analysis, the Danish Yes vote in the
second referendum on Maastricht should speed up ratification in the UK,
restoring stability to the financial markets and making it probable that a
majority of the Twelve would elect to proceed to Emu in 1997, in line with
Maastricht.
The trouble with this analysis is that it blames all of Emu's troubles on
the original Danish rejection of the Maastricht treaty in their first
referendum. Yet several high-level inquiries into the recent upheavals in
the ERM make clear that economics, just as much as politics, was largely to
blame.
As a recent report by the International Monetary Fund noted: 'Actual
achievements in convergence among the ERM countries - although significant -
were neither durable nor deep enough to justify assuming complete fixity of
exchange rates.
'Losses of competitiveness, large fiscal deficits not yet under control,
weaknesses in financial sectors, sharp cyclical differences, and divergent
mixes of monetary and fiscal policies (in the wake of German unification)
were each vulnerable elements.'
Much criticism has been heaped on the Bundesbank for pursuing unnecessarily
high interest-rate policies, to the detriment of the rest of Europe.
Germany's national priorities clashed with her (nascent) international
obligations. The need to control inflation, because of the Bonn government's
decision to borrow to finance German unification, clashed with the need to
defend at all costs parities in the ERM.
Yet the Bundesbank has a strong case for arguing that other ERM countries
failed to make timely currency adjustments before last September. The
absence of realignments after January 1987 led to currency rates becoming
out of line with economic performance. Maintaining parity became a virility
symbol, all the more so as weaker, higher-yielding currencies such as the
Spanish peseta became repositories for huge amounts of 'hot' money.
According to a central banker involved in drafting the report on the ERM
crisis last autumn, an estimated Dollars 200bn to Dollars 300bn was held in
these weaker currencies. Once they came under attack, it became impossible
for the central banks to maintain the parities. The ERM, which by habit had
become a fixed exchange rate mechanism, reverted to its original semi-fixed,
adjustable form. Hence, the monetary authorities' conclusion that the ERM
does not need fundamental reform.
The British government disagrees. Yet its contention that there are
'fault-lines' in the ERM has one flaw: it has not put forward any blueprints
for reform. Meanwhile, the 'hard core' ERM currencies - the German mark,
French franc, Belgian franc, Dutch guilder, and Luxembourg franc - have
survived with their rates intact.
The two battles to save the franc were seminal events, leading to even
closer co-operation and a sense of solidarity between the French and German
authorities. The single most important result was the election of a pro-EC
government in the French parliamentary elections. The French political elite
closed ranks, and the advocates of a floating franc were reduced to silence.
Yet the franc may only have gained a stay of execution. The nagging concern
among Emu enthusiasts is whether the strategy of maintaining the ERM for
four to six years before the full transition to Emu is merely an open
invitation to speculators.
According to a report by the Commissariat Du Plan - the semi-official
think-tank in Paris - one idea would be to form a 'monetary Schengen'. This
would draw on the name of the group of hard-core EC countries which agreed
to dismantle their frontiers before other members were ready.
Among the suggestions are: a formal commitment to ERM central rates and a
possible reduction in the fluctuation margins from 2 1/4 to 1 per cent; all
central banks to hold reserves denominated in the currencies of partner
countries; stronger mutual support mechanisms for intramarginal
intervention; and central bank independence (a subject taken up with
alacrity by the new French government).
A Danish No would have forced both France and Germany to consider these
moves as a statement to the financial markets that they are still serious
about Emu. But in the light of the Yes response, EC economies will have to
show more convergence. Emu enthusiasts suggest that the pressure for
monetary union is so overwhelming that the strict 'convergence criteria'
will be simply fudged in 1996. But the Bundesbank has other ideas; and so
may Chancellor Helmut Kohl.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930526

