FT932-6707

FT  27 MAY 93 / People: Tyrrell finds home away from the Abbey


James Tyrrell, group finance director of Abbey National, is stepping down to
take up the same position at London International Group, the
condoms-to-photo-processing company with a market capitalisation only some 5
per cent the size of the Abbey. Ian Harley, appointed treasurer only last
summer, succeeds him.
The building society-turned-bank has earned a reputation for well-planned
management successions, and it is understood that last summer's reshuffle of
key executives confirmed Tyrrell in his feeling that it was time to move on.
Harley, then retail operations director, swapped jobs with Gareth Jones, who
had been managing Abbey's profitable treasury operation. Outsiders concluded
the two were being groomed for the top when Peter Birch, who turns 60 only
in 1997, retires.
Tyrrell, 52, a chartered accountant who trained with Coopers & Lybrand, has
had a varied career. After a spell as finance director of Associated British
Cinemas, he worked with EMI Leisure Enterprises and EMI Records before
becoming managing director of HMV shops in 1979. From there, he moved to
Abbey National, initially as general manager, finance. He joined the board
in 1989, and it was on his watch as finance dir-ector that the conversion to
plc status was made.
Anything but a typical Abbey man, colleagues record that his office is
renowned for its collection of rock memorabilia alongside toy soldiers. He
earned the nickname 'squirrel Tyrrell' for his cautious nature, whilst
gaining a reputation for his intellect and command of detail.
Harley, a less extrovert figure, joined Abbey in 1977. His career pattern is
what one insider describes as 'a super example of horizontal progression'.
He has worked both in head office as group financial controller and in the
regions as, first, finance director and, then, operations director on the
retail side.
The current finance director at LIG, David Harbut, 55, announced a year ago
his intention to take early retirement. Tony Butterworth, LIG chief
executive, indicated Tyrrell would have been attracted by the multinational
nature of LIG's operations. Colleagues assumed Tyrrell's move to LIG meant
his sites were targeted on the chief executive's seat.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930527

