FT934-8372

FT  16 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Mr Delors in absentia


THE ANNUAL conference of the Confederation of British Industry provides a
curious snapshot of British attitudes to Europe. Ostensibly, all is now
sweetness and light between the CBI and the UK government. Last week's
squabble over the CBI director general's alleged criticism of the government
has been ostentatiously forgotten. Each side loads the other with
compliments and assurances of unanimity. Both are united in criticism of Mr
Jacques Delors, whose speech to the conference, delivered by proxy from his
sick bed yesterday, was the only jarring note in the universal harmony.
But Mr Delors' speech slyly inserted the wedge: complimenting the CBI on its
enlightened stance to Europe, and welcoming Mr Davies's remarks of last
week. In his original text, Mr Delors also referred to the 'dangerous
forces' and 'unscrupulous individuals' out to block European integration.
Shorn of invective, this was a reminder that there are real divisions within
both the British industrial community and government. The CBI's leaders
cannot hope to represent all the industrial rank and file, and pro-European
ministers like Mr Clarke and Mr Heseltine, both speakers at the conference,
certainly do not represent the whole cabinet.
But the British camp is probably united in repudiating the imposition of
additional social costs on business. As it happens, this formed the most
interesting part of Mr Delors' speech, particularly in the light of the
Commission's forthcoming white paper on European competitiveness. The CBI
president and the chancellor reserved their greatest contempt yesterday for
the notion that in the depths of recession and after a decade of
underperformance, European industry should be loaded with shorter working
hours, longer paternity leave and so forth - 'the economics of the
madhouse', as Mr Clarke put it.
But there is one point in Mr Delors' favour. Implicitly, he is saying what
many European business leaders are starting to say for themselves: that if
the price of industrial success is the creation of a marginalised class, the
fruits of that success will not be either enjoyable or sustainable.
Mr Delors' error, which it must be hoped he will avoid in his forthcoming
white paper, has been to place too much emphasis upon mechanisms of social
protection, high non-wage costs, restrictions on working time and minimum
wages, which merely exacerbate the forces of marginalisation.
But he is right that European business will not escape from its current
malaise merely by cutting costs. That will take a better-trained workforce,
more productive research and development and a more developed
infrastructure. Above all, it will take economic recovery.
It is to be hoped that Mr Delors' white paper recognises the blind alleys
down which much EU social policy has led. If it does, business in Britain
and in the rest of the European Union will respond.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931116

