FT932-3306

FT  15 JUN 93 / Technology: Keeping tabs on thieves


   By DELLA BRADSHAW


Every time you buy an electric drill or a pair of shoes, part of the price
covers 'shrinkage', that retailing euphemism for theft. One problem for
retailers is that about 35 per cent of thefts (total thefts cost between
Pounds 2.5bn and Pounds 3.5bn a year in the UK) are carried out by their own
employees.
Eliminating employee pilfering is one advantage of a system being developed
in the UK which has united retailers, equipment manufacturers and packaging
companies under the auspices of the Centre for Exploitation of Science and
Technology. The project's purpose is to develop a way of tagging items
during the manufacturing process, in such a way that would-be thieves cannot
distinguish whether an item is tagged or not.
Source tagging would also eliminate the time-consuming task of attaching
electronic article surveillance (EAS) tags once the goods reach the stores;
one type of tag could be used to protect everything from tea bags to CDs.
Cest's Martin Swerdlow says that the present worldwide market for EAS
equipment is worth Dollars 350m-Dollars 500m (Pounds 227m-Pounds 325m) a
year. He predicts, however, that if source tagging takes off the market will
grow to Dollars 10bn-Dollars 20bn within five years.
Cest has already produced a 'road map' for the development of source tagging
and the first element, the 20-micron wide sliver of magnetic tape which will
be incorporated in products, is available at less than 1p per item. The task
now, says Swerdlow, is to look at the best way of insetting the tape into
plastic, cardboard, paper and even metal.
Once the tag is in place, it can be activated by orientating the magnetic
strip to emit a signal. This is picked up by equipment at store exits if
goods are stolen. With legitimate purchases the tag, which is positioned
near the bar code, is deactivated - switched off - when the assistant reads
the bar code at the point of sale.
A full demonstration system should be in place at a CWS store in Slough,
Buckinghamshire in 18 months.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930615

