FT932-6905

FT  26 MAY 93 / International Company News: TNT still deep in red but
improving trend continues


   By BRUCE JACQUES


   SYDNEY


TNT, the Australian transport group, stayed deep in the red in the nine
months to March, but its directors have pointed to an improving underlying
trend which continued in the current quarter.
The company said its net equity-accounted loss for the nine months had grown
to ADollars 92.04m (USDollars 63.5m) from ADollars 88.96m on revenue of
ADollars 4.07bn, down from ADollars 4.69bn.
However, at the pre-tax level TNT managed a turnround to profits of ADollars
4.2m from losses of ADollars 56.9m, largely reflecting lower interest and
depreciation charges. The interest provision fell to ADollars 69.9m from
ADollars 84.4m and depreciation was down to ADollars 74.8m from ADollars
107.2m.
A net abnormal loss of ADollars 50.5m against a loss of ADollars 10.8m
previously and a rise in the tax provision to ADollars 45.3m from ADollars
20.9m saw the bottom line slide into the red.
TNT directors said the result was influenced by seasonal factors and a
deepening recession in Europe. 'Despite these negative factors, the group
recorded a modest improvement in operating results,' they said.
'While the economic outlook worldwide is expected to remain difficult, it is
anticipated that the improvement in operating performance. . . will continue
for the last quarter.'
They said the GD Express Worldwide operation had continued incurring losses,
but a plan to achieve profitability within two years was attainable. They
said the company's domestic freight businesses in the UK and Italy made
excellent profit contributions, TNT Germany traded profitably, but Spanish
freight operations were hit by continuing recession.
TNT Canada lifted profits, while Awas, the aircraft leasing operation
jointly-owned with News Corp, made a reduced profit contribution. Directors
said abnormal losses mainly comprised a ADollars 52.5m provision for GD
Express, unrealised currency losses and tax changes.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930526

