FT932-6790

FT  27 MAY 93 / White House follies upstage Bosnia and the budget


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


EXPENSIVE presidential haircuts by Belgians called Christophe and cancelled
Dollars 15,000 (Pounds 9,740) breakfasts for lobbyists, even the shenanigans
in the White House travel office, could be dismissed as perfect 'silly
season' stories. Except for the fact, which is unfortunate for Bill Clinton,
that a combination of the budget, on which the House votes today, and Bosnia
make this far from a silly season.
Earlier this week, George Stephanopoulos, the communications director of the
modish coif, ruefully admitted that 'clearly last week did not go as
planned'. His boss blithely claimed the reverse was the case, because the
Ways and Means Committee had agreed a budget bill to his liking, though it
actually did so nearly two weeks ago. He did not adduce the latest Bosnian
agreement as evidence of 'a good week'.
Of the three incidents, 'Travelgate' threatens to have the longest
shelf-life, but all three, in the opinion of the president's growing army of
critics, demonstrate that something is seriously amiss with Mr Clinton's
sense of what is right and the White House's perception of what is wrong.
The on-board haircut that kept Air Force One on the ground at Los Angeles
airport for an hour is seen as a mistake because it showed the president had
lost his common touch, not least with the airline commuters he may have
inconvenienced. Worse, in the eyes of Washington, it was further evidence
that he had fallen under the sway of Hollywood, whose stars all have
'personal contracts' with hairdressers, face-lifters and individual trainers
and frequently these days seem to be occupying the Lincoln bedroom in the
White House.
The Democratic party fundraising breakfast for lobbyists seemed similarly
insensitive, since the president is supposed to be intent on curbing their
influence and cutting down on their tax deductions.
Travelgate is altogether messier because it involves, in no particular order
of importance:
The summary dismissal of career employees accused of mismanagement but
denied the right of appeal: the humiliating volte face on Tuesday night,
apparently rescinding the firing of five of the seven, but without restoring
their jobs, merely compounds the confusion.
The misuse of the FBI, called into investigate without the prior approval of
the agency's ultimate chief, Janet Reno, the attorney general, who, being
Janet Reno, has made her discontent about its politicisation public and
extracted an apology from the White House.
Nepotism, because a distant cousin of the president from Arkansas, who did a
lot of travel work for his campaign, wrote a memo in February explaining how
the travel office could be better run, and volunteered herself for the task.
Hollywood again, with cronyism added, because Harry Thomason, the Clinton
friend and Los Angeles-based TV producer, has interests in the airline
charter business which, in turn, complained about not being able to bid for
White House press flight contracts.
The extent of Mr Clinton's personal knowledge of any and all of the above is
in doubt, though sooner or later he will be asked what he knew and when he
knew it. So far he has confessed only to a general awareness.
But this is hardly the point, for he is the man in charge of the White House
staff and it is in the hottest of waters, a mere three weeks after it was
supposedly shaken up and down and reinforced by the arrival as deputy chief
of staff of Mr Roy Neel, Vice President Al Gore's veteran and politically
smart adviser.
The fundamental lack, a common argument goes, is that there is no one in the
White House with the clout to say to the president, 'This is wrong', or
'Have you considered the political fallout?' Thomas 'Mack' McLarty, the
chief of staff, does not seem able to do this; Bernard Nussbaum, the legal
counsel not long out of Wall Street, could apparently see nothing wrong with
inviting the FBI in for help; even Mr Stephanopoulos himself, with
supposedly sharp political antennae, did not see the danger signals.
Mr Gore went on TV to deny charges that the White House is too stuffed with
the young and politically unsophisticated. 'We've got a lot of veterans,' he
insisted. But former presidential candidate Paul Tsongas was closer to the
prevailing wisdom when he said Mr Clinton 'needs a few greybeards around
him'.
Though far from grey, it may be significant that his sharp campaign crew,
James Carville, Paul Begala, Mandy Grunwald and Stan Greenberg, are being
sighted more around the White House these days. It was, after all, Mr
Carville who posted up the immortal placard, 'It's the economy, stupid', to
keep the Clinton campaign team's minds focused.
But it is also true that Mr Clinton consciously set up this White House to
his own liking. They are his sort of policy people and, collegial though
their working environment may be, they do defer to him because they are in
awe of his intellect and application. Therefore their faults are seen as
extensions of his.
And it could not have come at a worse time. Perhaps it has provided some
cover for the difficulties the administration has in explaining its Bosnian
policies, but, domestically, it has distracted far more from the overriding
order of business, which is to get the budget package through Congress.
A president who is considered fair game by the press can become dead meat at
the hands of Bob Dole, Sam Nunn, and half a dozen others at the other end of
town who probably think they can do the job better.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930527

