FT932-6997

FT  26 MAY 93 / Personal View: Britain wrong on human rights


   By ANTHONY LESTER


September 3 is the 40th anniversary of the coming into force of the European
Convention on Human Rights. There is much to celebrate. The convention is
the jewel in the crown of the Council of Europe, an enlightened instrument
for the collective enforcement of fundamental human rights.
But a cloud hangs over the festivities, for the convention system is in
danger of collapse, and the British government is hampering the reforms
needed to save it.
The crisis concerns the convention's enforcement machinery - the avenue for
individuals to take their cases to the European Court of Human Rights at
Strasbourg if their rights have been violated. The facts speak for
themselves. It typically takes between five and six years from the time when
an individual complains to Strasbourg until the court gives judgment. Since
the claimant must have exhausted all effective remedies in his or her home
country before complaining, the subject matter of the complaint may be six
or more years old before it even reaches Strasbourg.
A period of some 10 or more years in which to obtain a remedy for a
violation of fundamental human rights is grossly excessive and constitutes a
denial of justice. If a contracting state permitted delays of this length in
national legal proceedings, it would be in manifest breach of article 6 of
the convention.
These problems will become even worse. From 1960 to 1983 the court gave a
total of 76 judgments. In 1989 and 1990 alone the court gave 53 judgments.
Within the past five years, the number of complaints made to Strasbourg has
trebled. Five years ago, about 2,000 complaints were received annually;
currently some 5,500 complaints are being received each year, and there is
now a backlog of about 2,500 applications.
The convention was conceived when the Council of Europe consisted of 10
member states. Future enlargement of the council to 35 or even 45 member
states threatens its very existence as an effective enforcement mechanism.
Bulgaria, Hungary, and Poland have recently accepted the right of individual
petition under the convention. Estonia, Lithuania and Slovenia - the newest
members - will doubtless follow suit. The list of new democracies from
central and eastern Europe applying for membership includes Albania,
Belarus, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Latvia, Moldova, Romania, Russia,
Slovakia and Ukraine.
A conservative forecast, based upon present experience, suggests that the
number of complaints and registered cases is likely to double, if not
treble, within the reasonably foreseeable future. The existing machinery
cannot conceivably cope, and tinkering or half measures will not be enough
to enable it to do so.
Since 1985, two main reform proposals have been developed. First, there is a
plan, supported by two-thirds of the member states of the Council of Europe,
including France and Germany, to create a single, full-time European Court
of Human Rights in place of the present two-tier system. This court would
take over and absorb the functions of the Commission of Human Rights, which
currently decides whether complaints are admissible.
Second, there was a scheme put forward by the Netherlands and Sweden for a
two-tier jurisdiction, with the commission operating as a court of first
instance and the court acting as an appeal tribunal, subject to leave being
granted.
The case for a permanent and full-time court is cogent and compelling. A
two-tier modification of the present system would not tackle the central
weaknesses. It is likely that recourse to the second stage would become the
rule, not the exception; and there would be continuing problems of wasteful
duplication and unreasonable delay. Realising this, Sweden and the
Netherlands have abandoned their two-tier scheme and now support the
establishment of a single permanent court.
Meanwhile, behind the scenes, the UK government has procrastinated and
prevaricated. At first it argued that there was no need to reform the
present system in any significant way and that increasing resources would be
sufficient. Now Britain professes support for reform but is backing the
cumbersome and inefficient two-tier system.
We all rejoice at the emergence of the new democracies of central and
eastern Europe. It would surely be more fitting for the UK government to
give a high priority to strengthening the effective legal protection of
human rights in those countries and at home. The UK is now as isolated on
this issue in the Council of Europe as it is on the Maastricht treaty's
modest agreement on social policy.
What matters now is that the necessary political support should be mobilised
in Britain and across Europe to enable the court to meet the needs of the
peoples of Europe. Otherwise, the convention system will soon collapse under
its own weight.
It is vital that a new protocol amending the convention system is agreed
when the Council of Europe's governments meet in Vienna in October. The UK
government should give unequivocal support for a single and effective
permanent European Court of Human Rights. Britain should be in the vanguard
of the reform movement together with its European partners, rather than
seeking political compromises to limit or dilute those reforms through a
combination of English insularity and bureaucratic narrow-mindedness.
The author is a leading human rights barrister. His article is based on an
extract from a recent lecture, to be published by Charter 88, 3-11 Pine
Street, London EC1R 0JH

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930526

