FT932-13539

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (7): Foreigners take the lead - A look at
the most recent developments in banking


   By MARK NICHOLSON


After a tough and messy legislative battle, Egypt's predominantly public
sector banking industry this year reluctantly overcame its xenophobia.
With a push from the president in February, the government agreed to allow
foreign bank branches in Egypt to deal in local currency.
The measure was the latest and probably last refinement of Egypt's new
banking law, which was passed in June last year.
But the modification may do as much in the long run to raise Egypt's
cossetted banking sector to international standards as any other in Law 37.
At the law's heart is the requirement that all Egypt's banks meet by the end
of this year the Basel Committee's resolutions on capital adequacy, a ratio
of 8 per cent of recognised capital to risk-weighted assets.
Law 37 also shifts control for the banking sector from the economics
ministry to the Central Bank.
But many bankers in Cairo believe that it will be the influence of foreign
banks' introduction of sophisticated services, practices and financial
instruments so far absent from the Egyptian market which will do most to
raise the local game. 'We will initiate, and the locals will follow,' says
the manager of one foreign branch.
It was precisely the prospect of such banking technology transfer which led
many in the public sector banks and the government itself to oppose the
granting of full local currency rights to the foreign branches. The big four
public sector banks, Banque Misr, Bank of Alexandria, National Bank of Egypt
and Banque du Caire are feared for their oligopoly - they presently hold
65-70 per cent of domestic footings.
Allied to this was both an historic distrust of foreign banks, deriving from
pre-Nasserite days when overseas bankers financed and somewhat controlled
the key cotton crop, and continued resistance in some quarters of the
government to further economic liberalisation of any flavour. But in the
end, substantial US government pressure, pushed along by the IMF and
interested parties such as Bank of America and Citibank, overcame.
Constraints on the operation of foreign bank branches might still be applied
in the executive regulations for the banking law which are still under
discussion. The law will not take effect until these regulations are
promulgated by the president.
Among the limitations these regulations might impose are ceilings on the
number of branches a foreign bank can open, a requirement that Egyptian
branches be managed by Egyptians, and rules limiting entry to the market for
overseas banks not already in situ.
But none of these potential limitations much deters foreign bankers in Cairo
who are at pains, at the same time, to stress that they do not see
themselves as competing with the big public sector banks, nor even
essentially with the several joint venture banks these have formed in recent
years with international partners. 'We will complement, rather than
compete,' says one US banker.
Of the 22 foreign branches already in Egypt, no more than seven or eight are
expected to embrace with relish the new opportunity. Chief among these are
expected to be Citibank, Arab Bank, Bank of America, Bank of Nova Scotia and
Paribas.
Neither do these banks see the opportunity as one of eroding the public
sector banks' dominance of the local deposit market. Nor do they subscribe
to the oft-repeated view that with a total of 102 banks servicing Egypt the
place is overbanked.
'People take that view from the numbers,' says one foreign banker. '100
banks, and thousands of branches. But Egypt is underdeveloped in a banking
sense. Egyptians are hungry for new products.'
'When it comes to plain vanilla commercial lending,' says another, 'the
local banks can more than cope. What you don't see here yet, and what we can
introduce, is leasing, forward currency dealing, commercial paper and
interbank funding - there's almost none of that here yet.'
Many of the foreign banks already have their eyes on developing the capital
market in Egypt, for which new legislation was passed at the same time as
the new banking law. There is, for instance, as yet no secondary market for
government treasury bills. 'We can make money off these, and make them
liquid,' says a US banker. One foreign branch is already planning Egypt's
first non-government bond issue in decades.
Inroads into the retail market are expected to be limited, though Arab Bank
is considering introducing a phone banking service for clients. Few of the
banks likely to be most active in Egyptian pounds say they intend to open
more than a handful of new branch offices, if any.
In commercial lending, the chance to lend in Egyptian pounds will enable
banks to move out of a short-term straitjacket imposed by the fact that
their clients' cashflow is in pounds while the foreign banks have hitherto
been able to lend only in, for instance, dollars, with the attendant
currency risk. 'We have been practically been unable to do medium term
business here as a result,' says one banker.
But as foreign bankers in Cairo rub their hands together at the prospect of
branching out into Egyptian pounds and inserting new sophistication into the
Egyptian market, they nevertheless raise one substantial doubt. Few are
entirely confident that the Central Bank is yet as sophisticated as it may
need to be.
'The central bank should really be offering the best salaries in the banking
sector, and not the worst,' says one banker. 'Until it does, I think there
will be problems.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930422

