FT933-12608

FT  23 JUL 93 / Insolvency review sparks fears for creditors


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE GOVERNMENT is to review the work of the Insolvency Service in a move
that could lead to the privatisation of part of the Official Receivers'
work.
Such a reform would be the most radical change to insolvency practice in the
UK for nearly a decade. It has caused concern in some quarters because of
fears that the interests of creditors may be adversely affected.
Mr Neil Hamilton, corporate affairs minister, disclosed details of the
review yesterday in a written answer to a parliamentary question.
He said an independent review would 'consider the scope' for 'achieving
better value for money, by making use of the private sector in the work
currently carried out by the Insolvency Service'.
Independent consultants will consider which of the receivers' tasks can be
best carried out in the private sector.
Mr Hamilton said the review would focus on ways in which the Official
Receivers 'can concentrate more on their important investigatory role by
involving the private sector to a larger extent in mechanical processing
work in insolvencies'.
As well as administering and investigating the affairs of bankrupts and
companies in compulsory liquidation, the receivers also report criminal
offences, take disqualification proceedings against unfit directors, and
authorise and regulate insolvency practitioners.
In March 1990 the receivers became an executive agency of the Department of
Trade and Industry, known as the Insolvency Service. Since then its workload
has increased dramatically.
The number of compulsory liquidations of companies in England and Wales has
risen by nearly 200 per cent in five years, from 3,667 in 1988 to 9,734 last
year.
Bankruptcy orders increased from 7,717 to 32,106 over the same period.
Mr Steven Hill, partner with Coopers & Lybrand, the largest insolvency
practice in England and Wales, said: 'The problem, very simply put, is
weight of number of cases.
'The reality is that they can take only quite a small percentage of cases to
investigate further. People are getting away with things.'
Coopers & Lybrand, which obtains a portion of its fees from work stemming
from the Insolvency Service, has chosen not to bid for the work.
Mr Hill said Coopers would study the proposals and would want to be
responsive to the interests of its own clients.
But he was sceptical about the ability of the private sector to improve
matters.
'The Civil Service is doing it at cost. We are doing it for profit. I don't
see how you can square the circle,' he said.
'I'd be concerned on behalf of creditors if the quality of work was diluted
because it was being done by the lowest bidder.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930723

