FT934-8356

FT  16 NOV 93 / UK tailor to the tsars buys stake in biggest Russian
suitmaker


   By LEYLA BOULTON and DANIEL GREEN


   MOSCOW, LONDON


THE BRITISH supplier of overcoats to Russian tsars and Politburo chiefs
yesterday acquired 49 per cent of Russia's biggest suitmaker as part of the
gradual emergence of foreign investment in the country's mass privatisation.
Despite its name, which literally means 'Bolshevik Woman', the Bolshevichka
factory today produces only menswear - 350,000 suits a year. It may expand
to women's clothing.
The investor is Illingworth Morris, a British company created by a
Lithuanian emigre early this century. It makes menswear sold under labels
such as Crombie and Christian Dior.
Links between Illingworth Morris and Moscow are already strong; 60,000
Crombie coats were once supplied to the former Soviet Union each year.
Customers included Mr Mikhail Gorbachev and other Communist leaders as well
as at least one tsar.
Mr Alan Lewis, chairman and owner of Illingworth Morris, is investing
Dollars 5.5m (Pounds 3.64m), mostly in technological knowhow, training and
licensing. His aim is to ensure a presence in a country which 'could become
a centre of production for western Europe in the next decade and beyond'.
The Dollars 5.5m, to be invested over five years, includes Dollars 2.5m for
the right to produce the Crombie label, which belongs to Illingworth Morris,
and Christian Dior, for which it has the UK licence.
The price tag on Illingworth Morris's retail network and the establishment
of Bolshevichka's own western marketing structure is Dollars 1m.
Transferring knowhow and setting up a production line to make an extra
35,000 suits at Bolshevichka's existing plant is valued at Dollars 2m in the
tender documents. The remaining 51 per cent of the company is owned by
Bolshevichka's staff and management.
The deal is the latest chapter in the extraordinary story of Illingworth
Morris. Mr Lewis, a born-again Christian and one of Britain's richest men,
won control of the company in the 1970s after a long battle with Mrs Pamela
Mason, widow of film actor James Mason. She was a Hollywood chat show
hostess and heir to Isadore Ostrer, a penniless immigrant who rose to become
a merchant banker, film impresario and textile magnate in pre-war Britain.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931116

