FT931-3974

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (6): Overdue reforms now on the
way - There are at least two positive developments that could serve to
bolster the property market as it awaits a uniform recovery of the economy /
Spain


   By TOM BURNS


TWO unfinished 24-storey office blocks that dramatically lean towards each
other as they span the northern end of Madrid's main artery, the Paseo de la
Castellana, sum up the situation of Spain's property market.
The towers, grandiosely named the 'Gateway to Europe', should have been
ready for tenants in May but nobody knows now when they will be completed.
Their owners, the property group Prima Inmobiliaria, which is linked to the
Kuwait Investment Office, went into receivership at the end of last year.
Recession is all-too evident in Spain and the real estate sector is deeply
caught in the rut. Rents began to fall two years ago and are still sliding.
In the peripheral areas of big cities, where business parks were cavalierly
planned just a short while ago, vacancy levels are above 25 per cent. The
drop in housing starts and in project approvals set in three years ago and
shows no sign of abating.
The towers were emblematic of the late 1980s boom in the domestic economy.
When work started on them, office rents along the Paseo de la Castellana
were nudging Pta6,000 a sq m. Flanked now by idle cranes, the 'Gateway to
Europe' is a testimony to a GDP growth rate that has slowed to a virtual
standstill. Rentals along Madrid's prestige artery are currently down to the
Pta4,000 level.
In the midst of such gloom, there are nevertheless at least two positive
developments that in the mid-term could serve to bolster the domestic
property market as it awaits a uniform recovery of the economy.
The first is a draft bill unveiled at the end of last year that aims to
liberalise rent controls which have been in place since the 1940s and
before. The longstanding regulation of rents, which was only partially
amended in 1985, demonstrably distorted the property market as much as the
economy as a whole.
It is estimated that some 70 per cent of Spanish tenants pay below-market
prices. On many a Spanish high street, recently-opened upmarket stores stand
oddly alongside old-fashioned businesses whose tied rents, at a huge
fraction of those of their neighbours, have been handed down through
succeeding generations.
The second development is a legislative package covering investment in the
real estate sector that offers generous tax incentives to funds especially
to those dealing in the housing sub-sector and in its rented segment.
Affordable housing is a political priority in Spain as elsewhere.
Under the terms of the rent liberalisation bill, leases for office and
commercial properties will be completely deregulated over an eight to
16-year period depending on the nature of the business and the period during
which the contract has been in force. The deregulation of housing rents will
be rather more gradual. Sitting tenants will be able to enjoy their strictly
controlled housing leases during their lifetime although they will no longer
be able to bequeath them to their descendants.
The bill has been enthusiastically welcomed by property companies which now
stand to gain considerable additional income as a portion of their returns,
which were effectively frozen, are boosted up to represent real market
values. Mr John Bain, of Healey and Baker, argues that it will also bring a
far greater stability to the market by eliminating the volatility created by
past discriminations.
There are a string of commercial enterprises, particularly European
Community-based ventures, that are queueing up to enter Spain but have so
far been barred from setting up by the lack of available space and by the
high price of the properties that did come onto the market.
The so-called Real Estate Investment Funds, which have still to get properly
off the ground, will clearly be so by the onset of deregulated rentals for
there are strong inducements for the funds to enter this segment of the
property sector.
The legislation states that funds which invest exclusively in rented
accommodation will be taxed at a rate of only 1 per cent, while those
investing 50 per cent of their assets in rented accommodation and the
remaining 50 per cent in other types of property will be taxed at 7 per
cent. Funds which avoid rented accommodation will be levied the standard
corporate tax of 35 per cent.
Ms Leonor Aresti, an analyst of Madrid securities firm FG, says that the
funds will deliver greater stability to the real estate sector by providing
a constant flow of investment which in turn will allow the formation of
reference prices. Valuations should be easier and price swings brought on by
speculation should be reduced.
Further stability will be ensured by the time scale - the legislation
suggests a four-year period - during which the funds must maintain the
properties they have purchased. The aim of this time period is to force the
funds to view rents as the source of their returns, rather than resale
capital gains. Since the funds will be seeking long-term returns from their
operations, they should be hesitant to invest during boom periods.
No legislation in the world can protect the real estate market from
recession but the long overdue initiatives now under way in Spain should
help contain some of the damage. The property market in Spain is all too
prone to boom and bust patterns because of its strict regulations and the
lack of stable funding. The initiatives should help to reduce the cyclical
nature of the business.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

930312

