FT931-4203

FT  12 MAR 93 / German business leaders call for spending cuts


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


LEADERS of Germany's business community yesterday called for an urgent end
to the months of negotiations over a solidarity pact to finance east German
recovery, as Chancellor Helmut Kohl launched his last-ditch bid for
agreement.
The four business leaders representing employers, industry, commerce and
small enterprises, called for public spending cuts, not tax increases, to be
the key to the pact, which is intended to revive the east German economy and
guarantee long-term cash transfers from the west.
Their plea was backed in a new report on the state of the German economy by
Ifo, the Munich-based economic research institute, which said the current
sharp recession could bottom out before the end of the year, provided that
the solidarity pact negotiations come to a clear and swift conclusion.
The institute said manufacturing was clearly in recession, but it argued
that the current pessimism in business and banking circles was exaggerated.
'In spite of the extremely precarious situation, one cannot talk of 'the
worst recession since the war', or even of an 'economic catastrophe', as
some people are doing,' Ifo said.
The sharpness of the downturn was in part a clear reaction to the abnormal
upswing caused by the reunification of Germany in 1990.
The business leaders saw Chancellor Kohl yesterday immediately before he
opened a two-day, closed-door conference with the 16 prime ministers of
Germany's Lander (federal states), and the opposition Social Democrats, to
finalise his long-awaited solidarity pact.
Mr Bjorn Engholm, the leader of the opposition SPD and prime minister of
Schleswig-Holstein, and Mr Kurt Biedenkopf, the Christian Democrat prime
minister of Saxony, in east Germany - both key players in the talks -
expressed cautious optimism about a possible compromise.
Mr Kohl's strategy appears to be to focus on ways to cut federal and state
spending before allowing the debate to move on to possible tax increases.
The SPD and several of the states say that a tax increase from July 1, in
the form of a 'solidarity surcharge' on income tax, is unavoidable.
Mr Kohl and his finance minister, Mr Theo Waigel, along with the business
sector, say that tax increases before 1995 would be 'poison for the
economy'.
The Ifo institute yesterday rejected tax rises only for 1993.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930312

