FT932-3338

FT  15 JUN 93 / Tecs warned on links with other groups


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff


TRAINING AND Enterprise Councils must forge better working relationships
with other employer organisations if targets for improving the skills of the
workforce are to be met, Mrs Sheila Drew-Smith of Coopers & Lybrand, the
management consultancy, said at a training conference yesterday.
She was presenting a study on relations between the 82 Tecs, which deliver
government training schemes in England and Wales, and the 126 Industry
Training Organisations, which are national bodies focusing on particular
sectors.
When the government set up Tecs more than four years ago it wanted them to
work closely with the 126 training organisations.
They have information, for example, on sectoral labour needs which the
government believed could provide a national perspective to Tecs, whose
prime responsibility is to respond to local labour markets.
The partnership has been patchy, however, with the organisation sometimes
complaining vigorously that Tecs have ignored them.
Mrs Drew-Smith said the study suggested that each set of organisations may
not have perceived the value of the other's role, or at worse viewed the
other as a potential threat.
Tecs had sometimes been seen by the training organisations as inexperienced
newcomers to the education and training field.
She said there was confusion about how they could collaborate to achieve
national targets for National Vocational Qualifications and Investors in
People, the government's main vehicle for improving the training of people
in work.
Mrs Drew-Smith, who has prepared a checklist for Tecs and Industry Training
Organisations to see whether they are working effectively, said: 'This
situation cannot persist. We are dealing with scarce resources.'
She suggested that the Department of Employment should invite Tecs to become
the 'lead Tec' for promoting the national targets for training in individual
sectors.
Mr Ian Johnson, director-general of the training directorate of the
employment department, said the time was right for a more mature
relationship between Tecs and the training organisations.
He urged them to work more closely on matters of common interest such as
influencing the government's policy on training issues.
Miss Judith Rutherford, chief executive of Aztec, a Tec in south-west
London, told the conference her Tec was working with 12 of the Industry
Training Organisations to persuade companies to work towards the national
NVQ targets.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930615

