FT934-10085

FT  08 NOV 93 / Changes at top of French state sector


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


THE French government has set in train a round of musical chairs at the top
of the public sector. The nomination of new heads for Union des Assurances
de Paris (UAP), the country's largest insurer, and for Credit Lyonnais, the
largest state-owned bank, are expected this week. Both institutions are
slated for sale in Mr Edouard Balladur's privatisation programme.
In Saturday's edition of the government's official journal, Mr Jacques
Friedmann, a close associate of the prime minister and architect of his
1986-88 privatisation programme, was named to the UAP board, while the head
of UAP, Mr Jean Peyrelevade, was appointed to the Credit Lyonnais board.
They are expected to be nominated presidents of these institutions at
Wednesday's cabinet meeting.
The current head of Credit Lyonnais, Mr Jean-Yves Haberer, whose
controversial expansion strategy has helped plunge the bank into the red, is
reported to have been offered the relatively minor job of Credit National, a
small private bank whose presidency, for bizarre historical reasons, is in
the gift of the government. This report is given some credence by the fact
that Mr Yves Lyons-Caen, president of Credit National, who has reportedly
been offered a public procurement job, has summoned his board for a meeting
today.
For the most part, the changes are aimed at getting rid of previous
Socialist government appointees, with the signal exception of Mr Peyrelevade
who was influential in the Mauroy government's nationalisations of the early
1980s. But Mr Peyrelevade, who headed the Suez group before taking over UAP
in 1988, has won wide respect for his business competence. In recent weeks,
he settled a long-drawn out dispute with Suez by gaining control for UAP of
Colonia, the German insurer.
The government has already changed the top men at Banque Nationale de Paris,
the first state institution to be privatised, and at Elf-Aquitaine, the oil
company, which is expected to be the next for auction, following the sale of
Rhone-Poulenc, the chemicals group, which is under way.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931108

