FT934-11745

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: Fisher aims to give Kodak a
sharper focus - The appointment at the photographic group


   By MARTIN DICKSON and LOUISE KEHOE


The board of Eastman Kodak, the troubled US photographic products company,
has achieved a big coup in wooing Mr George Fisher, the head of electronics
group Motorola, to be its new chairman.
For the 52-year-old Mr Fisher, whose appointment was announced late on
Wednesday night, is one of the most highly regarded managers in the US.
He has overseen a period of remarkable growth at Motorola which has turned
the company into a global leader in the cellular telephone and paging
markets and the world's fourth biggest chip maker.
At Kodak, he replaces Mr Kay Whitmore, ousted because of the company's
lacklustre financial performance.
His task will be to restore growth to a company facing mature markets and
increasing competition for its film products, while groping for a strategy
to cope with the global information revolution.
A short, articulate man with a modest manner and penchant for running five
or six miles a day, he has been chief executive of Motorola since 1988 and
chairman since 1990.
An engineer by background, with a doctorate in applied mathematics from
Brown University, he began his career in research and development at
American Telephone & Telegraph's Bell Laboratories, one of the world's
foremost industrial R&D labs, and joined Motorola in 1976.
He is one of the leading US proponents of total quality management - the
theory that businesses must concentrate on the highest quality in all
aspects of their operations, and in meeting customer needs. Motorola is
often held up as an example of the success that can be achieved through TQM.
He said yesterday that the fundamentals for success, be it at Motorola or
Kodak, included 'first and foremost, a focus on the customer, because they
are the people who pay the bills . . . if you get that right, almost
everything else follows.'
Companies had to focus on cycle times - how quickly they did everything -
and on leadership products: 'products that customers want, not just products
that technology can provide'.
He is well known in Washington as the outgoing chairman of the private
sector Council on Competitiveness, which has worked closely with the Clinton
Administration in developing its industrial and trade policies.
His departure from Motorola shocked that company and the US electronics
industry yesterday, prompting speculation over the reasons for his move.
After all, he spurned IBM's advances earlier this year when the troubled
computer company approached him about its chairmanship.
Mr Fisher himself explained that he saw Kodak as an extension of what he had
been doing at Motorola - helping a company accelerate the information
revolution.
Motorola was doing a great job building the wireless infrastructure for this
revolution and was on a tack he could see going forward successfully for
many years.
Kodak gave him the chance to get into the content side of the revolution
'and come out in five, 10, 15 years with a company as high growth and
exciting as Motorola is today'.
Some analysts felt that pay may have had much to do with his decision.
Mr Fisher played down this idea. However, he did acknowledge that Kodak
would be paying him much more than Motorola, provided it performed well.
'I'm betting that Kodak is going to perform very well.'
Analysts speculated that he might have been feeling pressure at Motorola to
make room for Mr Christopher Galvin, 43, the senior vice-president and
grandson of the company's founder.
He is widely expected to become chief executive - though not necessarily
immediately following Mr Fisher.
Mr Gary Tooker, the company's president, is to take over as interim chief
executive until the Motorola board decides on the succession.
Whatever the reasons for his departure, there is no doubting Mr Fisher's
track record at Motorola.
He has presided over five consecutive years of rapid sales and earnings
growth and the company's stock has appreciated at a compound rate of 26 per
cent.
Still, much of the credit for Motorola's success is often given to Mr
Fisher's predecessor, Mr Robert Galvin, the son of company founder Paul
Galvin and a dominant presence at the company as chairman of the board's
executive committee.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931029

