FT932-6840

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(15): Pen computing is still in its infancy - A look at the prospects for a
market for which estimates vary wildly


   By PAUL TAYLOR


WITHIN two to three years, it should become clear whether pen computing can
provide a real alternative to computer keyboard input, at least for portable
computing.
Over the past 18 months the hottest products unveiled at computer trade
fairs and press conferences have been those operated by moving a pen pointer
across a touch-sensitive screen or pad.
Portable computer manufacturers, including industry heavyweights Apple and
IBM, are racing to deliver computers which take their commands from a
cordless stylus-style pen rather than a keyboard.
Some market researchers have predicted that 1m pen computers will be sold by
1995, but the market is in its infancy and the estimates vary wildly.
Mr Jeff Goldburg, Dataquest's mobile computer specialist, describes the
current state of pen computing as 'a lot of hot air and posturing.' It 'is
giving people inflated expectations,' he warns.
He believes that 1995 or 1996 could mark 'a watershed'. By then, he says:
'We will find out whether pen-based machines will come down to a price
people can afford.'
There is no doubt that one reason why sales of pen-based machines have been
slow to take off is cost. Most of the early pen-based tablet computers have
price tags around the Pounds 2,500 level - a substantial premium over the
price of a basic notebook computer with a keyboard - or are hand-held
machines with no big advantages over traditional electronic organisers with
keypads.
Other problems include a lack any software standards in the embryonic pen
computing market, the difficulty of producing software capable of reliably
recognising cursive (joined-up) writing, and the underlying doubt about
whether there are any real applications for the technology.
Aside from the individual proprietary systems used by some manufacturers,
there are at least two rival 'standard' operating systems for pen-input
devices, Microsoft's Windows for Pen Computing, which claims the support of
more than 120 software vendors and Penpoint from GO, a Silicon Valley
company.
In addition, IBM is expected to enter the fray with a version of OS/2 for
pen systems. 'It is really a mess,' says Mr Goldburg, who is nevertheless
betting on Microsoft's Windows for Pen Computing, 'providing they get their
act together.'
Certainly Mr Bill Gates, Microsoft's chairman, is betting heavily on the
success of pen computing and has said he expects pen computing systems to be
'the next generation of portable computers,' because of their relative ease
of use and accessibility.
Indeed, despite the market's disappointing slow start, most hardware
manufacturers are pressing ahead with plans for pen-based machines and some
have already delivered their first offerings. Among the first pen-based
machines to reach the market were hand-held machines from Poqet, the Fujitsu
subsidiary, and the GRiDPad from Victor Technologies.
NCR, the ATT subsidiary, has already introduced a successor to its original
3125 pen-based machine which was the first system based on Intel's 80386
microprocessor and Toshiba, the notebook computer specialist, has recently
launched its first pen-based offering, the Dynapad T100X.
The Dynapad is a hand-held machine based on an AMD processor with a backlit
LCD screen. It measures 10.6 by 8.3 by 1.5 inches and weighs 3.3lb and is
likely to cost about Pounds 2,500. To circumvent the problem of the lack of
a standard pen-computer operating system, Toshiba offers a 'dual boot'
facility that loads either Microsoft Windows for Pen Computing or the rival
PenPoint 1.01 system developed by GO.
Some manufacturers have gone even further, providing transitional machines
which cater for both pen and keyboard input. For example, both the GRiD
Convertible and AST's PenExec look and work like any other clamshell-type
notebook computer with a keyboard. However, the screen is both a display and
data input device which can be used as a writing surface by the unit's
cordless pen.
In the handheld market Sharp, the Japanese electronics group, has launched
an electronic organiser which for the first time uses pen technology. The
IQ-9000 has a small keyboard and an electronic pen which can be used to
activate the usual functions of an organiser on its touch sensitive screen.
But aside from these hybrids, two basic designs of pen computer have
appeared: the tablet or clipboard and the palm-top. Clipboards are generally
A4 size, weigh about 6lb, and are used just like a conventional pen and
paper clipboard for collecting data or completing pre-defined electronic
forms.
Several companies on both sides of the Atlantic have begun to use clipboard
machines with specialist software or 'vertical applications', to achieve
cost savings in paper-intensive areas. The use of pen computers for this
type of work could well prove a niche market.
But the biggest market share of any emerging pen-based computer market is
expected to go to the hand-held palm-tops, the more sophisticated of which
have been given the name 'personal digital assistants' - although
definitions of exactly what constitutes a PDA vary considerably.
The most eagerly awaited of these is Apple's Newton, which is due to be
launched later this year. Newton, measuring 7in by 4in, will feature a
flip-up lid, an electronic pen which clips onto the side of the casing and
handwriting recognition software.
Amstrad, the UK consumer electronics group, has announced the Pounds 299 Pen
Pad, which it describes as a PDA: it is due to go on sale this month. Other
machines are expected from EO, a US-based joint venture start-up, IBM and
Motorola, Philips and Tandy.
One key limiting factor, however, for all these pen-based machines is the
current state of handwriting recognition software. At present most systems
can just about cope with carefully crafted capitals each entered in its own
box, but are lost when it comes to reading cursive writing - which means
that most typists, even the hunt-and-peck variety, can write more quickly
with a keyboard.
For example, Amstrad's PDA needs to be 'trained' to understand each
individual user's handwriting before it can be converted into text and
stored. Even then, each letter must be entered into its own individual box -
although users will be able to store and recall electronic 'pages' of their
natural handwriting and drawings as well.
Several companies have been working on more sophisticated recognition
software which they claim is able to recognise more than 80 per cent of
cursive script.
A technique called Freeman coding reduces each letter to a set of eight
little arrows, known as vectors. Another system called CalliGrapher,
developed by ParaGraph International, a Russian-American software company,
concentrates on words rather than letters and is claimed to achieve mearly
90 per cent accuracy.
Both systems, however, still require training time, and need expensive and
relatively bulky computing power which is difficult to fit into a hand-held
machine.
But technology could once again eventually come to the rescue, delivering
the low-priced specialised chips - and applications software - which pen
computing probably requires if it is to match the aspirations of those who
believe its time is still to come.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930526

