FT932-6713

FT  27 MAY 93 / Technology: Consultant's Critique


   By KEVIN GRUMBALL


No school that I know of restricts pens and pencils solely to the art
department. Sadly, few schools are as enlightened about computers. Many
systems are still the exclusive province of the maths or design & technology
department. Westlands School demonstrates that computers have more general
application. IT is integrated into other subjects as an enabling technology.
Whilst computer programming can be regarded as a discipline, the use of a
computer is far more general. In my opinion, expert systems
have been the most disappointing area of the computer industry in the past
10 years. The theory of rule-based systems is attractive - the computer
makes decisions based on patchy data. To do this, it needs an array of
knowledge extracted from experts in the field and weightings to know what
information is important.
White has been extremely innovative in his use of the various software tools
available. Westlands School has used Crystal well. How transferable this
case is to a typical business scenario is
dubious. Nat West's use of Pharos seems to me to be more of a marketing tool
than a serious business application. Expert system shells such as Crystal
impose a level of discipline. They are useful for identifying what you need
to know to make a decision. Whether they are of value in making that
decision is a matter of conjecture.
One reason often stated for the apparent rarity of expert systems is that
they give such competitive advantage that companies are reluctant to talk
about them. This is disinformation. Expert systems
that deliver real customer benefits have become common knowledge very
rapidly.
The real lesson from Westlands School is that a good manager with vision,
such as White, makes all the difference.
Highlights of this study are:
IT is a tool for all areas of business, not just finance;
Expert systems may be useful for imposing discipline on problem-solving;
Managers with vision make the difference.
Kevin Grumball The author is a consultant at Software Design and
Construction, of Milton Keynes

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930527

