FT932-6896

FT  26 MAY 93 / International Bonds: Mixed reception for Abbey National


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


ABBEY National launched a Pounds 500m five-year deal via UBS and SG Warburg,
which met a mixed reception despite being quite attractively priced. Dealers
said the five-year area of the yield curve was still suffering from
oversupply.
Abbey National said the proceeds would be used partly to repay outstanding
debt and partly to meet demand for mortgages, which has been rising for
several months.
If demand for mortgages continues to grow, building societies may find that
they, too, need to raise larger amounts in the wholesale markets due to the
decline in deposits they have suffered.
Abbey's five-year offering yesterday was priced to yield 60 basis points
more than the comparable gilt issue. Dealers said this represented
floating-rate funding of about 15 basis points over the London interbank
offered rate. Abbey recently launched a Pounds 650m 10-year deal and a
Dollars 1bn 10-year offering.
At the long end of the market, Bristol & West Building Society launched a
Pounds 75m issue of 10 3/4 per cent subordinated bonds due 2018, arranged by
Baring Brothers and Hoare Govett.
The deal, which will count towards lower tier two capital for the society,
was priced to yield 190 basis points over the comparable gilt issue due
2017, and met strong demand from UK insurance companies. The long-end of the
market is now the only area of the yield curve to offer double-digit
coupons, which seem particularly attractive in the current low interest rate
environment.
In the dollar bond market, Asian Development Bank's Dollars 500m issue of
10-year bonds via JP Morgan and Lehman Brothers also met a rather mixed
reaction. The lead managers said that they had sold around Dollars 400m of
the issue between them, but some dealers said that the issue looked rather
aggressively priced at 23 basis points over the 10-year Treasury yield,
given the fading performance of the US bond market.
The issue was designed to increase European distribution of ADB's bonds, to
widen the investor base, since the ADB now taps the the yankee bond market
and the dragon bond market separately.
The lead managers said that around 60 per cent of bonds were placed in
Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930526

