FT934-11456

FT  01 NOV 93 / Crunch has come for S Africa's power-sharing constitution:
Proposals look more like majority rule than National party supporters could
have imagined


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


'IF YOU'RE scared of majority rule, vote Yes'. That was the promise the
ruling National party in South Africa made to its white supporters during
last year's national referendum campaign: vote Yes for a constitution
entrenching minority rights and preventing majority domination; vote Yes,
and prevent majority rule.
Those who did, two-thirds of white voters, are in for a shock. The new
constitution negotiated by the National party and the African National
Congress, due to be finalised shortly, looks far more like a majority rule
constitution than any National party supporter could have imagined.
As promised, the constitution is based on multi-racial power-sharing in the
executive, in the legislature, and between central government and the
regions. But the share of power guaranteed to minorities is considerably
less secure than that originally demanded by the National party. This could
provoke a revolt among traditional party supporters and new recruits from
minority communities, who may see the deal as a sell-out to the ANC.
That deal - on the first post-apartheid constitution, likely to remain in
force until the end of the decade - is now all but done. Within a week, ANC
and National party negotiators expect to have finalised joint constitutional
proposals which go to a technical committee for drafting. They will then try
to sell that constitution to the right-wing Freedom Alliance, which so far
seems disposed to reject it.
It seems likely that parliament will endorse a new constitution within a
month to six weeks, in time for the first all-race elections on April 27.
That constitution will enshrine a multi-party government of national unity
for the first five years. But within that government, the power exerted by
the National party, standard-bearer of white and other minority interests,
seems likely to depend largely on the goodwill of the ANC and of Mr Nelson
Mandela, its leader.
Far from entrenching an effective minority veto over cabinet decisions on
fundamental matters - long the National party's bottom line - President F W
de Klerk appears willing to accept a voluntary arrangement, which would have
no constitutional force, under which Mr Mandela promises not to act on
crucial issues without Mr de Klerk's assent.
The National party would have one further mechanism for blocking majority
decisions in cabinet: where consensus could not be achieved informally
within an inner cabinet of the main leaders, a vote would be taken.
The exact percentage required to pass decisions in areas such as finance and
state security has yet to be agreed: but the ANC is insisting it be 60 per
cent, and National party negotiators say they may accept this. If they do,
the party alone could probably not block cabinet decisions. Its share of
cabinet seats would reflect the party's share of the national vote - current
opinion polls put NP support at 12 to 20 per cent.
Even voting with potential allies in the cabinet (each party with at least 5
per cent of the vote would have proportionate cabinet representation), Mr de
Klerk might not be guaranteed blocking power.
Government negotiators believe that the ANC and NP share common goals for
the government of national unity, including agreement on the need to restore
stability. Most of all, they believe assurances from ANC leaders including
Mr Mandela that the ANC does not think itself capable of governing alone. So
Mr de Klerk seems to be willing to abandon the rigid entrenchment of
minority power in cabinet, in favour of a primarily voluntary form of
power-sharing which he thinks will give him more influence in fact, if not
in law.
But if, after more than three years of constant negotiations, he and his
officials have lost their fear of the ANC (government and ANC negotiators
even shared bungalows at their recent bush summit, and relations are very
cordial) the same cannot be said of much of the white electorate. Nervous
whites wonder whether cosy unwritten agreements between Mr Mandela and Mr de
Klerk would survive a landslide ANC election victory, and they question
whether the spirit of national unity which inspires the current negotiations
will endure when the new government starts to take hard policy decisions.
NP officials say they will sell the constitution as a package which, taken
together, fulfils the referendum promise of protecting minority rights and
preventing majority abuse of power. They point to a bill of rights which
substantially protects individual economic and political rights against
state abuse; and substantial devolution of power to regional governments,
aimed at weakening central government and its ability to dominate.
But what Mr de Klerk has dubbed a 'federal' constitution in fact reserves
very strong powers for central government. True, substantial powers are
devolved to regional governments in areas such as education, policing,
health, housing, welfare, but central government reserves the right to
intervene in these areas to impose uniform national norms and standards, to
ensure proper regulation, to protect the national economy or national
security.
In short, the constitution authorises central government to intervene in
terms so vague as to undermine regional autonomy. And with regions barred
from imposing taxes without central government approval, it is hard to
accept Mr de Klerk's claim that the new state will be 'federal'.
In the end, the best way to protect minority rights may be, as government
negotiators claim, for whites to prove that they are indispensable to the
new government. Officials believe they can build more power this way than by
entrenching the minimum rights needed to survive.
But success will depend on the number of white, coloured (mixed-race) and
Indian voters willing to take the same gamble. If minority voters desert the
National party in droves, it will not have the electoral strength to claim
the role agreed with Mr Mandela. Indeed, with white support for the party at
an all-time low and attempts to muster black support going badly, there is
an outside possibility that the NP could come third in a national election,
behind the right-wing Freedom Alliance which includes the mainly Zulu
Inkatha Freedom party, the white supremacist Conservative party and the
nationalist Afrikaner Volksfront.
Still, it is hard to imagine the Freedom Alliance surviving tensions between
black conservatives and white racists long enough to fight an election
together. At the moment, the greater risk seems to be that the Freedom
Alliance could oppose elections altogether, and launch something to close to
a civil war. Alternatively, some members might choose to oppose the
constitution but fight the elections anyway.
The next few weeks are crucial as the intentions of the Freedom Alliance
become clear. At last, the crunch has come.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931101

