FT932-45

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (8): Voters call for a new administration -
Agriculture


   By DAVID LANE


ITALIANS enjoy a privilege offered to few electorates; the power to abolish
government departments. And they exercised it in April when the score from
the referendum ballot box was a resounding 3-0 against the ministries.
The ministry of agriculture was one of the losers, some 54 per cent of the
electorate voting that it should be closed. In a turnout of 77 per cent, 70
per cent voted that the ministry's powers should pass to Italy's regional
authorities.
The referendum campaign was led by the regional authorities of the Alto
Adige, Piedmont, Lombardy, the Trentino, the Veneto, Emilia Romagna,
Tuscany, the Marches, Umbria and Basilicata. (With the exception of
Basilicata, all are wealthy northern or central regions.) The opposition
line-up included all the main farmers' and agricultural organisations.
Immediate closure of the ministry would be difficult, and the government has
been able to delay implementation of the electorate's verdict until August
4. In the meantime, an effort is being made to establish a new framework for
administering agriculture. 'We are working towards the creation of a new
ministry which will be the ministry of agricultural, food and forestry
resources,' states Alfredo Diana, the minister of agriculture.
In setting up a new organisation that bows to the will expressed by the
electorate in April, the government is having to perform a delicate
philological and constitutional balancing act.
'Though the timescale is short, the deadline is absolutely inflexible,' says
Mr Diana. 'Draft legislation has been prepared and is now being discussed.
The main issue is to decide which activities should be transferred to the
regions.' He believes that the responsibility of the state is essentially
that of planning and co-ordinating policy for the sector.
'Land improvements and reclamation ought to pass to the regional
authorities. Responsibility for co-operation should be centred on the
regions, and so also should interest rate assistance. A large part of
activity will be decentralised. I envisage that the regions will have the
task of managing agricultural policy,' says Mr Diana.
One certainty is that Italy will not be represented in EC negotiations by 20
regional agricultural assessors. Eurocrats and Italy's community partners
will not be treated to a Babel of Italian regional dialects or heated Latin
demonstrations of differences on policy and how agricultural funds should be
divided.
'There will be no change in our presence in Brussels,' says Mr Diana, noting
that national responsibilities are indicated by the Treaty of Rome. He
points out that federal administrative structures in Germany and Belgium do
not prevent single national representation in EC discussions.
'The responsibility of overseeing the application of EC policy definitely
belongs to the state. The agreement that we recently reached on milk quotas
is conditional on control being exercised by the state. The 173,000
registered letters to Italian milk producers dealing with quotas were from
AIMA, a ministry agency. Almost 700,000 sowing declarations are being
handled by the ministry, as the body responsible towards the EC.'
At least 30 per cent of the ministry's 2,200 jobs will go in the shake-up.
Mr Diana admits that there will problems, but believes that the changes can
be achieved without trauma. Employment security is not at risk. Nobody will
be fired.
Though amalgamation of departments generally leads to fewer jobs, it is hard
to believe that Mr Diana's ideas for bringing the ministry's 23 research
institutions under one roof will not lead to job creation. And the state
agency for market intervention, AIMA, ought to offer openings to some of the
civil servants whose jobs at the ministry will disappear. 'It is absolutely
necessary that AIMA should establish an inspection service, and this will
require staffing.'
Another source of new jobs will be in the food sector, if Mr Diana's plans
for re-defining the ministry's fields of competence are extended in this
direction. 'The food industry would welcome closer links with agriculture.
The new ministry ought to cover food as well as agriculture,' he says,
foreseeing the acquisition of new and different responsibilities.
The position of the Corpo Forestale di Stato, Italy's 7,000-strong force of
forest rangers, is also under discussion. Mr Diana believes that the nature
of its work, which includes fire-fighting and protection of national parks,
is such that it should pass to the environment ministry. 'But some members
want to keep police status and would prefer that the Corpo Forestale should
be part of the internal affairs ministry.' Mr Diana dismisses the idea that
the Corpo Forestale's job could be devolved to the regions.
Italy's minister of agriculture and his staff are clearly more than usually
busy. Although heavily engaged in discussions on transferring
responsibilities to the regional authorities and transforming the central
organisation, the ministry has continued its efforts to put Italy's case in
international forums. In mid-June Italy presented two position statements;
to the council of agricultural ministers, one on the Uruguay Round and the
other on Common Agricultural Policy reform.
Mr Diana emphasises Italy's objective of obtaining Gatt agreement as soon as
possible. He is concerned, however, that the Blair House agreement risks
affecting some sectors adversely. Mediterranean products such as wine, olive
oil and fruit and vegetables are an area where Italy seeks a favourable
response before accepting Blair House. 'They have never been a source of
contention on international markets, and external protection and internal
support have declined to negligible levels,' says Mr Diana.
Closer to home, Italy has concerns about CAP reform, complaining about
complex mechanisms and the consequences of errors and omissions by farmers.
'The experience of applying the reform has shown the need for significant
changes in the system, from both an organisational and regulatory point of
view,' says Mr Diana. But given Italy's record in terms of CAP fraud, it is
hard to see EC partners accepting an easing of regulatory constraints where
these help combat fraudsters.
Mr Diana complains about quotas and that Italy is being put in a
straitjacket. 'Only countries that have already reached satisfactory
production levels find quotas acceptable. Italian farmers are reluctant to
submit weakly to measures that bestow advantages to agriculture in northern
EC member states.'
The farming lobby in Italy is numerically strong. Latest statistics show 3m
farms and an agricultural workforce of 2.1m. But the problem of small-scale
farming has not been solved by co-operation. 'Perhaps too much emphasis has
been given to this form of activity. Lack of funds would prevent such
support today,' says Mr Diana, noting that this will soon be a regional
responsibility.
He considers that the collapse of Federconsorzi, an event two years ago that
laid open malpractice and maladministration and created much discontent
among foreign bank creditors, is a loss to the agricultural sector. 'It was
very useful to small farmers for storage and the sale of products,' says Mr
Diana.
In addition to fragmentation, Italian agriculture is characterised by
substantial regional differences. Farmers in the north are closer to their
counterparts in north European countries, technologically, culturally,
economically and geographically, than to fellow Italian farmers in the
south.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

930630

