FT934-8544

FT  15 NOV 93 / Hands across the water: Links between the Pacific nations
are likely to be strengthened, say Alexander Nicoll and George Graham


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL and GEORGE GRAHAM


The unprecedented meeting this week of leaders of Pacific nations may be
short on concrete moves towards future co-operation, but it will be full of
powerful symbolism.
The 15 members of Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation, a four-year-old
grouping that will hold its first leaders' meeting in Seattle on Friday and
Saturday, include the world's two biggest economies - the US and Japan - and
by some measures the third largest, China. They represent a large proportion
of the world's wealth, and sport the fastest rates of growth in output,
trade and investment.
For Asian countries the gathering will underline this prosperity, as well as
the increasing closeness of trade and diplomatic relations within the
region. Apec's other members are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Hong Kong,
Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea,
Taiwan and Thailand.
They will be discussing the acceleration of already fast-growing trade and
investment between their dynamic economies, while governments of
slow-growing industrialised countries struggle to overcome domestic
protectionist pressures and push through free trade measures. US President
Bill Clinton will arrive in Seattle having won or lost the battle in
Congress for the North American Free Trade Agreement in the House of
Representatives vote on Wednesday. And a December deadline for a conclusion
of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is fast
approaching.
For Mr Clinton, who has called for the creation of a 'new Pacific
community', the meeting will be an opportunity to persuade Americans that
their destiny is tied more to Asia than to Europe. Mr Winston Lord, US
assistant secretary of state for Asia, says: 'Europe is still very important
but, in relative terms, we believe Asia has become more important for
America - and not just for economic reasons.'
The economic justification, however, is clear. US trade with Asia last year,
at Dollars 344bn, was 51 per cent higher than trade across the Atlantic. By
1991, Asia accounted for Dollars 66bn or 15 per cent of US direct investment
abroad.
Just as important, moves towards multilateralism, such as Apec's
development, are a step forward for a region in which a strong US troop
presence has, since the second world war, kept the security balance. Asia
has a history of hostility and wars between neighbours. It still has a
number of outstanding security issues, such as the nuclear aspirations of
North Korea's dictatorship and the disputed Spratly Islands in the South
China Sea.
Regional co-operation should help the US to achieve its goal of a reduction
in post-cold war military expenditure while remaining an Asian power - a
role that Pacific countries want Washington to maintain. 'It (Apec) is an
important device for keeping the US engaged in the region,' says Mr Don
Russell, Australian ambassador to the US.
South-east Asian countries and their main industrialised trading partners
agreed earlier this year to expand annual talks into a regional security
forum. Though there is no suggestion that Apec should also take on a role in
discussing security issues, officials from both sides of the Pacific see it
as having a long-term role in promoting peace.
This sort of role is welcomed by China, for example. Mr Wu Jianmin, China's
foreign ministry spokesman, says that while China opposes a formalised trade
bloc, 'we believe it is useful to have a leadership conference to enhance
mutual understanding'. China's president, Mr Jiang Zemin, will be in Seattle
and his first meeting with Mr Clinton will potentially mark an important
step forward in the difficult Sino-American relationship.
Actual moves towards economic co-operation among Asian countries, however,
have been insubstantial and are unlikely to be much advanced this week. Apec
is a consultative body dealing with issues such as harmonisation of customs
data and exchange of information on marine pollution. The Seattle meeting
will take it a step further by establishing a trade and investment
committee.
The committee will aim to simplify customs procedures and improve investment
flows within the region. But Ms Charlene Barshefsky, deputy US trade
representative, says it could expand into other areas, as Apec members
become more comfortable with and committed to greater co-operation.
The reason for this cautious approach is that there are deep divisions among
members about the nature and degree of future co-operation. Asian countries
resent any move that could be interpreted as intended at regional
domination, and are particularly suspicious of US emphasis on human rights
and the promotion of democracy.
These worries have been illustrated by reactions to an ambitious report from
an Eminent Persons Group, to be considered by Apec ministers when they meet
in Seattle on Wednesday and Thursday. The group, chaired by Mr Fred Bergsten
of the Institute for International Economics in Washington, calls for the
creation of an Asia Pacific Economic Community, and specific steps towards
the establishment of an Asian free trade area, which would push regional
trade liberalisation further than measures agreed under the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
US officials acknowledge these are distant prospects. But the
recommendations have caused concern among the six-member Association of
South-east Asian Nations, which is keen to maintain its own position as a
regional grouping.
'Malaysia has made it clear it would like Apec to proceed slowly, just as
Australia has made it clear it would like to proceed quickly,' says Mr Lord.
Malaysia's prime minister, Dr Mahathir Mohamad, declined Mr Clinton's
invitation to the Seattle meeting.
Japan, wishing to expand its global role but anxious not to upset the US or
its regional neighbours, is trying to tread a line between them. Mr Takeshi
Isayama, a senior official in the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry, says: 'We have to think what kind of management will be most
beneficial to the world economy after the end of the cold war. Apec can be
an extremely effective place to think about that.' But he also says the Gatt
Uruguay Round is essential to Apec: 'Making Apec an alternative to Gatt
means to make it a forum for negotiation. That's impossible.'
Even Australia, which sparked Apec's original creation and remains its
keenest promoter, made clear last week that a suggestion by Prime Minister
Paul Keating to change the 'Co-operation' in Apec's name to 'Community' did
not imply it wanted to establish a free trade area.
Domestic political considerations would in any case rule out an Asian free
trade agreement for the foreseeable future. Mr Clinton, after his troubles
over Nafta, could hardly launch an even more ambitious trade initiative.
Leadership struggles in Japan and China will also limit their freedom of
action.
Divisions may emerge this week on admission of new members. Mexico, Chile
and Papua New Guinea are the most immediate candidates, but India, Pakistan,
Macao, Sri Lanka, Russia, Ecuador and Peru have also made overtures, and the
European Union has asked for observer status. Ms Barshefsky says: 'The
desire to include new members is currently juxtaposed against an increasing
concern among many members that Apec must first consolidate and produce
concrete results.'
This week's strongest rhetoric is therefore likely to be reserved for issues
of global rather than regional importance. Apec members will forcefully
demand a successful resolution of the Gatt talks by the December deadline.
'We are interested first and above all in the Uruguay Round. That really is
the overall setting,' says Ms Joan Spero, US undersecretary of state for
economic affairs.
Before true Asian co-operation can make any further significant progress,
there will need to be many more confidence-building sessions such as the
Seattle meeting. Ms Spero says: 'It (Apec) is not going to be a snail. On
the other hand, it is not going to be a jack-rabbit, either.'

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931115

