FT934-11471

FT  01 NOV 93 / De Klerk concedes ground to ANC over constitution


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   JOHANNESBURG


SOUTH AFRICA's ruling Nation-al party appears to have abandoned its demand
for a constitutionally enshrined veto in a government of national unity to
be headed by Mr Nelson Mandela if his African National Congress wins the
country's first all-race general election next April.
Joint proposals, which will be incorporated in a draft of the constitution
due to be released today, show that the government has given substantial
ground in its negotiations with the ANC on a new constitution. The National
party would have little constitutionally entrenched power to block majority
decisions.
In an earlier draft, the party was guaranteed what amounted to a veto in the
areas of budget, finance and security.
The proposals call for multi-party power sharing in a five-year national
unity government. However, the long-ruling National party, which speaks for
minority interests and is likely to come second in next year's elections,
now seems to have accepted a form of voluntary rather than enforced power
sharing, with President F. W. de Klerk appearing to rely on assurances from
Mr Mandela that fundamental decisions will not be taken without his
approval.
If the ANC wins the general election set for next April, Mr Mandela would
become president of South Africa. Unless National party electoral support is
drastically eroded, Mr de Klerk is likely to become second deputy president,
alongside a first deputy president also from the ANC.
If Mr de Klerk disagrees with the ANC, he can try to muster support from
allies to outvote it in the cabinet. He is likely to need 40 per cent
support to block the ANC, which still might not guarantee him automatic veto
power.
Dissent surfaced within Mr de Klerk's National party about the outcome of
the talks. One influential party member said the proposals would leave the
party 'at the mercy of the ANC'.
The proposals also offer only limited powers to provincial assemblies. They
are likely to reinforce fears of many whites and harden the opposition of
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi and his Inkatha Freedom party which demands a
quasi-independent status for Natal province, the IFP stronghold.
The IFP and its white partners in the right-wing Freedom Alliance have been
given 10 days to respond to the proposals.
Freedom Alliance officials condemned the proposals, released yesterday,
saying they did not devolve sufficient powers to regional governments.
ANC and government negotiators expect to wrap up three years of off-on
constitutional negotiations this week, completing proposals on how a final
constitution should be written, on the composition of a constitutional
court, and on local government. They will then present the document as a
final offer to the Freedom Alliance, which includes the IFP and the white
Conservative party. Negotiators, say they will tell the alliance to accept
the offer within 10 days, or the government and ANC will proceed to
elections alone.
Crunch for power-sharing constitution, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931101

