FT932-3114

FT  16 JUN 93 / Clinton makes strong defence of his record


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday launched a vigorous defence of his
management of domestic and foreign affairs, claiming that his presidency was
'the most decisive you've had in a very long time on all the big issues that
matter'.
He called a press conference less than 24 hours after angrily terminating
one on Monday because he was offended by a question about the process by
which he had chosen Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg to fill the vacancy on the
Supreme Court. This time he offered a joking olive branch and the first
question to the TV reporter who had so upset him.
Declaring 'there is no wavering', he cited in evidence a long catalogue of
achievements from the first budget resolution through the decline in
unemployment to aid to Russia. 'People would have said at Christmas-time
that that's a pretty good and decisive record.'
He argued he was 'confident' that recent economic progress - he cited lower
inflation and the 755,000 jobs created so far in his presidency - would
continue if Congress passed a deficit-reduction plan increasing investment
and fairly sharing the burden of sacrifice. His budget, he insisted, was
'the first taken seriously in this town for a dozen years'.
He conceded he did not agree with all the proposed changes to his package
now being considered by the Senate finance committee. But he expected the
Senate and subsequently the whole Congress to pass a bill in which tax
increases were matched by equal spending cuts. 'In the end,' he said,
echoing his campaign theme of last year, 'this is a jobs package'.
In the budgetary context, he promised announcements soon on the space
station and the supercollider, two multi-billion dollar projects that could
be cut by Congress. He appeared sympathetic to both, while allowing for the
possibility of lower funding.
He said politicians keen to promote other projects should think 'for a long
time' about reducing the US investment and qualitative edge in space,
science and technology. He particularly noted that the space station, now
subject to a less ambitious schedule, 'offers us the potential to work with
other countries,' most obviously Russia.
Mr Clinton was clearly encouraged by the overwhelming approval accorded the
Ginsburg nomination, which may even be approved by the Senate before the
summer recess. His only 'regret' about the protracted selection process were
'leaks' that may have exposed other candidates, specifically Mr Bruce
Babbitt, the interior secretary, and Judge Stephen Breyer from
Massachusetts, to more public scrutiny than should have been the case.
He had not, he said, 'hung them out to dry'.
Finally Mr Clinton reacted robustly to the derogatory remarks made about him
by Major-General Harold Campbell of the US air force in the Netherlands. The
Defence Department confirmed that the general had described him as
'gay-loving, pot smoking, draft dodging and womanising'.
Mr Clinton said: 'Personally, I didn't care, it had no impact on me. . . but
for a general officer to say that about the commander-in-chief. . . is a
very bad thing.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930616

