FT932-6536

FT  27 MAY 93 / World Trade News: Many trials on the long road to harmony in
drug testing - Peter O'Donnell reviews progress on common clinical standards


   By PETER O'DONNELL


IF a European company wants to market a drug in the US, the chances are it
will have to conduct two new clinical trials there. To launch it in Japan,
it will have to conduct entirely different preclinical testing.
The diversity of national drug regulations has impeded pharmaceutical trade
and rising expectations of drug performance are making things worse.
As new testing techniques become available, national requirements on drug
launches become more onerous. It couldn't have come at a worse time - just
as each expensively developed medicine needs to be brought rapidly into
revenue generation on as many markets as possible, there are loud calls for
closer international alignment of drug testing requirements.
It is not only the drug industry pushing for change. Far-sighted regulators
perceive that duplication of testing is not only a drain on resources, but
can also delay patient access to valuable new drugs. 'Unnecessary repetition
of trials is unethical,' said the EC Commission's Fernand Sauer at a meeting
in Brussels last month.
Moves towards harmonisation of requirements are nothing new in Europe's
patchwork quilt of drug markets, where diverse rules complicate the lives of
companies seeking international exposure for their drugs.
In the European Community, the first directive on pharmaceuticals in 1965
aimed at a balance: to 'safeguard public health', but in a way that 'will
not hinder' trade in medicines.
The latest stage of this EC development is the European Medicines Agency -
now on the point of becoming a reality. There are also numerous moves to
bring Efta countries and Central and Eastern Europe into a form of
pan-European harmonisation.
But the most ambitious recent initiative in pursuit of drug-rule
harmonisation involves the big three: the USA's Food and Drug
Administration, the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare, and the drug
division of the Commission of the European Community, who are now
co-operating with one another and with the drug industry as part of an
International Conference on Harmonisation of drug regulation (ICH). A ICH
meeting is planned for later this year, and some significant tripartite
agreements are in prospect.
The subject matter of ICH is necessarily arcane, and its procedures
byzantine: in preparation for the Orlando meeting, expert working groups are
hammering out the minutiae of guidelines on stability testing, on medicines
for geriatrics, on dose-response studies, and on reproductive toxicology.
As Dr Francoise de Cremiers of Wyeth Ayerst Research in Paris says:
'Industry and regulators believe that harmonisation will reduce testing in
animals and, eventually, in humans, and will promote earlier access to
useful new medicines.'
Among outcomes listed by Mr Kumeo Shirota, senior managing director of the
Japanese Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association, are abolition of LD50
testing, shortened testing for repeated dose toxicity in rodents, and
unification of some drug monographs. Mr Marc Duchne of Searle is more
direct: 'This will save us money and stop us killing so many animals,' he
says.
Regulatory harmonisation at this level is far from easy - the search for
accommodations between schools of thought in Japan, Europe and the US has
repeatedly highlighted widely differing medical and cultural traditions.
Dr John Beary of the US Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association believes
this is an important part of the ICH process. 'In parallel to the scientific
agenda, ICH is also promoting common managerial and administrative methods
which help create a more efficient working environment,' he claims.
Harmonisation isn't universally welcome, either. Standardisation threatens
the status of people working in health authorities or within multinational
drug firms. And it can create discomfort: the strongest opposition to
European harmonisation has come from countries where a strong national
industry lobby feared that standardised drug evaluation would upset
privileged relationships with national authorities. National pride can be as
powerful a rallying cry as international trade.
Harmonisation is not a linear process, says Eigill Hvidberg, professor of
Clinical Pharmacology at Copenhagen's University Hospital. 'Even after
agreement in principle has been reached by an international group of
regulators on a common concept, it can take quite a time for the ripples to
spread outwards so that everyone is ready to accept a common rule,' he says.
This may be some time in coming. Progress on the European Medicines Agency
has again slowed down this month, putting in doubt its 1995 start date. And
an agenda is already under preparation for yet another ICH mega-meeting, in
Tokyo, in late 1995. For the drug industry, there are certainly no quick
fixes in sight on harmonisation of regulations.

The Financial Times


International Page 4

930527

