FT933-12830

FT  22 JUL 93 / Arts: The Savoy rises from the ashes - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


London's Savoy Theatre re-opened on Monday, entirely rebuilt after the
terrible fire that gutted it in February 1990. It is good to report that
Basil Ionides' charming Art Deco interior has been scrupulously recreated:
the silvery auditorium, the carpets and painted ceilings, the period
ironwork and lighting, are all there, spankingly fresh and as stylish as
ever. (Only one regret: the theatre curtain is still hideous).
The Savoy has in its time housed dancing, albeit the stage is too small for
anything ambitious in scale. Its most celebrated occupant was George
Balanchine's dazzling but ephemeral troupe, Les Ballets 1933, whose brief
season was backed by Edward James as a gift to his wife, the Viennese dancer
Tilly Losch. Now the honour falls to English National Ballet to christen its
new stage this week with two triple bills.
The opening programme had as its centre-piece Olga Roriz' Seven Silences of
Salome, over-sibilant as to title, but tough as to dance content. (I
reported on its creation earlier this year). It features seven men who are
got up in a rag-bag of women's attire over trousers, and who behave as if in
the throes of delirium tremens. There is an obscurely argumentative
programme note, and the suggestion that what Roriz is giving us is a ragout
of Chippendales with more than a dash of feminist exegesis.
In the event, Silences triumphs over its ingredients, thanks to Roriz'
ability to make taut, anxious dance and to the splendid performances of the
men, among whom Denzil Bailey's rhythmic versatility, Thomas Edur's pure
style and Stephen Sherriff's psychic concentration, are outstanding. It is a
strong work, excellently suited to this stage, and it reveals a great deal
about the sure talents of the dancers involved.
Nothing in the rest of the programme made any comparable effect. Frederick
Franklin's Raymonda Grand Pas is the statutory classical divertissement,
with Petipa's dances cleverly adapted, but it demands truly grand dancing.
Among the soloists, Agnes Oaks and Irena Pasaric looked happy in their
pretty variations: these solos are jewels that they wore with the right
assurance. The rest was as subdued as the dreary powdered shoes worn by the
women: dancers ought to realise that the fashion for marshmallow shoes is
hugely unflattering to their feet. Light reflected from satin gives shape
and clarity to the foot, and to movement.
Wayne Sleep provided a romp to close the programme. This is Savoy Suite,
which makes jokes about Gilbert and Sullivan - whose music is given in a
brash arrangement - and marks the re-opening of the theatre with a great
deal of energetic activity. On these terms it is merry enough as an
occasional piece, and it ends with a resourceful dance for gondoliers (of
course). But its life-expectancy is not great.
English National Ballet is at the Savoy Theatre until 24 July. Programme
varies.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930722

