FT934-10139

FT  06 NOV 93 / Fashion: Hard sell for sweet smells - Lucia van der Post
finds a fragrant area of successful market growth


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


THERE IS no longer any excuse for not smelling sweet. In the flower-growing
centres of provincial France, in streamlined Connecticut laboratories, in
domestic kitchens up and down the UK magic potions are being mixed and
measured, lotions stirred, essential oils refined. From The Body Shop, with
a branch on almost every high street, to esoteric and exclusive little
operations known only to the cognoscenti, sweet smells are selling as never
before.
It is not hard to see why. Sweet-scented candles, oil-burning rings and
bowls of pot-pourri lend a house a particularly magic air while nothing so
engenders a sense of luxuriousness as body and bath lotions, essential oils
and unguents. It is their very inessentialness that is their most beguiling
quality.
For those who like the imprimata of a grand and charismatic name they don't
come much more charismatic than Giorgio Armani. At all the Emporio Armani
shops there is currently a pot-pourri of sweet-smelling products with a
distinct trend towards the natural herbs and spices.
From Australia come natural vegetable soaps in pure white, tea-tree salmon,
avocado, apple, milk and honey, wheat-germ yellow, lavender and rose-pink.
Bath products are scented with marigold and sage or thyme and mallow and
come packaged in beautifully simple natural wood boxes, cork boxes and ashed
wood shells. As for the candles, these come smelling of cinnamon (a
wonderful winter smell) and of the new Armani's 'Fire' and 'Earth'
fragrances. A happy morning or three could easily be spent sniffing your way
among the range though to avoid fragrance pollution I would try and stick to
one or other of the ranges.
Those who do not like to pay fancy prices and in any event are
temperamentally more inclined towards the simple bottle, the natural
products and the essential oils, then Neal's Yard offers a whole wealth of
options. Those who fancy a little experimentation can order their simple
creams and lotions and by following the instructions in the mail order
catalogue can mix their own face creams, bath lotions, body creams and even
their own sports and muscle rub or sun protection cream. A wonderful
catalogue with lots of inspiration for those who think body lotions and gels
are, on the whole, over-priced.
For the catalogue write to Neal's Yard Remedies, 5 Golden Cross, Cornmarket
Street, Oxford OX1 3EU. (Tel: 0865-245436). Neal's Yard has also just opened
a new shop at 9 Elgin Crescent, London W11.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

931106

