FT932-7204

FT  25 MAY 93 / International Company News: Dublin confirms Telecom
alliances


   By TIM COONE and ANDREW ADONIS


   DUBLIN, LONDON


THE IRISH government yesterday confirmed that it is seeking a strategic
alliance for Telecom Eireann, its national telecommunications utility.
However it emphatically ruled out privatisation, following reports that
Cable and Wireless, the telecommunications group, is negotiating for a 25
per cent stake.
C&W said that discussions were progressing 'at a senior level, with a view
to a possible strategic alliance or joint venture'.
Privatisation is a political minefield in Ireland.
The sensitivity of the issue was underlined yesterday by Mr Dick Spring, the
deputy prime minister and leader of the Irish Labour party, who said that
the sale of any of TE 'would represent a breach of the programme of
government'.
This was a thinly-veiled warning to his Fianna Fail coalition partners that
the Labour party might be prepared to leave the government on the issue.
Mr David Begg, the general secretary of the Communications Workers' Union
also warned that his members would fight any efforts to privatise the
company.
Mr Brian Cowen, minister for transport, energy and communications, said:
'Privatisation is not on the agenda.'
However he added that he had instructed TE to look for 'strategic alliances
or joint ventures . . . to maintain its position in a sector which is moving
at an alarming and accelerating rate.
'The idea of the company standing alone in an international arena is
something that I think would be questionable in the long term.'
With a debt/equity ratio of about 250 per cent, and a telephone line
penetration rate of only 31 per 100 people, TE is anxious for overseas
investment and expertise.
Privatisation of state-owned telecommunications utilities is now commonplace
outside Europe. Within the EC only the UK has yet privatised, but Greece is
negotiating with overseas companies for the sale of a significant equity
stake and most operators have been constituted as companies separate from
the government, in some cases with a view to possible privatisation.
Both Mr Spring and Mr Begg have made it clear they were not opposed to TE
entering into new joint ventures, but neither spelled out how the company
might raise capital for such a move without giving a future partner a stake.
With its UK Mercury network, which now extends to Belfast, C&W has obvious
attractions to TE as a partner or equity holder.
For C&W it would be in line with the company's policy of expanding from
existing business centres. Apart from Mercury, its European business
includes a 40 per cent stake in Tele2 of Sweden, the second national
carrier, and leased line businesses in France, Italy and Germany.
TE has had a turbulent decade since its establishment in 1984, with four
chairmen in the past two years. Mr Michael Smurfit resigned in September
1991 after it was revealed he had an interest in a company which was
involved in selling a site on to TE for building its new headquarters.
His successor, Mr Brendan Hynes, was sacked after only six months, after a
revolt by fellow directors upset by his 'hands-on' management approach in
dealing with overstaffing and lack of competitiveness. An acting chairman,
Mr John Scanlan, was replaced last December by Mr Ron Bolger, a partner in a
prominent Dublin accountancy firm.
The government's inept handling of recent privatisations, in particular that
of Greencore the sugar, malting and milling group, has made it even more
difficult for the issue of future privatisations to be the subject of
rational public debate.
Boosted by reports of the Irish deal, C&W's shares closed up 10p on the day
at 724p.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930525

