FT932-114

FT  30 JUN 93 / Renault and Volvo fortify links


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   STOCKHOLM


RENAULT, the state-owned French vehicle maker, and Sweden's Volvo said
yesterday they were setting up a department to plan joint car production,
adding momentum to an alliance which appears to be heading towards a merger.
The 'joint strategic and product planning department', to be set up by
September, will succeed a joint planning committee and create a common
management team for planning and co-ordinating the range of cars made by the
partners.
Both companies, which entered an alliance in 1990, stressed they would
retain the distinct identities of the Renault and Volvo marques, and
separate production. But they would deepen co-operation on what cars each
produced in different classes of vehicle and on shared use of components.
The move coincides with negotiations over a possible merger, which hinge on
the French government's privatisation plans for Renault.
A privatisation bill is due to be passed by the French parliament next month
which would allow Volvo to increase its 20 per cent stake in Renault and
open the way for private French investors to take up Renault stock.
Renault at present holds 8 per cent of the Volvo parent company and 25 per
cent of the Volvo car company.
The new joint planning department is the latest development in steadily
growing co-operation between Renault and Volvo. Already they make some 20
per cent of their annual purchases - worth some Dollars 15bn (Pounds 10bn) -
together to achieve lower supply prices.
The companies already have joint quality projects, some shared marketing and
distribution and are jointly developing a commuter bus.
Volvo's Dutch car production plant is to use Renault diesel engines and
Renault plans to use a Volvo two-litre petrol engine for one of its future
models. The two are also working on project called P4 which envisages each
company producing two executive car models built on a common platform.
Matra studies Renault, Page 28

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930630

