FT931-4068

FT  12 MAR 93 / UK Company News: SFO probe into the affairs of Norton


   By JANE FULLER


THE SERIOUS Fraud Office has launched an investigation into transactions
involving Norton Group, the motorcycles and engineering company which has
been severely criticised in a Department of Trade and Industry report.
It is understood that the SFO inquiry will focus on the Pounds 8.2m
acquisition of a German company, which profited the family of chairman Mr
James Tildesley, and the rights issue which funded that deal.
The DTI report, published yesterday, criticised the men who ran Norton
between 1987 and 1990 and their advisers. The DTI is considering
disqualifying certain of the directors from managing any other company.
The inspectors say: 'The management of the company was conducted in a very
unsatisfactory manner.' They blame Mr Philippe Le Roux, chief executive, for
much of the deficiencies.
They pick out several points of concern in the 1990 FUS acquisition,
including:
The obvious conflict of interest between Norton and its chairman. 'From the
outset, Mr Tildesley seems to have planned for a profit out of this
transaction, first for himself and later . . . for his children's trusts',
which were the vendors of FUS.
The inspectors put the profit at Pounds 1.9m, although they say Pounds
725,000 should be deducted to allow for sums unrecovered from Norton by Mr
Tildesley.
The involvement of Mr Le Roux's company Manstorm in the sub-underwriting of
the 1990 rights offer.
The directors of Manstorm were Mr Le Roux and his mother Mrs Fylippa
Cumming. Mr Le Roux resigned from Norton after failing to pay Pounds 195,000
to an agent who purchased the company's shares for him.
TC Coombs, stockbroker, which went into receivership, underwrote the Pounds
7.5m issue. Manstorm sub-underwrote Pounds 1.75m. The inspectors say: 'That
company had no assets to meet such a liability.'
They also criticise a 'comfort letter' from Blyth Dutton, Norton's
solicitors. It wrongly gave Coombs the impression that Manstorm could meet
its liabilities. The letter was written by Mr Peter Hooper, who was also
Norton's company secretary.
The circular to shareholders about the FUS acquisition had many
deficiencies, according to the inspectors.
They also raise questions about Norton's merger with Minty, the furniture
and property company.
A variety of financial advisers, accountants, surveyors and lawyers are
criticised in the 240-page report, which has been sent to the relevant
professional bodies as well as the Stock Exchange. Norton's financial
adviser was Robert Fleming and its auditors Hacker Young.
The inspectors were Mr Richard George Bramwell McCombe and Mr John Kenneth
Heywood, of accountants Price Waterhouse.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930312

