FT933-12674

FT  23 JUL 93 / Egypt and IMF in accord on debt relief deal


   By MARK NICHOLSON


   CAIRO


EGYPT and the International Monetary Fund have agreed on a draft letter of
intent for a three-year extended fund facility which would trigger the debt
relief of about Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.98bn) owed to the Paris Club of
creditor nations, and which charts the next phase of the country's
structural adjustment reforms.
The letter sets the terms for Egypt's second agreement with the fund since
it resumed relations with the agency in 1991. The proposed reforms will make
the country's progress towards a more open, free-market economy
'irreversible', Mr Abdel-Shakour Sha'alan, director of the fund's Middle
East department, said in Cairo.
The letter will go before the fund's board for final approval at a meeting
scheduled for September 17.
Board approval is expected to depend on Egypt first taking a series of
measures on tax and trade liberalisation.
Approval would then lead to the relief of 15 per cent of Egypt's outstanding
Paris Club debt, as it stood in May 1991 when Egypt struck its first IMF
agreement, and an accord with sovereign lenders to tie debt relief to
progress on economic reforms.
Fifteen per cent of the total debt - which then stood at more than Dollars
20bn - was written off in July 1991 and Paris Club creditors have said
further 20 per cent will be relieved if Egypt satisfies the terms of a this
second IMF agreement.
Under the first accord, Egypt cut its budget deficit to 3.5 per cent of GDP
from 20 per cent, halved inflation to 12 per cent, liberalised exchange and
interest rates, freed prices, eased import restrictions and began to cut
tariffs.
Mr Sha'alan said inflation under the proposed second agreement was set to
fall to 7-8 per cent, with the budget deficit falling to about 2.5 per cent
of gross domestic product, largely through increases in tax coverage.
He said Egypt was unlikely to draw on the Dollars 600m credit attached to
the new facility, given the accumulation of hard currency reserves of about
Dollars 16bn during the previous agreement.
'If we continue with the reforms for three years, I can imagine the economy
growing at 5 or 6 per cent annually,' Mr Sha'alan told Al-Ahram newspaper
yesterday.
That, however, will depend on Egypt having more success with structural
reforms than it has had with fiscal and monetary changes.
Economic growth is at present flat, thanks partly to the effect on tourism
of recent terrorist attacks but mostly to Egypt's sloth in revitalising the
private sector and reforming loss-making public sector industries.
Egypt's privatisation programme is well behind schedule, mired in
bureaucratic complexities and political fears about the social effects of
unemployment.
The new agreement would set targets for the number of public-sector
companies Egypt should bring to the point of sale - but the government has
so far sold only a handful of the 85 companies and assets slated for sale
under the first agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930723

