FT931-4097

FT  12 MAR 93 / Letter: UK industry could compete if regulatory regime
favourable


   From Mr EWAN MACPHERSON


Sir, Your leader ('The pleas for manufacturing', March 8) posed the question
of why Japanese industrialists can make internationally competitive products
in the UK when their British equivalents find it so difficult.
The answer is that in most of the cases which attract attention, the
Japanese have been able to set up on greenfield sites: they can then install
state of the art equipment at the outset and train the labour force to their
requirements. In addition, the financing of the projects has often been made
attractive by UK government incentives, and their own cost of finance was
extraordinarily low in the 1980s.
Given the chance of a greenfield operation for a project, I believe the
British industrialist can do just as well as the Japanese. Where the Brit is
at a disadvantage, all too often, is when he is trying to modernise an
existing facility, retrain an existing labour force, deal with a major
redundancy at the same time, and manage his earnings statement, all in
volatile economic conditions where interest rates are increasing just at the
time when demand is falling. In such circumstances, it becomes managerially
easier and financially less risky to run down the old plant and become a
distributor for a product made elsewhere.
If the government wishes British industrialists to remain internationally
competitive, it should provide at least a level playing field to encourage
them to stay as manufacturers in the UK.
This means ensuring that the regulatory regime is in step with Britain's
competitors (not ahead of them because of the cost implications) and some
help with financing might also be necessary.
In times past it was possible at reasonable cost to raise long-term,
fixed-interest rate finance for long-term projects so that the financing
cost became a matter of certainty. Today, long-term, fixed-interest rate
finance is relatively scarce and appears very expensive compared to
short-term finance. The government might usefully devise a scheme to
encourage manufacturing by providing a mechanism to fix the finance cost of
plant modernisation and capacity expansion projects, just as it has in the
past provided fixed rate finance through the Export Credit Guarantee
Department and for ships.
Ewan Macpherson,
chief executive,
3i Group,
91 Waterloo Road,
London SE1 8XP

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930312

