FT933-12827

FT  22 JUL 93 / Arts: A dark Orlando - Aix Festival


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


The festival at Aix-en-Provence has a distinguished history, which it
preserves proudly. A videotheque, set up by the town, holds an archive of
opera productions back to 1959, which is available to the public, every
individual aria instantly accessible, free, in well-appointed video viewing
rooms - surely a unique resource.
A glance through the catalogue suggests that Aix has traditionally put the
emphasis on singers. Audiences here are always ready to applaud good
singing, while they reserve a peculiarly French cacophony of boos, catcalls
and whistles for producers and conductors to whom they have taken a dislike.
But there can be justice in their verdicts: none of this year's three
productions drew as much strength from its subject as it might.
The most successful was Orlando, produced by Robert Carsen. For a producer
this opera must be either a dream or a nightmare. In one of his most daring
scores Handel ran together a wildly heterogeneous succession of moods -
light comedy, magic, lavish theatrical effects, romance and black tragedy,
all derived from the story of poor Orlando, whose obsessive love drives him
headlong into madness.
It was this last aspect which interested Carsen. Faced with the familiar
problem of how to deliver Handelian opera to a present-day audience, he
determined to confront the opera's dark side. No magic power was allowed any
influence over events; the characters were driven by their own psychological
demons.
What was asked of Felicity Palmer was a portrayal of the title-role
emotionally so frank as to make one want to avert one's eyes. Full-frontal
anguish, naked pain were put before us. As a sheer outpouring of feeling it
was enormously impressive, as exhausting for us as it must have been for
her, but it was achieved at a price: the vocal performance became a
relentless onslaught of raw chest notes, tipping over into wild exaggeration
in the celebrated mad scene. Surely the early part of the role might have
been played a little more easily?
For light relief there were scenes of mundane everyday life. As the
shepherdess Dorinda, Rosa Mannion washed her smalls in the brook and ironed
them in the kitchen later, all the while singing with delectable
spontaneity. Her long second-act aria was the evening's winner. Rosemary
Joshua sang with some beauty of tone as Angelica, deserving of a more
interesting princely consort than Jennifer Lane's Medoro. Harry van der Kamp
as the sorcerer Zoroastro, reduced to a businessman in a shabby raincoat,
was left without his magic powers or much charisma.
Ultimately there was no place for sorcery in a production which wanted human
weakness to shoulder responsibility for human actions. The wonders, both
magical and scenic, in Orlando were missing. Too many cliches, too. (The
naked girl extra must have felt chilly as the night closed in - the
performance did not end until after 1am.) But Antony McDonald's simple,
trendy sets looked good and nothing that Carsen did distorted the
characters.
As so often, a late 20th-century production style was teamed with carefully
considered 18th-century musical practice. For Handel (though not Mozart) Aix
prefers period instruments these days. William Christie directed his group
Les Arts Florissants with a light touch. Altogether, a performance not
without interest for the archives.
Aix-en-Provence festival continues until July 28.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930722

