FT932-252

FT  30 JUN 93 / Mates accuses fraud office of undermining Nadir defence:
Attorney-general rules out independent inquiry


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and JIMMY BURNS


SIR Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, last night ruled out an
independent inquiry into the Serious Fraud Office after rejecting a series
of sensational charges from Mr Michael Mates about its handling of the case
against Mr Asil Nadir.
In a resignation speech which alternately captivated and perplexed MPs and
prompted angry interruptions from the Speaker, Mr Mates accused the SFO of a
campaign to undermine the defence of the fugitive Turkish Cypriot
businessmen.
Mr Mates, speaking five days after his enforced resignation as Northern
Ireland minister because of his connections with the head of the Polly Peck
empire, said the SFO had sought to put 'improper pressure' on the judge
hearing the case.
It had also tried to engineer through judicious leaks a 'trial by media' of
Mr Nadir, he said. It had further colluded illegally with the Inland Revenue
and had misused privileged legal documents.
Mr Mates's detailed exposition of his own involvement in the case brought
several stern warnings from Miss Betty Boothroyd, the Speaker, that he
risked prejudicing any future trial if Mr Nadir returned to Britain from
northern Cyprus.
Mr Mates's main charges were immediately rejected by Sir Nicholas.
He said his office had 'carefully and dispassionately' investigated
allegations made by the former minister since he took up the case in 1991.
Some had proved to have no substance. Others had contained some 'underlying
facts' but his office had satisfied itself that in such cases there was a
'reasonable explanation'. In those circumstances, he saw no reason for an
inquiry.
Sir Nicholas was last night considering whether publication of his extensive
correspondence with Mr Mates would prejudice any future trial.
He was also preparing for the possibility later today of a statement in the
House of Commons. But it was made clear that his previous rebuttals had
covered all the substantive points made by Mr Mates in the Commons.
His office said: 'If Mr Mates's statement is found to raise any new points,
these will also be carefully and dispassionately examined. The
attorney-general is considering how far it is appropriate for him to make
further comment in the light of the continuing court proceedings.'
Mr George Staple, director of the SFO, denied last night that any of his
officers had acted improperly. He said: 'The director of the Serious Fraud
Office categorically denies any impropriety in the conduct of the SFO
investigation of Asil Nadir and his subsequent prosecution.'
Mr Mates's allegations brought a mixed response from MPs. Labour called for
a statement by the attorney-general, but refused to back Mr Mates's call for
an inquiry.
Some Conservative MPs said his allegations deserved investigation but others
privately accused the former minister of too readily accepting the case of a
fugitive from justice.
Mr Mates said he made no judgment as to whether Mr Nadir was guilty or
innocent of thecharges he faced. He said he had done nothing wrong in
presenting the evidence to the attorney-general and that he had no criticism
to make of the government.
The former minister said the SFO's handling of the case hadbeen
characterised from the outset by an attempt to undermine Mr Nadir's
credibility by leaking in advance details of its raids at the offices of
Nadir-associated companies.
He suggested that calculated leaks had continued until last week when some
of his own correspondence with the attorney-general was given to a national
newspaper and thus precipitated his resignation.
Mr Mates, who said he had discussed the case with Mr Anthony Scrivener QC,
Mr Nadir's counsel, went on to claim that there had been 'illegal collusion'
between the SFO and the Inland Revenue. He would be happy to give evidence
of this collusion to an independent inquiry. Mr Mates said the SFO had
wrongly opened bags of documents while their privileged legal status was
being examined by independent counsel.
Mr Mates's most startling allegation was reserved for the end of his speech.
Referring to the 'most serious aspect of this whole affair', he said that
'quite improper pressure has apparently been exercised by the SFO upon the
trial judge Mr Justice Tucker. It is this sequence of events above all which
demands independent inquiry'.
Mr Mates said that in an attempt to 'destabilise' Mr Nadir's defence,
counsel for the SFO had first suggested that there might have been an
attempt to bribe Mr Tucker.
In a later hearing, said Mr Mates, counsel for the SFO suggested the police
were investigating a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice. Mr Mates
continued: 'The suspected conspirators were, said counsel, Mr Nadir, Mr Wyn
Jones, assistant commissioner of Metropolitan Police, Mr Anthony Scrivener
QC and the judge himself, Mr Justice Tucker. Needless to say the police have
not ever questioned the judge, Mr Wyn Jones or Mr Scrivener.'
The claim by Mr Mates that the SFO had applied 'improper pressure' on Mr
Justice Tucker was dismissed as 'complete nonsense' last night by a central
figure involved in the investigation into the allegations that an attempt
had been planned to bribe the judge.
The source, who is totally unconnected with the SFO, said that while the
SFO's barrister had invited Mr Justice Tucker to consider his position in
the light of the corruption inquiry, he had not misrepresented to Mr Justice
Tucker the intentions of the police, as was claimed by Mr Mates.
Mates speech, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930630

