FT932-6652

FT  27 MAY 93 / British Coal offers cut-price supplies to power generators


   By MICHAEL SMITH and JOHN MASON


BRITISH COAL has offered to sell additional coal to the two largest
electricity generators at prices less than two-thirds of those in existing
contracts in an effort to save the 12 pits reprieved in March after a public
outcry over pit closures.
The offer came as the High Court yesterday ruled that the corporation could
go ahead with the shutdown of the first 10 pits in its closure programme.
The cost of keeping the 10 mines open since last October, when the
government first retreated on the closure programme in the face of fierce
cross-party political pressure, is understood to approach Pounds 100m.
British Coal estimates it has spent Pounds 13m a month to keep each pit open
since production in them stopped. The National Union of Mineworkers has
calculated the total cost to the public purse to be more than Pounds 150m.
The pits covered by the judgment are Cotgrave, Silverhill, Grimethorpe,
Houghton Main, Markham, Trentham, Parkside, Betws, Taff Merthyr and Vane
Tempest.
British Coal's offer to cut prices follows a government pledge to subsidise
output from the pits provided British Coal could find markets for them.
The talks with National Power and PowerGen, the generators for England and
Wales and the corporation's main customers, have confirmed how tough the
sales drive will be - initial signs are that at least one of the generators
believes the price of 90p-95p a gigajoule - the unit of energy from coal -
is too high.
Although the generators have indicated a willingness to talk, they have
emphasised that high stockpiles mean there is no strong need for them to
take any additional tonnages. Their stocks mean they can drive a hard
bargain on the price.
The 90p-95p price compares with European spot price, as charted by McCloskey
Coal Information Services, the independent analyst, of 86p delivered to
Rotterdam. It is thought that the generators will argue they can get similar
prices to the UK.
Neither British Coal nor the generators would comment yesterday. However, Mr
Malcolm Edwards, former marketing director, said even if the generators paid
what British Coal was asking, the coal would produce the cheapest power in
the UK.
The final level of subsidy will depend on the sale and production price of
the additional coal. It is likely the total will fall well below the Pounds
500m envisaged by the select committee in January.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930527

