FT931-3889

FT  13 MAR 93 / City settles on the way ahead after Taurus: Richard Waters
on suggestions for handling share transactions


   By RICHARD WATERS


THERE was a surprising unanimity in the City yesterday over what should
replace Taurus, the London Stock Exchange's proposed settlement system,
which was declared dead on Thursday.
Different sections of the securities industry have different interests, but
there seemed to be agreement over the general direction that future
development should take.
First, individual shareholders should be left out of the first stage of the
development. Taurus had been conceived from the point of view of
institutional investors, and getting the large volume of private
shareholdings on to an automated system would add to the complexity and
cost.
Second, the Stock Exchange already has an automated settlement system which
could be adapted to handle much of what Taurus was meant to do. Called
Talisman, it was introduced as long ago as 1979 and is used to settle
bargains between marketmakers. Each marketmaker has a nominee account in
which they group together all their holdings.
In theory, institutional investors could be offered such accounts, as could
a stockbroker which maintained a nominee account for its clients - in effect
allowing a retail stockbroker to take part in the automated settlement
system.
Third, the stock market should move quickly to a system of 'rolling
settlement'. Share bargains are now settled once a fortnight: under rolling
settlement all transactions would be settled a set number of days after they
took place. With institutional investors in Talisman, the settlement cycle
could be as little as five or even three days. Individual investors, outside
the system and still using share certificates, could settle on a 10-day
cycle.
The idea of different settlement cycles was discussed during the Taurus
project. At that time marketmakers agreed that the different cycles would
not lead to institutional and private investors buying and selling shares at
different prices.
There was less agreement yesterday on how, if shares were held in nominee
accounts, companies could draw up complete share registers as they are
legally obliged to do. Companies would be able to comply with their legal
obligations by drawing up a register which simply showed the amount of their
stock held in each nominee account.
To find out more, companies would have to employ agents to make inquiries of
each nominee to draw up a picture of their share registers. However, this
private register would take time to compile and would be unavailable to an
outsider.
One way round this would be a central registry, which would construct a
complete record of a company's shareholdings.
Technically this would be easy to achieve. A system already developed by a
UK registrar could be bought by an independent clearing house and run for
the interests of the City as a whole.
This would put the existing bank-owned service registrars out of business,
and could curtail severely the operations of the bank-owned custodians. But
the Bank of England has made clear that some interests are likely to be
trampled in the pursuit of a quick and cheap solution.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930313

