FT934-8848

FT  13 NOV 93 / Clinton reaffirms defence support


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE US is ready to supply Israel with advanced ground attack fighter
aircraft that could include the sophisticated McDonnell Douglas F-15E.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, said after a meeting in Washington
yesterday with President Bill Clinton that the US leader had 'gracefully
told me and all the Israelis of your decision to strengthen the security of
Israel.'
Mr Rabin said this included maintaining Israel's edge in military technology
through the supply of advanced aircraft, the lifting of barriers on the
export of advanced computers, and an effort to strengthen Israel's
anti-missile capacity.
Mr Clinton said the details of the agreement had still to be worked out at a
meeting on Monday between Mr Rabin and Mr Les Aspin, US defence secretary.
Officials said the final decision on whether the package would include the
F-15E had not yet been made.
The F-15E Eagle is a dual - role fighter which can be used both to establish
air superiority and for strategic bombing missions.
In the Gulf war two squadrons of F-15Es were used mostly to drop
laser-guided bombs on night missions.
At a joint press conference at the White House after their meeting, Mr
Clinton and Mr Rabin both called on Mr Yassir Arafat, chairman of the
Palestine Liberation Organisation, to condemn the killing of a Jewish
settler last month by terrorists apparently affiliated to his Fatah
organisation.
As Mr Clinton and Mr Rabin met, Israeli soldiers shot and fatally wounded a
Palestinian who fled from a roadblock in the occupied West Bank. Two
Israelis were stabbed in knife attacks by Palestinians.
Mr Rabin asked the US to help arrange 'quiet contacts' to move forward peace
talks with Syria, Lebanon and Jordan. Mr Clinton promised to try to persuade
the Congress to maintain financial aid and loan guarantees 'to help Israel
defray the cost of peace.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931113

