FT932-3109

FT  16 JUN 93 / World Trade News: Beijing Jeep is out of the thicket - One
of the first, and therefore 'model', investments in China


   By TONY WALKER


MR FRANC Krebs, head of Chrysler's jeep project in China, is in expansionary
mode, as the Americans might say. Having weathered early storms, the
Chrysler joint venture is set for larger production runs, fresh models and
possibly a new 'greenfield' works.
This is a long way from a gloomy period in the mid-1980s when it seemed that
American Motors, the original foreign partner in the Beijing Jeep venture,
was set to walk out over payment delays and staffing disputes: not to
mention a huge cultural and professional divide between American managers
and their Chinese counterparts.
The man who helped save the AMC venture in 1986 was Mr Zhu Rongji, then vice
minister of the State Economic Commission. This is the same reformist Mr Zhu
who has now emerged as senior vice premier in charge of the economy and the
man tipped as a possible future premier.
The well documented Beijing Jeep saga*, marked something of a watershed for
foreign investors in China in the early phase of the country's economic
reform; although many of the problems that bedevilled the AMC project have
certainly not been eradicated.
Because Beijing Jeep was one of the first joint manufacturing ventures in
China it achieved 'model' status. This is probably what helped save it in
the end: desperate to attract foreign investment China could not afford a
'model' failure.
Mr Krebs is cagey about profitability, saying merely that Beijing Jeep has
been profitable for much of its nine years, and he views the period ahead as
promising in a country where demand for vehicles of all sizes and dimensions
is growing by leaps and bounds.
But problems persist, not least access to foreign exchange to pay for kits
and imported machinery at a time of rapid expansion for the Chrysler-Beijing
Auto Works joint venture (BAW is owned by the Beijing municipality).
Chrysler, which took over AMC in 1987, the year after faltering production
began in Beijing, is anxious to keep building up its stake in the local
joint venture to 50 per cent from the present 43 per cent. AMC with an
original investment of Dollars 8m plus technical assistance took an initial
23 per cent share.
Management problems have eased, Mr Krebs says, with a good working
relationship at senior level. However, Chinese middle managers, used to
operating in a strictly hierarchical and authoritarian system, are loath to
show initiative lest they be criticised for possible mistakes.
Another problem, not anticipated by AMC and Chrysler in the early days, is
job mobility. Previously, it was rare for Chinese workers and managers to
change jobs since there was little scope for competition for talent. Now, a
competitive market for skilled labour is developing and Chrysler, like every
other joint venture partner, is caught up in it. 'We tend to gold-plate
people and they leave us,' says Mr Krebs ruefully.
Beijing Jeep produces a range of four-wheel drive vehicles including copies
of primitive Russian-designed military vehicles, plus the Jeep Cherokee
which is proving a hot seller with supply barely keeping pace with demand.
The company is scheduled to produce 37,500 Beijing Jeep 202 models this
year, and 22,500 Cherokees compared with 20,000 in 1992.
Target production for 1995 is 100,000 vehicles for both models, but, as Mr
Krebs observes, the size of the existing plant is placing limitations on
growth. He believes that in time Beijing Jeep will be obliged to look at
establishing a new facility, possibly in southern China at a cost of up to
Dollars 300m.
Sensing an era of greater competition is dawning, Beijing Jeep is, for the
first time, devoting resources to advertising. In the first three months of
this year it spent more on marketing than it did for the whole of 1992.
The company has a network of about 20 dealerships and deliveries of spare
parts are being speeded up. Before, distributors would be obliged to drive
to Beijing every two or three months from outlying provinces to pick up
supplies. Now parts are being delivered 'every week or so' even to remote
areas.
Chrysler, which fell into the China market with the AMC takeover, is
congratulating itself for having a foothold in what is likely to prove a
lucrative, if highly competitive area.
With just 7m vehicles spread thinly among China's 1.1bn population, and with
more than 92 per cent of the country's roads unpaved, the future for Beijing
Jeep would seem to be secure, even buoyant.
*Beijing Jeep: The Short Unhappy Romance of American Business in China. By
Jim Mann. Simon and Schuster, 1989

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930616

