FT933-12533

FT  23 JUL 93 / Wellcome wins ruling on patents


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


WELLCOME, the UK pharmaceuticals group, yesterday claimed victory in its
struggle for ownership of the patents for AZT, its treatment against the
Aids virus, HIV.
The drug, also called Retrovir, is the company's second best-selling
product, generating worldwide sales last year of Pounds 213m, representing
12.5 per cent of Wellcome's turnover.
Its share price rose 29p to close at 641p after the ruling by a federal
court in North Carolina.
Barr Laboratories, one of the two US generic companies challenging the
patents, contested Wellcome's claims to victory. Mr Edwin Cohen, Barr's
chairman, said his company would appeal to a federal appeals court in
Washington.
The other group contesting the patents is Novopharm.
Wellcome said the judge had decided the evidence was overwhelming and
conclusive that inventors at Burroughs Wellcome, its US subsidiary, had
first conceived of the idea of using AZT as a therapy for treating persons
infected with HIV. The company added that the judge had decided there was no
evidence for the jury to find against Wellcome.
Mr Paul Holcombe, vice-president and general counsel at Burroughs Wellcome,
said: 'I call that sort of conclusion a clear-cut victory. It is a victory
not just for Wellcome, but also the whole research-based industry as well.'
Mr Cohen, however, said the judge had been unable to decide a definition of
the term 'conception of the inventive process', which was vital to the case.
If the appeal court agreed with Barr's definition, Barr would ask for the
case to be heard before a new jury.
Mr Holcombe said the judge had agreed with Wellcome's definition.
Meanwhile, Wellcome announced that Sir Alistair Frame, its chairman, would
retire for reasons of ill-health. In April, Sir Alistair announced he would
step down as chairman of British Steel on the advice of his doctor.
Mr Roger Gibbs, chairman of Wellcome Trust, which last year sold its
majority stake in Wellcome, said: 'We are most sad that Sir Alistair's
health will not allow him to continue. We are grateful to him for the
outstanding contribution he has made over the past three years, and will
miss his wisdom and experience.'
The group's chief executive, Mr John Robb, will take over as interim
chairman. The company insisted the move would be temporary until a
replacement could be found.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930723

