FT932-240

FT  30 JUN 93 / IG Metall to take strong line on share ownership


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


OFFICIALS in IG Metall, Germany's most powerful union, are to be banned from
owning shares in German companies on whose supervisory boards they sit.
The action is an attempt to reassure members following the scandal in which
Mr Franz Steinkuhler was forced to resign as leader for alleged insider
dealing in shares in a Daimler-Benz holding company.
However the union's full-time executives have deliberately not agreed to
instruct their members to sign in-house company codes of conduct, designed
to counter insider dealing.
Germany has no law forbidding insider dealing, although a draft is being
prepared by the Finance Ministry in Bonn.
'We are making our own insider rules,' said Mr Klaus Zwickel, the man
nominated to take over the union leadership.
'We don't need any which the employers make. The people whom we propose to
become members of supervisory boards should be responsible to our members,
and not to the employers.'
The new rule was agreed by the full-time union executive of the engineering
workers' union on Monday and will be submitted for formal approval by the
full national executive, which meets in two weeks' time.
It reflects the puritan instincts of Mr Zwickel himself, previously Mr
Steinkuhler's deputy. He owns no shares in either BMW or Mannesmann, on
whose supervisory boards he sits under Germany's system of worker
participation.
It has not been decided how long union officials will have until they must
sell their shares. The one exception will be shares issued under
employee-participation schemes to those worker representatives on
supervisory boards who are also employees.
'We have nothing against such shares,' a union spokesman said. 'They are
often issued subject to special conditions, and cannot be openly traded.'
With its decision, the union leadership clearly hopes to distance itself
from the taint of scandal associated with Mr Steinkuhler.
He resigned last month after it was revealed that he had bought shares worth
DM1m (Pounds 400m) in MAH, the holding company set up by Daimler, on whose
supervisory board he sits. Shortly afterwards, the board decided to exchange
MAH shares for full Daimler shares, causing a sharp rise in their stock
exchange price.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930630

