FT932-6615

FT  27 MAY 93 / International Company News: UBS plays down takeover hopes


   By PETER MONTAGNON and IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


UNION Bank of Switzerland, the country's largest bank, would like to expand
its investment banking presence in the US, but faces extraordinary
regulatory obstacles there.
Any important acquisition of a US company or business in investment banking
would almost certainly oblige the bank to close its substantial and
successful commercial US bank branch, Mr Ulrich Grete, UBS executive
vice-president, said.
Thus, stock market rumours in recent weeks of a takeover by UBS of Lehman
Brothers, the investment banking subsidiary of troubled American Express,
seem unfounded.
UBS never comments on rumours, but Mr Grete said the bank was not working on
any acquisition projects at the moment. He said the bank probably would not
make any large acquisition within the next two years.
The comments come in the wake of the bank's controversial resolution at last
month's annual meeting to raise authorised equity capital by about 8 per
cent for possible use in financing takeovers.
Under a new Swiss law, companies can use such reserve capital at any time
for a period of two years without seeking further shareholder approval for
rights issues or for 'important purposes' without offering shareholders the
prior right to buy the shares. At the end of the two years, it must seek a
fresh mandate from shareholders at the AGM.
UBS has been criticised in Swiss financial circles for stretching the
interpretation of the law and seeking to undermine shareholder rights. It
was generally understood that such shares would be used in lieu of cash in
cases of takeovers, but UBS has given itself the right to make market
placements as well to finance takeovers.
Mr Grete said the bank's main goal was to improve its return on equity - 7.4
per cent last year - to 10 per cent by 1995, so it would try hard to avoid
issuing new shares. However, the US was 'the one area' where the bank might
make 'an extraordinary step' to improve its position in asset management and
investment banking.
The problem was that any such acquisition could undermine its ability to
continue carrying on both investment and commercial banking in the US. At
the moment, it benefitted from 'grandfather' status, having both types of
business prior to the passage of the International Banking Act. But this
status would be in jeopardy if it made a significant acquisition.
'The probability that in two years time we will have to renew the authorised
capital without having used it is very high,' Mr Grete said.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930527

