FT934-11751

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: Alcazar partners dismiss talk of
collapse


   By IAN RODGER


THREE of the four European airlines aiming to merge their operations in the
so-called Alcazar project dismissed speculation that their negotiations were
collapsing.
A fresh round of talks would be held next week, an Austrian Airlines
spokesman said. Swissair and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines said they expected to
reach a conclusion in the next few weeks.
Press speculation in Holland, Scandinavia and Switzerland about a collapse
of the talks sent shares of KLM and Austrian tumbling 3 per cent yesterday,
while Swissair registered shares eased SFr8 to SFr694.
The partners had aimed to complete the negotiations, which began earlier
this year, by mid-September. However, it proved more difficult than expected
to resolve key issues, such as the relative valuations of the airlines and
the selection of directors and a headquarters location.
One of the toughest issues has been the selection of a US partner. KLM wants
Northwest Airlines, in which it has a 20 per cent stake, while Swissair is
arguing for Delta, with which it has a co-operation agreement.
On Tuesday, Mr Paul Reutlinger, marketing director of Swissair, said
Northwest was not a satisfactory partner, partly because of its financial
weakness and partly because it has only two hubs in the continental US.
'Swissair would not want to get into bed with a sickly partner,' Mr
Reutlinger said at a travel industry fair in Montreux. 'If Alcazar is to
become a worldwide carrier, the choice of a US partner must fall on Delta,'
he added.
A Swissair spokesman said these remarks did not mean that Swissair would
pull out of Alcazar if Delta was not selected. 'It only implies that we
prefer Delta. We are still negotiating on a US partner.'
The spokesman denied reports that Germany's Lufthansa had made an offer of
co-operation to Swissair.
He also played down Scandinavian reports indicating that Scandinavian
Airline System, the fourth partner in Alcazar, was losing interest in the
project. He attributed them partly to stresses arising from SAS's latest
rationalisation plans.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931029

