FT934-11551

FT  30 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: Boost for co-habitees


   By BARBARA ELLIS


A RECENT decision by the law lords in a repossession case could have given
rights to those who co-habit, as well as to married couples, according to
some lawyers.
Bridget O'Brien had been misled by her husband into signing a surety which
she believed guaranteed a short-term loan of Pounds 60,000 secured on the
couple's house. In fact, it covered her husband's business debts of Pounds
135,000, which rolled up to Pounds 154,000. Barclays bank had not explained
to her what she was signing. She paid back the Pounds 60,000 she thought she
had guaranteed, but the bank sued for repossession to recover the rest.
In deciding that Barclays was not entitled to take the house, the law lords
said the fact that the O'Briens were married gave the bank constructive
notice of a potential for emotional pressure, and possibly undue influence,
being used by one partner on the other. Because the bank knew it was dealing
with a married couple, it should have asked questions, such as whether Mrs
O'Brien understood the transaction.
The law lords made clear that the same principles would apply to other cases
where there was an emotional relationship between people living together,
saying 'the tenderness shown to married women is not based on the marriage
ceremony but reflects the underlying risk of one co-habitee exploiting the
emotional involvement and trust of the other.'
They added that since unmarried co-habitation and less conventional couples
now were widespread, the law should recognise the fact. 'This could make
lenders a lot more nosy in order to preserve their position,' said Pauline
Walker, a solicitor specialising in family law with Manches & Co,
'If two people are living together, the bank is immediately on a sort of
notice to ask questions.' She noted, however, that the decision applied only
to people guaranteeing loans from which they did not benefit.
Walker added: 'One of the most interesting things about the (O'Brien)
judgment is the law lords going so far as to say they were accepting social
change. The law always has done, of course, but judges have never argued it
so publicly before.'
Barclays said this week it had tightened its procedures on guarantees
already in line with the Banking Code introduced last year, but did not feel
the judgment put any onus on it to discover additional personal details
about cohabiting couples. A spokeswoman pointed out that the bank had won a
Crystal Mark for the clarity of its guarantees.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

931030

