FT931-4020

FT  12 MAR 93 / International Company News: Siemens chief repeats warning on
profits


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


MR HEINRICH von Pierer, chief executive of Siemens, the German electronics
and electrical group, yesterday repeated it would be difficult to match
1991-1992 profits in the current financial year.
Speaking at the company's annual meeting in Munich, he said that after five
years of profits growth, it would be a great achievement if profits held at
the same level as in the year to the end of September 1992. Profits for that
period climbed 9 per cent to DM1.96bn on sales of DM78.5bn.
The company's view of prospects has deteriorated slightly since Mr von
Pierer first gave his veiled warning on profits in mid-January. He said that
he expected group sales to rise 6 per cent to DM83bn this year - marginally
worse than January when he said sales would climb to DM84bn.
In the first five months of the year, order intake slipped by 2 per cent to
DM33bn while sales increased 3 per cent to DM29.5bn, Mr von Pierer revealed
yesterday.
He warned that it was hardly to be expected that a company such as Siemens
would be unaffected by recessionary conditions in Germany. He said that the
number of people employed by the group would be down to 400,000 by the end
of the financial year, from 407,000 now and 413,000 less than five months
before.
The job cuts will affect all business areas, but Siemens Nixdorf, the
group's computer subsidiary, will be hardest hit. He said the group was
making good progress in cutting losses in the computers and semiconductors
businesses.
Siemens was attacked yesterday over the special voting rights attached to
the company's preference shares, a class of shares owned exclusively by
descendants of Mr Werner von Siemens, the company founder.
Prof Ekkehard Wenger from the University of Wurzburg proposed the abolition
of the voting rights, which under certain circumstances give the holders of
the preference shares up to 9.5 per cent of the votes in the company
although they account for 1.65 per cent of the group's share capital. Late
yesterday, it looked likely that the motion would be defeated.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930312

