FT931-4094

FT  12 MAR 93 / The plan that fell to earth: City confidence has been shaken
by the decision to abandon the Taurus project


   By RICHARD WATERS


The City yesterday turned its back on a complicated and expensive stock
market settlement system in favour of a 'quick fix'. Hundreds of millions of
pounds of development costs, incurred by more than 150 financial
institutions in the City and many more listed companies, were formally
abandoned at 3pm, when news of the decision was announced.
The London Stock Exchange board's decision to drop its blighted Taurus
project has shaken the confidence of the City establishment. It was planned
by a wide range of institutions with interests in the securities industry to
be an electronic system of ownership and transfer of shareholdings.
City leaders had always stressed that it was an essential part of the
infrastructure needed to underpin London's stock market and re-inforce its
claim to being Europe's leading financial centre. In the event, it proved
only that the City establishment is incapable of overcoming the conflicting
self-interests of its members to put London as a financial centre first.
Mr Peter Rawlins, chief executive of the Stock Exchange, yesterday resigned,
to take responsibility for the failure of the project. But Sir Andrew Hugh
Smith, exchange chairman and chief executive for the moment, pinned the
blame largely on the fact that the early design for Taurus, developed by the
exchange, was rejected in 1989. Service registrars, who maintain share
registers for listed companies, voted down the idea because it could have
put them out of business. 'It wasn't surprising - after all, turkeys don't
vote for Christmas.'
Yesterday's move also raises serious questions about the future of the Stock
Exchange, which has been traumatised by its failure to complete Taurus.
Settlement is one of the exchange's core services, providing Pounds 47.5m of
its Pounds 194m of income last year.
Yesterday, it was effectively shunted aside by the Bank of England, which
stepped forward to take over responsibility for overhauling stock market
settlement in London. The exchange will continue to run the current system,
and may eventually have a role in whatever new arrangements the Bank
proposes - though Sir Andrew said he had urged the Bank to consider an
independent clearing house to run whatever system it comes up with. 'If
you're providing an industry-wide service, it should be done by an
industry-wide utility,' he said.
City-wide projects such as Taurus have been tried and failed before. They
have also relied on leadership from the Bank of England to pull them
through. In the early 1980s, the Bank and the Stock Exchange spent three
years trying to build an automated settlement system for the gilts market
before the Bank took over sole responsibility in 1985. The Central Gilts
Office is now an effective and widely admired part of the gilts market.
Also in the mid-1980s, the Bank was forced to step in when a City-wide
grouping of banks and discount houses failed to complete London Clear, a
project to automate settlement of transactions in the money markets. The
result was the Central Money Markets Office, which is also now run by the
Bank.
The Bank has no plans to take stock market settlement under its wing in this
way - but it believes it knows enough about clearing and settlement to take
a lead. Inevitably, the banking industry will be asked to play a stronger
role.
The Stock Exchange itself toyed with the idea of hiving off settlement to
the banking industry in the late 1980s. A committee under the chairmanship
of Sir Geoffrey Littler, a former Treasury official, was set up to plan an
independent clearing house. It was never formally closed, but ceased to meet
more than two years ago as the banks and the exchange lost interest.
For at least two reasons, the UK clearing banks are now likely to find
themselves thrust into a central role, whether or not they want it. First,
they play a central role in the securities markets.
Barclays, for instance, operates the UK's largest share registration
service, maintaining share registers for listed companies. It is a
custodian, providing administrative services to institutional shareholders,
and runs a retail stockbroking service through its branches. In Barclays de
Zoete Wedd, its securities subsidiary, it also owns one of the country's
largest institutional stockbrokers and an investment management company.
Second, the banks are likely to be forced into a central role because they
control the cash clearing system, Apacs. Cash and securities settlement will
need to be meshed together under whatever system is developed - and would
have been necessary under Taurus - to achieve 'delivery versus payment', the
automatic exchange of shares for cash after a stock market transaction has
taken place. This was one of the objectives laid down by the Group of 30,
the Washington-based think-tank whose initiative on the subject four years
ago helped to stimulate the modernisation of settlement systems in most
leading financial centres.
Also, banks will play an important role in any move away from the current
'account' arrangements on the stock market, under which all the share
transactions which take place over a two-week period are settled on a single
day, a week later. This will be replaced by rolling settlements - another
G30 initiative - under which bargains are settled a set number of days after
they take place.
A stock market based on such a short settlement cycle can only function when
control of shares and cash is centralised. Germany has achieved this partly
because the securities business has always been the domain of the banks.
The London Stock Exchange, meanwhile, has been left to pick up the pieces
from the unfortunate episode. Mr Rawlins had been brought in three years ago
 -with the Bank of England's backing - to give a new direction to a
venerable City institution which had lost its way.
Costs were rising at a time when profits in the securities industry were
being squeezed as never before. The exchange's technology base, pulled
together piecemeal over a number of years, needed replacing. The exchange
had lost one of its central roles - regulation - to the Securities and
Futures Authority, set up under the Financial Services Act of 1986. Mr
Rawlins was to bring it a new sense of purpose.
Three years later, costs have fallen but the technology base remains the
same. Of two grand technology plans, one - Taurus - has now been scrapped.
The other could now prove to be still-born.
This is the proposed new electronic trading system, viewed in some parts of
the City as a white elephant on a par with Taurus. Under review ever since
Mr Rawlins arrived at the exchange, it was meant to replace the system put
together hastily in the run-up to the Big Bang reforms of 1986.
The exchange has never publicly divulged its plans. However, brokers in the
City say that the proposed system is too complex and expensive. Eighteen
months ago, the estimated cost of building the system was Pounds 40m. Recent
indications of the cost given to securities houses put it at more than
Pounds 70m.
'Clearly, we will have to go over it with the board and assure them that
this is not another can of worms,' Sir Andrew said. 'I'm convinced we can do
that.'
In the stock market's current straitened circumstances, such projects look
too expensive. That was certainly the mood yesterday, with the new emphasis
on reducing the cost and time it takes to bring in a new settlement system.
The exchange's existing technology base, discounted by Mr Rawlins, may yet
be pressed into service for a little longer.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930312

