FT932-3396

FT  15 JUN 93 / Calls for reform of Community's new VAT system


   By ANDREW JACK


THE European Community's new value added tax system is excessively
complicated and costly and requires reform, Mr Serge Foucher, director of
finance and accounting for Sony Europa, said yesterday.
Mr Foucher told the Financial Times international tax conference in London
that the origin-based system introduced at the start of this year had proved
a heavy administrative burden.
'We feel penalised because we have set up as a European company,' he said.
He told delegates that Sony had been forced to register an additional 26
times in EC member states to comply with VAT regulations, and employ 200
extra staff to amend its systems to the new requirements.
He called on the EC to require all countries to implement EC directives
fully and consistently in place of the existing haphazard system, and to
simplify the requirements for business transactions involving several
different countries.
Sony's comments were supported by Mr Peter Jenkins, head of the VAT practice
at accountants Ernst & Young, who called the new system 'onerous and
burdensome'.
He said his clients complained of a lack of commercial awareness on the part
of EC officials, and difficulties for UK companies of negotiating with
customs officials in other member states.
The difficulties had been the direct result of the 'hybrid' transitional VAT
arrangements introduced in advance of the proposed move to a
destination-based system in 1997.
The views were rejected by EC officials. Mr Peter Wilmott, director general
of the customs and indirect taxation director in the EC Commission, called
the abolition of customs controls at the end of last year 'a great
achievement'.
He said work still needed to be done on an EC-wide system to exchange
information for audit and control in the VAT network.
He suggested that officials needed to consider amendments to the existing
VAT rules for privatised business, financial services and services linked to
goods such as repair work. He stressed that there was a very tight timetable
if the destination-based system is to be introduced by 1997.
Ms Valerie Strachan, chairman of HM Customs & Excise, said she was very
pleased that more than 80 per cent of British companies were now filing the
monthly 'Intrastat' statistical returns required.
She claimed that an estimated Pounds 135m in net benefits to business last
year of the new system, after one-off start up costs, was 'not very far off
the mark'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930615

