FT932-119

FT  30 JUN 93 / Bonn agrees Pounds 9.8bn savings: Cuts plan arouses fury but
may pave way for lower interest rates


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


LEADERS OF Germany's ruling coalition agreed yesterday to savings worth
DM25bn (Pounds 9.85bn), chiefly in social spending. They prompted a furious
reaction from trade unions and opposition leaders.
At the heart of the programme is a 3 percentage point cut in labour market,
unemployment and social assistance payments, combined with a time limit on
payment of earnings-related benefits, saving DM14bn in 1994 and up to DM16bn
a year by 1996.
The aim is to keep the 1994 federal government budget deficit about DM68bn,
as forecast this year, and in following years to cut the net borrowing
requirement from 15 per cent to 10 per cent of the federal budget.
The cuts, in providing some evidence of control of public spending, might
open the way for the Bundesbank to make further interest rate cuts. They
will also head off criticism of Germany's tight monetary policy and fiscal
laxity at next month's summit of the Group of Seven leading industrial
nations in Tokyo.
The plan was condemned by Mrs Ursula Engelen-Kefer, deputy leader of the
German trade union federation, who said it was the most drastic assault on
unemployment benefits since the early 1930s. 'That had catastrophic effects
on the Weimar republic,' she said, referring to the ill-fated German
democracy overthrown by the Nazis.
It was also greeted with scepticism by the banking community, where the
DM25bn savings at federal government and state government levels in 1994,
rising to almost DM35bn by 1996, are seen by many as inadequate.
Mr Helmut Geiger, retiring president of the savings banks association, said
the real 'horror scenario' remained from 1995 onwards. Only then would the
full effect of borrowing for unification, by organisations such as the
Treuhand privatisation agency and the German Unity Fund, fall on the federal
budget.
The plan was presented jointly by Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, Mr
Gunter Rexrodt, the economics minister, and Mr Norbert Blum, the labour
minister, as a great success for the ruling coalition.
Given the sharp downturn in the German economy, the plan, they said, was
intended to strengthen growth prospects and revive Germany's reputation as
an investment location.
The coalition parties still face a fierce battle to push the cuts through
the German parliament. Mr Rudolf Dressler, deputy leader of the Social
Democratic party and social affairs spokesman, said the cuts would be
opposed 'with all the political means at our disposal'.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930630

