FT933-5117

FT  04 SEP 93 / Arts: Old masters in Venice - Nigel Andrews hails films by
Allen, Altman and Scorsese


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


WE all approached the 50th Mostra Del Cinema with mixed feelings. There it
was, shimmering into view, a toast to half a century's conjugal bliss
between art and commerce since Benito Mussolini, that famed benefactor,
founded the world's first film festival in the 1930s.
This year all was not well between Mammon and the Muse. Italy's recent
clean-up has helped to clean out the nation's culture coffers. The Golden
Jubilee was more like a pauper's wedding. Four nights' paid hospitality
maximum for all visitors. No Barbra Streisand on the jury: she wanted too
many first-class air tickets. And such cash as remained, set aside for a
last-week Directors' Symposium involving Scorsese, Spielberg, Altman,
Wenders and other cine-VIPs who do not come cheap.
But nothing more consoles a film critic than fulsome film fare. Thanks
mainly to three films from Hollywood, we have had that. Woody Allen's
Manhattan Murder Mystery is a throwback to the funny Allen of long ago: a
champagne comedy thriller with Woody and Diane Keaton as the New York
married couple sleuthing after a neighbour suspected of wife-murder. The
one-liners are a wonder; the comic pace is near-Olympic; and in spite of
some signs of strain in Allen's own performance - a year of
trial-by-tabloids leaves its mark - a fairminded Venice audience laughed
itself silly. Britain gets the film in the new year.
It gets Robert Altman's Short Cuts and Martin Scorsese's The Age Of
Innocence as soon or sooner. The first is Altman's best since Nashville.
Another fresco of fragments, here adapted from Raymond Carver's astringent
stories of life on the Western seaboard, it finds a prismatic coherence in
the jumble of different stories and emotional colours. Love, murder,
ambition, cookery, sex, fishing, parenthood: Altman creates a majestic,
unforced statement on the passion of little lives trying to tune in to
bigger truths.
Short Cuts boasts the kind of cast few but Altman can assemble, snapping his
fingers like a modern Prospero calling his sprites: Jack Lemmon, Andie
McDowell, Tim Robbins, Lily Tomlin, Robert Downey Jr, Matthew Modine.
Every name still left in the casting directory has been snapped up by
another Grand Old Mage. Martin Scorsese scatters his adaptation of Edith
Wharton's The Age Of Innocence with luminaries from today's movie costume
genre. In 1890s New York Daniel Day-Lewis meets Michelle Pfeiffer and this
new passion tests his betrothal to Winona Ryder.
Wags have called The Age Of Innocence Scorsese's first James Ivory film. You
do wonder at first what the maker of Raging Bull is doing amid this
china-shop decor. (How long before De Niro and Pesci burst through the
French windows with barking machine-guns?) But Scorsese's pictorial flair
brings dazzling new perspectives to period-movie tradition: the overhead
shot that turns a ball into a scorpion dance choreographed by Busby
Berkeley, the card-shuffle of impressionistic images seen through opera
binoculars, the airborne camera-arabesques around banquets or tea parties.
There are still, for me, reservations. The film seems at times an awkward
marriage of kinetic visuals with choked-back performances. Every star is
genteelly strangled with a mid-Atlantic accent; and every star trails clouds
of Pavlovian association with past period-pieces. Many of my colleagues
raved, but until a second viewing I prefer to keep a Whartonesque distance.
An even greater distance is required - positively Jamesian - between the
sane critic and some of the rubbish we have seen at Venice. Liliana Cavani's
Where Are You? I Am Here? is a romance of the aurally challenged: involving
a deaf boy, a deaf girl and a movie audience deafened by sentimental special
pleading. In Carlos Saura's Shoot] a brutally raped circus sharpshooter
fills her assailants full of lead and then spends the remaining story dying
slowly, much like the melodrama-raped film. And in Bertrand Blier's 'comedy'
Un Deux Trois Soleil, the hills above Marseilles are alive - though barely -
with the usual job-lot of wacky outrages and reversals this French director
specialises in: including parent-swapping, group rape and bewildered guest
stars (here Marcello Mastroianni) looking for an exit route.
Though this is a festival where America is trouncing the opposition, one
French film has impressed and one US film has taken a pratfall. Aline
Isserman's L'Ombre Du Doute is a delicately ambiguous story of child abuse,
set as much in the heroine's fantasy-prone mind as in her acidly-etched
family and social milieu. And the American clinker is Even Cowgirls Get The
Blues from Gus Van Sant, the gifted director of My Own Private Idaho. A
bunch of Sapphic cowgirls chewing on 1960s dialogue in a no-address,
no-narrative prairieland holds less charm than the earlier three-way pile-up
of Shakespeare, gay rights and existential comedy.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

930904

