FT934-11709

FT  29 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Judge orders seizure of
UK-bound mahogany


   By OLIVER TICKELL


A BRAZILIAN judge has declared that a shipload of mahogany half way across
the Atlantic on its way to Britain may have been felled illegally and has
ordered its immediate seizure.
The decision came from Justice Alvaro Eduardo Junqueira, who ordered the
sequestration of thousands of cubic metres of mahogany belonging to C & C
Industria e Comercio because he feared that it was stolen from Indian
reserves in the country's Amazon region.
Some of the mahogany is destined for London-based timber agent Tradelink,
which, says director Mr Paul Gates, has been buying from C & C for four
years. 'Its not as if we're buying our timber from Ronnie Biggs,' he says.
He added, however: 'If the information is confirmed anything outstanding
will be terminated immediately. It will be cancelled - as simple as that. If
any company is found guilty of illegal practices after due process of law,
we are obviously not going to be involved with them'.
C & C was caught red-handed this summer by Brazil's environment protection
agency, IBAMA, with thousands of logs stolen from the Indian land in the
state of Para. The logs were confiscated and the company's export licence
revoked.
Then, at the end of September, C & C obtained an export licence for 4,000 cu
m of timber from Justice Junqueira on the basis, says the judge, of false
information. When the deception was drawn to his attention last week by
IBAMA, he revoked the licence, initiated an investigation into C & C and
ordered the sequestration of its timber.
The matter is causing embarrassment for Britain's Timber Trade Federation,
of which Tradelink is a member. The federation last month launched a scheme
designed to ensure that only legally-sourced Brazilian mahogany reached the
UK market. Members were informed that unless the scheme won their 'full and
wholehearted' support, 'we risk the scheme falling into disrepute and
increase the threat of legislation'.
However, Tradelink's Mr Gates is not yet aware of the scheme. 'I don't think
the TTF has got a list of approved companies,' he says.
Under the scheme, Brazilian companies supplying participating TTF members
must sign a declaration that they are only dealing in legal timber, which
must not come from indian lands. Mr Rupert Oliver, for the TTF, says that C
& C is not on the federation's list of approved mahogany suppliers.
But even if C & C were on the list, that would provide no guarantee of the
legality of its timber. Earlier this month three timber companies, Maginco,
Perachi and Impar, were ordered out of 36,000 sq km of indian reserves in
southern Para by the Brazilian federal court of appeal. The companies, which
collectively supply over two-thirds of Britain's Brazilian mahogany imports,
had all signed the TTF's declaration.
The Brasilia-based Nucleus of Indigenous Rights group, which obtained the
injuction, says that 64 per cent of Brazil's mahogany exports originate in
Para, and over 80 per cent of these are taken from indian lands or protected
areas, as legal supplies are nearly extinct.
Britain imports about half of Brazil's entire mahogany exports.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

931029

