FT932-11

FT  30 JUN 93 / Power deal near in E Germany


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BERLIN


A DECISION is close on a formula which would gradually introduce more
competition in the eastern German electricity industry. Only one local
council is holding out against a deal that would resolve the future of the
region's electricity supply and pave the way for limited foreign
involvement.
The compromise, which involves eastern Germany's 164 local councils, the
association of municipal utilities, the economics ministry, and west
Germany's utility companies, would give councils access to power generation.
It would also allow them to buy 30 per cent of their electricity needs
locally, or from a foreign supplier, and to form partnerships with
outsiders.
The compromise also means that Vereinigte Enerkiwerke, or Veag, eastern
Germany's main utility which operates the region's high voltage grid, could
speed up its massive investment programme.
The deal results from opposition by eastern Germany's local councils to the
Stromvertrag, or electricity contract, signed in August 1990 between the two
Germanies.
Ostensibly it set out to modernise eastern Germany's power industry, but
with little room for competition. Not only were the east's local councils
denied the right to generate their own power, but the grid, sales, and
distribution of energy were monopolised by western Germany's eight utility
companies.
However, the local councils appealed to the constitutional court, arguing
they had the right to claim 100 per cent of the regional utilities' assets
because they had owned them until 1952 before they were expropriated by the
Communist regime. The court upheld the Stromvertrag but suggested a
compromise.
The councils will be allowed to sell their 49 per cent stakes in the
regional utilities. At the same time, the councils will be free to use the
assets to meet 30 per cent of their energy needs. However, they must still
obtain 70 per cent of their electricity from the regional utilities, which
in turn must obtain 70 per cent from Veag.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930630

