FT934-10112

FT  06 NOV 93 / Arts: Books branch out - Antony Thorncroft helps celebrate
National Library Week


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


WHAT ON earth has happened to our libraries? At Birmingham Central Library
they have been dancing all night; at the British Library they have let
ordinary people into the Reading Room; and at Malvern Library regulars have
been confronted by Nigel Kennedy stamping their books.
It is not privatisation gone mad. Quite the reverse. It is the Library
Association's National Library Week, designed to show the government that
the nation's libraries are alive and kicking and one successful British
institution that needs minimal reform.
The Week is timely. Last month Iain Sproat, number two at the Department of
National Heritage, threw a Molotov cocktail at the library service by
wondering out loud whether the loaning of books should always be without
charge. He was slapped down on Wednesday by his boss, Peter Brooke, when
opening a new Pounds 15m library in Croydon.
Brooke is a keen library man and Croydon was a good place to confirm that
the traditional library service can flourish inside state-of-the-art
packaging. So books are checked in and out by a computerised scanner - but
there are more of them on the shelves, up from 140,000 to 200,000. There are
40 computer terminals, which will not only hunt down books and, if they are
out on loan, tell you when they will be returned, but will also act as a
data base for businessmen seeking information and customers in Croydon - and
abroad. There are audio and music tapes, CDs and videos, but there are also
chairs where people can rest awhile. Half the local population uses the
library but almost half of these never take out books.
The new Croydon is inside the shell of a Victorian library, and is not only
the last word in its lighting, lifts and raised floors, but also in its
purpose. It is part of an arts complex, along with a museum, cinema, art
gallery, cafe, etc., and is also designed to serve the needs of small
businessmen, with its fax service and on line computer which links into the
data bases of hundreds of computers world wide. Just as Glasgow, Birmingham,
and Bradford have poured money into major arts developments in an effort to
attract business, and jobs, to their cities, so Croydon is using the library
as, in current jargon, a resource centre.
Of course there is a price to pay - a fee for businessmen wanting hard
copies of any information garnered; for members of the public taking out
videos and CDs. The more popular items among the Pounds 800,000 worth of new
stock should pay for themselves within a few weeks. But at least it is a
library which reflects the changing world outside rather than one retreating
into staff cut backs and shorter opening hours.
Although Peter Brooke has just embarked on a fundamental review on the
library service he is at pains to point out that he hopes the result will be
thousands of individualistic libraries serving their idiosyncratic local
communities. But the Library Association is wise to take the initiative this
week in promoting libraries and, in particular, the joy of reading books,
even if it does mean getting into bed with Radio 2 and encouraging actors
dressed as Miss Haversham to abseil down the walls of Newcastle Library.
Brooke places much emphasis on not charging for what was the core activity
of libraries - books will be safe - but in a decade's time libraries could
be more like business, educational and recreational centres, with the books
cornered off to appease a few wrinklies. Already persistent small cuts by
local authorities are eating into the service. In 1974-75 there were 229
libraries in England open for 60 hours a week; by 1991-92 this had dropped
to 18. Trained staff has fallen from 8,384 to 7,651 in the past decade. And
a recent survey shows that three out of four local authorities are planning
cuts this year. By law every local authority must maintain a library
service: unfortunately the law does not set out the quality of that service.
Libraries cannot rely on the goodwill of the current Heritage Secretary.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931106

