FT933-5120

FT  04 SEP 93 / Arts: Teuton with a light touch - Edinburgh Festival /
Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


THE EDINBURGH Festival has preserved its best theatrical performance for the
end. Heinrich von Kleist's Der Zerbrochne Krug (The Broken Jug) may not be
quite a masterpiece, but it is given a masterly showing by the Deutsches
Theater, Berlin, directed by Thomas Langhoff. The production contains some
of the best light comedy acting I have seen.
Like Jakob Lenz, the other German dramatist featured at the Festival, Kleist
came to a sticky end. He belonged to an old officer family, disliked the
army, left it for the civil service which he liked no better, was spurned by
Goethe, finally ran out of money and entered into a suicide pact with the
wife of an official in Berlin in 1811 when he was only 34.
Most of his life was spent writing: plays, literary theory and journalism.
He was the founder of the first German daily newspaper, the Berliner
Abendblatter.
Of his wit and erudition there can be no doubt. The Broken Jug brings the
two together. On one level it can be seen as a simple comedy about the
wayward course of justice in a village in the Netherlands around the
beginning of the 19th century. Yet, just as pleasing, there are other
dimensions. Two of the principal characters are called Adam and Eve. For the
play is also about the fall from grace and how to get back to it. Moreover,
Adam, the local judge, is based on Falstaff. There is a touch of Dogberry in
the court scenes. Moliere never seems far away and you could say The Broken
Jug is one long Canterbury Tale.
Yet if Kleist drew heavily on past writers, future central European writers
certainly drew on Kleist. If you see The Broken Jug, you will recognise
Kafka as a disciple. There is also plenty of Kleist's legacy in the lighter
side of Brecht.
The truly wonderful aspect of the play and the production, is the lightness
of touch. Yesterday I criticised Peter Stein's production of Julius Caesar
for its Teutonic heaviness. Today it gives me great pleasure to report what
I always knew: namely, that the Germans are not always like that.
The play is good without being exceptionally so, though it does have some
clever twists, especially at the end when it becomes clear that the search
for justice over who broke the jug will go on to a higher court. But if
there is skill in the storytelling, the great virtue is in writing parts for
actors. Even the smallest characters have their moments, and know how to
take them. There are maids almost without speaking parts: Langhoff lets them
shine as they pass through with an axe to cut the logs, or sometimes with
chicken feathers in their hair.
Of the larger parts, watch (it is impossible not to) Gudrun Ritter as Frau
Martha, the woman whose jug was broken and persists in her complaint. You
will be riveted by the others as well, but the crowning triumph belongs to
Langhoff who resists the temptation to turn the visiting magistrate into an
over-heavy bureaucrat. Other German directors would have made him an
incipient Nazi. Here, as played by Klaus Piontek, he is ultimately a kindly
figure who mellows when offered wine, recognises the origin and the vintage
and never loses a sense of fairness. This is a very humane play.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

930904

