FT933-12630

FT  23 JUL 93 / Uranium testing at Thorp likely to be approved


   By BRONWEN MADDOX, Environment Correspondent


BRITISH Nuclear Fuels is likely to be allowed to start uranium tests on its
Thorp nuclear reprocessing plant at Sellafield in Cumbria within weeks, the
Pollution Inspectorate and the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food
said yesterday.
In a joint statement, the inspectorate and MAFF said they were 'minded' to
give the go-ahead to the tests 'on or after August 12'. Under the 1960
Radioactive Substances Act 1960 the tests cannot start before local
authorities respond to test permission.
BNF has been waiting since January for a licence to begin operating the
Pounds 2.8bn plant which environmentalists have called the UK's biggest
white elephant.
The Inspectorate and MAFF yesterday rejected claims that testing would
prejudice public consultation on the future of Thorp, which is due to start
within weeks and is likely to last until late this year. Greenpeace, the
environmental pressure group, said last night that it was considering a
legal challenge to the decision.
BNF wants to test the plant with radioactive material to determine any
technical problems. It said testing would save at least two months'
preparation and between Pounds 20m and Pounds 30m if it finally obtains a
licence for full operation. BNF added that the tests 'would enable BNF to
retain up to 700 contract staff who would otherwise have their contracts
terminated this month'.
The inspectorate and MAFF said BNF had 'indicated that it would be possible
to decontaminate the plant (after testing) for the relatively small sum of
Pounds 250,000 should permission for reprocessing not be given'.
They said they would be likely to authorise testing because 'the
radiological impact would be very small, less than 0.001 per cent of the
average dose to the UK population from natural background radiation'.
They added that emissions during testing would be far lower than those
during full operation, and it had already been determined that the impact of
full operation on human health and the environment would be 'acceptable'.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930723

