FT934-11161

FT  02 NOV 93 / Supreme Court to review California's unitary tax: Surprise
decision appears to favour Barclays Bank


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE US Supreme Court placed the Clinton administration in a painful quandary
yesterday by announcing that it was going to review the constitutionality of
California's unitary tax system - which taxes multi-national corporations on
the basis of their worldwide income.
The nine-member court said it would review both the case brought by Barclays
Bank of the UK, questioning California's right to apply the unitary system
to foreign-owned companies, and a parallel case brought by Colgate-Palmolive
raising similar issues in relation to US-owned businesses.
Together, the two cases may affect about Dollars 4bn in tax revenues that
California has either collected or assessed.
Fulfilling a campaign pledge, President Bill Clinton reversed the policy of
the last three administrations by backing California's argument that the
case should not be heard. The administration is anxious that California,
politically crucial and virtually bankrupt, should not lose the Dollars 4bn
(Pounds 2.6bn) at stake.
At the same time, the Clinton administration is unwilling to stand
forthrightly against its foreign partners - especially the UK - who have
unrelentingly criticised unitary taxation as contrary to the internationally
accepted arm's length system.
In a brief filed with the Supreme Court last month, the US solicitor-general
argued that although the decision by the California Supreme Court upholding
the unitary system was 'subject to serious question', there was no practical
need for a review because of changes California made last month to its tax
law to meet foreign objections.
The unitary method assesses tax on a proportion of a group's worldwide
income, whereas the arm's length system taxes only the revenues of the
companies doing business in the state.
Yesterday's announcement surprised many legal experts and appeared to shift
the odds of victory strongly in Barclays' favour, but Mr Jerome Libin, a
lawyer representing the UK government in the case, cautioned against any
such prediction.
Mr Brad Sherman, a member of the California franchise tax board who was
active in promoting the changes to the unitary tax system, said he was
disappointed by the Supreme Court's decision.
In reviewing the Barclays and Colgate cases, the Supreme Court will revisit
its 1983 decision in a case brought by Container Corp, in which it upheld
the fairness of the unitary system.
Barclays' argument against the unitary method is that by running against the
grain of internationally accepted tax practice, it interferes with the
federal government's authority over foreign commerce, enshrined in the US
constitution.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931102

