FT931-4206

FT  12 MAR 93 / Glaxo removes chief executive after board row: Departure
follows disputes with regulatory and government authorities in Europe and US


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


DR ERNEST MARIO, chief executive and deputy chairman of Glaxo Holdings,
Europe's biggest drugs group, was ousted yesterday after falling out with
the rest of the board.
Sir Paul Girolami, chairman, said Dr Mario had not been removed for any
single reason. 'It was far more complicated than that. He was not the right
man for the future,' he said.
Dr Mario, 54, who was appointed chief executive in 1989, said he had
resigned because of differences of opinion over the running of the business.
Dr Mario last year received a salary, including bonuses, of Pounds 975,000.
Neither he nor Sir Paul would spell out the cause of disagreement. One
possibility was Dr Mario's aggressive American management style, which sat
uneasily within a conservative British company. In the past 18 months, Glaxo
has had a series of public disputes with regulatory and government
authorities in Europe and the US.
Another possible cause was differences over Glaxo's strategic direction. Dr
Mario was thought to have wanted to make a substantial rights issue to
finance a large acquisition, possibly Warner-Lambert of the US. This would
have allowed Glaxo to re-enter the over-the-counter (OTC) non-prescription
drug market.
Sir Paul denied yesterday there had been any difference of opinion over
Glaxo's OTC intentions. 'Even if it had been true that we had disagreed over
the OTC question, it's incredible that it would have been a leaving issue.'
Sir Paul said that when Dr Mario was appointed chief executive the board had
been aware he had no tremendous feel for an extremely sensitive industry,
was relatively new to the group, had more experience in OTC drugs than in
prescription medicines, had not been a member of the board of a publicly
quoted company for long, and had never worked outside the US.
'If you take that into account, the fact that we still appointed him shows
the respect and esteem we held him in,' Sir Paul said. 'All those factors
played a role in (his departure at) the end.'
Dr Mario's departure was accompanied by a wider shake-up at Glaxo, which Sir
Paul said was intended to strengthen the group's central organisation.
Dr Richard Sykes, research and development director, has been appointed in
Dr Mario's place, but retains his R&D responsibilities. Dr Franz Humer,
director in charge of commercial policy and eastern Europe, Africa and the
Middle East, has been appointed to a new position, chief operating officer.
Sir John Cuckney, a non-executive, has been appointed as non-executive
vice-chairman.
The reshuffle would also help the issue of his successor, said Sir Paul, who
will be 68 in January and is due to retire when he reaches 70. He said that,
with Dr Mario as chief executive, there had not been many candidates for
chairman. Now, although Dr Sykes had first claim, there were three or four
candidates.
Not such a super Mario, Page 12
Lex, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930312

