FT931-4137

FT  12 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: NUM executive supports 24-hour
strike on closures


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


THE EXECUTIVE of the National Union of Mineworkers authorised its members
yesterday to stage a 24-hour strike on April 2 in protest at the
government's plan of pit closures and job losses.
The date chosen coincides with a planned day of worker action organised by
the European Trade Union Confederation over unemployment and redundancies
across Europe.
The mineworkers' decision follows a ballot of members last week which gave
60 per cent support for a strike and further industrial action. But the
miners' action is not going to bring Britain's coalfields to a standstill as
was first thought.
Yesterday Nacods, the pit deputies' union, announced it had narrowly failed
to secure the two-thirds majority it needed to call a one-day strike with
2,036 (64 per cent) voting for a strike and 1,144 (36 per cent) against.
Mr Peter McNestry, Nacods' general secretary, said he was 'very
disappointed' by the outcome of the ballot.
British Coal expressed relief yesterday at the Nacods decision. Mr Kevan
Hunt, the corporation's industrial relations director, said: 'The vote by
the deputies means that miners who wish to work normally if the NUM members
persist with their reckless action can do so. A substantial part of the
coalfields will be working normally.'
The Nacods ballot has come as a setback to the campaign spearheaded by the
NUM for co-ordinated militant action. Members of the Union of Democratic
Mineworkers will be working normally on April 2. They have not been balloted
on any strike action.
The NUM leadership will now have to wait until next week to find out whether
its members will be campaigning on their own or with the 63,000 members of
RMT, the transport union.
The union has held a strike ballot and the result will be known later in the
month.
RMT members are being asked to strike in opposition to British Rail's
failure to guarantee that there will not be compulsory redundancies on the
network as a result of privatisation.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930312

