FT932-13300

FT  23 APR 93 / London Stock Exchange: Overseas buying lifts equity market


   By STEVE THOMPSON


FURTHER evidence that the recovery in the UK economy is gathering momentum,
a reduction in German interest rates and a sharp upward move by Wall Street
combined to drive London share prices higher yesterday.
The FT-SE 100 Index finished 11.5 up at 2,881.1, extending its rise over the
past four days to 56.7. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which has tended to lag
behind the 100 index in recent weeks, outperformed the senior index, posting
a gain of 19.8 at 3,135.7.
The trading session was enlivened by reports of further heavy overseas
buying interest, mainly reflecting switching operations out of other
European markets and into the London market.
Turnover in UK equities expanded rapidly during a hectic session which saw
more than 703m shares traded, well ahead of recent levels which have been
exaggerated by a number of exceptionally large placings and bought deals.
Activity was boosted by at least four programme trades, two of which were
said to have been substantial in size. All the trades were described as
evenly balanced on the buy and sell side. Consumer stocks, notably the food
retailers, were heavily represented in one of the trading programmes.
Share prices began the session in subdued fashion ahead of the March
unemployment figures and average earnings numbers for February, expected
mid-morning, and news from the Bundesbank meeting, expected shortly after
lunch. The Footsie 100 opened around three points higher at 2,872.8 and made
heavy weather of moving up to 2,874.3 immediately following the economic
data. The 26,000 fall in umemployment during March, the second successive
decline, against expectations of a rise of around 35,000, and a marked
slowing in the increase in UK average earnings were accompanied by good news
on housing sales and car production.
Then, news that the Bundesbank had cut its discount rate by a quarter of a
percentage point and its Lombard rate by half a point came as a pleasant
surprise to the market.
The combination of encouraging pointers and a strong opening performance by
Wall Street saw the Footsie 100 reach the day's peak of 2,881.2 before
easing off and staging another good run just before the close.
Some traders cautioned that the market was running out of steam above the
2,880 level, citing the argument that there will be a number of big calls on
institutional cash in the next few months, notably BT III. Other
marketmakers, however, remain convinced that there is still considerable
upside in the equity market, with the possible added bonus of takeover
activity.
Mr Richard Jeffreys, economist at stockbroker Charterhouse Tilney, said:
'The impact of earnings growth will drive the market sharply better later
this year.' Mr Ian Harnett, at SGST, commented: 'The momentum is with the
market at the moment, it looks like onwards and upwards in the short term.'
Oil shares were among the market's poorest performers, reacting to renewed
selling on Wall Street overnight. But British Gas gained ground in high
volume after Sir James Mackinnon, the gas industry regulator, addressed the
London Oil Analysts Group in London on Wednesday evening.
CE Heath, the insurance broker, came under fire after the profits warning.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

930423

