FT934-8381

FT  16 NOV 93 / Arts: 'Kentucky' conquers Broadway - Karen Fricker finds
Robert Schenkkan's epic play about American history a triumph


   By KAREN FRICKER


New York has been waiting so long for the opening of Robert Schenkkan's The
Kentucky Cycle that by now the facts are well known here. It is the first
play ever to win the Pulitzer Prize (in 1992) without having played in New
York, and at Dollars 2.5m is the most expensive non-musical ever mounted on
Broadway. The six-hour, two-part epic spans 200 years in the lives of three
families in the Appalachian region of eastern Kentucky, played by a cast of
21 led by Stacy Keach and directed by Warner Shook, who also directed it in
Seattle and Los Angeles.
All this we knew before its opening last Sunday, but the Dollars 2.5m
question remained: was The Kentucky Cycle to join the ranks of plays that
garnered extravagant praise in the regions only to meet critical and
audience indifference on Broadway?
Its financial fate still hangs in the balance, but this much is sure:
artistically, The Kentucky Cycle is a triumph, a gorgeously written,
ingeniously structured play given a reverent production featuring some of
the most remarkable acting seen on New York stages in several seasons. Full
of action, humour, danger and pathos, it is a searching journey through
American history told through scene after riveting scene of people pushed to
the extremes of human experience. The Kentucky Cycle joins Angels in America
in reclaiming Broadway as the place where American theatre's best and most
uncompromising visions can be displayed.
Shook's staging, on Michael Olich's elegantly spare set, flows so naturally
from the script that it is hard to imagine another interpretation, let alone
a better one. When the audience enters, the stage is exposed - no curtain -
to reveal a simple scaffolding structure that creates a large, bare playing
area centre stage. The actors enter, while the house lights dim, and face
the audience. A spotlight grabs a single actor, who announces the first of
the play's nine sections: ''Masters of the Trade'. The year is 1775. A small
clearing in a thick forest somewhere in eastern Kentucky. A creek flows
nearby . . . ' This introductory ritual is performed before each section.
The actors perform all set changes in view of the audience and never leave
the stage, taking seats around its periphery to observe the action while
they are not performing.
'Masters of the Trade' introduces the scion of The Kentucky Cycle's central
family line, Michael Rowen (Keach), and establishes the play's cracking
pace. By the section's end, Rowen has ruthlessly killed two men to lay claim
to the homestead that will provide his family its identity - and its strife
 -over the next 200 years. In the brief second section, 'The Courtship of
Morning Star', Rowen literally drags a Cherokee woman into his home to be
his wife; she bears Rowen a son, Patrick, who is, as we soon see, 'born with
teeth'.
The barrel-chested, basso-voiced Keach is in commanding form; in the course
of the play he will give impressively varied portrayals not only of the
first Rowen but of four of his descendants; it is one of the production's
delights to watch the 12 core cast members transform into generation after
generation of characters.
These first two sections, however necessary, are not the play's most
compelling; it is in the third, 'The Homecoming', that the Cycle really
begins to spin. Patrick Rowen, now aged 16, commits a bloody act which
recalls the house of Atreus and entails similar results on his and future
generations. 'The Homecoming' also sets in motion a feud between the Rowens
and their nearest neighbours, the Talberts, and introduces the third family
line that figures in the Cycle in the form of Sallie, a black woman whom
Michael brings home to be the family's slave.
The play is now in its stride: the final chapter of Part I, 'God's Great
Supper', which takes the play through the Civil War years, is its most
action-packed; the first two sections of Part II, 'Tall Tales' and 'Fire in
the Hole', which chronicle the mining industry's destruction of the land and
the rise of the unions, are equally gripping; Gregory Itzin gives the play's
outstanding performance as a salesman who hoodwinks the Rowens out of the
mineral rights to their land.
The pace wanes in its final two sections. The penultimate, 'Which Side Are
You On?', is so heavy with union/owner machinations that we lose track of
the family story: that of Josh Rowen, whose choice of corporate
responsibility over family loyalty brings about a tragedy that severs the
family line. And in the final chapter, 'The War on Poverty', set in 1975,
there is too much banter before the play moves to its inevitable, and
inevitably moving, end as Josh Rowen literally buries his past while his
ancestors bear witness.
While situations and relationships in The Kentucky Cycle echo Shakespeare
and Greek drama, in scope at least, its specific theatrical reference points
are distinctly American: its themes of workers' struggle to maintain
self-respect and identity, the debt owed to family, and the moral price of
betrayal recall, in turn, Odets, O'Neill, and Miller. The play's most
affecting message is its debunking of that most American of myths: the
eternal frontier. The world of the play sickens as man's distance from the
land grows; the play's most heroic characters are those closest to nature;
and the only closure possible for the last of the Rowens is achieved alone
on his land with his hands in the earth.
It is appropriate that a play with such a strong environmental theme should
be produced on Broadway: what could bring its message home more fully than
emerging with a sickening jolt, to the urban monstrosities of West 45th
Street?
The play can be viewed in a day-long marathon or on successive evenings.
Tickets come dear - Dollars 100 - but there is nothing on or off-Broadway
that matches The Kentucky Cycle for entertainment, theatricality and food
for thought.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931116

