FT932-6972

FT  26 MAY 93 / Boots to open outlets in Sainsbury stores


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, Consumer Industries Editor


BOOTS, Britain's largest chemists chain, is to open pharmacies and drugstore
outlets in stores owned by J. Sainsbury, the country's biggest food
retailer.
Boots will open outlets in seven Sainsbury superstores in southern England
in July for a trial expected to last several months. The companies said that
if the arrangement was successful it would be extended to other Sainsbury
sites.
This will be the first time that Boots, which operates about 1,100 high
street shops, has established outlets in stores belonging to another
retailer.
Sainsbury in the past five years has opened a few of its 330 supermarkets to
12 shops operated by Sketchley, the dry cleaners, and five belonging to
Lloyds, the second biggest chemists chain.
Sainsbury has also been gradually expanding its supermarket operations to
non-grocery products, including petrol, tobacco, newspapers and cut flowers.
Last month, it launched a magazine, which is on sale at its supermarket
check-outs.
Boots said its planned pharmacies would dispense privately-prescribed
medicines, and that it was seeking licences to enable them to dispense
National Health prescriptions.
The outlets, each of about 200 sq m, would also sell a range of toiletries,
cosmetics, baby products, special foods and film developing services similar
to those available in Boots' smaller shops.
Sainsbury, which proposed the collaboration to Boots, already stocks several
of these product lines in its stores. The two companies said they expected
to compete on price promotions and special offers.
Boots said it would judge the trial on the returns earned by the outlets and
whether they affected sales in its existing local shops. Sainsbury said it
would employ a range of criteria to measure the response of its own
customers.
The new outlets will open at Sainsbury stores in Camberley, Dulwich, Hemel
Hempstead, Ipswich, Poole, St Albans and Sevenoaks.
Tesco, Britain's second largest supermarket chain, began opening in-store
pharmacies in 1981 and now has more than 50. About half belong to Tesco.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930526

