FT933-9981

FT  06 AUG 93 / Book Review: It's not a disaster until it's on the box


   By EDWARD MORTIMER


DISASTERS, RELIEF AND THE MEDIA By Jonathan Benthall I B Tauris, Pounds
14.95, 267 pages
A press conference was held in London last week to launch the Pathfinders, a
private group of independent relief teams, intended to 'give Britain a new
ability to respond instantly to overseas natural disasters'.
The group explained at the launch that 'as well as their own, independent
insignia, teams will wear the Pathfinder badge and the Union flag'. One of
the teams was described as 'much decorated by foreign governments'. Another,
'originally earthquake-oriented, now majoring in communications', had 'held
the fort for the Foreign Office in the Hurricane Hugo operation' which
lashed the Caribbean and south-eastern US in 1989. A third 'aims to match
Medecins sans Frontieres' (MSF): one of its founders 'travelled Afghanistan
with Bernard Kouchner, disguised as Mujahadeen'.
The idea for the Pathfinders was attributed to the late Group Captain Lord
Cheshire VC and the term itself 'derives from the target-marking at which
Cheshire excelled during the second world war'.
Jonathan Benthall must be tickled by the coincidence of the group's launch
in the same week as his book, for it illustrates a number of his themes. His
main message is that almost all relief agencies are now 'majoring in
communications', since disasters, as we have come to know them, are largely
'media constructs'.
Indeed, Benthall suggests, we can hardly recognise a disaster as such unless
it is served up according to a familiar narrative pattern, with a set of
stock characters whom he identifies with the 'functions' in the classic folk
tale, as analysed by the Russian scholar Vladimir Propp.
The characters are the travelling hero, 'who may be an expatriate
fieldworker, such as an officer of Oxfam or MSF; the villain (failing Saddam
Hussein, 'lack' or misfortune will do); the dispatcher, who sends the hero
off on his mission; the donor, who provides him with a magical agent,
sometimes in the form of a magical helper ('clearly, in our case, the
embodiments of western abundance and technology in various forms'); the
false hero (fake charity, incompetent or corrupt humanitarian bureaucrat);
and the princess, who gives him his reward - literally in the case of Save
the Children Fund (SCF), whose president is the Princess Royal.
So familiar is this narrative, according to Benthall, that even when only
part of it is shown on television - 'for instance, pictures of starving
babies, or an aeroplane setting off from a familiar airport taking supplies,
or an ambassador thanking the public for their generosity' - viewers can
immediately recognise it and know what to expect.
He devotes 15 pages to the 'French doctors' movements - the prototype MSF
and its offshoots, Medecins du Monde and Aide Medicale Internationale. Their
founder, Bernard Kouchner (a minister in the last French government), crops
up throughout the book. Benthall is fascinated by the personality of
Kouchner, a crusading humanitarian who has been explicit and unashamed about
his relationship with the media, especially television.
As director of the Royal Institute of Anthropology, Benthall is naturally
interested in the different 'cultural styles' of relief agencies. He finds
that the 'French doctors' movements have a very distinctive national style,
which he calls 'flamboyant', even 'macho', and are much readier than their
British counterparts to 'ventilate disagreements in the national
newspapers'.
One of these disagreements concerns the expression 'French Doctors', which
Kouchner has adopted. His rival, Xavier Emmanuelli, a leading figure in MSF,
warns that it 'makes it possible for French politicians to take credit, in a
covertly piratical manner, for an initiative originally undertaken by
private individuals'. It sounds as though, by draping their teams in the
Union flag, Britain's new Pathfinders may actually surpass their French
model in flamboyant patriotism.
Benthall gives careful attention to the badges and 'logos' different
agencies use, explaining how the Red Cross, despite the best efforts of its
International Committee, comes to be seen as a Christian symbol, so that in
Moslem countries it has to be replaced by the Red Crescent. MSF, founded by
Kouchner in anger at the Red Cross's excessive discretion during the Biafra
war in the late 1960s, uses 'a red cross which slopes forward and is half
erased by a red squiggle: it is almost saying 'Not the Red Cross'.'
Christian Aid has 'Slim Jim', a thin human figure with tapering arms and
legs; and SCF now uses 'Charlie Brown', a stylised child with arms
outstretched above its shoulders. (Its earlier logo, a della Robbia bambino,
represented qualities of 'total dependence on paternal funding and maternal
swaddling - exactly those which a progressive agency concerned with the
rights of children today strives to combat'.)
All this may sound cynical or far-fetched, but Benthall is not just another
debunker. Nor is he simply regurgitating the neo-Marxism of some specialists
in 'media studies'. He does not belittle the reality of suffering or the
genuine self-sacrifice in most attempts to relieve it. In fact he defends
the agencies and the media, albeit mildly, against the strictures of
Professor Mahmood Mamdani, a Ugandan who attacks the former for wielding
influence in Africa without accountability and the latter for 'softening up
public opinion in the west to make armed intervention more acceptable'.
Benthall supports the effort to help disaster victims. But as an
anthropologist he is interested both in the way that western cultures
interrelate with those of the third world, and in the role played by images
of suffering and relief within western culture. The result is a readable and
fair-minded book, which highlights some very difficult dilemmas without
claiming to resolve them.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930806

