FT932-3333

FT  15 JUN 93 / Pounds 93m of Polly Peck assets realised


   By ANDREW JACK and DAVID OWEN


ADMINISTRATORS to Polly Peck International have realised assets of Pounds
93m since Mr Asil Nadir's conglomerate collapsed in October 1990, a report
circulating among creditors shows.
Further realisations are expected to come from future sales of businesses
and from recoveries through legal action launched against Mr Nadir and
others.
The report projects that PPI Holdings, parent to many of the group's
subsidiaries, had realisable assets at March 2 this year of Fl 683m (Pounds
247m), against liabilities of Fl 2.6bn.
The details emerged as Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary,
called on the government to explain why no charges had been brought against
Mr Nadir for failing to declare in the Polly Peck accounts donations of more
than Pounds 400,000 to the Conservative party.
Mr Cook asked Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, in a
letter whether he accepted that there were 'prima facie grounds' for
proceedings on a breach of the Companies Act, whether the DTI still had the
Nadir case 'under active consideration' and why charges had not been
brought.
The question of the donations is likely to be raised at a meeting of the
Commons home affairs committee tomorrow when Sir Norman Fowler, the
Conservative party chairman, appears before it.
The report says that proceeds from litigation have so far exceeded Pounds
1m. Proceedings continue for Pounds 378m against Mr Nadir, and for more than
Pounds 73m against Citibank, which is arguing that the case should be heard
in Switzerland. There are also legal actions in Turkey to gain control of AN
Graphics, a Turkish printing company and to recover shares in the company
which are allegedly held by Mr Nadir. They were transferred to him from
Voyager, a Polly Peck subsidiary, four days before administrators were
appointed.
A writ against Mr Mentes Aziz, Mr Nadir's lawyer, is to be discontinued
following 'a recent agreement', and a case against Impexbank, based in
Turkey, has been dropped since a settlement in February.
The Central Bank of northern Cyprus, which fought and won in the Court of
Appeal an argument that it could not be sued in the English courts, is
seeking to recover losses from the administrators that it claims were
sustained while its assets were frozen between October 1991 and March 1992.
The administrators are seeking a court ruling on whether to launch action
against Holdings BV to determine ownership of a Dollars 400m loan for the
purchase of Del Monte.
Polly Peck will tomorrow be claiming Pounds 2m of the Pounds 3.5m in cash
security provided by Mr Nadir as bail money.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930615

