FT934-10133

FT  06 NOV 93 / Cookery: Pheasant - just the most for a roast


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


FEATHERS are becoming to women. At the Prince of Wales' wedding Kiri Te
Kanawa enchanted the nation not only with her singing but also with her
appearance. That hat with its frivolous plumage turned her into a bird of
paradise.
Two other images stand out in my mind. First a snapshot my father took of my
mother at the time of their marriage. Standing in the snow, elegant and
dashing in tweed with arching pheasant tail feathers pinned to her hat, she
could have stepped out of Claude Renoir's La Regle du Jeu.
Second, a seductive Cecil Beaton portrait of a model, pale-skinned and high
cheekboned, her face framed by a black feather boa hat.
Among birds it is of course usually the males that boast the finest plumes.
Most handsome of all in Britain at this time of year - and don't they know
it - are the pheasants strutting newly-ploughed fields or hanging the length
of one wall in a butcher's shop like some feathery Persian carpet.
More often recently I have spied those dandies downcast and bedraggled in
the rain, trailing their glorious tail feathers in the mud as they maraud
our vegetable patch in search of their dinner. That is the point at which my
heart hardens. I see it as my cue to think about putting them into the pot.
Feasting on pheasant is, after all, one of the rites of winter and November
is probably the best month to enjoy them.
Many birds today are sadly tame stuff, but those that are wild rather than
semi-farmed, and properly hung, make flavoursome eating and the smell of
roasting pheasant is a seasonal pleasure as atavistic as wood smoke and
roasting chestnuts.
Mushrooms, celery and Brussels sprouts are traditional vegetable choices.
Chicory is less obvious and every bit as pleasing, if not more so.
In the recipe that follows the birds are roasted on a rack over a dish of
buttered chicory so the agreeably bitter leaves are annointed with meat
drippings.
Plenty of plain mashed potatoes are needed to mop up the combined juices. I
like to serve potato chips as well for a crunchy contrast, and this is an
instance where convenience foods get my vote. Kettle chips are the next best
thing to game chips made at home - and they spare the cook the ghastliness
of frying smells.
PHEASANT ON CHICORY (Serves 6)
Four birds are more than are needed to serve six people but a brace can
cause the carver to panic. Besides, I like to have plenty of leftovers: cold
pheasant goes wonderfully well with bubble and squeak next day.
4 pheasants, preferably untrussed so that heat can circulate round them
easily; 4 thin slices of lemon; 4-8 slices of green streaky bacon; 2 1/2 -3
lb chicory;  1/4 lb butter; about 2 teaspoons each sugar and lemon juice;
1-2 tablespoons chopped parsley; a small handful of walnut kernels
(optional).
Slip a hazelnut-size knob of butter into the body cavity of each bird. Add a
grinding of pepper and a slice of lemon. De-rind the bacon, stretch it flat
with the back of a knife and tie it waistcoat fashion round the breasts of
the birds to protect against drying out in cooking.
Quarter the chicons lengthways and lay them in a large thickly buttered
roasting tin. Grind pepper over them and sprinkle with sugar and lemon
juice.
Melt the rest of the butter and drizzle some of it over the chicory.
Straddle the rack from a grill pan (or a cake cooling rack) across the
roasting pan and lay the pheasants on it on one side of their breasts. Brush
the upper parts of the birds with melted butter and roast for 15-20 minutes
at 400'F (200'C) gas mark 6, basting at half time.
Turn the birds on to the other side of their breasts. Brush the upper parts
with more melted butter and roast for 15-20 minutes just as before.
Then lift the rack of birds off the roasting tin. Turn the chicory and baste
it well. Replace the rack of birds over the vegetables and sit the pheasants
breast upwards. Brush the last of the melted butter over them and roast for
15 minutes more.
Tilt the birds as you lift them from the rack so that juices from the
cavities pour into the roasting tin. Then let the birds rest while the
chicory continues to cook in the oven, uncovered, for 10-15 minutes more so
the buttery vegetable juices and those from the pheasants mingle and reduce
a little.
Cut the waistcoats from the pheasants and discard them if too frazzled for
your liking. Or cut the bacon into snippets and sprinkle it over the chicory
just before serving. (An alternative savoury finish is walnut pieces, which
can be toasted in the oven alongside the chicory for 5 minutes.) Add a
sprinkling of parsley for colour.
You may wish sometimes, as I do, to serve the breasts of roast pheasant only
with the chicory, saving the legs to eat cold with bubble and squeak. In
this case roasting times can be reduced a little.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

931106

