FT933-12680

FT  23 JUL 93 / Clash over choice of new EBRD chief


   By GILLIAN TETT and ROBERT GRAHAM


   LONDON, ROME


THE backroom battles surrounding the election of a new president of the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development reached new heights
yesterday.
The last-minute extension of the nomination period has plunged the bank into
a potentially damaging diplomatic battle in which the bargaining chips
include not only the EBRD presidency but also the location of the European
Central bank and a host of other top EC jobs.
Italian officials yesterday claimed that postponement of the deadline had
come at the initiative of Mr Jacques Delors, head of the EC Commission, who
sought to avoid a damaging row among the 12.
Although the bank itself insists that the decision to postpone for a week
was made by Mrs Anne Wibble, chairman of the board of governors, officials
within the bank yesterday admitted that the surprise entry of Mr Guiliano
Amato, the former socialist Italian prime minister, left the governors
embroiled in tortuous last-minute negotiations.
At present, the election for Mr Jacques Attali's successor contains four
confirmed candidates - Mr Jacques de Larosiere, governor of the bank of
France, Mr Amato, Mr Leszek Balcerowicz, former Polish finance minister and
Mr Henning Christopherson, EC economic commissioner.
Until Mr Amato entered the contest, Mr de Larosiere was regarded as the
leading contender. The French argued that since Mr Attali had been elected
for four years, a French candidate should succeed him, at least for the
re-maining two years of Mr Attali's term.
The Germans were widely believed to accept this, in exchange for agreement
that the European central bank would be sited in Frankfurt. The British, who
previously had French support in locating the EBRD in London, were
understood to pose no objection. And though other countries - particularly
the East Europeans - were less than happy at the apparent French fait
accompli, EC officials were keen that the Community should be seen to be
presenting a united front.
Last week European finance ministers agreed the Community should endorse one
candidate.
However, by yesterday it was clear that this attempt at unity was
foundering.
Although President Francois Mitterrand had asked Chancellor Helmut Kohl to
support the nomination of Mr de Larosiere as EBRD president during informal
talks in Germany last Tuesday, Mr Kohl did not commit himself, but instead
hinted that if Mr de Larosiere were to take over for the remaining two-year
term, preparations should also be made for putting into place a successor,
possibly Mr Amato.
Meanwhile, according to Italian officials, Mr Ciampi discussed with Mr Amato
his willingness to be considered for the EBRD job prior to the Tokyo summit,
and then sounded out Mr Kohl on the likelihood of an Italian candidate
obtaining sufficient consensus.
Faced with this last-minute manoeuvring, the governors decided to postpone
the deadline, apparently, according to bank officials, without the knowledge
of the bank's board of directors who met yesterday to discuss the recent
audit report.
Italian officials said the postponement would be used to hammer out
agreement on a common candidate endorsed by all EC members.
Mr Ciampi, the former governor of the Bank of Italy, feels strongly that his
country has been under-represented at the senior level in international
institutions.
This was not because of lack of opportunity but because successive
governments have never sought a protagonistic role in international affairs
and few Italians have volunteered for such jobs.
Which way Germany and the US jump in choosing Attali's successor will now be
crucial in the diplomatic battle.
Additional contributions by David Buchan in Paris, Judy Dempsey in Berlin
and Lionel Barber in Brussels.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930723

