FT934-8422

FT  16 NOV 93 / Call to reduce regulation of employment: Heseltine stresses
government's determination to deregulate


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT


SHARP DIFFERENCES of approach to pulling the European Union economies out of
recession and ensuring growth are emerging between British business and the
European Commission.
Sir Michael Angus, CBI president, told the conference: 'To make European
business more competitive we need to make labour more flexible, reduce
over-regulation - especially from Brussels - and scale down the burden of
so-called social costs which industry has to bear.'
The differences will crystallise later this month when the commission
presents the main points of its long-awaited white paper on growth,
competitiveness and employment to EU economy and finance ministers.
The commission thinks that the British approach to securing economic growth
lays too much emphasis on cutting costs.
Mr David Williamson, the secretary-general of the commission who was
speaking on behalf of Mr Jacques Delors, commission president, said:
'Europe's long-term strategy cannot be one of competing solely on costs. An
effective long-term policy to generate growth and employment must be geared
also to increasing productivity. Competitiveness should not depend on low
pay.'
The differences seem likely to cause further political difficulties for the
government in its talks with EU members over economic policy.
Speakers in Harrogate chastised the commission for what they saw as
over-regulation and for failing to ensure that regulation was not uniformly
applied country by country.
However the commission's white paper will seek to jump over immediate
economic difficulties. It will suggest means of coming to terms with the
effects of technological change and the shift in economic power to the
Pacific Rim.
In a obvious reference to UK government uneasiness about future European
economic integration, Mr Williamson warned the CBI that 'future increases in
prosperity will not be generated by focusing only on cyclical or immediate
concerns or by adopting increasingly inward policies'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931116

