FT931-4096

FT  12 MAR 93 / Corn Laws all over again


   By JOE ROGALY


The Conservatives may yet fall apart over Europe, as they did in 1846 over
the repeal of the Corn Laws, and again in 1904-05 over tariff reform. The
glue that is keeping them at least nominally together is the tribal memory
of what happened after those celebrated schisms. Following the election of
1857 the Tories became the natural party of opposition to the Liberals. At
the 1906 general election, following the second great split, a Conservative
majority of 135 was lost. It was replaced by a Liberal majority of 129.
Heaven knows how long the Tories would have stayed in their early
20th-century wilderness, had they not been rescued by Asquith's wartime
coalition in 1915.
The same awful warning is evident from the history of Britain's other great
national parties. The Liberals split in 1886 over Gladstone's proposals for
Irish home rule. Liberal unionists joined the Conservatives, who governed
for all but three of the subsequent 20 years. Nearly a century later Labour
right-wingers, appalled by left-wing extremism and an outbreak of parochial
anti-Europeanism, walked out to found the Social Democrats, a short-lived
party of the centre. The leading Labour proponent of trade-union domination
and egalitarian socialism was Mr Tony Benn, now fading into the venerability
that the House of Commons bestows upon its long-stayers. Bennfoolery cost
Labour four general elections in a row. The continuing aftershock may yet
cost it a fifth.
Today the question facing Conservatives is how far the foolery encouraged by
Lady Thatcher and Lord Tebbit will go. Banished to the House of Lords, their
ghosts still haunt the Commons, where a band of hardline Europhobes
contrives with devilish skill to gum up the proceedings. In the process,
they are stripping the remaining tatters of authority from the increasingly
ragged figure of the prime minister. If they manage to destroy the bill to
ratify the Maastricht treaty, he will probably feel obliged to resign.
Was it a case of 'no bill, no John Major?', I asked a colleague of his on
Monday. It was more 'no bill, no government', came the reply. But there
would be a Conservative replacement. Whatever happened, Labour would not get
a general election out of the Tories' present discomfiture. Another
minister, himself a Eurosceptic, remarked that, while he thought the bill
would pull through, he had to say that it looked remarkably sick.
Mr Major knows what such musings imply. It is natural that he should regard
the maintenance of party unity as his principal task. He believes he has
done well in this endeavour, given the tensions that existed when he came to
office in November 1990. It would not be surprising if at yesterday's
cabinet meeting he had asked his ministers to speak out in favour of the
Maastricht bill, but to choose their words with care. He does not want
vituperative attacks on the Europhobes. Unity on non-Maastricht matters will
have to be restored if the government is to gain parliamentary acceptance
for various difficult measures that lie ahead, perhaps on the Budget and
most certainly on the new plans for coal. It would not do to destroy the
chances of reuniting the Tories on such matters by initiating a war of harsh
words on Europe now.
Seen from Downing Street, the anti-Maastricht rebellion is containable. The
bill is about halfway through the Commons. The dangers ahead can be divided
into three categories. First, the thundering from the all-party flotilla of
procedural obstructionists is being countered by an attempt to shame Labour
and the Liberals into restraining themselves. They do, after all, profess to
favour the Maastricht treaty. Whatever the opposition contrives, government
whips will continue to score tactical gains as opportunities arise. Second,
various minor amendments, none of which threaten ratification, have to be
talked through. Mr Major is prepared to take the punishment inherent in
losing some or all of the votes on these.
That leaves the third area of danger, a list of potentially destructive
amendments, such as a fresh attempt to incorporate the social chapter. The
latter is essentially a statement of good intent on employment and social
policies, but it has become a symbol for all sides in the parliamentary
battle. If the opposition finds a way of drafting a clause that nullifies
Britain's opt-out, and if it is accepted for debate and wins, the government
will regard the bill as sunk. It may be bravado, but the message from senior
members of the cabinet is that Labour cannot have both the bill and the
social chapter.
We must not take this line of argument too far. A sense that there may be a
schism is not the same thing as certain knowledge that the government is
doomed. The comforting thought with which Mr Major and his colleagues soothe
themselves to sleep at night goes like this: the bill will get through, if
not in the summer then in the autumn. The economy will by then have shown
tangible signs of recovery. People will begin to realise that the time spent
on the Maastricht struggle did not prevent the administration from
completing a large quantity of other business. Confidence will begin to
return. Next year will be better and 1995 will be really good. An election
in, say, April 1996 is therefore winnable, perhaps with an increased
Conservative majority.
Throughout the troubles of the past six months this bedtime story has seemed
to be the most plausible account of what is likely to happen. It still is -
just. It has, however, become prudent to question it, if only in response to
the bitterness with which Conservatives are now attacking one another. They
are in danger of tearing their party to pieces, in spite of the prime
minister's desire for less divisive discourse.
The government is therefore in the invidious position of relying upon Labour
and Liberal Democrat votes, or abstentions, to get its main piece of
business through. Perhaps the principled Europeanism of the leaders of those
parties will save the bill, and the treaty. The alternative may be a huge
political bust-up, with an outside chance of smashing the Conservatives. The
minimum benefit to the opposition could be the defenestration of half the
present cabinet. Europhile Labour and Liberal MPs might not let their
leaders get away with it. Yet it must be the mother of all political
temptations.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930312

