FT932-3353

FT  15 JUN 93 / Jordan near London Club accord


   By JAMES WHITTINGTON


   AMMAN


JORDAN is on the verge of a Dollars 1bn (Pounds 650m) debt rescheduling
agreement with the London Club of commercial creditors which is said to give
among the best terms ever obtained by a Third World debtor country.
After many rounds of tough negotiations, the London Club has offered a draft
agreement which will give direct and indirect relief of around 58 per cent
of the kingdom's gross debts to the banks.
The formula presents the commercial creditors the option of either 35 per
cent discounted bonds, or par bonds, both payable after 30 years and with
low interest rates. Jordan has stipulated that creditors must opt for at
least 35 per cent of the debt to be covered by discounted bonds.
The London Club had been wary of setting a precedent which other debtor
countries would then request. But Jordan, which boasts an impressive
economic record since its IMF adjustment programme began in the autumn of
1991, was supported in its hard bargaining by the IMF. It will now replace
Argentina as the Club's most favoured Third World debtor.
Mr Sami Qammo, the kingdom's new finance minister, is due to go to London at
the end of June to finalise the agreement.
Despite the kingdom's overall success with the adjustment programme so far,
the London Club's offer comes at a time when Jordan is facing increasing
difficulties in implementing certain IMF strictures.
The government had been expected to introduce a controversial sales tax
before debt rescheduling took place. But faced with fierce opposition,
especially from the private sector, the idea was dropped.
Instead Mr Qammo last week announced amendments to the kingdom's old
consumption tax which he described as 'a compromise with the IMF'. Fuel and
electricity price increases have also been announced recently.
Jordan's total external debts are around Dollars 6.5bn, or 140 per cent of
gross domestic product. The Paris Club of creditor governments and lending
agencies is due Dollars 4.5bn. The rest is owed to Russia, former East bloc
states, Arab lending groups and the London Club.
A Paris Club meeting is scheduled for July 1993 and western diplomats in
Amman express confidence that further debt rescheduling will be agreed to.
'Most western countries are sympathetic towards Jordan and appreciate its
moderate political stand. I think they want to help,' says one diplomat.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930615

