FT932-7142

FT  25 MAY 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar up on rate speculation


   By PETER MARSH


SPECULATION about a tightening in US interest rates pushed up the dollar
against a D-Mark weakened by increasing signs of economic slowdown in
Germany, writes Peter Marsh.
The French franc traded comfortably, in spite of a further cut in French
interest rates which promises to head off the possibility of a further
faltering in economic activity.
Sterling gained against the D-Mark but lost ground against a dollar
strengthened by a newspaper report that the US Federal Reserve might soon
raise interest rates to damp inflationary pressures.
Meanwhile the D-Mark continued to sag, as investors weighed up the
possibility of a deep recession in the German economy this year.
In spite of the Bundesbank sounding the usual messages that it will think
long and hard before cutting interest rates further, many in financial
markets think a steady easing in borrowing conditions in Germany is assured
in the coming months.
The dollar climbed nearly 1 pfennig on the day against the German currency,
closing in London at DM1.6365. Investors took profits after the US currency
climbed during European trading to just under DM1.64.
Hitting the headlines in a quiet day's trading was the decision by the
French government to cut the Bank of France's intervention rate to 7.5 per
cent from 7.75 per cent. The French franc traded at FFr3.3665 per D-Mark
after the news, from FFr3.3661 earlier. It closed at 3.365, little changed
on the day.
Sentiment about the outlook for the D-Mark was helped somewhat by tough
comments from Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister, about the
government taking 'decisive action' next year to cut its mounting budget
deficit. However, that failed to prevent the yen hitting another new high
against the German currency. It closed at Y67.37 per D-Mark, compared to
Y67.90 on Friday night.
The guilder also hit a five year peak against the D-Mark, being quoted in
London last night at NFl 1.119 per D-Mark. There was strong speculation that
the Dutch monetary authorities might soon decide on a further bout of
interest rate easing.
After the pound's 4 pfennig rise against the Germany currency last week, it
continued its rise yesterday, closing in London at DM2.5125, up half a
pfennig. Against the dollar sterling closed in European hours at Dollars
1.5350, just over half a cent down on the day.
Foreign exchange dealers took little notice of a European Community report
over the weekend approving the idea of new checks to stop a repeat of last
year's currency crisis. However, the absence of significant strains in the
European exchange rate mechanism pushed the escudo slightly firmer at the
top of the grid. It closed at Es94.60 per D-Mark versus Es94.70 at the close
on Friday.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930525

