FT933-9887

FT  06 AUG 93 / London Stock Exchange: Peak for the FT-SE Mid 250 Index


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


SECOND line issues continued to lead the UK stock market ahead yesterday,
the FT-SE Mid 250 Index hitting a new high, although the blue chip leaders
brushed off early losses to renew the advance of the past fortnight. Much of
the day's action in equities was led from the stock index futures sector.
The reluctant acceptance that cuts in interest rates in continental Europe
and the UK may well be postponed was balanced by renewed firmness in
London's government bond market.
Initial weakness, largely prompted by falls in stock index futures, took the
FT-SE 100 Index down by more than 15 points. But 2,925.7 proved to be the
day's low, and a gradual recovery then ensued which took the index to a
closing 2,943.4, a net 2.1 up at the highest reading of the session.
Traders professed themselves more than happy with the resilience shown by
the blue chips but the strongest performance came from the second-line
stocks. The FT-SE Mid 250, which has now risen by more than 5 per cent in a
straight line for over a fortnight, closed last night at a new peak of
3,362.3, up 12.9 on the session. Some fund managers have, however, expressed
dissatisfaction with the size of the 'spreads'  - the gap between buying and
selling prices quoted by marketmakers - on many second-line stocks. Wide
spreads can make share trading very expensive.
Turnover in non-Footsie stocks fell yesterday to provide only about 58 per
cent of the day's Seaq total of 616.4m shares. On Wednesday, 735.9m shares
were traded through the Seaq network, worth Pounds 1.56bn in retail
business. Retail, or customer, business, the life-blood of the equity
market, has risen sharply over the past five sessions.
With currency markets now calmer and the excitement over ERM currencies more
broadly absorbed into the UK financial markets, institutional investors are
content to reshuffle portfolios rather than to chase share prices. Stock
shortage has begun to show itself in many blue chip stocks and the
unwillingness of fund managers to buy at any price has reasserted itself as
a factor in equities.
This was reinforced yesterday in the form of a severe squeeze on shares of
Reuters Holdings, the global financial reporting group, where the board's
buy-back plan has strengthened institutions' unwillingness to part with
shares.
Stock index traders have found that stock in the Footsie blue chips is by no
means readily available when opportunities for arbitrage between stock index
futures and cash present themselves.
Profits were again taken in the consumer and retail sectors, which are most
closely allied to interest rate hopes. But losses were small and sector
analysts remained confident that lower rates are on the way.
Banking and financial shares moved nervously around overnight levels as the
profits reporting season rolled on. Among the best favoured was HSBC, still
benefiting from this week's trading report, which cast a favourable light on
recovery at Midland, the UK banking subsidiary.
Results from Royal Dutch and from British Petroleum found a cautious
reception in London and analysts continued to focus on the uncertain outlook
for crude prices.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930806

