FT933-5140

FT  04 SEP 93 / Food & Drink: A charge card with a difference - A pioneering
approach to restaurants and their customers


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


IN A low-key press release that may have enormous benefits for chefs,
restaurateurs and restaurant-goers throughout Europe, Transmedia Network,
based in north Miami, Florida, announced its first overseas licensing
agreement and the opening of Transmedia Europe's office in London's West
End.
The office will be opened on Monday by Edward Guinan III who spent the first
half of this year raising capital to buy the franchise and to establish the
company in the UK. During meetings with merchant banks in Manhattan and
London which have raised more than Dollars 4m (Pounds 2.60m) for this
venture, Guinan told me my articles on 'Lunch for a Fiver' had been in his
briefcase and helped convince potential investors that British restaurants
may be ready for Transmedia.
He provides this additional custom through a scheme which enables regular
diners to obtain a 25 per cent discount at restaurants which join his
scheme. The incentive for the restaurants is an offer of interest free
loans. These are repaid, not in cash, but from the extra revenue generated
by the diners on Transmedia's list.
The company was conceived by its chairman, Melvin Chasen, as a media barter
business in New York in 1984. After years in the restaurant trade, he
realised that although restaurants can be busy, popular and profitable, they
face difficulties raising money from the more usual lending sources, such as
banks. Even in a recession restaurants can secure initial funding in the way
short-lived musicals attract 'angels'; but many restaurateurs can offer
little security for capital to buy equipment, to redecorate or to advertise.
Transmedia's way of ensuring that its loans are repaid with profit is to
exchange its cash for food and beverage credits (called rights to receive)
of double the value of the amount advanced. These credits are repaid by the
diners on Transmedia's list who are persuaded to go to the restaurant by the
discount.
Suppose for example that the Happy Trout restaurant received Pounds 50,000
interest free for kitchen improvements. It would exchange this for Pounds
100,000 worth of food and beverage credits which Transmedia would sell to
its customers, each of which is issued with a special card.
These food and beverage credits are used up and repaid by Transmedia
cardholders. Having advanced Pounds 50,000 to the ABC restaurant, Transmedia
receives, via the credit card payments, Pounds 75,000 (Pounds 100,000 less
25 per cent), ensuring for the company a gross profit of Pounds 25,000, a
highly respectable gross margin of 33 per cent and a 50 per cent return on
invested capital. For the cardholder, the saving is 25 per cent on
restaurant bills.
Transmedia then becomes an advertising medium for the restaurant, adding the
restaurant's name, address and telephone number to those already on its
books.
There are nearly 2,000 restaurants listed in New York, Boston, Florida and
Philadelphia and franchised areas in New Jersey, Chicago, Washington DC and
California.
In America, the minimum advance to a restaurant is Dollars 2,000, the
largest so far has been Dollars 600,000. It will not advance cash for
restaurant openings but its staff evaluate applicant's risk factors:
location, capacity, pricing and style of cooking.
The company's own charge card (called The Restaurant Card) costs
dinersDollars 50 a year. There are no restrictions on how often the card can
be used and the net amount is billed to the diner's Visa, MasterCard or
Discover Card.
The only restriction on the card's use is on reservations for tables of six
or more, which have to be booked via Transmedia.
Back at HQ, a small staff monitors the sophisticated computer software which
handles up to 70,000 credit card transactions, tips and tax rebates a month.
It also monitors how quickly each restaurant is repaying its loan via
reclaimed food and beverage credits.
Once signed on, the restaurateur must remain with Transmedia for a minimum
of a year even if the credits are repaid earlier. After that the
restaurateurs can choose to take out another loan, and therefore stay on
Transmedia's restaurant list which now goes out to more than 170,000
cardmembers.
Transmedia's success hinges on timing - it received a huge burst of
applications after 1988 when the recession began to affect the restaurant
trade. The originality of the concept and the substantial discount it can
offer card members who supply its revenue (it has only begun to tap the
corporate market, signing up 5,000 Chemical Bank executives) have also been
crucial factors.
The real strength of Transmedia's operation lies in Chasen's understanding
of the restaurant business and his ability to buy extremely competitively
but still leave his suppliers, the restaurants, with a small profit. Most
restaurants aim to operate on a food and beverage cost of 40 per cent or
less. His aggressive buying still therefore leaves the restaurateurs with a
reduced profit to repay the company's advance. The extra business The
Restaurant Card brings sweetens the pill and Transmedia's newest ventures
into marketing links with airlines and a division that will combine its
participants' food purchases to obtain savings and group insurance should
ensure the restaurants' loyalty.
After eight years Chasen and Transmedia are an 'overnight success' and the
darling of various stock market analysts in America (the company has been
listed in BusinessWeek's top 100 Hot Growth Companies for the third
consecutive year). He met strong opposition at first and I fear that British
restaurateurs will react similarly. But this is one American marketing
concept that I hope becomes a success in the UK.
Transmedia Europe, 11 St James Square, London SW1 4LD. Tel: 071-229 5134,
fax 071-221 1514.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

930904

