FT931-3915

FT  13 MAR 93 / Italy's export credit agency chief arrested


   By ROBERT GRAHAM and HAIG SIMONIAN


   ROME, MILAN


THE Italian treasury has assured Sace, the country's state-run export credit
guarantee agency, that it will continue to operate normally despite the
arrest of Mr Roberto Ruberti, its chief executive, on charges of corruption.
Mr Ruberti was arrested on Thursday and five other key figures connected
with Sace activities were warned by Rome magistrates they were under
investigation.
These included Mr Vincenzo Martinez, the deputy chairman, Mr Giuseppe Mazza,
director general of the Commerce Ministry and head of Sace's management
committee, and Mr Roberto Bonfigli, an indemnities department executive.
According to Rome magistrates, Mr Ruberti is alleged to have received
payment in return for providing insurance cover for overseas Italian
contracting operations.
Sace, which was established in 1977, last year was providing credit
guarantees for exports totalling L150,000bn (Pounds 68bn). Since its
inception it has paid out indemnities totalling L9,597bn.
The management committee is composed of representatives of the treasury,
foreign and commerce ministries, INA, the state insurance institute, and
Mediocredito, the state credit institute.
Separately in Milan, police arrested Mr Pompeo Locatelli, the well-known
financial consultant who played a decisive role advising the Eni state
energy and chemicals group over the Enimont chemicals joint venture with
Montedison in its final days.
He is accused of accepting stolen funds and illegal financing of political
parties. The arrest follows allegations made by Mr Pier Francesco Pacini
Battaglia, a Geneva-based Italian banker, who testified before magistrates
earlier this week.
The allegations are said to relate to L3bn in illegal financing for the
Socialist party, made in conjunction with Mr Silvano Larini, the playboy
Socialist architect who gave himself up last month.
Mr Locatelli sprang to public notice in late 1990, when he was one of the
main advisers to Eni in the negotiations over the future of Enimont. Many
observers ascribe to him the complex procedure under which Eni and the
Montedison chemicals group, the two warring partners in the joint venture,
agreed for one to buy out the other.
That transaction, and other aspects of Enimont's affairs, are now under
scrutiny in a separate strand to the current corruption investigations.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930313

