FT934-11748

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: French-US team eyes Matav stake


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


   BUDAPEST


FRANCE Telecom, the French state telecommunications utility, and US West,
the regional Bell operating company, are forming a consortium to bid for a
stake in Matav, Hungary's state telecommunications company.
The sale of the 30 per cent stake is expected to raise at least Dollars
420m, making it the biggest single privatisation in eastern Europe.
The two foreign companies have reached an agreement in principle and expect
to seal the tie-up today, according to France Telecom officials.
The consortium, led by France Telecom, will challenge front-runner Deutsche
Telekom, the state-owned German operator, which has teamed up with Cable &
Wireless of the UK and Ameritech of the US.
Matav is the first state telecommunications utility to be sold in eastern
Europe. Advisers believe that the new Greek socialist government's halt to
that country's telecoms privatisation will lead international industry
investors to focus on Hungary. 'It is the only near-term game in town,' one
adviser said.
Preliminary bids are due on November 5 and contenders will have to make
final offers in early December if the transaction is to be closed, as
planned, by the end of the year.
Rivals of Telekom have held back because of a suspicion that the Hungarian
government, which has close relations with Bonn, favours the German company.
Hungarian officials have stressed that the race is open. But Telekom
recently missed winning one of two concessions to operate digital mobile
telephone networks, and some observers detected official hints that the
Matav stake would go to Telekom in compensation.
While the main battle appears to be between the French- and German-led
consortia, privatisation advisers point to interest from Nippon Telegraph
and Telephone of Japan. Eight companies are participating in the
due-diligence process.
France Telecom's consortium was to have included Stet, the Italian telecom
company, but the parties could not reach agreement over their relative
weights.
The London-based European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is also
set to take a stake in Matav, and the EBRD board last week committed
Ecu52.7m (Dollars 46.3m) to purchase convertible preference shares. These
will be exchanged for ordinary shares at the price of the winning bid in the
main transaction.
Indications of intensifying competition are reassuring to Hungarian
officials, who have been worried that only the Telekom consortium would bid,
depressing Matav's price.
The privatisation tender specifies that the first Ft40bn (Dollars 420m) of
the proceeds will go to meet Matav's investment needs, but beyond that there
are no public guidelines.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931029

