FT933-12541

FT  23 JUL 93 / Church of England investment managers censured for losses


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


THE Church of England's investment managers came under serious criticism
yesterday for policies which led to the loss of more than Pounds 800m in the
value of their assets over three years.
A report by accountants Coopers & Lybrand says a decision by the Church
Commissioners to speculate heavily in property, particularly in large retail
schemes, left them exposed in a sector with a 'high inherent level of risk'.
The slump in the property market was largely responsible for a fall in the
capital value of assets from nearly Pounds 3bn in 1989 to Pounds 2.16bn last
year. Property represented 60 per cent of total assets in 1990
The dent in the church's finances will force parishes to meet a far greater
share of its running costs and provoke early changes to a non-contributory
pension scheme for clergy.
Yesterday's report was commissioned by Dr George Carey, archbishop of
Canterbury. Criticism of the commissioners responsible for the Church of
England's main investments followed an investigation by the Financial Times.
The Coopers and Lybrand report also criticises the handling of asset
management. Several large property developments, it says, had been adversely
affected by 'poor project control procedures, disregard for external
professional advice and inadequate internal reporting structures'.
The fall in income will have severe implications for the Church of England.
An accom-panying report published by the Lambeth Group, a committee set up
under the chairmanship of the Rt Rev John Wayne, bishop of Chelmsford, to
consider the Coopers & Lybrand recommendations, says the contribution by the
commissioners to the cost of pensions, stipends and housing 'cannot be
maintained' at present levels.
Sir Michael Colman, chairman of Reckitt & Colman, appointed first church
estates commissioner after the events under investigation, said that the
commissioners 'had something to apologise for'. He agreed with
recommendations for greater accountability and, as incoming head of the
commission, would have wanted to implement such changes regardless of the
problems.
The Coopers & Lybrand report says, measuring the commissioners' performance
in terms of total yield, that 'the fund as a whole has performed
significantly worse than the market average'.
In the last five years total yield had failed to match inflation. Average
annual real terms yield during the ten years to December, 1991, was 6.2 per
cent, compared with a market average for large funds of 9.7 per cent. Over
the last five years the comparison was 'even less favourable'.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930723

