FT932-6747

FT  27 MAY 93 / Swan Hunter wins frigate contract extension


   By CHRIS TIGHE


THE MINISTRY of Defence has agreed that work on three Type 23 frigates can
continue for a further two weeks at Tyneside shipbuilder Swan Hunter,
receivers Price Waterhouse confirmed yesterday.
Mr Ed James, head of the receivers' team at Swans, said oral agreement had
been reached with the MoD for outfitting on the three frigates to continue
until June 11.
'We have an agreement in principle for a further two weeks,' he said.
Details of prices for the fortnight's work are still being concluded.
Written agreement is expected by tomorrow when the current deal between the
receivers and the MoD on the frigates' outfitting expires.
News of the extension provides a lifeline for the company, which is fighting
to retain a core workforce, secure further orders and strengthen its chances
of being sold as a going concern.
Local hopes of longer survival were boosted later by a meeting between
council leaders and Mr Tim Sainsbury, industry minister. Mr Brian Flood,
leader of North Tyneside council said afterwards that Mr Sainsbury had said
that, subject to agreement with the defence ministry, Swan Hunter was the
'preferred finisher' of the work on the frigates.
Today the yard's 2,200 employees and 280 contract workers will learn the
names of the 420 being made redundant tomorrow. Mr James confirmed that the
outfitting extension would sustain the remainder for at least the next two
weeks.
Another tentative boost to Swans survival chances came yesterday with news
that the government, in a softening of its stance on Swan Hunter, had asked
the European Commission to reconsider the non-eligibility of UK warship
yards for the Shipbuilding Intervention Fund, a 9 per cent subsidy for
merchant shipbuilding orders. At present UK warship yards receive only 2 per
cent Shipbuilders' Relief.
The receivers hope during the coming fortnight to reach long-term agreement
for completion of the frigates. 'We remain very optimistic the vessels can
be completed on Tyneside,' said Mr James. Temporary agreements had been
needed, he said, because of the complexity of pricing the work.
Announcing the Intervention Funding move during his visit to Tyneside, Mr
Sainsbury said he had written to Mr Karel van Miert, the EC commissioner for
competition and state aid. He said: 'I have asked my officials to open
immediate discussions with commission officials, drawing particular
attention to the problems facing Tyneside.'
UK warship yards returned to private ownership in the mid 1980s under an EC
agreement which wrote off heavy debts in exchange for non-eligibility for
SIF. Since then the government has twice, unsuccessfully, asked the EC to
reconsider, both times for Birkenhead-based Cammell Laird, now about to
close.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930527

