FT934-11717

FT  29 OCT 93 / Government Bonds: Treasuries post solid gains despite GDP
growth


   By PATRICK HARVERSON and CONNER MIDDELMANN


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US TREASURY prices recovered from early losses to post solid gains yesterday
in spite of a strong third-quarter GDP report.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  5/8 at 104
1/16 , yielding 5.952 per cent. At the short end of the market, the two-year
note was up  1/32 at 99 13/16 , to yield 3.957 per cent.
Prices eased in early trading after the commerce department announced that
gross domestic product climbed by 2.8 per cent in the third quarter.
Although the number was in line with expectations, dealers and investors
started selling Treasuries when they saw that GDP showed growth of 3.4 per
cent when the impact of crop losses related to the big summer floods in the
mid-west was excluded from the figures.
News of a 4,000 decline in weekly jobless claims also depressed prices.
The market, however, gradually recovered, aided by comments from Susan
Phillips, a Federal Reserve governor, who said fourth-quarter GDP growth
could turn out weaker than third-quarter growth.
Later in the day, retail demand, and a subsequent rush of short covering by
dealers, pushed prices even higher at the long end.
EUROPEAN government bonds had another volatile day, mostly tracking US
Treasuries in the absence of important local news. Most markets managed to
recoup some of the ground lost in Wednesday's sharp sell-off.
Many investors remained sidelined ahead of today's EC summit and the
three-day weekend in most of Europe. However, traders reported some buying
by dealers who needed to cover short positions following Wednesday's plunge.
GERMAN bonds recouped most of Wednesday's losses and ended slightly higher.
Failing to break key support at 99.65, the December bund contract returned
to above par, closing at 100.08, up 0.29 point.
Opinions are divided over the near-term outlook, with some seeing the
market's downside well-protected at current levels, but others warning it
could correct further.
'We've had five months of rally without serious setbacks, and I think we're
in for more weakness at the long end,' said a senior Frankfurt trader,
pointing to remarks by Bundesbank president Mr Hans Tietmeyer that long
yields had little scope for further easing.
FRENCH bonds shadowed bunds, leaving their 10-year yield premium over
Germany unchanged at 12 basis points. Traders reported late retail buying of
shorter-dated bonds following Wednesday's weakness.
Today's focus will be on September unemployment data, with bond traders
forecasting a rate of 11.8 per cent. A bad number could trigger more
rate-cut talk, although easing hopes were damped by warnings from prime
minister Edouard Balladur that the pace of easing should not be forced.
UK GILTS also staged a strong recovery, with the long gilt contract rising
17/32 on the day to 114 7/16 .
Traders reported healthy cash buying across the curve, with particularly
strong demand for the new 6 per cent gilts due 1999 from international and
domestic investors.
Market participants are now set to turn their attention to the Pounds 500m
tap offering of 7 3/4 per cent gilts due 2006 which the Bank of England
announced last week. The bonds are being offered at 116, a point above the
current market price of 115 21/32 . So far, little or none of the paper has
been taken up, traders said.
Italian bonds were rattled by political jitters after the government called
a confidence vote for today.
However, after an initial sell-off, prices recovered amid widespread
confidence that the government would survive the vote, and the BTP future on
Liffe rose 0.71 point to 117.04.
JAPANESE bonds hit new highs on more switching out of equities, as the stock
market continued to weaken. However, profit-taking eroded the gains and
bonds closed slightly lower.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

931029

