FT934-11742

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: US insurers lifted by absence of
catastrophes


   By RICHARD WATERS


   NEW YORK


US property/casualty insurers continued to benefit from the absence of big
catastrophe losses this year, helping both American International Group and
USF&G report stronger earnings for the third quarter.
However, the absence of devastating claims, such as those a year ago
stemming from hurricane Andrew in the US, has prompted fears in some
quarters that catastrophe insurance premiums are set to fall again next
year.
Catastrophe losses at AIG amounted to Dollars 47.3m, compared with Dollars
153.3m a year before. The turnround helped the insurer to report
third-quarter net income of Dollars 451.1m or 1.42 a share, compared with
Dollars 338.9m or Dollars 1.06 a year ago.
USF&G, in figures released on Tuesday, said property/casualty operating
profits had improved by Dollars 93m over a year before, with the 1992 figure
depressed by losses from hurricane Andrew. The insurer said net income had
risen to Dollars 20m in the latest period, from Dollars 5m.
Mr Maurice Greenberg, AIG's chairman, said catastrophe losses during the
third quarter stemmed mainly from flooding in the Midwest, the earthquake in
Guam and typhoons in Japan.
AIG has taken steps to 'reduce catastrophe exposures throughout our business
and further tighten our underwriting standards,' he said.
Higher reinsurance premiums for catastrophe business have attracted about
Dollars 4bn of new capital into Bermuda-based companies this year.
However, Mr Greenberg said: 'Even with this additional capacity, prices for
catastrophe reinsurance should remain stable.' He said that one year's
claims experience would not be enough on its own to drive down premiums.
However, other industry executives say the improved performance will make it
difficult for insurers to maintain catastrophe insurance premiums at current
levels when negotiating rates for next year.
The insurers' results were bolstered by rising premiums in general
property/casualty business. Mr Greenberg said premiums had firmed in many of
AIG's overseas markets, and rates in property and specialty casualty classes
had improved in the US.
Mr Norman Blake, chairman and chief executive of USF&G, said the improved
underwriting environment had helped to lift profitability, 'despite the
industry-wide impact of lowered investment income due to interest rate
reductions and higher reinsurance costs'.
Pre-tax capital gains at AIG in the third quarter were Dollars 25.4m,
compared with Dollars 26.8m a year before.
Leaving aside capital gains and catastrophe losses, pre-tax income rose by
13.7 per cent compared with a year earlier, the company said. Gross revenues
climbed by 10 per cent to Dollars 5.12bn, as general insurance premiums rose
by 10 per cent and life insurance premiums were up 18 per cent.
AIG took a further Dollars 90m charge to cover an expected loss on
investments at AIG Financial Products, its derivatives unit.
This follows a Dollars 120m charge in the previous quarter.
The company, which has been one of the most ambitious and successful
derivatives businesses outside the banking industry, was rocked by the
departure of its founder, Mr Howard Sosin, earlier this year, along with
other senior managers.
Mr Greenberg said that most of the unit's core management group remained,
and that the business was 'going forward strongly'.
Pre-tax operating income in AIG's financial services businesses fell to
Dollars 98.7m, from Dollars 99.6m.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931029

