FT933-5095

FT  06 SEP 93 / Ericsson set to win Polish telecoms deal


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


   WARSAW


ERICSSON, the Swedish telecommunications company is expected to win a
Dollars 100m (Pounds 66m) defence telecommunications contract from Poland.
It is the country's first such contract to be awarded to a supplier outside
the former Warsaw Pact.
Mr Roman Czerwinski, a deputy industry and trade minister, said at the
weekend at an arms exhibition in Kielce that the government would be taking
the decision this week.
Under the contract Ericsson, which was competing with Marconi and Racal of
the UK, would produce mobile radio network equipment under a joint venture
with the Unimor factory in Gdansk. Deliveries are to be spread out until the
year 2000.
Ericsson has so far failed to win big contracts to supply civilian
telecommunications equipment to Poland. Under the country's World
Bank-financed programme most of the telephone systems in the longer term are
to come from three suppliers, of whom two, Alcatel of France and AT&T, the
US group, have already been chosen. Siemens of Germany and Northern Telecom,
the Canadian company, are competing to become the third supplier.
Unimor, which makes TV sets, would control two thirds of the equity in the
proposed joint venture with Ericsson, involving a Dollars 25m investment in
new technology.
Meanwhile Bofors, another Swedish company, is renewing pre-war links with
Huta Stalowa Wola, a large defence works in south eastern Poland which has
for over a year been selling components for production of Bofors' 40mm gun
system.
Talks are under way on a co-operation agreement to produce entire turrets
for an armoured combat vehicle at the Polish works.
Bofors is also looking to the Mesko arms works to provide parts for its Bill
anti-tank missile. Mesko already has a barter agreement with Thomson- CSF,
the French arms group which is delivering artillery fuses to the plant and
is also interested in co-operating in production of rockets and rocket
systems.
The Kielce arms fair is the first of its kind in an area where around
four-fifths of Poland's arms industry is located. The industry is suffering
from a dearth of orders from the Polish army as well as a collapse of former
Soviet bloc markets. However, British and US arms producers were conspicuous
at Kielce by their absence.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930906

