FT933-10248

FT  05 AUG 93 / Hammer lives to fright again


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


HAMMER FILMS, Britain's most famous horror film company, is about to rise
from the dead years after a stake was put through its heart when the
receiver was called in.
Mr Roy Skeggs, who bought the company from the receiver, has signed a
four-year deal with Warner Brothers to remake many of its old titles.
The agreement could involve productions worth more than Pounds 100m and give
a big boost to the hard-pressed British film industry.
The first film to be made under the agreement, a re-make of The Quatermass
Experiment, is expected to cost about Dollars 40m (Pounds 26.8m) and will
start filming in either London or Los Angeles in January. It will be the
first feature film to be produced by Hammer since Mr Skeggs bought the
company eight years ago, although the company has made television
programmes.
Mr Skeggs, who joined Hammer for four weeks 30 years ago and stayed on to be
production supervisor on Frankenstein films, said yesterday that he had
spent nearly five years reorganising the company and setting up the Warner
Brothers agreement.
'I now have a wonderful deal,' he said, adding that he plans to stay away
from re-makes of Dracula and Frankenstein.
Quatermass will be followed by updates of Stolen Face and The Devil Rides
Out and a new film Hideous Whispers to be directed by Richard Donner.
The Warner Brothers agreement is with Hammer and Donner/Schuler-Donner
Productions and involves developing film and television shows based on the
Hammer library and new material.
Mr Skeggs said a number of top directors including Martin Scorsese had
expressed interest in making pictures under the agreement.
Meanwhile details emerged yesterday of two satellite television channels
which will soon be broadcasting to the UK.
The Family Channel, which will be part of the British Sky Broadcasting
subscription package which starts in September, said yesterday it would be
producing more original family programming than any other cable or satellite
channel.
In its first British commission Action Time will produce 65 episodes of the
game show Trivial Pursuit for the channel. Pearson, owner of the Financial
Times, holds a significant stake in BSkyB.
Landmark Communications, the US media group which owns The Weather Channel
and The Travel Channel in the US, has confirmed that it is to launch its
Travel Channel in Europe next year.
The Travel Channel in the UK will show programmes dealing with all aspects
of travel including 'action, adventure, culinary experiences and cultural
insights'.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930805

