FT933-12769

FT  22 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Verity seeks Pounds 5.9m in move to reduce
borrowings


   By PETER FRANKLIN


IN A move to reduce gearing and strengthen its balance sheet, Verity Group,
the USM-quoted company which manufactures and distributes Wharfedale and
Mission loudspeakers, is seeking to raise Pounds 5.9m net of expenses via
two placings and an open offer.
Directors said that, in the light of the forecast loss of up to Pounds 4.25m
for the year to June 30 and the resultant diminution in net assets, an
injection of fresh funds was necessary to secure the company's future.
Verity proposes to raise Pounds 4.9m via a placing and open offer of 83.3m
shares at 6 1/2 p each.
Qualifying shareholders will be entitled to apply for the new shares on a
19-for-23 basis. Verity's management is committed to subscribe (subject to
clawback) for Pounds 1.8m of the shares.
There will be a separate placing of 15.4m shares, also at 6 1/2 p, with
Tomei, a Hong Kong-based manufacturer of electronic and electrical products
which acts as a distributor for Verity's products.
Because Tomei has conditionally subscribed for a fixed number of new shares,
shareholders will not be entitled to a clawback.
Following the placing Tomei will hold about 7.7 per cent of Verity.
In addition to the offers, Bank of Scotland will subscribe Pounds 1.5m for
preference shares in Verity Investments, a wholly owned subsidiary.
The proceeds of the subscription will be used to fund the purchase of the
Huntingdon property from Centralforce Holdings, from which Verity acquired
the Mission and Cyrus brand names in September 1992.
These proceeds will in turn be used by Centralforce to repay the mortgage on
the Huntingdon property and to reduce group borrowings.
As a result of the proposals Verity's gearing will be reduced to about 34
per cent and net assets increased to some Pounds 7.8m.
In order to enhance the marketability of Verity's shares, the directors have
applied to the Stock Exchange for a full listing. Dealings are expected to
begin at August 19.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930722

