FT933-10044

FT  06 AUG 93 / Prison cheese on the Savoy's menu


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


HARRODS, the Savoy, the Ritz and many other leading London stores, hotels
and restaurants will this week start taking their supplies of mozzarella and
ricotta from the prison service.
In one of the most ambitious commercial ventures ever undertaken by the
prison service in Britain, women prisoners at East Sutton Park Open Prison,
Kent, have been trained in cheesemaking. Each day they will turn 12,000
litres of milk from cows on the prison farm into one tonne of mozzarella and
half a tonne of ricotta.
The scheme brings together a number of features that officials hope will
increasingly shape the future of the prison service - public/private sector
partnerships, market-rate wages for prisoners and training for real jobs
that may help reduce the re-offending rate.
The prison's cheesemaking activities will take place in conjunction with Mr
Edgardo Pasquali, an Italian businessman. The prison service will sell the
cheese to Mr Pasquali whose company, Mama Mia, will distribute and market
it.
Prisoners employed on the scheme will work in a realistic workplace
environment and earn around Pounds 130 per week, compared with an average of
about Pounds 6 in traditional prison workshops. They will pay tax and board
and lodging allowances from their wages, and much of the rest will
accumulate for their release. The women had to submit written applications
to join the project, and were selected by interview.
Mr Derek Lewis, director-general of the Prison Service, who launched the
scheme at East Sutton Park yesterday, said prison could be very
debilitating, taking away people's sense of responsibility. The new
enterprise should enable prisoners to regain that responsibility for their
own lives, and help them to live in a law-abiding way after their release.
He said the venture showed the value of partnership with the private sector.
The prison service would not have had the marketing, distribution or
technical skills to launch it alone.
Mr Pasquali said he believed the quality of farming conditions at East
Sutton Park would enable the prison to produce some of the best mozzarella
and ricotta in Europe. Only high-quality outlets, including 250 leading
London restaurants, would be supplied.
The prison service owns 5,800 hectares of land - 60 per cent of it in use as
farms and gardens. Most of the produce and milk is used to supply prison
kitchens.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930806

