FT934-11486

FT  30 OCT 93 / EC leaders use summit for display of unity


   By LIONEL BARBER and DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


EC LEADERS yesterday restored a semblance of unity to the European Community
with a decision to base the future European Central Bank in Frankfurt as
part of a wide-ranging agreement on the location of EC institutions.
But the deal struck at a special European summit in Brussels followed an
acrimonious battle over the division of 'Euro-spoils', including veto
threats by the UK and Spain unless they got the European Agency for the
Evaluation of Medicinal Products.
After several hours of haggling, the prize went to the UK which immediately
praised the deal as creating several hundred jobs and confirming Britain as
a world leader in the pharmaceutical industry. Spain was given two sites as
a consolation prize - the EC trade-mark office and a new institution
responsible for monitoring health and safety.
The summit, chaired by the Belgian presidency of the EC, was called to
revive Europe's faltering progress toward greater political and monetary
integration after the near failure to ratify the Maastricht treaty.
The choice of Frankfurt as the location for the European Monetary Institute
 -the forerunner of the European Central Bank - was seen as a minimum step
towards rebuilding credibility in European Monetary Union after the August 2
currency crisis.
Germany, which stands to surrender the D-Mark under the Maastricht treaty at
the end of the century, fought tenaciously for the EMI.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's argument that the choice of Frankfurt was necessary
to reassure Germans about the loss of their symbol of post-war stability
carried the day over reservations from France and the UK.
The Bank of England said last night the decision was 'a pity, not for the
City but for the EMI'.
The EMI, whose president will be Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy of Belgium, is the
institutional anchor for the second stage of EMU due to begin on January 1,
1994 under the Maastricht treaty.
With the treaty set to enter force on Monday, EC leaders used the one-day
summit to pledge closer co-operation in foreign policy and the fight against
organised crime, as well as a broad endorsement of the goal of a European
monetary union by the end of the decade.
They steered clear of any new initiatives to tackle mass unemployment in
Europe, preferring to wait for the European Commission's White Paper on
competitiveness, employment and growth which will be presented at the next
summit in December.
They also avoided a damaging row over the Uruguay Round world trade talks in
which France is holding out for more concessions on farm trade. But the
final communique warned of the of the community 'turning in on itself.'
Despite relief that the log-jam over the location of more than 10 new
institutions had been broken, there was also an air of contrition among EC
leaders and a general admission that mistakes had been made before and after
the Maastricht agreement.
EC summit, Page 3
Man in the News, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931030

