FT934-11094

FT  02 NOV 93 / International Company News: Wharf plugs in to a guaranteed
success - Hong Kong's first cable TV franchise has been worth the wait


   By SIMON DAVIES


PATIENCE is a virtue rarely appreciated by Hong Kong's investment community.
However, for Wharf (Holdings), which has just accomplished its six-year
struggle to deliver cable television to the colony, the rewards of
perseverance could be substantial.
A Wharf-led consortium was first awarded the cable TV franchise in 1989. It
collapsed a year later, amid accusations that the government had breached an
exclusivity agreement by allowing Hutchison Whampoa, flagship of the
diversified Cheung Kong Group, to launch satellite broadcaster Star TV in
Hong Kong.
Further delays were caused by China's insistence on approving all franchises
straddling 1997. But eight years after the government first examined the
feasibility of cable television in Hong Kong, the system has finally gone
ahead, and the outlook is far more positive for Wharf than when it signed up
in 1989.
Hong Kong is arguably one of the most attractive sites for cable television
in the world. According to Credit Lyonnais Securities, the
cost-per-household of installing a cable system there will be USDollars 50,
compared with around USDollars 300 in the US. This is because of the
vertical nature of Hong Kong's urban core.
The colony has per-capita GDP higher than the UK, and 99 per cent of
households own a television. Despite this, the Chinese population -
accounting for a vast majority of the colony's 5.9m inhabitants - is served
by only two Cantonese-language television channels.
Experience elsewhere in the western world suggests this represents a
potential gold mine for a cable television company introducing 11 channels
to a wealthy population starved of choice.
Mr Stephen Ng, managing director of Wharf, predicts that by the year 2000,
Wharf Cable will have turnover of HKDollars 4bn (USDollars 517.5m) and an
operating profit of HKDollars 1.6bn.
Investment analysts are more cautious, but the consensus is that the
business should provide an average annual return on the HKDollars 5bn
investment of between 20 and 25 per cent before interest and depreciation,
during the 12 years of its franchise.
Mr Ng said the market was better prepared for the service than in 1989,
while recent technological advances have enabled Wharf to improve the
system, while maintaining the initial costs budgeted in 1989.
It is also guaranteed exclusivity until June 1996, providing sufficient time
to pick up critical mass to prevent anything other than niche competition;
and it has unrestricted access to government-owned housing estates,
accounting for 960,000 households.
Jardine Fleming Securities estimates the system will have close to 600,000
subscribers by the end of 1996, and will break even during that year.
However, this will depend on the quality of programming, an area in which
Wharf has no expertise. If the quality is not there, even a HKDollars
198-per-month subscription fee will seem excessive.
The number of channels to be offered on the new system is already a
sensitive issue. Wharf is offering an initial package of eight, but it was
also to carry three of Star TV's existing channels, and a further four
'premium' channels to be added by the satellite broadcaster.
The two groups failed to resolve an argument over the details of this
preliminary agreement before Sunday's launch. An accord is extremely
important, since it prevents significant competition between the two groups.
Whatever the impact on television viewers, however, the network still offers
vast potential for Wharf. The company is keen to emphasise the investment as
a television project, but there has always been a hidden agenda: the group's
ambitions to set up a telecommunications network.
Wharf is bidding for a licence to compete with Hongkong Telecommunications
(HKT) when its monopoly on domestic telephony runs out in 1995. In 2006,
HKT's international monopoly also disappears, and one of the world's most
lucrative telephone franchises will be up for grabs.
Wharf suggests the existence of its cable TV network would shave around
HKDollars 1bn off the costs of a telephone network; it would also provide
entry into most Hong Kong homes, creating potential for home banking and
other interactive services. Wharf is considered certain to receive a
licence.
Mr Edmund Brandt, investment analyst at Jardine Fleming, said: 'Wharf Cable
as a stand-alone project is a viable investment and it should contribute up
to 15 per cent of Wharf's total cash flow by the year 2000. But the
potential synergies with a telecommunications network make it that much more
exciting.'
Despite writing off HKDollars 107m against its 1989 investment in cable
television, Wharf's ambitions have already proven lucrative. It purchased
the consortium's headquarters and will realise a substantial profit from it.
Second time around, however, the returns could be far more impressive.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

931102

