FT931-3872

FT  13 MAR 93 / Still asleep after the wake-up call: One year after the LA
riots, there is anger at the government's inadequate response


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


A year ago, South Central Los Angeles burst into arson, looting and killing
after the surprise acquittal last April of four white police officers
accused of brutally beating Mr Rodney King, a black motorist.
Last week, in a federal courtroom a few miles away in downtown Los Angeles,
Mr King took the witness stand in a second trial of the same officers on
slightly different charges.
It is scarcely surprising that city officials are nervous about the outcome
of the case, and of the imminent trial of the four black men who attacked Mr
Reginald Denny, a white lorry driver who found himself in the middle of the
riots last year.
But some in Los Angeles's diverse and divided communities almost wonder if
they need another riot, so inadequate has been the response from government,
at any level, to six days of mayhem that left 42 people dead and 700
businesses burnt to the ground.
'The Los Angeles riots were supposed to be a wake-up call. I am beginning to
be afraid that people have put it on snooze control,' says Ms Dolly Gee, a
labour lawyer active in the Asian-American community.
Much of the attention in the days after the riots subsided focused on a
private sector initiative, Rebuild LA, set up by Mayor Tom Bradley under the
leadership of Mr Peter Ueberroth, who organised the 1984 Los Angeles
Olympics and whose reputed Midas touch raised high expectations.
Rebuild LA's leaders acknowledge that visible results have come slower than
many in the community would have liked.
'We call ourselves Rebuild LA and people say: how come you haven't rebuilt
the place on the corner,' says Mr Barry Sanders, a senior partner with the
Los Angeles law firm of Latham & Watkins and one of Rebuild LA's
co-chairmen.
Rebuild LA has cajoled well over Dollars 300m of investments out of
companies in the Los Angeles area and beyond; Shell, for example, succumbed
to its persuasion to rebuild its burnt petrol stations.
But Rebuild LA itself merely emphasises to many the abdication of
responsibility by government.
'Most of the strategy and a great deal of the commitment is coming from the
private sector, which is marvellous, but it has to be matched by serious
legislative reform,' says Dr Kathleen Connell, an academic and investment
banker who chairs Rebuild LA's business investment task force. Community
activists have for years criticised the federal government for its failure
to come to the aid of the struggling inner cities. But what is most striking
today is the extent to which their anger is now shared by businessmen, who
never before came closer to South Central than a concert at the Los Angeles
Coliseum.
'It is most disheartening. Everybody says this was the worst riot in the
history of American and what has the government done about it? The city has
done nothing, the state has done nothing and the federal government has done
nothing,' complained a senior executive at one big Los Angeles company.
The riots came at the worst possible time for government to respond. Even in
the years of rapid economic growth in the 1980s, the inner city stagnated.
With the recession, deeper and longer in California than any other state in
the US, incomes have declined and unemployment has risen. As a result, more
than 18 per cent of the citizens of Los Angeles now live in poverty.
But the recession also dried up tax revenues, forcing cuts in public
expenditure. Governor Pete Wilson proposes to cut state spending by 11 per
cent this year, with education, health and welfare services hardest hit.
'Just the time you need government to respond coincides with the time they
don't have the resources,' says Mr Sanders.
But 'we would if we could' no longer cuts much ice with the many Angelenos
who see an abject failure of political will at all levels of government:
Washington playing election year games with an urban aid bill that never
passed into law, Sacramento paying its bills with IOUs in a two-month budget
deadlock, and Los Angeles plunged into a political vacuum with the
retirement of Mayor Bradley after 20 years in office.
Beneath their anger and frustration many Angelenos still believe their city
has, despite all, a bright and prosperous future. Some of the most
optimistic are the new immigrants who continue to flock to the city from
Asia and Latin America. The nagging doubt remains, however: is this
sprawling metropolis, its 9m inhabitants divided by language, culture and
income, now too big to be governable?
Moves to break up the Los Angeles School District are already gaining
ground, and a few brave souls have even suggested dissolving the city
itself.
Los Angeles's borders defy logic. From its centre 15 miles inland, the city
has thrown out tentacles, reaching south along a narrow, 20-mile corridor to
its harbour and encircling the independent cities of Beverly Hills and Santa
Monica to the west. In 1918 it swallowed whole the San Fernando valley to
the north, as a by-product of a grandiose scheme to divert the waters of the
Owens River, 250 miles away on the other side of the Sierra Nevada.
Los Angeles's city charter, too, is a historical relic: a well-intentioned
reform from the 1920s which has led to administrative chaos.
'The central weakness of the charter, of which we are daily reminded, is
that its extreme vigilance in protecting citizens from potential abuses of
power makes the exercise of effective power impossible,' says Ms Xandra
Kayden, a prominent advocate of charter reform.
The city council has only 15 members, each of whom holds de facto veto power
over affairs in his or her own district. This leaves the mayor as the only
elected official with a city-wide perspective. But the mayor's power is
diluted and shared with 51 semi-independent commissions, running everything
from the animal shelters to the airport.
'I would rather give birth to a porcupine backwards than become the mayor of
Los Angeles,' said Mr William Mulholland, the engineer who, as head of Los
Angeles's water department from 1886 to 1928, laid the foundations for the
city's development.
This did not deter 52 people from announcing their candidacy to succeed Mr
Bradley, although only 31 of them have qualified for the April 20 ballot.
Most proposals for reforming the city's government would concentrate more
power in the hands of the mayor, enlarging the council, weakening the
commissions and giving him the power to sack department heads.
A strong new mayor, even without such reforms, could exert personal
leadership, as many argue Mayor Bradley did, at the beginning of his two
decades in office. But for the moment, that leadership is not evident.
Some community activists, however, see a silver lining to the government's
inactivity. In particular, it has spurred residents to take matters into
their own hands in a somewhat perverse form of the 'empowerment' beloved by
politicians from right and left. One encouraging sign was the truce declared
by leaders of the Crips and the Bloods, two of Los Angeles's most notorious
gangs, who also demanded more funding for schools, better street lighting
and sanitation, and a thorough overhaul of welfare programmes. 'After the
riots, people now have less tolerance for neglect,' says one Los Angeles
council aide, noting a surge in demands for proper street cleaning.
Will that agitation get the streets cleaned and lit? The answer may help
determine whether Los Angeles will succumb to its welter of economic, racial
and social problems, or develop into the vibrant metropolis that many of its
inhabitants believe it can still be.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930313

