FT934-11458

FT  01 NOV 93 / Municipal Elections: Northern League set to take another
bastion - After decades of communist rule, Genoa is likely to fall to a
regional party


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


IT USED to be said that the Genoese were reluctant to buy fridges because
they believed the light was still burning after the door had been closed.
They still have a reputation for being cautious and suspicious of change.
But this might be about to change. On November 21, the Genoese, along with
445 other municipalities, vote for a new mayor and council. And there are
signs of a growing disenchantment with the left-wing politicians who have
run the city throughout the post-war era.
Opinion polls suggest that Italy's sixth largest city could fall to the
Ligurian League, one of the regional political groups belonging to the
Northern League, a regional autonomy movement for Lombardy. Under the fiery
populist leadership of Mr Umberto Bossi, the Northern League has grown in
recent years from a relatively obscurity to a party that has 40 per cent of
the vote in the rich northern industrial belt. If it wins Genoa, it would be
the first proof that the league can appeal to voters outside its Lombardy
heartland.
The more garrulous league officials in Genoa read even more into the
prospect of victory. 'Winning Genoa gives a future Republic of the North its
outlet to the sea,' says Mr Bruno Ravera, one of the Ligurian League
founders.
Since the second world war, the administration of Genoa has been dominated
first by the Communist Party and latterly by its successor, the Party of the
Democratic Left (PDS). Grassroots support came from the trade unions, based
in the port, steelmaking and engineering.
The appeal of the left has waned with the collapse of the Berlin Wall and
the decline of Genoa's loss-making state-owned industries. Nine out of ten
industrial workers are in the public sector and the city's economy has been
undermined by recession and the drying up of state subsidies to the port and
industry.
Genoa's unemployment, at nearly 15 per cent, is double the average in
northern Italy and is worsening.
Despite a magnificent setting, hugging the curves of low mountains that drop
steeply to the sea, the city has an air of melancholy neglect. The
infrastructure has been punished by two consecutive years of heavy flooding.
The historic centre has been dubbed by some the Casbah because of the 20,000
immigrants living there. Most are North African and and many are illegal
immigrants. The area has been patrolled by 500 police on 24-hour duty since
riots last summer, the worst racial conflicts seen in Italy.
Last year's celebrations for the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery
of the New World occasioned an expensive renovation of the port and a brief
recovery of local pride. But funds have run out to finish the city's metro
rail network and it has emerged that the claimed '1.7m' visitors were
inflated by about 1m.
Symbolic of Genoa's plight is the elegant glass-structured Sheraton Hotel,
unopened because of lack of clientele.
As elsewhere in Italy, magistrates are investigating corruption in various
public works contracts. The previous city administration was dissolved in
May following accusations of corruption against Mr Claudio Burlando, the
mayor. Although it seems a zealous magistrate may have overstepped the mark
in having the mayor arrested, the accusations besmirched the previous
administration. As a result 'clean honest government' is on the lips of all
those in the electoral contest.
In an attempt to adopt new clothing, the left has formed a 'progressive
alliance'. The PDS has chosen to back an independent candidate for mayor, Mr
Adriano Sansa, a well known local judge, and has obtained the support of the
cross-party reformist grouping, Democratic Alliance, plus the Greens. Polls
give Mr Sansa 38 per cent of the vote.
But the league has crept up, pushing aside the Christian Democrats and their
allies, and now holds about 36 per cent of the vote. 'This is a contest
between the league and the PDS,' says Mr Enrico Serra, the 59-year-old
orthopaedic surgeon who hopes to be the league's first mayor. 'It's a vote
between the old and the new.'
Their platforms are remarkably similar: an emergency programme to deal with
flood damage; reorganising the city administration; improving the crumbling
infrastructure and renovation of the historic centre. But when it comes to
emphasis and style, the differences are marked.
The league wants to look in detail at the books of the previous
administration, believing there are L700bn (Pounds 290m) worth of
questionable operations. 'We want to provide a transparent administration,
that offers real services, and of course we will privatise as much as we
can,' says Mr Serra. The league will seek to prune the 16,000 workforce on
the city's payroll.
Mr Sansa puts the emphasis on a more efficient use of resources and seeking
new investment to create jobs. He wants tighter immigration policies but is
alarmed at the more extremist among the league who are demanding mass
expulsions.
Under new laws approved in March, mayors are directly elected and are able
then to control the formation of the councils. If no one obtains an outright
majority in the first round, there is a run-off. In Genoa a run-off is very
likely.
Although Mr Sansa is in the lead, it is not clear how he can boost his
support in the run-off without turning to the hardline marxists,
Reconstructed Communism. In Genoa, they hold 9 per cent of the vote. In
contrast the league will be looking in the second round to the centre,
especially the Christian Democrat vote.
Two factors may tip the scales in the league's favour. The Genoese blame
last month's flood disaster on the failures of the previous city council,
and the league is picking up protest votes among the self-employed and
shop-keepers who are furious over the government attempts to tighten up on
tax evasion.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931101

