FT932-7016

FT  26 MAY 93 / Management: Laying down a code of honour - In the wake of
scandals, bribery and corruption European companies are trying to become
more ethical


   By DAVID BUCHAN, CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES, TOM BURNS, LUCY KELLAWAY and
DAVID WALLER


Italy's corruption scandal - which moved to the telecoms sector last week -
has highlighted the risks for senior executives of bribing their way to
bigger profits. But the problem is not just one for individuals and the
courts. The recent series of arrests in Rome and Milan has demonstrated the
damage which can be inflicted when internationally respected corporate names
are dragged through the dirt.
While Italy may be the most topical case, corruption and how to prevent it
are important issues elsewhere in Europe too. In Britain, for example,
Stanley Kiaer of the Institute of Business Ethics believes the number of
misdeeds may have increased slightly during the recession as the lax ways
practised during the 1980s came unstuck. But he argues that the long-term
trend is for companies to be more ethical.
Recent corporate scandals such as the dirty tricks campaign waged by British
Airways against its smaller rival, Virgin Atlantic, have caused a shudder to
run through British boardrooms. There is now a growing awareness of the
impact of such revelations on staff morale and on relations with the outside
world.
According to a survey conducted by the Institute of Business Ethics last
year, 30 per cent of large companies had such a code; many more were
considering adopting one.
Fear of scandal is not the primary impetus, according to the experts. Other
surveys show that customers place high importance on the reputation of their
suppliers, that employees want to be treated fairly and that shareholders
want greater accountability.
Banco Bilboa Vizcaya, BBV, is not the only Spanish institution to have been
caught out in allegedly corrupt dealings with the government - but so far it
is the corporation that has most publicly sought to make amends. Its recent
publication of a code of conduct for senior executives was a highly unusual
step for a Spanish company.
Judicial investigations into what is known as the Filesa case, after the
apparently bogus Barcelona-based consultancy company controlled by Socialist
party members, have suggested that BBV paid close to Pta200m (Pounds 1m) to
Filesa before the 1989 election.
Taking the blame was the easy part for the bank. It placed it squarely on a
past, and now dead, chairman who was known for his friendly relations with
the socialist government. Present chairman Emilio Ybarra told the bank's AGM
that when his predecessor ordered the payment for the Filesa reports; 'It
was because he thought them opportune and convenient'. Ybarra left the
matter at that.
The ethical code is a 12-page document that deals with confidentiality,
conflicts of interest, lending policies and related issues. It does not
mention the Filesa scandal. But it specifically calls upon BBV's senior
executives to refrain from any action involving the bank group in which,
directly or indirectly, they might have particular interests.
If preoccupation with business ethics is new to Spain, the same cannot be
said for Scandinavia. Sweden takes the problem seriously enough to have set
up a special body to help tackle it. The Institute against Corruption, which
keeps companies up to date about codes of practice and legislative changes,
was established in 1923 and is backed by organisations including the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce and the Swedish Federation of Industries.
'Inside Sweden serious bribery, involving thousands of kronor, is unusual
both in the public and the private sectors', says Thorsten Cars, the
institute's chairman. 'But there is a feeling that the problem is getting
worse at another level in that Christmas gifts, study trips and business
entertainment are getting more lavish,' he states.
Recent attention has centred on 'buddy loans' - where banking executives are
offered inducements from clients seeking big loans. Cars said legal cases so
far indicated the problem involved those at middle management levels rather
than top bank executives.
Recent German corruption cases have largely tainted the country's
politicians. Quite apart from that, however, the brutal tactics increasingly
used by companies in the recession have led to talk of a 'moral crisis' in
German industry and widened the debate on ethics.
For example, the case of Jose Ignacio Lopez, recently recruited to
Volkswagen from rival General Motors and accused of unfairly trying to poach
former colleagues, has raised the question of what is acceptable corporate
behaviour.
'At a time when companies are fighting a desperate battle to restore
profitability, ethical considerations are not the first priority,' says
Gertrud Hohler, the Berlin-based communications guru who advises many large
German companies. 'His (Lopez's) tactics have unleashed great indignation,'
says Hohler, 'but at the same time his hardness and his relentlessness
convince many that he is exactly the right man for the job.'
Count Augustinius H. Henckel-Donnersmarck, a Dusseldorf-based monk who
advises on ethical issues disagrees. He told Wirtschaftswoche, a weekly
business magazine, that Lopez's tactics threatened to undermine capitalism.
'Management immorality begins at the very point where managers stop
fulfilling their obligations to other members of society,' he said.
The French, meanwhile, appear to be displaying their customary sang-froid.
Every local businessman knows what 'fausse facturation' means - inflating
invoices with the extra going to line the pockets of national or local
politicians who award contracts. But none will admit their companies need to
take any special measures against it, beyond what already exists in French
law.
Since 1988, France has had legislation providing for some public funding of
political parties' or candidates' expenses, and limiting the amount which
companies can give. A company cannot provide more than 10 per cent of a
parliamentary candidate's expenses, up to a limit of FFr500,000 (Pounds
60,000). Any such gift must also be reported.
This mixed regime of public funding and private disclosure has not, however,
prevented some recent scandals, with companies conniving at false billing in
the interest of winning favour and/or contracts from politicians, mainly at
the local level. It is the construction industry which seems most prone to
the temptation.
The tendency is to blame the politicians for soliciting bribes rather than
companies for giving them. As in Germany it is the former who have been
prosecuted, not the latter.
'No special code of conduct for companies exists at the national level',
said an official of the Patronat employers federation, adding he knew of no
company which had instituted formal anti-bribery rules.
Bouygues, France's biggest contractor, said it had no code of conduct. 'The
idea of voluntary rules going beyond what is in the law is very
Anglo-Saxon', said the Patronat official. 'We regard state control as
sufficiently tough for companies not to have to make any special effort to
sensitise their employees to it.'

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930526

