FT932-7086

FT  26 MAY 93 / EC voices doubts on global standard for HDTV


   By ANDREW HILL


   STRASBOURG


EC officials said yesterday that a concerted new US effort to develop
digital high-definition television was unlikely to produce a single global
standard for cinema-quality television.
But a senior European Commission official said the US 'grand alliance',
formed on Monday between competing HDTV consortia, would probably boost
worldwide co-operation on television standards, and lead to technology
sharing.
Political progress on a European HDTV initiative has been stalled since last
year, with Britain blocking agreement on EC funding on the grounds that
digital HDTV technology will soon supersede the original Community strategy.
Two European electronics groups, Thomson Consumer Electronics of France and
Philips of the Netherlands, are among the companies which have now decided
to collaborate on a single digital HDTV standard for the US, instead of
competing for the approval of the US Federal Communications Commission.
However, a simple transfer of US standards to Europe would not be possible,
the European Commission said yesterday, because of differing technical
requirements, although EC digital standards could use the same basic
technologies as the US system.
But a Thomson spokesman yesterday said: 'Now Philips and Thomson are
involved in a grand alliance I should think there's definitely worldwide
potential for this standard.'
The announcement of the grand alliance should bring new urgency to the
meeting of EC telecommunications ministers on June 16, when 11 member states
will again try to overcome long-standing British opposition to a proposed
Community strategy on advanced television.
Philips and Thomson were supposed to be among the principal beneficiaries of
the EC's original HDTV strategy, based on exclusive satellite transmission
standards. Unlike the analogue technology first selected by the EC, digital
standards can also be used for terrestrial broadcasts and for links with
computer and audio technology.
Denmark, which holds the EC presidency until July, wants the Commission to
present proposals for a 'family' of EC digital standards in the autumn.
Philips said that a joint US digital standard could be agreed by the FCC
next year and broadcasts could begin by 1996. However, the company said
digital transmissions were more likely to begin in 1997.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930526

