FT932-6842

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (16): Systems prepare for battle
 -Electronic brokerage is on the march - But even bullish project managers
recognise the pitfalls


   By JAMES BLITZ


THIS AUTUMN, foreign exchange dealers will have to watch their screens more
attentively than ever. The major suppliers of electronic real-time price
information to the market are about to engage in a huge sales war across
their desks.
The battle is to sell computer systems to the banks which simulate the work
currently done by human brokers - and which will do that work a good deal
cheaper.
Around 50 per cent of all FX deals are currently struck in direct
conversations between two counterparties in the interbank market. An
additional 35 per cent of deals are matched by brokers, who bring together
the buyers and sellers in the investment banks.
But, although brokers are extremely skilled and quick at their job, they add
significantly to the transaction costs which banks incur. Brokers charge
commissions, which can be quite considerable for less liquid currencies like
sterling and the French franc. At times of volatility, they can also widen
the spread between the cost of buying and selling currencies, so that they
can make returns.
Electronic matching systems aim to do the same work as the brokers, but at a
reduced cost. As one London-based foreign exchange manager puts: 'With these
new computerised systems, what the dealer sees on the screen is what he
gets.'
But more than one system is coming on to the market, and the battle to sell
them is set to be fierce.
Reuters, which has the largest market share in the provision of real-time
information to financial markets, launched its 2000-2 dealing system in May
of last year. Last month, Minex, a Japanese company, launched its system
which, for the moment, predominantly operates in the Tokyo market.
Later this year, a consortium bringing together the major foreign exchange
banks and the electronic information group, Quotron, is launching an
electronic matching system called Electronic Broking Service (EBS).
The Reuters system might easily have gone unchallenged. The information
group already has a huge hold over communications in the foreign exchange
market through its main dealing systems, Reuters 2000-1 and Reuter Monitor,
with 19,000 dealing terminals around the world. Quotron, which is backing
the EBS project, has only 3,000 of its FX Trader systems world-wide.
However, the launch of 2000-2 was of such concern to foreign exchange
managers at London's leading banks, that a group of them felt that they
needed to launch a rival in the form of EBS.
One fear was that Reuters would be in a position to dictate the nature of
foreign exchange dealing if it could extend its share of transactions to
some 80 per cent of the market.
There are concerns, too, that an increase in Reuters market share could put
it in a position to change the whole structure of FX dealing, if it so
wished.
A growing concentration of the FX business is in the hands of the major
interbank counterparties. According to investors in the EBS system, a key
concern of the banks is that Reuters should not sell its system outside the
non-banking sector.
As one backer of the EBS project puts it: 'If Reuters gained such a powerful
position that it could put its systems in the hands of anyone it wanted, the
interbank market would lose its strong hold on liquidity.'
The battle between EBS and Reuters over automated brokerage will be
particularly intense, because both companies have approached the development
of their systems in different ways.
Reuters spent years developing 2000-2 in laboratories, setting it up live
and then finding customers. 'You must make sure your product works,' says
Bob Etherington, marketing director at Reuters in London. 'At the end of the
day, people will judge your system on reliability, speed and security.'
The EBS consortium is also confident about the technical prowess of the
system it is yet to launch. But Mr Peter Bartko, director of the group, says
the critical advantage of the EBS system is the backing it has from the
dozen or so banks which - together - have a 35 per cent share of the
liquidity in the currency markets.
'You can't be half pregnant in this game,' he says. 'You have to encourage
dealers to use your system, and they will only do that if they can see a
two-way price on the screen with depth. You need a wide audience on day
one.'
Reuters has come under criticism for launching 2000-2 without signing up the
major counterparties as clients. The company is unwilling to reveal detail
on transaction volumes, but there has been criticism of the low level of
trading in the system's first year.
However, Mr Etherington is confident that the system is going from strength
to strength. He says that 183 users have signed up for the system, and
another 118 have contracted to use it, in 17 countries. The daily traffic on
the system is four times higher than it was at the start of the year. At
least one member of the EBS consortium is also thought to have subscribed to
Reuters 2000-2 system already.
'We would like to have the major counterparties, but we still have an
increasing number of the major players in the market,' he says.
Will automated brokerage change the nature of foreign exchange? Even at
their most bullish, the project managers acknowledge the pitfalls.
One of the biggest problems is that automated brokerage systems might be
comparatively slow in inputting prices into a market where every trading
second counts.
Today, when a dealer strikes a price with a broker, the transaction is
completed when he shouts 'done' down the telephone. He is now invited to use
a system in which deals are done in the slightly longer time it takes to
type a message on a typewriter keyboard.
But the earlier Reuters systems proved how technology can - with time -
change the nature of the market. The volatility and profits in FX are as
great as they are today because millions of dollars flow around the world in
a split second.
These funds would flow even more smoothly - and foreign exchange turnover
will be even greater - if a single institution can claim to be the world's
greatest broker.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930526

