FT934-11304

FT  02 NOV 93 / Danish bank rescue backfires on minister


   By HILARY BARNES


   COPENHAGEN


DENMARK'S Social Democratic-led coalition government, which promised a
'decade of decency' when it came into office in January, has become
embroiled in a controversy over a banking rescue operation.
The opposition is calling for the resignation of Mr Ole Stavad, minister for
taxation, for allegedly misleading the Folketing, or parliament, over his
part in a rescue action in August for a bank in Mr Stavad's North Jutland
constituency.
Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, the prime minister, whose government has only a
one-vote majority, was forced at the weekend to give in to demands both from
the opposition and from within the ranks of the coalition parties for an
'impartial investigation' into the rescue.
Mr Stavad's troubles began when the government negotiated a deal with a
North Jutland savings bank, Sparekassen Nordjylland (Spar Nord) to keep open
the offices of a small local bank, Himmerlandsbanken, in the town of Hobro,
which had collapsed with debts of around DKr400m (Pounds 40.2m). According
to Spar Nord's managing director, Mr Jorgen Giversen, the savings bank
obtained a 'crystal-clear' agreement that, as the price of taking on
Himmerlandsbanken's operations, the savings bank would be allowed to make a
tax-loss deduction of DKr173m.
However, when opposition politicians looked at the deal, they concluded that
the offer of a tax-loss deduction was illegal. A tax-loss deduction is legal
only if a company takes over another company in its entirety, but Spar Nord
took over only part of Himmerlandsbanken, which was subsequently declared
bankrupt.
Confronted with this argument, Mr Stavad said the government had never
promised the savings bank a tax deduction, only that it could make normal
loan-loss provisions for DKr173m.
In that case, retorted Spar Nord's Mr Giversen, the government misled the
savings bank's shareholders.
He published a fax from the Customs and Excise Board, sent to him at 4 am on
Monday August 23, after a weekend of negotiations with the government, which
appears to confirm his version of events. 'We told the government during the
negotiations that the alternative to a tax-loss deduction of this order was
payment of about DKr53m in cool cash to make up the difference between the
assets and liabilities we were taking on,' he says.
Mrs Kirsten Jacobsen, of the right-wing Progress party, who has spearheaded
the attack on Mr Stavad, claims that the minister has repeatedly misled the
Folketing and its committees in his attempts to escape blame.
The opposition parties yesterday accepted the government's proposal for an
impartial investigation, which for the moment takes the pressure off Mr
Stavad.
Mr Rasmussen's government took office when the prime minister for over 10
years, the Conservative party's leader, Mr Poul Schluter, resigned following
a judicial inquiry.
The inquiry's highly controversial report found that he had misled the
Folketing when reporting to it on the so-called Tamil scandal, in which his
minister of justice illegally denied Tamil refugees the right to bring their
families to Denmark.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931102

