FT933-5386

FT  03 SEP 93 / There's no place like the virtual reality office


   By NUALA MORAN


VIRTUAL REALITY technology is being applied to solve the problem of making
people who work from home feel more closely in touch with their office.
The government-funded Pounds 3m Virtuosi project, to be launched next month,
will develop sophisticated computer displays to give remote workers the
illusion that they are in the office, working alongside other homeworkers
and interacting as if they are face-to-face.
The three-year project will be headed by BT and supported by the Department
of Trade and Industry, Science and Engineering Research Council, GEC and
Division, a specialist virtual reality company run by Mr Ian Barron,
inventor of the Transputer, the original computer on a chip.
The programme - believed to be the first systematic effort to apply virtual
reality to a business environment - could spell the beginning of the end for
expensive corporate headquarters, according to Mr Alastair Rogers, a
researcher with the project at BT's Martlesham Laboratories in Suffolk.
'Virtual reality offers the most intimate and direct method of interacting
with a computer, and hence with the users of other computers,' Mr Rogers
said.
Computer networks already allow people at different sites to work together
but they severely limit human interactions. For example, it is not possible
to have unconstrained conversations or to read between the lines by looking
at facial expressions or body language.
Staff who work remotely often become disenchanted because they feel socially
deprived and isolated. BT's recent experiments in Scotland have resulted in
home-working directory inquiry operators being equipped with videophones,
not directly to support their work but to reduce their sense of isolation.
Users sitting at a virtual reality screen will see themselves in an office
with colleagues. They will be able to move themselves around the virtual
space, to interact and talk to people.
The input device could be a simple as a mouse or it could be 'data suit' - a
futuristic style of overall which picks up the user's movements and conveys
the subtleties of body language and facial expression to colleagues.
With an advanced virtual reality system, the corporation could cease to
exist as a physical entity. Employees could work entirely from home,
conducting business in a corporate virtual environment.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930903

