FT932-6991

FT  26 MAY 93 / The man in the middle: John Major expresses his convictions
on inflation and Europe, and refuses to be politically pigeon-holed


   By IAN HARGREAVES


An hour spent with John Major is an hour spent in middle England. At the end
of an internecine year, which ended with his party's 'bloody nose' in the
Newbury by-election and which has now given way to torrid speculation about
an imminent cabinet reshuffle, Mr Major is visibly tired.
So, has he spent the whole day poring over ministerial possibilities? No, he
has been to the Chelsea flower show. What will he be doing after the
interview? Talking to BBC television's Bookmark programme about his
favourite author, Anthony Trollope, the 19th-century master of middle
England's social and political life. And what is that hanging over the
mantelpiece in the prime minister's study? A portrait of W G Grace, the
legendary England cricketer, recently shipped from the National Portrait
Gallery on Mr Major's personal instructions.
The prime minister's affection for a Britain of country lanes, warm beer and
village cricket grounds is evidently more than a speech-writer's device to
reassure doubters about his 'heart of Europe' strategy. It is, indeed, the
softer side of a politician best known as he rose through the ranks for his
love of policy detail and the tactical machinations of the whip's office.
Once the interview is rolling, however, it is not long before he is delving
through a thick file, pouring out comparative international economic
statistics. We begin with the robustness of the economic recovery. Is he
sticking to the Treasury's forecast of 1.25 per cent growth this year?
'I'm not going to change the Treasury forecast in an interview . . . but I
would be very surprised if the forecast is not met this year.' He promises
not to quote figures, before reciting pages of them: on inflation (a 30-year
low), unemployment (falling for three months), manufacturing productivity
('a record high'), industrial production (up 1.6 per cent on a year ago),
and the statistical coup de grace: a list of 'quite startling' international
comparisons of peak-to-trough declines. In industrial production. Britain's
7.6 per cent looks good alongside Germany's 12.3 and Japan's 11.5, although
it is steeper than France's. He concludes: 'We are in a position where we
can move into a period of steady and sustainable growth. I emphatically do
not want a sudden, short-term sharp burst of activity.'
But what about the public finances, in this slow growth scenario? With
public spending back to 45.5 per cent of gross domestic product, won't
spending have to be cut back well beyond planned levels?
The prime minister points to the effects of recession on tax receipts and
social security benefits. Just as the huge surplus of the 1980s was
'something of a surprise', so now the pendulum had swung back dramatically.
With a jab at critics inside his own party, he insists: 'This is not a
runaway spending spree by government.' During the recession, he thinks it
was right 'to protect the people who are hurt and to protect some of the
public sector and infrastructure programmes'.
The spending review being conducted by Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary
to the Treasury, is not mainly concerned with this cyclical problem. 'We are
doing what I thirsted to do when I was chief secretary, to look not just at
the annual increase in public expenditure but to strip down below the
baseline, right to the very roots, programme by programme.'
With scare stories almost daily about where the axe will fall, the concern
has arisen that Mr Major may be preparing to work around his carefully
worded manifesto commitments to attack welfare state provisions for those
with modest incomes, especially pensioners.
'You touch on one of the most important things and where so much of the
concern is apt to arise. We do have a particular concern for people on
modest incomes who worked through their lives to provide for themselves
rather than depend on the state. . . . That is why I am saying that we have
to select priorities. . . . If we do not do so, then taxes will rocket.' So
will he stick to the spirit and the letter of the manifesto? 'Of course.'
Does that mean the Portillo review will not question the principle of
universality which underpins so much of the British welfare state? 'There
are areas where we will look at universality, yes.'
Confusing? Well, perhaps it could hardly be otherwise, since nobody can say
how much of the budget deficit is cyclical or structural and how it will
respond as the economy recovers. 'I wish I knew,' says the prime minister.
Given that he does not, when will Mr Portillo's digging to the very roots
actually make a difference? Certainly not in the next two to three months.
The questions 'are very fundamental and they will take rather a long time'.
In the short term he cannot avoid taking a view on public-sector pay. Is Mr
Major tempted to extend the 1.5 per cent ceiling of the past year? 'We will
be discussing that in the very near future,' he says. What about a freeze?
Straight bat: 'We will be discussing it in the near future.' What about
taxes? Would he be prepared to put them up, rather than impose sharp
restraints on expenditure? 'It is principally a public-expenditure problem
rather than a taxation problem and it is at public expenditure that we must
look first.'
If that does not quite echo the spirit of Thatcherite low-taxation rhetoric,
it may be because Mr Major acknowledges more readily that under the
Conservatives the burden of taxation has been shifted rather than eased.
A subject on which he does speak with passion, however, is inflation. In
mentioning the businessmen who tell him that a little inflation will be all
right, he comes as close to thumping the table as his nature allows. 'We
could have blinked on inflation on a number of occasions. If we were
prepared to sacrifice potentially a general election by not doing the easy
and popular thing to get inflation down, it is not likely that we would let
go of it now.'
This too is his answer when asked about the case for an independent central
bank, as a more credible guardian of stable prices. 'What matters is the
determination of the people responsible for the policy in keeping inflation
down. We are determined.'
Until last September, of course, Britain's anti-inflationary anchor was the
exchange rate mechanism. Now that the EC has concluded that there are no
fault lines, does that mean Britain will stay out? 'We won't start
contemplating going back into the ERM until Britain's economy is more in
step with the rest of Europe. . . . Above all we would need economic
conditions in Germany and Britain to be much more closely in line.' Does he
expect to lead Britain back into the ERM during his premiership? 'I don't
know.' Does he still think there are fault lines? He does. 'As people's
ambitions stretched out towards a single currency, the ERM became rigid to
the point of inflexibility.'
Turning to his agenda for the EC, at next month's Copenhagen summit, Mr
Major focuses upon enlargement talks with the Efta countries. 'I want to
give that a big push. That is pivotal to the future of the way I see the
Community, to have the Eftans in place as members before any further
consideration is given to institutional change in the Community.'
These new members - Sweden, Norway, Finland and Austria - 'are countries
with a greater affection for free trade than some that are already in there.
Also you have four countries that will be net contributors to the budget.
For the first time since the Community was established, you begin to see a
balance in members between net contributors and net recipients. You begin to
change the culture of the Community. That is a principal aim.'
He is also interested in the Community's growth initiative, though not as an
expenditure-driven exercise. He makes three points: the need for more
deregulation, greater subsidiarity and a determined effort 'to make sure
that barriers to the single market genuinely are removed and that subliminal
barriers aren't erected by our partners'.
In the longer term, in the run-up to the EC's proposed intergovernmental
conference in 1996, he does recognise the case for institutional reform. 'I
don't believe many people are satisfied with the accountability of the
Commission. When people say they don't like Europe, what they mean is that
they think the Commission is overweening and overpowerful.' He also wants
the EC to examine 'the role of national parliaments and the European
parliament, to make sure that that is properly in kilter and that they have
the appropriate responsibilities. We also need to look at the role and the
operation of the European Council.' There will, he says, be 'fierce
discussion and squabbles' about these matters, but he considers enlargement
a certainty and with it 'an opportunity to introduce a much greater degree
of flexibility into the European Community.'
There have been signs recently that the Foreign Office has been toying with
a more favourable attitude towards a Community of 'variable geometry' or
'multi-speeds', perhaps even accepting the fact that Britain may settle for
a medium-speed lane. Mr Major professes himself 'pretty sceptical about how
that would really work.
'With regard to variable speed, the social chapter to an extent has done
that. . . . To what extent they will actually proceed with the social
chapter without the British, I don't know. There may be areas where we will
have disuniformity, a form of variable geometry, but I don't know how far
you could carry that and it still be a credible Community. I'm not saying it
can't be done. It's easier to talk about in the abstract than in detail.'
It is all very well, though, to talk about an alliance with the Eftans. What
about Britain's relations with Germany and France, the motors of the
Community?
He considers Germany a significant ally on subsidiarity and enlargement, but
then slips into rhetoric rather than realpolitik. He thinks the Maastricht
debate across Europe should serve as a warning of the distance between
politicians and public. 'If the European politicians don't understand that,
they are heading for very big trouble.'
If he has big challenges before him in Europe, he also has severe
difficulties to his rear, following the Maastricht debate. Discussing the
political diversity of his own party, he comments that it is 'a pretty broad
church . . . and I hope we will keep them all in it.'
But people are puzzled. In his cabinet, he has Thatcherite radicals and
avowed consolidators. Which is he? It is easy to mislead in answering this
question, he suggests, and offers the following: 'When I see something that
I believe is wrong, I will want to change it. Where I see something that
operates broadly with the grain of the British instinct, I won't want to
change it.' Surprisingly, he cites the fiery and philosophical Enoch Powell
as an example of an unclassifiable politician from his own party. He too
resists classification. When he wants change, it is not 'through some
ideologically-driven motive'.
For example, he wishes to semi-privatise the railway only 'because British
Rail is deeply inefficient'. He thinks the improvement of a privatised
Docklands Light Railway shows the potential. 'I want something that works,
something that is efficient. If that is radical, I would just say it is
common sense.'
To those who see him as a political weathervane, a leader without authority,
he returns to his proudest accomplishment: suppressing inflation, even
through an election campaign. To that he adds Maastricht, on which he
spurned the lure of 'cheap popularity' which ditching the treaty would have
brought. He acted 'because I believed it was right . . . so that Britain has
the appropriate authority in Europe to shape the future of the EC and not be
shaped by the future of the EC. The record shows that I would not shift the
view that I thought was right. I don't think that argues anything other than
conviction politics.'
One subject he will not discuss is the looming cabinet reshuffle. There's
something else he won't do. He is asked what he has learned from the last
year and spots at once the reference to his chancellor's taste in popular
music: 'Qu'est-ce que vous regrettez, Mr Major?'
'I am not going to reply in French. I have at least learned that,' he
laughs. He says he has mainly learned about life with a small majority. As
for regrets, they all concern the economic pain individuals have suffered in
the battle against inflation. 'I do not think that was wrong, it was
inevitable, but I do regret the fact that many people were hurt while we did
it.'

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930526

