FT934-8838

FT  13 NOV 93 / Ford no longer the pay-rise driver: Wage bargaining at the
motor manufacturer used to be copied throughout industry. Times have
changed,


   By DAVID GOODHART


THE FORD pay deal, sealed late on Thursday, is no longer the trendsetter for
collective bargainers that it once was.
Ford has been rather more generous than most manufacturing companies over
the past few years. However, one senior personnel manager yesterday said
that the company still had 'a psychological significance', partly because it
was so widely written about.
Pessimists on pay inflation will say that the Ford deal - 2.5 per cent now
followed by a rise of either 3.5 per cent or the rate of inflation next
November, whichever is greatest - shows how deeply embedded inflationary
habits are. Ford has been losing more than Pounds 1m a day since 1990 and
faces another sharp fall in production because of weakness in the European
market.
Given the widespread fear of unemployment, a pay rise comfortably above
inflation this year and no less than inflation next might seem rather high.
It follows a two-year deal which gave 5 per cent for two years running and
has proved more generous than expected in relation to inflation.
Incomes Data Services, the independent pay analysts, has announced the
decline and fall of the pay freeze and has been predicting a resurgence in
pay for some time. The Ford deal suggests it may be right.
There are other signs. The monthly reports sent in by regional officials of
the AEEU engineering union show a sharp increase in the number of pay offers
going to strike ballots in some of the traditional parts of manufacturing.
Workers at Vauxhall's Ellesmere Port plant in Cheshire are expected to start
an overtime ban from next week after rejecting a pay offer of 2.5 per cent
this year and 3 per cent plus a 1 per cent lump sum payment next year.
There is also anecdotal evidence - from the building industry among others -
that many companies have cut employment so far that they badly need to hang
on to those people they have kept, which means granting higher pay rises
than they want to.
However the optimists on pay have strong arguments too. Ford says that the
deal is likely to be at worst neutral in terms of unit labour costs. It
expects to improve productivity by at least 2.5 per cent a year over the
next two years.
Mr Robbie Gilbert, head of employee relations at the Confederation of
British Industry, broadly welcomed the deal and said that it was at about
the average settlement level in manufacturing.
The Engineering Employers' Federation yesterday produced average settlement
figures for August to October running slightly lower at 2.13 per cent. And
unit labour costs in manufacturing remain negative although slightly down on
the minus 4 per cent of May.
Mr Ian Thompson, the federation's chief economist, said: 'We find no
evidence at all of a pay resurgence at present.
'There is the expectation of higher inflation, but in many companies that is
balanced by the pressure created by price cuts in their main product
markets.'
The CBI also continues to celebrate a broader reform of British pay
bargaining. A paper on pay and employment for next week's CBI conference
says that 74 per cent of employers use performance-related pay for at least
some of their employees.
It also says collective bargaining now covers only 34 per cent of employees,
that 59 per cent of the main pay decisions affecting manual employees are
taken at plant level, and that - according to a Gallup poll - more than half
of employees believe that pay and conditions should be bargained between the
individual and their employer.
But the pessimists can point to the stubborn persistence of 'pay drift'  -
bonuses, overtime and probably performance pay too - which means that
average earnings are still rising at about 4 per cent a year although
reported settlements are averaging only 2.5 per cent.
Earnings, in other words, continue to rise at about twice the level of
inflation in spite of high unemployment.
Relatively generous pay rises - made to look historically low by the
inflation rate - combined with continuing productivity improvements in
manufacturing, is what most employers are seeking - and getting.
Many public-sector workers faced with a second year of squeeze will feel
left out. Such an outcome is also not good for job creation, since employers
are concentrating resources on keeping existing staff happy.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931113

