FT934-10136

FT  06 NOV 93 / 'Have you stopped beating your wives?': Michael
Thompson-Noel considers the long and distinguished history of the media
interview


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


YOU WOULD think that interviewing people for magazines and newspapers was
one of the easiest forms of journalism - money for old rope, undisguised
vampirism. Take the subject out to lunch; order cocktails and fine wines;
push the tape recorder button; use flattery and cunning in approximately
equal measure - and suck the victim dry.
There is, after all, a trade-off involved. An interview is usually a two-way
seduction.
The interviewer wants good tape: yards of serviceable quotes which display,
in passing, his skills as a questioner and background knowledge. Or her
skills, more likely, for modern-day stars of the killer interview - 'jugular
journalism' - are predominantly female.
The interviewee, in turn, is talking for publication. He can speak sincerely
and to the point, or seek a refuge in blandness, or conceal his real views
with lies.
What I hadn't realised was that the media interview has such a long and
distinguished history; or that its serviceability is so well-recognised that
it occupies a niche in the theory of communication.
W. T. Stead, who was responsible for popularising the interview formula in
Britain in the 1880s (he was editor of The Pall Mall Gazette), described
interviews as 'an immense engine of democratic enlightenment.' He was
echoed, 90 years later, by Denis Brian, in Murderers and Other Friendly
People: 'These days, more than at any time, our most vivid impressions of
our contemporaries are through interviews. Almost everything of moment
reaches us through one man asking questions of another. Because of this, the
interviewer holds a position of unprecedented power and influence.'
In the accepted sense, the first fully-fledged newspaper interview with a
celebrity was Horace Greeley's with Brigham Young in Salt Lake City in 1859.
Greeley was editor of the New York Tribune, Brigham Young the leader of the
Mormon Church. The interview was published throughout the world and
contained, interestingly, several lies on the part of the Mormon leader. He
gave a falsely low figure for his number of wives (he admitted to 15; in
fact there were 17) and under-stated his personal wealth. Young also denied
the existence of the Danites, his secret order of destroying angels.
The New York editor reported that Young was 'a portly, frank, good-natured,
rather thick-set man of 55, seeming to enjoy life, and be in no particular
hurry to get to heaven.' Much of the interview was couched in the Q and A
format still familiar today:
HG: 'Can you give me any rational explanation of the aversion and hatred
with which your people are generally regarded by those among whom they have
lived and with whom they have been in contact?'
BY: 'No other explanation than is afforded by the crucifixion of Christ and
the kindred treatment of God's ministers, prophets and saints in all ages.'
The Greely-Young exchange rings up the curtain on The Penguin Book of
Interviews, published this week and edited by Christopher Silvester.
Distrust of interviews and interviewers has been a constant theme since the
beginning, says Silvester. Kipling told two reporters that being interviewed
was 'just as much of a crime as . . . an assault . . . cowardly and vile.'
(Kipling himself had interviewed Mark Twain a few years previously).
But soon journalism was showered with them. From Silvester's anthology we
learn of Karl Marx's belief that 'as soon as (the English middle class)
finds itself out-voted on what it considers vital questions we shall see
here a new slave owners' war';
that Thomas Edison worked a 20-hour day and kept, at home, a supply of
35-cent cigars encased in expensive wrappers to fool alleged connoisseurs.
'You should hear them praise them';
that Emile Zola never mapped out a plot. 'I cannot do it. I have frequently
meditated for hours, buried my head in my hands, closed my eyes, and got ill
over it. But no use';
that Sir Edwin Lutyens had a childish sense of humour. 'There was once a
Scotsman who met a man in a fog, and said: 'Have you seen Macphierson?' 'I'm
not sure,' replied the other. 'I've seen one man but he was either a very
wee man wi' a beard or a very tall man wi' a sporran';
that Al Capone could talk the birds off the telephone wires. 'Graft is a
byword in American life today. It is law where no other law is obeyed . . .
Virtue, honour, truth and the law have all vanished from our life. We are
smart-Alecky';
that Benito Mussolini often read Byron;
that Adolf Hitler was two joints short of a rave;
that Joseph Stalin was as slippery as an eel in a tub of yoghurt;
that Brendan Behan was fabulously witty. 'I shake hands with no member of
the upper class except the Guinness family. They've done a lot for me';
that Frank Lloyd Wright was a mesmerising talker. 'Most . . . educated taste
today is an acquired taste. It has nothing whatever to do with certain
senses or the beneficial character of the thing tasted; it's only whether
you like it or not. And who are you? You are only an artificial thing whose
taste may be atrocious. So when we have a taste-built culture we have a
haphazard jamboree of all kinds of things';
that Ernest Hemingway so hated sharks that he went after them with rifles,
Tommy-guns, shot-guns and air-guns. 'With the .22 it's a brain shot. You
have to know the spot and hit them just right when they surface';
that Marilyn Monroe could be whimsically poetic. 'I have a reputation for
always being late. Well, I don't think I'm late all the time. People just
remember the times I come too late. Besides, I don't really think I can go
as fast as other people. . . I don't think mankind was intended to be like
machines';
and that Mae West was a monotonous old body. 'I wish I could've shown you my
beach house. But I sold it. I miss it. I had murals of naked men on the
walls. Great art. Nudity in art isn't sex, it's art.'
The business of interviewing - its theory and technique, etiquette and
ethics - has been analysed and atomised many times. One early critic accused
British interviewers of 'dressing out their interviews with dramatic or
melodramatic, minutely accurate or judiciously imagined details.'
For more than a century interviewees have been complaining that they have
been misrepresented, if not misquoted: that the published version of the
interview gave a markedly different impression to the one they recall.
Even without malice, misrepresentation is easily achieved. On the other
hand, Murray Fisher, who used to supervise the Playboy interviews, has said
that the magazine's technique was ' . . . to sift and refine the raw
verbiage of a tape transcript into a linear, continuous conversation. . .
This meant there was always a process of distillation and condensation, of
reshuffling and rearranging, but with sufficient faithfulness to the
original that the material had the verisimilitude of . . . spoken
conversation . . . Many of the interviewees have volunteered publicly that
the published interviews reported exactly what they said - even though no
interview has been published verbatim.'
Anyway, there can be bonuses in misquotation. I like what George Sylvester
Viereck, an American, told George Clemenceau, the French statesman, when he
interviewed him in 1928. It was Clemenceau's favourite trick to embarrass
his interviewers. He made startling statements, which he subsequently
repudiated. Early in the interview an impish Clemenceau referred to the
perils of misquotation.
Viereck fired back: 'To be misquoted is the destiny of great men. They are
always misquoted. That's no misfortune. Some of the best things attributed
to great men were probably never said at all - at least, not by them. The
world's imagination invents the appropriate word if the hero's own
imagination fails him.'
The Penguin Book of Interviews, Viking, Pounds 18.99.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

931106

