FT932-6620

FT  27 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Acquisitions behind 14% rise to Pounds
10.8m at Plysu


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


ACQUISITIONS helped to boost profits at Plysu, the plastic container
manufacturer which yesterday revealed a 14 per cent advance at the pre-tax
level to Pounds 10.8m for the year to March 31.
Mr James Summerlin, chairman, said difficult trading in industrial
containers and the arrival of competitors in the milk bottle business had
been responsible for a slight decrease in underlying profits. The return in
continuing operations before interest fell from Pounds 9.84m to Pounds
9.49m.
Group sales rose by 31 per cent to Pounds 86.4m (Pounds 66m). This was
largely due to the Pounds 18.8m contribution for 8 months from SEP, the
Benelux-based blow moulded plastics container company purchased for Pounds
13.5m last summer.
Mr Summerlin warned that although the first few months of SEP's performance
had been up to expectations, deepening recession in Europe had significantly
affected trading in the second half.
He estimated that recession had depressed SEP's sales potential by about 15
per cent in Europe. Plysu had decided to close a Belgian factory, acquired
before SEP, at a total cost of Pounds 750,000.
On a brighter note, Mr Summerlin said there were some signs of recovery in
the UK, although these were still tentative. He was particularly optimistic
about the outlook for plastic milk and juice bottles, in spite of an
increasingly competitive market.
Plysu claims some 70 per cent of this market which Mr Summerlin estimated
was worth about Pounds 35m a year 'and growing.'
The main growth in the current year was likely to come from this division. A
new factory would be opened this year and called for a large part of the
group's planned Pounds 14m (Pounds 12m) capital expenditure.
The final dividend was raised from 4.35p to 5p, for an increased total of 7p
(6p). Earnings advanced from 13.9p to 15.3p.
COMMENT
Plysu's decline from a 300p share price a year ago to last night's 248p may
be due partly to management changes last year. However, the steady fall is
more likely to reflect concerns over raw material price increases and the
company's exposure to recession-beset Europe. On the plus side, Plysu's
consistent investment in the business has left it with state of the art
manufacturing facilities and a leading position in the growing dairy market.
Forecasts have nevertheless been pulled back slightly to about Pounds 12m
pre-tax this year, taking into account tougher times in the industrial
market. The shares, on a prospective p/e of 16 times, appear to have little
room for immediate advancement.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930527

