FT934-11533

FT  30 OCT 93 / Food & Drink: A wizard of Oz weaves a spell in Italy -
Jancis Robinson meets a very well-travelled moustache / Wines


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


THE FIRST time I spoke on the telephone with South Australian wine-maker
Geoff Merrill, he was still recovering from cricketer Ian Botham's most
recent testimonial. He had got to bed at 3.45am and had to be on a 7.55am
flight to Rome. He made it.
Thus, he kept his promise to Sainsbury's, the UK supermarket giant, to see
some Orvieto and Frascati fermentations bubbling away before turning his
hired Lancia north and driving 680 km to position himself in readiness for a
hard spell of wine-making the next day. 'I've been told I must have been the
most photographed person in Italy last September, the speeds I've been doing
on those autostradas,' he told me. his
Merrill is one of those characters whose reputations precede them. Somehow,
our paths had never crossed - a lack of cricketing expertise on my part,
perhaps - and I was all prepared for Les Paterson incarnate. What I got was
a silk-shirted charmer with flowery waistcoat, a bunch of irises and a
handlebar moustache.
Sainsburys's, the most sober of the supermarket chains, has hired Merrill to
inject some Australian 'fruit - driven' character into an array of Italian
wines made at premises owned by Gruppo Italiano Vini, Italy's most dynamic
group of co - operatives. According to witnesses, the facial expressions
above the Italians' Milanese suits when Merrill was presented to them were
wonderful.
What Merrill did not realise when he took on the job is quite how long he
would spend in the Lancia between what turned out to be seven different
wineries from Rome to the Alps. In one 24-hour stretch, he drove 1,600 km.
'I had to work even harder in Italy than I do back home. There, you just
ring up and get answers to 'What's the sugar level? Any sulphide on the
nose?' You can't in Italy. You have to jump in your car in Trento and drive
to bloody Rome and back.'
Merrill swears he loves the Italians, though. Great people. Great food. Some
great wines, especially Tuscan reds. 'The elegant tannins in those Antinori
wines. That's what I'm trying to go for at home. I'm not a big rap for
Valpolicella, mind you, but I liked those - whaddyacall them? - Amarones.
That's all I drank up there (in Valpolicella country). Fifteen per cent
alcohol, mind you. Not very clever, was it?
'The only thing is, the way those guys eat lunch. You can forget asking
someone to give you a reading at five to twelve. Or put some Chardonnay into
oak on a Saturday, even if it's really ready for it. Could be the start of
the shooting season, or something really important like that.
'And d'you know what? At six o'clock, they go home] Chief wine-maker came up
to me at the end and shook my hand. 'You work very hard,' he said. Well, I
wouldn't want it any other way.'
Merrill's main amendments to the Italian wine-making recipe have been to
ferment cooler and use different yeasts, all the time trying desperately to
protect the embryonic wine from oxygen, the obverse of Italian philosophy.
'In terms of machinery, Italians have got it all. But what they don't have
is enough refrigeration, and it can be hot out there.'
Merrill claims he took on the job to keep sweet a very important British
customer for his own Mount Hurtle Australian wines. Sainsbury's, on the
other hand, realised that only someone who was his own boss would be allowed
out.
This is not the first time an Italian winery has seen the arrival of a
'flying wine-maker' during the quiet season down under. The ubiquitous
Jacques Lurton turned out some Basilicata wines last year, and Ricasoli of
Tuscany had a little help from South Australia. This year Gaetana Carron,
formerly of Rosemount (Australia), Trimbach (Alsace) and Concha y Toro
(Chile), has been working the vintage all over northern Italy.
Sainsbury's buyers are flying to Verona on Monday to choose from the
Merrill/GIV Bianco di Custoza, Pinot Grigio, a couple of Chardonnays, a
Veneto Sauvignon, a Cabernet or two, a Teroldego, a Frascati, an Orvieto,
and trials of varietal Grechetto and Verdello, two of Italy's less exposed
grape varieties. Deciding how to market them might be even more difficult,
though. A Vino Merrillo label? The Ozitalia range? Or GIVusabeer?
Footnote: Merrill must have found it difficult to improve on GIV's
Chardonnay delle Tre Venezie (Pounds 3.59 Sainsbury's). Best Merrill buys
are vehemently Australian. Mount Hurtle Grenache Shiraz 1992 (Pounds 3.99 at
Oddbins and Pounds 4.15 at Sainsbury's) is a juicy antipodean answer to
early-drinking Cotes du Rhone. Cockatoo Ridge Chardonnay 1993 (Pounds 4.19
at Oddbins) combines body with vivacity. Mount Hurtle Grenache Rose 1993
(Pounds 4.95 Sainsbury's) shows us what most Tavel is not.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

931030

