FT934-8722

FT  13 NOV 93 / Travel: Thaw brings anglers to the tundra - Rose Baring goes
fishing on Russia's Kola peninsula


   By ROSE BARING


OUTSIDE interference has been felt only twice in the remote village of
Varzuga, and it has always meant trouble. 'Ivan the Terrible sent his
oprichniki (secret police) in 1568. They killed two-thirds of the
population.' Svyatislav Mikhailovich Kalouchin paused to let this sink in,
stroking his moustache thoughtfully, before continuing. 'Then, after almost
400 years, Stalin sent his men, too.'
He caught my eyes and smiled. Both of us were outsiders.
Svet, as he is known by his western partners, or Mikhail'ich by his
respectful employees, is from Odessa, the 'pearl of the Black Sea.' For the
past four years, he has been director of the 2m-acre Rise Up Communism]
collective farm on Russia's Kola peninsula. If you imagine Scandinavia to be
the silhouette of a bad-tempered mule's head, then the Kola peninsula,
straddling the Arctic Circle, is its flattened back ears.
Beneath the surface, the Kola is rich in minerals; but the land itself is
like a massive black beach at low tide. Undulations in the sodden, peaty
soil create millions of small pools, and the only crop is forestry. The farm
is so inaccessible that it keeps its own herds of pigs and cattle for milk
and meat. Its bakery produces fresh bread daily from flour driven hundreds
of miles over rutted roads.
The main farm income derives from deep-sea fishing and salmon netting. But,
as subsidies in the state farming sector are cut, providing an income for
the 1,200 inhabitants requires the kind of lateral thinking for which
Russian managers are not generally famed. Yet Svet, a mere babe at 36,
appears to have what it takes.
As well as a recently-built frankfurter plant, he runs a factory making fur
clothing and sells fish, crabs and lobsters to the Germans. Perhaps the most
incongruous of his recent ventures is a series of partnerships with western
travel companies, offering salmon fishing on the farm's prolific Arctic
rivers.
Salmon stocks in many European rivers have been so depleted by netting that
you might pay large sums for a week's fishing and return without so much as
a story about the one that got away. The group of eight with which I
travelled caught 79 in one day. Such was their enthusiasm - and the
continuous polar daylight - that many fished into the early hours of the
morning.
There are camps on both the north and south coasts of the peninsula. The
larger fish head into the northern rivers, later in the season. It can still
feel like an early Arctic spring in May and early June, but that is not
entirely bad: the area's elephantine mosquitoes like warmer weather.
The arrival of foreigners in this introverted spot - a forbidden destination
for 70 years except for supply ships during the second world war - had its
surreal moments. We flew first to a tented camp, 130km from the nearest
village on a piece of blasted tundra with only an ancient belching tractor
engine to generate electricity. Yet, within the wind-buffeted kitchen tent,
two microwave ovens, a food processor and a pair of brand-new filter coffee
machines gleamed next to a corroded vintage refrigerator.
The locals found the western fishermen hilarious. An assorted bunch of
well-paid professionals, their kit was state of the art. Watching them cast
elegantly and continuously, the gillies grinned mischievously as they
described their own 4ft spinning rods, crude lures and landing technique -
which consists of walking backwards until the fish is lying on the bank.
Our second camp was a group of log cabins on a flat bend in the river, a
short way south of Varzuga. As we arrived by helicopter, the pilot dipped
down to look at the Church of the Ascension, a towering, 17th century wooden
structure. l was drawn to its complexity, unnerved perhaps by the utter
simplicity of the local architecture and way of life.
The cross-shaped building sits on raised wooden foundations and rises to its
central, tent-roofed tower in a series of exaggerated ogee gables. At the
top of the tower is a small, bulbous cupola, covered in wooden tiles.
Although built only with an axe, and without a single metal nail, there is
something in the arrogance of its design that is tantalisingly familiar.
Victor, a Ukrainian who lives next to the church and is building his own
wooden house, told how the village was the oldest on the peninsula, dating
from the 12th century. It had become immensely rich from fishing, furs and
the abundant supply of fresh-water pearls, which were used by the thousand
to decorate church robes and crowns. The church's upkeep was met from the
proceeds of all fish caught on religious holidays. Today, the village cannot
afford to build a house for - or pay - a priest.
On our last, gloriously sunny night, we heard for ourselves that, even
without a church, the musical traditions of the village had survived.
Valentine the fish inspector arrived with his accordian. He left at 1am,
setting off upstream in a matchstick of a boat, standing perilously every
now and then to wave goodbye. Still ringing in my ears is his aching,
melancholic song about an astronaut who dreams of his wife, his return to
earth and the numbing, romantic beauty of the Russian countryside.
Many camps on the peninsula are operated by Kola Salmon based at 25 High
Street, Hungerford, Wiltshire RG17 ONF (tel. 0488-683 222). The season runs
from late May to mid-September, and prices vary from Pounds 2,000 to Pounds
3,400 a rod per week. Non-fishing guests pay about Pounds 1,200. Prices,
covering everything except tips and drinks, include British Airways flights
to and from Moscow plus charter aircraft and helicopter transport.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

931113

