FT933-5272

FT  04 SEP 93 / Romania struggles to secure IMF standby agreement:
Unemployment and strikes are continuing to plague the government's flagging
reform efforts


   By VIRGINIA MARSH


A ROMANIAN delegation leaves for Washingon this weekend in a last-ditch
attempt to secure a 1993 standby agreement with the International Monetary
Fund and restore confidence in the country's flagging reform efforts.
A successful outcome to the talks would unlock some Dollars 3bn (Pounds 2bn)
in badly-needed foreign credits and boost the fragile minority government of
Mr Nicolae Vacaroiu, which is coming under increasing attack from opposition
parties, trade unions and its own political supporters.
Opposition parties have stepped up their criticism of the government
following last weekend's cabinet reshuffle which saw the removal of four
ministers including Mr Misu Negritoiu, who was considered the government's
key reformer.
Opposition leaders say the reshuffle will do nothing to improve the
cabinet's ability to govern and have lodged a parliamentary motion demanding
the removal of the finance and interior ministers and the goverment's chief
of staff, who have all been named in a corruption scandal sparked off by the
dismissal of the head of the Financial Guard.
Nationalist parties, on whom the ruling party, the recently renamed Social
Democracy party of Romania (SDPR), relies to stay in power, have been
angered at their failure to secure a cabinet post and are threatening to
withdraw their support. Mr Gheorghe Funar, the fiery nationalist mayor of
Cluj in the north-west, has also threatened to seek the impeachment of
President Ion Iliescu if bilingual signs are introduced in ethnically mixed
areas such as Transylvania. But Romania's application for imminent
membership of the Council of Europe has been tied to improved treatment of
the country's ethnic minorities.
The government also faces increased labour militancy in the wake of two
significant strikes last month. The industry ministry says more stoppages
are inevitable. 'Workers will only feel the full effect of this summer's
price hikes when they receive their winter heat and food bills,' an official
said. Recent price liberalisation has added to triple digit inflation and
the biggest price rises since the overthrow of the Ceausescu regime in 1989.
If the government, under pressure from the IMF and World Bank, restructures
state enterprises, workers will soon also face mass unemployment for the
first time. Until now only a quarter of the 1m unemployed, 9 per cent of the
workforce, have lost their jobs through forced redundancy, according to the
unions.
Politically the SDPR, which won last year's elections by promising slower
and less painful reforms, has not prepared the country for the hard times
which lie ahead. A privatisation official said: 'In May, the government
falsely said it could cover subsidy cuts '100 per cent' through pay
increases. Then, it helped provoke both the recent miners' and train
drivers' strikes by promising pay awards which it later realised it could
not afford.'
The train drivers' strike collapsed last month after its union's telephone
lines were cut and state radio and television broadcast government
statements saying that workers at most depots had returned to work.
Witnesses later said this was false.
Mr Miron Mitrea, joint president of the pro-reform CNSLR-Fratia
confederation which, with 3.7m members, represents more than a third of the
workforce, says: 'The government was not in close contact with the train
drivers. It thought it could stop the strike by declaring it illegal, as it
does with all strikes.' The government also repeatedy misrepresented the
miners' demands during the recent coal miners' strike.
That strike ended after the state owned Jiu Valley coal company, which
includes a representative of the ministry of industry, partially caved in to
the miners' pay demands. Rather than acknowledging this the prime minister
said the strike had achived nothing and that the miners had been forced to
go ack to work on the govenment's terms.
Once details of the settlement were known, the minister of industry declared
the RAH's agreement with the union void. Mr Miron Cosma, the miners' leader,
has now begun legal proceedings to have the minister's decision reversed. He
is also threatening to launch a new strike.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930904

