FT934-11180

FT  02 NOV 93 / Europe's metal fatigue: The threat from Japan's machine tool
makers


   By ANDREW BAXTER


The pile of aluminium castings bore little resemblance to car wheels. But
after two minutes each inside an innovative Japanese machine tool - which
can replace the three normally used by wheelmakers - they were the real
thing.
The Yamazaki Mazak machine was one of many examples at the recent Emo
machine tool fair of new products aimed at helping their customers find
better, more efficient ways of cutting, drilling and shaping metal.
In a neighbouring hall from the Japanese company's stand in Hanover, there
were five machines on show from Traub, the big German producer of turning
machines, or lathes. But no amount of smartly painted equipment can disguise
the fact that Traub and its fellow European producers are worried.
While some of them can match the Japanese on the flow of new products, they
find it hard to compete with their rivals' financial muscle. Japanese
manufacturers' higher sales volumes enable them to weather recessions more
easily and support a more aggressive global manufacturing and marketing
policy. Hitachi Seiki, for example, has started producing in Germany, and
has recently slapped its first 'Made in Europe' sticker on a machining
centre produced in a joint venture with the Klockner industrial group.
Traub, meanwhile, announced in September that it is receiving a capital
injection from banks and its main family shareholders to reduce its debts by
DM80m (Pounds 32.5m). It is also receiving help from the Treuhand, the
agency charged with privatising east German industry, to buy Heckert, an
east German producer of milling machines, in a deal that broadens its
product range.
The question of the competitiveness of the European machine tool industry is
the main talking point among producers. There are about 1,450 machine tool
builders in Europe, and their problems are summed up by Cecimo, the umbrella
body for national associations from Europe's 12 main machine-tool countries.
It says companies making standard machinery are too numerous and too small
to compete effectively in the world market. And builders of more specialist
machines lack the financial power to create a global presence and survive
recessions. For many, this recession has been the worst - over the past
three years, the value of machine tools sold in the European market has
fallen by 20 per cent to Pounds 8.6bn.
In spite of this bleak analysis, the share of total world production of
machine tools by Cecimo countries has risen from 40 per cent in 1990 to 47
per cent last year. Europe has maintained a trade surplus in machine tools,
albeit down from Pounds 2.45bn in 1989 to Pounds 1.92bn last year, as sales
to growing markets in China and south-east Asia offset the collapse of
traditional markets such as the former Soviet Union.
But Europe is still seeking a long-term solution through a two-pronged
strategy to resolve the problems of an industry which has lost 32,000 jobs -
17 per cent of its workforce - over the past two years. First, Cecimo is
asking the European Commission to adopt industrial and trade measures that
would help the industry cope with its competitors.
Among its requests are: action to reduce the financial and employment costs
for European producers, relative to those of the US and Japan: financial
incentives for customers to buy machine tools whenever the market is in a
severe downturn; a programme to help small and medium-sized companies take
part in EC research and development programmes; a positive conclusion of the
Gatt trade negotiations; and a co-ordinated EC policy to promote exports.
The aim, according to Mr Yves de Boisfleury, Cecimo's president, is to
correct what he sees as the 'flagrant imbalances' between the costs of doing
business in Europe, compared with those of Japan and the US. Cecimo claims
that 'social costs' in Germany - salaries, benefits and other
employee-related expenses - are 27 per cent higher than in Japan and 37 per
cent more than in the US.
Such pleas might be dismissed as another unrealistic wish list from
industrialists struggling in a recession, were it not for the fact that the
industry has accepted the need for restructuring through mergers, takeovers
and co-operation deals. This is the second plank in its survival strategy.
The recession can be credited for the new note of realism. 'I have been
through four recessions, but none has been as bad as this,' says Mr Walter
Trick, Traub's export manager.
For German machine tool makers, the crucial competitive battle is with
Japan. The two countries account for 47 per cent of total global machine
tool production, and Germany has far more producers competing head on with
the Japanese than is the case in the rest of Europe.
Mr Hans-Joachim Holstein, sales and marketing director at Traub, speaks of a
'vicious circle' in which the company is entwined in the system of high
German labour costs and at the same time is the victim of cost pressures
among its domestic customers.
'If we have cost cuts, then we have a chance to continue manufacturing here
in Germany,' he says. Traub already manufactures in France, Italy and
Brazil, and plans to reduce manufacturing in western Germany from 80 per
cent of total production to 50 per cent over the next 12 months.
It needs to reduce the cost of its high-volume standard machines by up to a
quarter over the next year or so, says Mr Holstein, or else make them
outside western Germany. Such an admission would have been unusual three
years ago but is now common among leading European producers.
Cecimo says the problem of high labour costs is not confined to Germany.
Only if the European industry can reform its cost structure will it be able
to respond to customers who are increasingly looking for value for money
rather than technical wizardry.
According to Mr Hans-Jurgen Marckzinski, general commissioner at the Hanover
show and chief executive of Dortmund-based Thyssen Maschinenbau, customers
want equipment that is 'as good as it needs to be', rather than 'as good as
possible'.
Giving customers what they want cannot be a strategy which relies for help
on the European Commission. Producers are increasingly aware that they
should take the future into their own hands rather than wait for concrete
proposals. The response from the Commission to Cecimo's plea has so far been
cautious, although it clearly recognises that Europe's machine tools could
unlock increased manufacturing productivity.
Mr Daniele Verdiani, a senior official at the Commission's industry
directorate, says: 'The Community can always make business conditions more
favourable', but adds pointedly: 'The microeconomy cannot be regulated by a
magic wand.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931102

