FT932-7119

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (5): Things are
improving - Profile: Rolls-Royce Power Engineering


   By ANDREW BAXTER


It would be easy to conclude from a tour round the Parsons steam turbine
factory at Heaton in Newcastle that one of the most illustrious names in the
UK's rich history of heavy engineering triumphs is down on its luck.
The factory is ticking over on a low level of activity, and some of the
massive machine tools capable of handling a 300-tonne workpiece are being
used on work for outside customers - now that the UK market for large
coal-fired steam turbines has dried up.
Parsons and its parent company, the recently renamed Rolls-Royce Power
Engineering, have, indeed, just been through a rough patch. Overall
employment has fallen about 40 per cent in 10 years, while Parsons'
workforce has been halved to 2,500 since 1985.
This is partly a reflection of the rationalisation of capacity throughout
the power equipment industry, and especially in the European steam turbine
business. But Parsons in particular was also badly hit by the Iraqi trade
embargo, causing the cancellation of its Pounds 70m Al Shemal contract and
the loss of 650 jobs. Bits of equipment for the order still languish at
Heaton.
Fortunately, Parsons' factory will soon be humming once again, as
manufacturing begins in earnest on two orders now in the design stage. Last
year Parsons won a Pounds 70m contract from Calcutta Electric for two 250MW
steam turbine generators to be installed at the new coal-fired Budge Budge
power station.
Parsons also secured an order worth Pounds 100m to supply three 250MW steam
turbine generators for Stage 3 of the Pulau Seraya power station in
Singapore. Having built Stage 1 and then lost out to Japanese competition
for Stage 3, the new order is the pay-off for all Parsons' recent efforts to
improve its competitiveness.
More orders are being chased, but meanwhile Mr Richard Maudslay, managing
director of Rolls-Royce Industrial Power Group, can claim that the power
generation business is 'quite well loaded: much better than 12 months ago'.
At Parsons, Mr Trevor Murch, managing director says: 'We have turned from a
situation of some gloom and pessimism to one where we can continue building
on these recent successes.' Over the next few months Parsons will even be
recruiting some 300 new manufacturing workers.
R-R PE can trace its history back to Sir Charles Parsons, the inventor of
steam turbines, and more recently has been at the centre of the
restructuring of UK heavy engineering. A merger in 1977 brought together
Reyrolle Parsons (turbine generators, transformers, switchgear and control
systems) and Clarke Chapman (boilers, water treatment plant, fossil and
nuclear fuel handling systems) to form Northern Engineering Industries. NEI
was itself bought by Rolls-Royce for Pounds 300m in 1989 in a move designed
to protect the aero-engine group from the vagaries of the aerospace market.
Subsequently, a deal with Asea Brown Boveri saw the creation of a UK joint
venture, NEI ABB Gas Turbines. This allowed NEI to participate in the UK
combined-cycle market, as it lacked a range of heavy-duty gas turbines.
Then last year, Rolls-Royce and Westinghouse Electric announced an alliance
covering technology transfer and marketing collaboration that is of
far-reaching significance for both companies. And in February, some big
changes were made to the corporate identity of companies within the
Rolls-Royce Industrial Power Group.
NEI's business is now conducted in the name of Rolls-Royce Power
Engineering, and the NEI prefix has been removed from companies with
historic names such as Parsons, Reyrolle, Peebles and Clarke Chapman. 'There
were too many names,' says Mr Maudslay.
Changes at R-R PE go a long way beyond the name. Over the past five years,
the company has worked hard at rectifying problems which were reducing its
competitiveness, especially in turnkey work.
Mr Maudslay is frank about the errors of the past. Up to the mid-1980s, he
says, the company lacked the management skills to bring in a project on time
and on-budget. 'A tremendous amount of time and effort has been spent
correcting that,' he says.
He contrasts the company's performance on the Rihand power station project
in India, where it made the mistake of signing the contract before the
technical specification was clearly agreed, to its recent work converting
the open-cycle gas-turbine Connaught Bridge power station in Malaysia to
combined cycle operation. The Pounds 70m turnkey programme won by Parsons,
was finished on time and on budget, and also brought work to other companies
within R-R's Industrial Power Group.
On the manufacturing side, the rationalisation included closure of the
Parsons plant at Long Benton and a change in the make-or-buy policy to
increase outsourcing of less critical components.
At Parsons, some Pounds 70m was invested in the 1980s on manufacturing
technology, and the rate is being maintained this decade, says Mr Murch. A
new approach to manufacturing organisation, which Parsons calls 'systems
engineering' has had a big impact on productivity.
Having slimmed down to what Mr Maudslay calls an 'essential core,' R-R PE
now has a stable base from which it can provide integrated solutions to
customers. As long as it was concentrating internally on reducing its
capacity, it tended to take a piecemeal approach to winning orders - the
same customer would be visited separately by Parsons, Reyrolle etc.
Mr Maudslay sees the overall strategy for R-R PE to be to select the market
areas and product ranges where it can play to its strengths.
In power generation this means building on its successful record in what
have conventionally been called medium-sized steam turbines - 250-500MW -
but which are now very much the standard size used in combined cycle power
generation.
Its regional priorities are the Middle East, India and the Far East. These
are the areas with the strongest growth, says Mr Maudslay. The trend towards
private power in India and several fast-growing markets in Asia increases
the chances of countries' power ambitions being realised, and, via
Rolls-Royce & Partners Finance, Mr Maudslay is prepared to take equity
stakes in projects. 'But I don't see us taking a major share in a major
project,' he cautions.
Looking ahead, Mr Maudslay attaches considerable importance to the tie-up
with Westinghouse. The attraction he says, is the big mutual interest in a
deal for both companies. Westinghouse gets aero-engine derivative technology
for its gas turbines, while Rolls-Royce gets access to Westinghouse's heavy
duty gas turbine range.
The companies will work together on marketing, with either leading a bid
depending on each other's market strengths. Co-operation in steam turbine
technology development has already begun - 'it did not make sense for each
to develop its own products,' he says.
The agreement with Westinghouse excludes the UK because of the NEI-ABB joint
venture, but this looks to be declining in importance for R-R PE overall,
perhaps because it lacks the necessary element of mutual interest. Even in
the UK, its prospects look uncertain as the market for gas turbines turns
cooler.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930525

