FT932-6859

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(7): Every home should have one - Personal computers: the next consumer
blockbuster?


   By GEOF WHEELWRIGHT


AS THE personal computer revolution celebrates a dozen years in business, it
is starting to shift its attack on the status quo from the office to the
home. For years, so-called 'futurologists' have predicted that the PC could
change the average person's home life - but only recently has the technology
been invented to meet that challenge.
Personal computer technology - and its recent 'ease of use' ideas - are
being used in everything from automated bank teller machines to hand-held
'personal data assistants', televisions, videotape recorders and microwave
ovens. The computer industry is being particularly successful at
popularising the use of pictures to control equipment.
Many modern video recorders, for example, now have either a built-in
'screen' for selecting which television programmes their users wish to
record or offer the ability to display and enter this information on a
television screen.
Pictures such as that of a runner at the starting blocks of a race (to use
that, you should enter the start time of a programme) and the same runner
reaching the finish line (where you are supposed to enter the time when the
programme ends) are typical of the 'icon-based' approach to controlling
consumer devices that is evolving from the PC world.
Among the most voluble leaders of the computer industry on this subject is
Mr Bill Gates, Microsoft chairman and co-founder. The success of its
picture-based operating environment for personal computers - Microsoft
Windows 3.1 - gave the company a revenue growth last year of Dollars 950m.
Mr Gates is working to incorporate Microsoft Windows technology into a wide
variety of electronics products in both the office and the home. His aim is
an environment where fax, photocopier and telephone all run some form of
Windows - and are connected to one another. Meanwhile, the telephone PABX
shares its phone directories with the electronic mail and voicemail systems.
Both are available to Personal Information Management products for dialling
by PC modems.
The most intriguing of Mr Gates' office equipment notions is the handheld
Windows machine - which he suggests would be not unlike Apple Computer's
planned Newton hand-held computer. The Apple system allows users to control
it through the use of handwriting on the screen. But Mr Gates says this is
actually a limitation. 'Newton relies on the weakest part of the system to
do the most work - I prefer structured interfaces on modeless devices.'
It is clear, however, that projects which marry personal computer technology
to office or consumer electronics technology will require partnerships
between computer companies and those in other industries. Thus, Apple
Computer recently struck an agreement with electronics giant Toshiba to help
bring its software expertise to the Japanese market for 'personal digital
assistants' or PDAs.
A number of large manufacturers are counting on these PDA systems growing
fast in popularity - with Hewlett-Packard, for example, recently releasing
its 100LX series hand-held computer with built-in electronic mail.
The key to their success is their built-in communications functions. The EO
system developed by AT&T in the US, for example, marries pen computing with
cellular phone technology to allow users from anywhere to read electronic
mail - as well as upload and download information and carry out standard
computing tasks. All of this happens by using a machine small enough to fit
in your hand and entirely controllable by pointing at pictures.
The growing number of US and European software companies in partnership with
Japanese manufacturers indicates how the market for 'picture-based control'
of electronic devices will advance. When pictures are used for control, they
are far more international. Just as certain international symbols are used
in automobiles for headlights, windshield wipers and brakes, common symbols
in the future could be used to control computers, video recorders,
refrigerators, radios and any other device that uses software.
In fact, some futurologists expect more and more consumer electronics
technology to be built around the PC - or at least to use a form of
picture-based control as an underlying control technology. They suggest, for
example, that it is ridiculous for people to have three remote controls in
their home (one each for the TV, the VCR and the CD player).
Instead, people might in future have a few wallmounted, colour flat screens
in their house that will be used for television, video games and information
management. The controls for all home systems would be condensed onto a
single hand-held controller running picture-based personal computer
software.
But many technological issues need to be settled before then. These include
international decisions about the resolution of high-definition TV, the cost
and reliability of large, colour screens and regulatory issues about their
use.
In the meantime, you can expect personal computer technology to appear in
almost anything that has electricity running through it - and pointing at
pictures to become the internationally standard way of controlling them.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930526

