FT933-5258

FT  04 SEP 93 / Smith faces tough fight on union votes


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


THE STRENGTH of opposition to plans by the Labour party leadership to end
trade union participation in the selection of parliamentary candidates was
underlined yesterday.
The agenda for next month's party conference includes nine pages of motions
and amendments on the reform of its constitution, most of which are hostile
to the proposals.
The depth of hostility will disappoint Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, who
won an important victory in July when the party's national executive
committee approved a deal hammered out in talks with the unions.
Mr Smith is unlikely to be surprised, however. Several big unions, including
the TGWU general union, have made clear that they oppose the deal, which
focuses on one-member-one-vote elections.
Most of the critical motions have been submitted by leftwing constituency
parties although their members would benefit most from a reduction in trade
union participation.
Many constituency parties complain that any weakening of Labour's links with
the unions would risk transforming the party into 'another Liberal
Democratic party' or worse, a mark two Social Democrat party.
Several unions and constituency parties have submitted motions giving full
or partial support to the leadership. These include the Fire Brigades Union
and the AEEU engineering and electrical union.
The most substantial opposition comes from unions such as the GMB general
union and Nupe, the public services union. Both have submitted motions
seeking to undermine the leadership's proposals.
Such an electoral system would be restricted to union members who paid the
political levy which helps to finance the Labour party, but would break the
link between constituency party members and MPs which the leadership wants
to strengthen.
Mr Smith's first public opportunity to win over union critics will come when
he addresses the Trade Union Congress on Tuesday.
He is expected to avoid any direct reference to the issue, however, to avoid
charges of attempting to hijack the conference agenda.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930904

