FT932-303

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (1): One stop that does it all
 -The growth of applications running on 'client-server' networks amounts to
a second computer revolution. Low-cost hardware and sophisticated software
have opened the way, while calls for greater business productivity are the
spur


   By ALAN CANE


It is being described as the second computer revolution, the most profound
shift in the pattern of use of information technology since the advent of
mainframe systems in the 1950s.
Computers and telecommunications are merging to allow the creation of IT
networks that are narrow enough to serve a single department in a
corporation or as broad as a global enterprise. The key development is the
growth of applications running on 'client-server' networks, workstations and
larger computers linked together to process data co-operatively. This has
been made possible by improved local and wide-area communications and
cheaper processing power and memory on small computers.
Among the moves that suppliers are making which indicate that the networking
revolution is fully under way are:
Microsoft, the world's largest personal computer software house, this year
launched Windows NT, its next generation operating system. Windows NT, a
large and complex piece of software, is the first Microsoft operating system
designed for enterprise-wide computing. It competes not only with
International Business Machines' OS/2 personal computer operating system,
but also with MVS, IBM's flagship mainframe operating system.
Novell, the local area network (Lan) software supplier, acquired Unix
Systems Laboratories last year and forged an alliance with the database
vendor Oracle this year, in moves to consolidate the position of both
companies and fight the challenge from Windows NT.
Most significant of all, IBM, the stumbling giant of the computer industry,
established a client-server business unit, a startling change of direction
for a company whose business success has been based on centralised
mainframes.
There are equally significant moves on the telecommunications side of the
fence. The world's large carriers are increasingly concerned to offer their
large customers 'one stop' shopping in voice and data communications. The
range of activity is broad. AT&T of the US, for example, is involved in the
development of 'personal digital assistants'. These inexpensive, hand-held
devices combine the functions of a telephone, computer, facsimile machine
and electronic organiser.
The scene is thus being set for a business environment where corporate
information is readily available to executives either in the office or on
the move.
Wireless communications is enjoying a new vogue. According to CSC Index, a
leading US IT consultancy, 'wireless communications is a technology in which
global players are making multi-billion dollar investments and forming
cross-industry alliances'. It says that cellular radio carriers in the US
alone have made more than Dollars 10bn in capital investments since 1984.
The business logic derives from the 'Negroponte Switch', the observation by
Prof Nicholas Negroponte of the MIT Media Laboratory that communications to
people on the move should shift to wireless means, leaving television and
other transmissions to fixed targets to cables in the ground.
Olivetti of Italy has already announced a system for connecting personal
computers using radio frequencies rather than cables.
It is clear, therefore, that the scope of networking has changed over the
past decade. In earlier days the emphasis would have been on linking
mainframes and on standards contests such as the battle between IBM's
Systems Network Architecture and the world standards organisations' Open
Systems Interconnect.
Today the emphasis is on effectiveness; what makes the revolution possible
is a combination of low-cost computer hardware and sophisticated software;
what makes it necessary is a universal demand for greater business
productivity and competitiveness.
An example is Equipment et Composants pour L'Industrie Automobile (ECIA),
which is majority owned by Peugeot of France. It has established a
pan-European network of 10 sites running the IBM mid-range AS/400 system.
The network runs on IBM's SNA rules and is driven by an IBM mainframe based
at Audincourt near Paris. It is part of a ECIA project called 'Parler le
Meme Langage (Pamela)' which is being built to ensure that all parts of the
group work in the same way with standardised information and with objectives
and results which can be compared on the same basis. The key element is a
package called Data 3, manufacturing resources planning software written by
Hoskyns, the UK arm of Cap Gemini Sogeti of France.
Mr William McGilvray, supply manager at ECIA subsidiary HPC of Coventry,
explains: 'Under the old system, top management could not have looked at the
1992 devaluation of sterling and said: 'Let's put more work into the UK
because costs are lower there'. Now comparisons of this kind can be made
quickly and objectively.' Other motor manufacturers are installing similar
aids to productivity.
Why has computer networking assumed this new significance? The starting
point is today's business environment. Customers are demanding better and
more flexible service. They expect shorter lead times, improved quality and
responsiveness. IT networking, through electronic data interchange (EDI),
computer aided engineering (CAE) or group working can provide the means of
fast and flexible response.
The computer industry has been quick to coin expressions to describe the
essential features of the revolution: 'downsizing' - moving applications
from mainframe systems to less expensive but no less powerful microprocessor
based computers; 'client-server computing' - processing data on networks of
computers, some of which provide computing or data services to the network,
the rest serving as workstations; 'co-operative computing' where the network
functions as a single processing unit.
Among the companies which are helping to shape the new communications worlds
are, at the personal computer level, network operating system supplier
Novell, the market leader with NetWare version 4.0, Microsoft and Banyan. At
the local area network level, fast-growing hardware companies Cisco and 3Com
as well as Ungermann-Bass provide the essential hubs and routers for network
interconnection while suppliers of wide area networks include the
telecommunications companies AT&T and BT. At the systems level computer
hardware and software vendors include IBM, Digital Equipment,
Hewlett-Packard, Sun Microsystems and Bull.
The aim of networking is simple: to enable computer users to have access to
information, applications software and computing resources without needing
to know where any of these are located. But there are dangers, not least of
which is the comparative novelty of the technology.
Prof Stephen Bradley of Harvard Business School sounded a powerful warning
recently: 'Competitors may invest first without fully understanding the
strategic implications or evaluating the financial impact of their
investment, and other firms may copy these investments lest they be left
behind in a rapidly changing industry', he wrote, arguing that many
companies were investing heavily in IT networking in the forlorn hope of
gaining significant advantages. 'Most firms', he concluded, 'do not realise
a competitive advantage from their investments and those that do find it
difficult to sustain.'
It is a damning judgment, but it echoes the concerns that managers have
frequently expressed over the difficulty of justifying investment in IT. The
answer, according to Prof Bradley, is to assess spending on IT and
telecommunications as part of a coherent business strategy; to view it as a
strategic necessity rather than an attempt to gain sustainable competitive
advantage.
Putting networks together is, in practice, hard work and the larger the
network, the more complex the problems. To judge from the enthusiasm with
which networks are being installed, the rewards seem worth the risk.
According to Mr Peter Wright, European director of Dell Computer's
integrated systems division, the number of personal computer local area
networks (PC Lans) grew by 33 per cent last year to 780,000. He says the
principal aim is not to save money through downsizing, but to gain greater
efficiencies in all parts of the business. In short, it is the essential
underpinning for business process re-engineering, today's shorthand for
rethinking a business from the bottom up.
With the growth of networking, the problems of network management have
expanded. It is now the single greatest concern of IT managers in larger
companies. The London consultancy Ovum forecasts that the market for
management frameworks will be worth nearly Dollars 900m in the US and Europe
by 1998.
Today, the concern is to manage a broad range of communications and
computing devices from a variety of suppliers distributed over many sites.
The more aware organisations are already looking beyond that to ways of
managing business applications - software that supports practical business
processes - across a diversity of networking technologies.

The Financial Times


London Page I

930629

