FT932-13480

FT  23 APR 93 / World Trade News: EC-US move revives world trade hopes


   By REUTER


   GENEVA


SIGNS that the United States and the European Community aim to contain their
dispute over government contracts have raised hopes for a revival of the
long-stalled Uruguay Round world trade talks, Reuter reports from Geneva.
Both Sir Leon Brittan, EC trade commissioner, and Mr Mickey Kantor, US trade
representative, who together shaped the partial accord, have said they are
determined to push on to end the round successfully.
The dispute, in which both the US and the EC claimed their companies were
often excluded from access to the other's lucrative public contracts, was
partly settled on Wednesday. At one stage it had appeared to be a serious
threat to wrapping up the Uruguay Round, which is widely seen as offering a
much-needed boost to the ailing world economy.
One trade envoy in Geneva, where the round is negotiated under the aegis of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, said yesterday he was not unduly
concerned that the two sides still retained some mutual sanctions over
telecommunications. Even with such measures, 'it looks as though they will
be trying to quarantine the dispute and get on with the major job - fixing
the round,' he said.
A senior diplomat from an exporting state said he was heartened by what he
saw as an effort by the US and the EC 'to maximise accord and minimise the
discord' on the procurement issue. 'They seem to be concentrating their
minds on the bigger prize - the round,' he said.
However, some envoys and analysts involved in the round negotiations doubted
whether the two key trading powers were ready to make a big effort to
advance the cause of international free trade.
One expert expressed the hope that the partial accord would be a 'step
towards a wider government procurement agreement that could be reached
alongside a multilateral accord inside the round'. But he thought it would
take a lot more than that to convince people they were moving towards
negotiating seriously and wrapping up the round.
Other diplomats and officials said they were not convinced that the
administration of President Bill Clinton had yet decided to make the talks,
originally due to have been completed in December 1990, a major priority.
The US and the EC have to settle all their own differences before the
100-odd other countries in the round can effectively be brought back into
the process.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930423

