FT934-10111

FT  06 NOV 93 / Arts: 'Moonlight' falls into place / Review of the transfer
of Pinter's play to the West End


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


HOWEVER MUCH we may enthuse about London's fringe theatres, there is still
nothing like the pleasure of seeing a good production in the West End when
the house is full and eager to listen. The facilities are better, there is a
wider as well as a bigger audience, many of them actually wearing suits: in
short, a sense of occasion. This is the serious theatre-going public that
the theatre has to catch unless it is to become a minority form.
Such thoughts are prompted by the transfer of Harold Pinter's Moonlight from
the Almeida in Islington to the Comedy Theatre just off the Haymarket. The
quality of the production has been transformed.
To be sure, some of the improvement may be put down to sheer practice.
Moonlight opened at the Almeida two months ago. Especially with a Pinter
text, where so much is left unspoken, it requires time for the actors to
adjust to their parts and to the way the rest of the cast is developing as
well.
Yet there must be more to it than that. Moonlight is Pinter's first
full-length play for 15 years. It was originally billed for 75 minutes, ran
for 80 and is now much nearer 90. The performance at the Almeida was not
bad, but the production was disjointed, the touch and the timing uncertain.
I described it as possibly Pinter's valedictory as a stage-writer. Perhaps
it still is, but at least at the Comedy he is going out in style.
There have been no cast changes and none in the technical direction. The
transformation is that everything has fallen into place. Take the lighting
first, if only because it is plainly important to a play of this name. At
the Almeida it seemed simply to go up and down or, to put it crudely, on and
off. At the Comedy it shades slowly and sometimes lingers. These nuances in
the lighting, designed by Rick Fisher, must be responsible for adding a good
three minutes to the play's length.
There was a particular moment when one noticed how much that mattered. The
lights went down to indicate a change of scene. In this season of 'flu and
and heavy colds, there was an immediate outbreak of coughing and clearing of
throats. The significance was that so intent was the audience on listening
to the dialogue that all coughing had been previously suppressed. And when
the lighting went up again, the coughing promptly stopped.
If that sounds like what happens during a symphony at the Festival Hall, it
is the right analogy. Pinter works through a mixture of sudden bursts and
pauses. At the Comedy the timing has become perfect. As a result, Moonlight
seems much more moving than when it first appeared.
Ian Holm's mortally ill civil servant, Andy, has become more angry at the
dying of the light, and strives less for effect. His wife Bel, played with
marvellous controlled calm by Anna Massey, looks genuinely disturbed at his
going. The minor characters - Ralph the referee and his wife Maria who has
been the lover of both Andy and Bel - now come on rightly as minor
characters, not the comic interlude they seemed before.
On the other side of the stage, the two sons who refuse to go to the death
bed show a kind of grief whereas at the Almeida they were a kind of musical
act. Even Claire Skinner's Bridget, the daughter who may or may not be
already dead, emerges in a clearer light.
I make no special claims for the meaning of Pinter and the pursuit of what
Moonlight is about seems futile. At his best, however, Pinter is a master of
ambiguity. He learned a great deal from TS Eliot, whose words did not always
make literal sense either. Where he excels is in using the stage in front of
a live audience straining to pick up every nuance, uncertain sometimes
whether to laugh a) because they are not sure whether there is a joke and b)
because laughter might interrupt the rhythm of the piece.
At the Comedy, David Leveaux's production has everything going for it. The
cast is in perfect stride. Theatre like this, however, will only work if the
house is full. Remember my words of last week. Going to the theatre is not
really expensive compared to what you spend might on other pleasures. It
costs Pounds 4.75 to buy a glass of non-vintage champagne at a conventional
London club close to the Comedy, and it probably costs much more at a less
conventional club even closer. Theatre is cheap at the price.
Comedy Theatre. (071) 867 1045

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931106

