FT931-4027

FT  12 MAR 93 / International Company News: Marriott pacifies some
disgruntled bondholders


   By NIKKI TAIT


   NEW YORK


MARRIOTT Corporation yesterday announced it had reached agreement in
principle with a group of disgruntled bondholders who have been opposing the
company's plans to 'demerge' its financially-healthy hotel management
operations from its property-related assets.
No sooner was the pact announced than a second grouping of unhappy
bondholders, led by PPM America - the US fund management arm of Britain's
Prudential insurance group - pledged to continue litigation against Marriott
over the scheme.
'This is totally inadequate,' said one lawyer, acting for the PPM group,
'and doesn't begin to redress the losses and damages sustained by our
clients.'
The pact would revise the capital structures of the two quoted companies
created by the demerger and offer bondholders a chance to swap into more
attractive debt securities.
Under the deal, the demerger plan would still go ahead, with the hotel and
food services operations being spun off into a new quoted company, called
Marriott International, and the property assets and airport-tollroad
concessions remaining as a separate entity, to be renamed Host Marriott.
But about Dollars 450m of additional debt and assets would be shifted into
Marriott International and Dollars 70m of Marriott Corporation shares would
be issued to retire public bonds.
In addition, Marriott International would provide up to Dollars 125m of
mortgage financing for Host Marriott's new Philadelphia Marriott Hotel;
Dollars 200m of a Dollars 630m credit line, to be provided by Marriott
International to Host Marriott, would be funded at the close of the
bondholders' exchange offer; and the availability of the credit line would
be extended until 2007.
Under the exchange offer, bondholders could swap into new Host Marriott
bonds, providing interest rates which would be 100 basis points higher and
maturities extended about four years later than the present Marriott bonds.
Marriott said the revisions would mean Host Marriott's total debt would be
reduced by around Dollars 500m. This entity had been due to retain virtually
all of Marriott Corporation's Dollars 3bn long-term debt burden.
Mr Stephen Bollenbach, Marriott's finance director, said Marriott
International's projected pro forma earnings would be reduced only modestly
by the revisions - by around 7 cents a share in 1993, and less than 5 cents
in 1994. On a pro forma basis, using early-1993 figures, Marriott
International would have long-term debt of about Dollars 900m.
Bondholders who have reached the agreement in principle have been
represented by Goldman Sachs. They include big US institutions, among them
the California Public Employees Retirement System, IDS Financial Services
and Allstate insurance.
The PPM grouping - whose lawsuit centres on Dollars 400m of bonds issued by
Marriott last year - has demanded full restoration of the bonds trading
value and credit quality.
Yesterday, analysts at Standard & Poor's, the rating agency, said although
details of the revisions could lead to a 'modest upgrade' in credit quality,
the rating was still likely to remain in a low to mid-speculative grade.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930312

