FT933-5083

FT  06 SEP 93 / Japan set to lower interest rates


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


THE BANK of Japan is on the verge of reducing official interest rates in an
attempt to stimulate an ailing economy and restore consumer and corporate
confidence.
After an apparent leak from the central bank, Japanese media widely reported
yesterday that the official discount rate (ODR) would this month be cut from
2.5 per cent to 2 per cent, a post-war low.
The bank is scheduled to release its quarterly survey of business, the
tankan, this week, and bank officials are concerned that a lack of
confidence in the economy is prompting companies to cut capital investment
targets.
Mr Yasushi Mieno, the bank's governor, is known to be reluctant to set a new
ODR low, but the recent appreciation of the yen has further undermined
corporate confidence and delayed a recovery.
Japan's new coalition government has been urged by business groups to cut
income taxes or the ODR to stimulate the economy, but the finance ministry
has resisted a tax cut, arguing that revenues have fallen sharply in the
past year.
The seven coalition parties are divided over interest rate policy. Some
members of the Social Democratic party, formerly the Japan Socialist party,
argue that a fall in rates will hurt old people dependent on savings for
income.
There has also been concern in the government that another rate cut, the
seventh in two years, would lead to a surge in asset prices and unfairly
benefit banks, which are likely to profit from the rate spread.
But the government is under pressure from trading partners to prove that it
is attempting to rekindle growth. The current account surplus has expanded
for 28 consecutive months, and Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime minister, would
like to take along a rate cut or some other initiative when he visits the US
late this month.
The lack of consumer confidence highlighted by falling retail sales was also
reflected in a survey released yesterday by the prime minister's office.
Only 4.8 per cent of 10,000 people surveyed thought their life had improved
over the past year, down from 7.3 per cent.
While the weakening economy has undermined consumer confidence, the annual
survey found that an accompanying reduction in overtime led to a fall from
39.9 per cent to 37.9 per cent in respondents who felt that they had no
spare time.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930906

