FT932-6973

FT  26 MAY 93 / Volkswagen says its car operations are close to break-even


   By KEVIN DONE and CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   WOLFSBURG


VOLKSWAGEN, the troubled German carmaker, is close to staunching the losses
in its core VW car division.
The VW brand operations accounted for around two-thirds of group turnover
and were already operating close to break-even in April and May, Mr
Ferdinand Piech, chairman of the VW group management board said yesterday.
The Volkswagen parent company mad a loss of DM578m (Pounds 230m) in January,
when the VW division was forced to implement extensive short-time working
and make provisions for significant job cuts.
Mr Piech said VW parent company losses had been reduced to an estimated
DM325m in February and trimmed to DM40m in March.
The VW division had cut 31 days of production in the first half of this
year, but was reducing vehicle stocks. Mr Piech said he was hopeful of
resuming full production after the summer.
He saw no reason to change his earlier forecast that the group would achieve
a small profit for the full year despite its DM1.25bn first-quarter loss.
Mr Piech said the first signs were appearing of a fragile recovery in demand
in the German new car market. Prices were improving in the used car market
and new orders had risen over the past three weeks.
Mr Piech said Volkswagen had failed 'to prepare for bad times' in the
previous eight years of rising car sales in Europe.
'We came into this crisis needing to produce at 100 per cent of capacity
just to break even, depending on the plant,' he said.
He added the company's goal was to reduce the break-even level to '70 per
cent of capacity or better,' but it could take six years to achieve this
target.
The 'drastic measures' taken since January had reduced the break-even level
to 85-90 per cent, but the company was still only using around 78 per cent
of its available capacity.
'My first task is to get into the black by the end of the year even with
this level of capacity utilisation, to bring the break-even down from 100
per cent to under 80 per cent,' he said.
VW defends Lopez, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930526

