FT932-251

FT  30 JUN 93 / IBM UK plans 'perform-or-else' sales shake-up


   By ALAN CANE and DIANE SUMMERS


THE UK sales operations of International Business Machines, the troubled US
computer manufacturer, are to be divided into 30 separate businesses as part
of a far-reaching scheme to restore the company to profitability.
IBM UK is also considering compulsory redundancies, hitherto unthinkable in
the group's culture of high job security. It also intends by the end of this
year to reduce headquarters staff to 100 from 2,500 in 1991.
Under the plan, codenamed 'Galaxy', each business will be responsible for
determining its own prices and costs and will be answerable to head office
for its performance. Businesses that fall short of agreed targets face
closure or radical restructuring.
''Perform or else' is a good way of putting it,' said Mr Javaid Aziz, IBM's
marketing manager for the UK. The plan, developed over the past six months,
has the approval of Mr Louis Gerstner, IBM's new chairman and chief
executive.
The businesses will deal with specific industries or specific products such
as mainframes, or personal computers or computer services. IBM's
manufacturing operations in Europe are already on a similar footing. The
disk drive plant at Havant, Hampshire, faces closure if it fails to make a
satisfactory profit this year.
The reorganisation, the most profound that any IBM subsidiary has attempted,
was presented to Mr Gerstner when he visited Britain at the end of April by
Mr Aziz and Mr Nick Temple, IBM UK general manager. IBM UK lost Pounds 616m
on sales of Pounds 3.75bn last year. Details of the plan have been outlined
to IBM's top 60 managers over the past few days. As it takes effect, staff
numbers in marketing and sales are likely to fall to about 6,000 by the
third quarter of this year, compared with 10,500 at the beginning of 1991.
Some of the surplus headquarters staff will be employed in the new business
units. Others have left the company already or will do so by next Monday. Mr
Aziz said the plan would not involve more job cuts than already announced.
The UK operation is, however, under pressure to complete cuts in the size of
its total workforce swiftly. Overall staff numbers will have been cut by 40
per cent by the end of the summer, from a peak of about 18,600 in 1985 to
just over 11,000. Monday is the deadline for staff to accept the latest of a
series of voluntary severance packages. If the final 600 jobs cannot be lost
voluntarily, staff will be told that job losses might be compulsory. They
would be the first enforced staff cuts in Europe. The company has made more
than 2,000 compulsory redundancies this year in the US.
IBM UK is to double its graduate intake to 100 this year, although all new
trainees will be on four-year contracts.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930630

