FT931-4004

FT  12 MAR 93 / International Bonds: Stream of new issues slows as investors
take a cautious view


   By ANTONIA SHARPE and EMIKO TERAZONO


   LONDON, TOKYO


THE STREAM of new international bond issues slowed markedly yesterday after
a hectic start to the week. The mood among investors was said to be turning
cautious in view of the latest developments in Russia and ahead of the UK
budget.
News in the afternoon that Standard & Poor's, the US credit rating agency,
had cut its rating of Finland's senior long-term foreign currency debt by
two notches added to the uncertainty, even though the downgrading had been
widely expected by the market. S&P's move quashed market talk that Finland
was thinking of tapping the Eurosterling sector.
S&P said its decision to cut Finland's rating from AA plus to AA minus
reflected the ongoing restructuring of Finnish trade and industry, which it
said had contributed to a sharp drop in economic activity and a steep rise
in government and external indebtedness.
The downgrading also incorporated the prospect of a slow and uncertain
recovery which could halt efforts to cut the government's large budget
deficits, S&P said.
The Eurofranc sector came into focus yesterday, as KfW International
Finance, the financing arm of the German government agency for
re-development, raised FFr1bn through a 10-year zero-coupon Eurobond issue.
This was the fourth such offering in the French market since the start of
March, and was mainly bought by continental investors outside France.
The yield spread on KfW's bonds was set at 10 basis points above the French
government's 8 1/2 per cent OATs due 2003, and tightened to eight basis
points later in the day.
The spread was well below that on the Kingdom of Sweden's bonds, which was
now at 20 basis points over comparable OATs compared with 24 basis points at
the launch on March 8.
Syndicate managers said the tighter spread on KfW's bonds reflected the
smaller amount on offer, as well as the borrower's triple A credit rating
and its rarity value among investors.
Lafarge Coppee, the French building materials giant which announced its 1992
results on Wednesday, also raised FFr1bn through an issue of seven-year
Eurobonds. An official at the lead manager, CCF, said that the unrated
borrower was taking advantage of the lowest interest rates in France since
1957.
He said that the all-in cost to the borrower was 8.175 per cent. However, he
did not expect many more domestic corporate borrowers to tap the market
ahead of the forthcoming French elections.
Lafarge's bonds were priced to yield 8.10 per cent or 85 basis points over
the 8 1/2 per cent OATs. They were not freed to trade by the close of
business.
Elsewhere, the Bank of Tokyo's Y50bn convertible bond issue, the
largest-ever launched in yen, was well received by investors. The price of
the bonds rose to 102 bid by yesterday afternoon, up from an issue price of
par.
An official at Morgan Stanley, the lead manager, said the healthy appetite
for the bonds reflected the recent strength of the yen and the lack of
supply by Japanese companies.
The issue marked the first capital-raising programme by a Japanese bank to
be placed solely with European investors. The bonds will count as upper tier
two capital until they are converted, at which point they will count as tier
one capital.
The proceeds from the issue will raise the bank's capital-to-asset ratio,
under rules set by the Bank for International Settlements, by 0.23 per cent
to 9 per cent.
Japanese banks have been criticised in the past for placing subordinated and
perpetual debt with their own affiliates and companies with strong business
ties. The ministry of finance has recently advised Japanese securities
houses to cultivate investors outside Japan.
The Alliance & Leicester Building Society returned to the international bond
market after an absence of two years with a a Pounds 75m, 15-year Eurobond
issue.
The bonds were priced to yield 155 basis points over comparable UK
government bonds and the spread was unchanged after the bonds were freed to
trade.
Meanwhile, the newly-rated Czech National Bank increased its Dollars 300m
three-year issue, launched last week, by a further Dollars 75m. On
Wednesday, Moody's, the US credit rating agency, assigned an investment
grade rating of Baa3 to the borrower.
The new tranche was priced at 99.65 to yield 260 basis points above
comparable US Treasuries, in line with the yield on the outstanding bonds.
The original issue had been priced at 99.83 to yield 272 basis points over
US Treasuries on Monday.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930312

