FT932-6767

FT  27 MAY 93 / Tory MPs voice concern over fees for drivers


   By RALPH ATKINS


TORY MPs expressed concern that motorists should not be penalised unfairly
under the proposals for road charging unveiled yesterday by Mr John
MacGregor, transport secretary.
But there was some enthusiasm for the increased investment in roads that
could be attracted by privatising Britain's motorways.
As the Commons battle over British Rail privatisation subsided, the
transport secretary was warned by Tory MPs that road charges should at least
be balanced by changes in the tax burden on motorists.
For many Conservatives the expected impact of the BR sale on rail fares and
the possible consequences on the welfare state of the government's spending
review have already created enough fears in the minds of voters.
Mr Iain Duncan-Smith, Tory MP for Chingford, said: 'There is nothing wrong
with the principle of privatisation for certain roads and the concept has to
be explored, but I think that it ought to be part of a general review of the
way that we tax and spend on transport.'
Mr Stephen Day, Conservative MP for Cheadle, said: 'It is right that these
matters should be raised because we have got to look at how we can bring
more money into road investment, but I'd be extremely cautious about any
early decisions being made on this.'
Mr Day defied the government and voted on Tuesday for BR to be allowed to
bid for franchises. But some MPs such as Mr Hugh Dykes, the Conservative MP
for Harrow East who feared that the break-up of BR would hit investment in
the rail network, indicated that they might support the transfer of
motorways to the private sector - precisely because it could encourage more
investment.
Mr MacGregor's stress on the longer term seemed wise. Even if privatisation
is widely supported in Tory ranks, there is little appetite for
controversial legislation in the immediate future as the party seeks to
listen more to voters' concerns.
There is also suspicion that this was was part of government attempts to
boost Treasury revenues without putting up taxes. 'People would jib at
handing over to private companies existing motorways unless they were
satisfied that the tolls were going to be used to improve roads,' said Mr
John Butterfill, Conservative MP for Bournemouth West.
Mr John Prescott, Labour's transport spokesman, said that Britain's
transport infrastructure was 'being sacrificed to a dogmatic obsession with
privatisation'. The only benefit of road pricing and road privatisation
would be to the Treasury. But, while Labour opposes the franchising of
motorways, the party has floated the idea of urban road pricing to ease
congestion.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930527

