FT934-10091

FT  08 NOV 93 / Markets braced for more pressure on bonds


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


INVESTORS and traders in US and European bond markets are braced for further
pressure this week - which could have a knock-on effect for shares - ahead
of a spate of US economic data.
Further signs of an acceleration in US economic growth in October could
trigger more selling of Treasury bonds. Two important inflation indicators
are due tomorrow and on Wednesday, and retail sales data will be announced
on Friday.
The yield on the US long bond rose  1/4 point to 6.21 per cent last week,
spurring similar moves in European bond markets and sparking a sharp decline
in world stock markets.
In London on Friday, the FT-SE 100 fell more than 60 points in line with the
main continental European bourses. This followed an overall drop on Wall
Street of more than 70 points in the Dow Jones Industrial Average on
Wednesday and Thursday, although the market ended on Friday with an 18-point
rally.
'Any further weakness in the US bond market will exert a lot of downward
pressure in the European market,' said Mr Jonathon Davies, a bond analyst at
UBS, the London arm of the Swiss bank.
However, last week's sell-off in the financial markets was partly a result
of profit-taking, as traders wanted to realise the large gains they have
made on investments before the end of the year. But analysts say bond
markets are likely to be more vulnerable than stock markets this week.
One European equity fund manager said, after seeing gains of 35 per cent on
his investments this year, that 5 per cent off global markets would be a
healthy correction.
Although the long-running bull market in US Treasury prices may be coming to
an end, 'we will probably consolidate at (a yield level of) 6 1/4 per cent
on the US long bond', said Mr Kirit Shah, an international strategist at
First Chicago, the US bank. In European bond markets, where further interest
rate cuts are expected this year, there is still room for further gains. 'I
think we have another 12 or 14 months of bond-positive markets in Europe,'
said Mr Rob Gambi, manager of international fixed interest and currencies at
AMP Asset Management in London.
However, international banks and brokerages are advising clients to adopt a
defensive strategy in the short term. For example, PaineWebber suggests
selling Spanish and Italian bonds and investing in more stable markets.
Italy braced for shocks, Page 2
Week ahead, Page 12
Weakening bulls, Page 19
International bonds, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931108

