FT934-8694

FT  13 NOV 93 / Motoring: Wiping the cheats off the road - Readers suggest
ways to deal with the unlicenced and disqualified


   By STUART MARSHALL


RESPONSIBLE British motorists who tax and insure their cars are enraged by
the way a minority puts up two fingers to the law and gets away with it.
Four weeks ago, this column noted that driving while uninsured or
disqualified no longer seemed to be regarded as serious offences. So much so
that the Association of British Insurers estimates 5 per cent of all drivers
 -more than 1m people - do not have cover. They feel the risk of getting
caught is slight, and the money they save by not buying insurance makes the
chance worth taking.
When they are involved in accidents, innocent parties suffer financially.
Generally, punishment for uninsured driving and for using a car while
disqualified rarely fits the crime. I thought it high time these anti-social
offences were taken more seriously and suggested that changing the law to
allow offenders' cars to be seized and sold might be a good idea.
None of the readers who have written to this column has disagreed. A retired
solicitor, James Inglis of Edinburgh, spoke for many when he wrote: 'If a
law is to be respected, it must be enforced without fear or favour.
Penalties should be severe enough to act as an effective deterrent, and I
can think of none more appropriate than the seizure of an offender's
vehicle.'
Most correspondents felt that catching the uninsured (and often unlicenced
and even disqualified) driver was a question of will, and that not enough
was being done. Proposals put forward included:
Local authorities should be encouraged to take powers to impose penalties on
owners who leave cars without tax discs in their car parks.
Untaxed cars left on public roads should be clamped or towed away and
released only if driver's licence, vehicle registration document, tax disc,
insurance and MoT certificate are produced within 14 days. Failing this, the
car to be seized and sold.
'If this service were privatised, with a bounty for every car legitimately
impounded . . . we would witness a revolution in resolving this aspect of
open criminal activity overnight,' wrote Les Bennett, of Bingley, West
Yorkshire.
Police should concentrate on catching uninsured and unlicenced motorists
'instead of routinely harassing otherwise law-abiding ones breaking speed
limits where no real danger is involved.'
Robert Street of Woking, West Sussex, complained that his local police had
ignored his request to check all parked cars on a local estate where at
least one in 10 had no tax disc. 'I hope you will continue to campaign
against the egregious complacency of both police and authority in general,'
he wrote.
Many writers expressed a common grievance. They are convinced there is some
kind of hidden agenda in which officialdom (the Home Office?) has told
police to go easy on tax-dodging, uninsured motorists - the New Age
travellers, for example. They resent having to pay ever-higher insurance
premiums and feel that if a minority genuinely cannot afford the cost of
motoring legitimately, it should not be driving cars, anyway.
If all readers who feel aggrieved write to their MPs, it might get the ball
rolling.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931113

