FT932-6777

FT  27 MAY 93 / Lamont foresees M-way sell-offs


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


THE INTRODUCTION of charges for motorists could pave the way for the
privatisation of large parts of Britain's motorway network, Mr Norman
Lamont, the chancellor, said yesterday.
Mr Lamont said at a Confederation of British Industry conference on raising
private finance for public projects that there was no limit on developments
which could be financed by private investment.
'From now on, any project which can be paid for from user charges and can
satisfy the normal planning requirements can proceed. If someone wants to
build a road, and private citizens are willing to pay to use it, why should
the government stand in the way?
'All over the world people have come to see what private finance can do.
They are familiar with privately financed roads in Asia and North America
and there is absolutely no reason why the benefits of private finance should
not be enjoyed more widely in Britain too.'
The chancellor said that private finance could transform the way in which
major capital projects were carried out in Britain in the 1990s - in the
same way that the country had been transformed in the 1980s by the
privatisation of state-owned industries like telephone and water services.
'We cannot look to public finances to fund the kind of improvements to the
road network we all want to see,' Mr Lamont said. He added that it did not
make sense for motorways which were used only by a proportion of motorists
to be paid for by the general taxpayer. Charges would have the benefit of
stopping people treating roads as if they were free and to 'think carefully
about how they really needed to use them'.
'If charges were introduced, that could ultimately pave the way for the
privatisation of large parts of the motorway network,' said the chancellor.
He said the government was prepared to consider joint ventures with the
private sector where developments would not be justified on commercial
grounds alone but also on social benefits such as congestion reduction.
The chancellor, for the first time, gave some guidance on how these might
work, saying: 'In many cases, I hope that the project's promoter will retain
all the equity in the project with the exchequer simply making a one-off
contribution.'
The size of this public-sector contribution might be determined by bids from
rival promoters in the private sector. Bids that require heavy investment
from the public sector would seem less likely to succeed than those offering
greater involvement by the private sector.
Mr Lamont said any project could go ahead provided it satisfied three
principles: proper value for money for taxpayers; private participation in
joint ventures should be decided on the basis of competition; and a
substantial degree of risk should be transferred to the private sector.
He said: 'Time and budget overruns are not confined to the public sector but
they are resisted more fiercely when investors' money is at stake. We can
see that all too clearly with the Channel tunnel.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930527

