FT934-10132

FT  06 NOV 93 / Gardening: Buried past heralds fine fuchsia - Robin Lane Fox
explains why he is going to dig a hole this weekend and lay some old flowers
to rest


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


AS A forward-looking fellow, I think of this article as back to the fuchsia.
For seven years, I have stayed away, driven off by interludes of white fly
and inertia in the face of winter. This year, I have returned to my old
allegiance: to fuchsias which span all social tastes and classes, from Lord
Roberts to Orange Drops and people with names like Annabelle Stocks. From
June until now, I have had the best of them  - in borders, as standards, or
in free-standing pots. I am returning to them this weekend for a ceremonial
pagan finale.
The fuchsias are not going on to the bonfire or flying skywards on the tail
of a rocket. They are not going to moulder in a possibly frost-free shed.
This year, they are going into the grave. Tomorrow, I will be digging a pit
about 3 ft deep. It will be lined with a layer of straw and the plants will
be laid horizontally with an atheist's prayer, asking for fuchsia life
beyond the grave.
There will be no question of turning sods darkly or poking around with
bayonets at dead of night. Burial will be in broad daylight in the
distinctively musical setting of the garden round my old vicarage. Every
Sunday, the believers in the nearby church obligingly sing their hymns so
loudly that I can join in my favourites while continuing to garden and avoid
the prayers. Tomorrow, Lord Roberts will be buried to the sound of pre-Poppy
Day hymns and, meanwhile, a different, pagan image will be living in my
mind.
In early years of Christianity, pagans before me were burying, too - not
fuchsias, but statues of their gods in trenches, laid carefully in the
ground to avoid and avert trouble. Above ground, a Christian might have
smashed them; underground, the images could still be effective, pointing
north to keep off barbarians who might otherwise break in through the Roman
equivalent of the Watford Gap.
In the year 421, Christians found three of them, buried carefully on the
line of a favoured barbarian in-road. They took them out of the ground, huge
statues of the old gods, long-haired and carved in marble. The barbarians
then broke into the area not once but three times - once for each of the
statues.
Forewarned by their experience, I think I will bury my fuchsias pointing
east in the direction of the vicar and on the cat-run of the village pets.
From now until March, they will hibernate in the ground, averting cats and
collecting boxes and saving their strength below the level of the frost.
I discovered this trick in an old fuchsia handbook for growers who do not
have heated greenhouses. The authors endorse it from their own experience;
modern growers still know about it and, if it works, it solves the fuchsia's
biggest nuisance: the need for shelter in winter.
Prepare your plants by drying them off and shaking off their leaves; dig a
pit; lay them horizontally, like pagan treasure on a bed of damp straw, wet
peat or polystyrene; put another layer of straw or bedding on top of them;
and then replace the earth while reciting your favourite line of Homer. The
grave should be at least 2 ft deep and you are advised to mark it with a
stick in case your mind wanders by spring.
Throughout the winter, the plants need no watering; late in March, they are
ready for their resurrection. Open the grave, shake off the straw and pot
them up. Admittedly, you have to find a frost-proof shed or room, but only
until late May. I wish they could return directly to normal life, but they
are still at risk after the resurrection and a frost around Easter could
wipe them out. By late May, they will be covered in new leaves and ready for
even better life in a border or in pots.
'All fuchsias,' the late Arthur Hellyer tells us, 'are of the easiest
cultivation.' To Arthur, no doubt, they were, but he must have taken his
answer to white fly with him. Indoors, especially, these pests are lethal
and a prime cause of failure: outdoors, they have more choice, and I find
they are combated best by giving fuchsias what they most appreciate. They
love to be sprayed, showered and fed heavily at every opportunity.
A dry fuchsia is unhappy; and if yours have been under-performing, the
reason probably is that you do not spray the leaves whenever you can with
one of those fertiliser fixtures from Phostrogen on the hose which I
mentioned last month.
Some of them, I believe firmly, are hardier than we realise, especially if
we heap earth, old ashes or leafy protection over the crown in the next few
days. The best collection of outdoor fuchsias can be seen in the Botanic
Gardens of Leicester University, where they are grown outdoors, often in
full sun, and left to survive the winter with a light top dressing.
Why, then, bother with burials and resurrection? The most exotic and opulent
fuchsias are the least reliably hardy, here or in Leicester. They have to be
protected, but they clutter up a greenhouse or spare bedroom for the next
six months. It is beautifully simple to treat them like an ancient statue
and lay them gently on their side below ground until the spring.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

931106

