FT934-8913

FT  12 NOV 93 / Money Markets: Call rate eases


   By CONNER MIDDELMAN


Money market activity in Europe was subdued yesterday by national holidays
in France, Belgium and the US, leaving rates stable on thin volume, writes
Conner Middelmann.
The rate for D-Mark overnight money slipped further to around 6.35 per cent
from Wednesday's 6.45 per cent on comfortable liquidity conditions in the
banking system.
Banks' ample reserves at the central bank and Wednesday's liquidity
injection at the Bundesbank's repo allocation softened the call rate. Again,
banks made no borrowings at the Bundesbank's 6.75 per cent Lombard facility,
reflecting the abundant supply of liquidity. The December three-month
Euromark futures contract rose 0.02 point to 93.86.
However, some traders noted that Friday's payment of some DM7bn for the new
Treuhandanstalt bonds and next week's tax outflows could drive the call rate
slightly higher.
Due to a German national holiday on Wednesday, next week's repos will be a
day earlier than usual, with the Bundesbank calling for bids on Monday and
allocating the funds on Tuesday.
Elsewhere, the Austrian National Bank said it will lower its GOMEX money
market intervention rate by 10 basis points to 6.1 per cent effective on
Friday.
The Bank of France at its repo operation today is expected to leave its 6.45
per cent intervention rate unchanged. Dealers do not expect it to ease rates
before Germany and the Netherlands have moved.
In the Netherlands, the call rate continued to trade below the 6.10 per cent
special advances rate at 6.00 per cent, reflecting ample money market
liquidity following recent generous market operations by the central bank.
This has many dealers expecting another near term cut in the advances rate.
Another uneventful day in the sterling money market left rates broadly
unchanged from the previous sessions. According to one money dealer, some
market participants have been scaling down their hopes for a substantial
base rate reduction accompanying the November 30 Budget.
The December short sterling futures contract eased 0.05 point to 94.41.
The Bank of England announced a shortage of Pounds 1.4bn, which it later
revised upwards to Pounds 1.45bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

931112

