FT932-3138

FT  16 JUN 93 / Italian magistrates call inquiries summit


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


ITALIAN magistrates investigating corruption yesterday held a hastily
convened summit in Rome to head off a squabble over conflicting
responsibilities for inquiries.
The main conflicts have emerged between Milan and Rome magistrates, but
magistrates from Bologna, Naples and Venice also attended the meeting. A
later statement referred to 'frank and loyal' discussions, hinting at some
tough talking.
The magistrates were reported to be unable to reach agreement on
responsibility for the three most important investigations in dispute. These
cover dealings behind the parcelling out of television channels between the
state and the private sector, telecommunications contracts and the
operations of the Ministry of Posts. An appeal court will probably have to
establish investigating responsibility.
There was only partial agreement on the probe into construction of the Rome
metro.
As the 16-month investigations into corruption and illicit financing of
political parties evolves, the cases are becoming increasingly intertwined.
Normally magistrates establish competence over a case if they initiate the
investigation and it then remains largely within their geographic area. But
the same names are cropping up in different places as the inquiries spread
through Italy.
Milan magistrates - a more homogeneous group with better technological
back-up and less subject to political pressure - have set the pace from the
start. They have sought to press their authority to the limit, to the dismay
of Rome magistrates.
Matters came to a head on Monday when Rome magistrates advised three senior
politicians - including Mr Giorgio La Malfa, the former Republican leader -
they were under investigation for alleged corruption relating to
telecommunications contracts and the awarding of television frequencies. Mr
La Malfa claimed he had already received similar notice from Milan.
Rome magistrates also appeared to ignore a deal cut in April between the
management of Fiat and Milan magistrates.
Mr Ugo Montevecchi, former chief executive of Fiat Engineering, had already
voluntarily appeared before Milan magistrates and been questioned for 10
hours. In spite of this Rome magistrates ordered his arrest on Monday for
the alleged payment of bribes relating to Culture Ministry contracts. Rome
magistrates argued it was difficult to be party to an arrangement concluded
by Milan magistrates which might involve plea bargaining.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930616

