FT931-3996

FT  12 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Slide in cocoa prices continues


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


COCOA PRICES were continuing to fall yesterday on further bouts of
liquidation sparked by the failure of last week's talks in Geneva on
renewing the International Cocoa Agreement.
The London May contract closed yesterday at Pounds 676 a tonne, down Pounds
11 on the day and Pounds 86 below the recent high struck two weeks ago
during the Geneva talks. At the New York Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange
the May delivery contract was recovering in late trading from an earlier low
of Dollars 841 a tonne.
Next week delegates to the International Cocoa Organisation meet in London
for their biannual council meeting. They are hoping to close the gap between
consumers and producers so that they can return to Geneva for more
negotiations on the pact, which expires at the end of September and cannot
be extended.
The two sides have been able to agree only that a maximum of 350,000 tonnes
of cocoa should be withheld from the market. They have not been able to
agree on how such a withholding scheme should be financed, nor on the price
range which an agreement should defend.
The drift in prices this week illustrates the disillusionment of the trade
with the endless talks. Profit-taking by a few speculators who were gambling
on the talks succeeding then turned into technical selling as chart support
levels were breached.
'There has been long liquidation by the speculators, the trade, the funds
and the industry,' said Mr Tony Chadwick of Prudential Bache yesterday. The
situation had been made worse by the fact that the market had absorbed a lot
of selling from producer countries while at the higher levels.
Mr Lawrence Eagles, analyst with GNI, said that market perceptions of the
Ivory Coast's crop were becoming clearer. Despite quality restrictions, the
main crop would still be large, he suggested. A big question remark remained
over the mid-crop - usually about 100,000 tonnes - which the Ivory Coast has
said it will not sell.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930312

