FT934-11416

FT  01 NOV 93 / Leaders ready to pay political price of peace / A look at at
the realities prime ministers Major and Reynolds are prepared to accept


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


THE MEETING on Friday between Mr John Major and Mr Albert Reynolds showed
that the London and Dublin governments are more determined than for many
years to achieve a political settlement for Northern Ireland. The most
recent in the latest spate of terrorist outrages just 24 hours later
underlines the depths of the morass from which they are seeking to lift the
province.
Both sides are aware that as long as the political vacuum remains then the
spiral of violence will continue, and quite possibly escalate. But after
more than 20 bloody years neither can be confident that the political
initiative on which they have embarked can avoid the roadblocks which have
halted so many of its precursors.
The lengthy communique released after the talks in Brussels renounced
terrorism, declared that there could be no place at the negotiating table
for those who used violence to further political aims, and underlined the
central role of the Ulster constitutional parties in any settlement.
This might seem to represent no more than a statement of the obvious, but
the very fact of its release sent an important message: that Mr Major and Mr
Reynolds were ready to expend political capital in a resumed effort at
permanent peace, and that in the process both were prepared to own up to
some obvious realities.
From Dublin the message was that it was now ready to remove what Mr Major
saw as two of the most foremost obstacles to peace. As part of an overall
settlement, Mr Reynolds would be ready to ask the voters of the republic to
remove from the Irish constitution its claim to jurisdiction over the north,
and the republic would recognise explicitly the veto over change in the
province exercised by supporters of the union.
For its part London would now state publicly what had always been obvious
but never admitted so explicitly by a British government: that if the IRA
ceased its military campaign a place would be found at the negotiating table
for Sinn Fein.
Behind the scenes Mr Major has also acknowledged that the quid pro quo for
changes in the republic's constitution would be a significant increase in
administrative co-operation between north and south.
Over the next few weeks the two governments will seek to build on that
agreement, starting at the meeting on Wednesday between Mr Dick Spring, the
Irish foreign minister, and Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland
secretary. Mr Major and Mr Reynolds will seek to strengthen it further at a
UK-Irish summit in Dublin within six weeks.
The aim is to create an atmosphere which will persuade the constitutional
parties - above all the unionists - to return to the negotiating table to
thrash out an internal political settlement.
Reassurance for the unionists ran right through the Major-Reynolds
statement: in the promise that there would be no secret deals; in the joint
disavowal of the initiative launched by Mr John Hume, the SDLP leader, with
Mr Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein; and in Dublin's implicit acknowledgement of the
unionist 'veto'.
In practice, the two governments are reversing the order of negotiations in
the three-strand peace process which stalled at the end of last year. Then
the priority was an agreement between the Northern Ireland parties before
moving on to the second and third strands - relations between north and
south in Ireland and an agreement between the republic and Britain on
Ulster's constitutional status. Now the aim is to secure a broad measure of
agreement on strands one and two as an umbrella for negotiations on strand
one.
But if the logic of a London-Dublin accord providing a catalyst for the
restart of talks between the parties in the province is obvious enough, its
chances of success are precarious.
The unionists, whose self-importance is bolstered by Mr Major's reliance on
their votes at Westminster, must be persuaded that the talks offer something
better than the status quo. Mr James Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster
Unionist party, is now the most important player in the game. Without a
positive response from him, the latest initiative will go nowhere.
Mr Hume, badly bruised by the rejection of his initiative, must also be
brought back within the inter-governmental process. He remains as convinced
as ever that a cessation of violence by the IRA is within reach if Mr Major
is prepared to listen carefully to the ideas to which Sinn Fein has put its
name. He has staked too much on his talks with Mr Adams to withdraw quietly
now.
Yet British officials were suggesting yesterday that the picture beneath the
surface was not as bleak as the familiarly unpromising rhetoric of Ulster
politicians may suggest.
Mr Molyneaux has remained silent. If he offered to return to the negotiating
table, both Mr Hume and the Rev Ian Paisley, the leader of the hardline
Democratic Unionist party, would find it hard not to join him. The good
intentions might this time offer at least a start on the road to an
agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931101

