FT932-13377

FT  23 APR 93 / CE Heath reports big losses on old aviation insurance


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE legacy of its past involvement in Australia came back to haunt CE Heath,
the insurance broker, yesterday when the group reported further heavy losses
from discontinued aviation reinsurance business. Heath announced that it
intends to sue two rival brokers over the losses, which will push the
company into a post-tax loss when it reports its 1992-93 results next month.
Shares in Heath fell 12p to close at 313p in London.
Heath, which has scaled back its involvement in insurance underwriting to
concentrate on broking activities, has been hit by claims on aviation
reinsurance business underwritten by its insurance subsidiary between 1987
and 1991.
Mr Peter Presland, chief executive, said total claims from the loss-making
aviation reinsurance business amounted to Dollars 70m (Pounds 45m), about
twice as much as premiums generated.
'Claims can go on for some time. It is the nature of underwriting. It is a
risk business,' said Mr Presland.
Heath is alleging breach of fiduciary duty, breach of the Australian Trade
Practices Act and negligence by two UK brokers which placed the business
with it and also arranged reinsurance cover. It is unable to identify either
broker until writs are served later this week.
The group expects the matter to come to trial within the next 12 months and
said that 'there are reasonable prospects of a substantial recovery'.
The group will post an Pounds 18.6m exceptional item to meet the aviation
losses. An exceptional gain of Pounds 5.6m from another corner of its former
Australian underwriting operations, was partially offset by a second
exceptional loss of Pounds 5m, incurred from restructuring UK retail broking
operations.
The exceptional gain has occurred as a result of recent developments in the
protracted litigation between Heath and other insurers and the nationalised
workers' compensation fund of Victoria.
Heath reported interim pre-tax profits of Pounds 8.9m for the six months to
September 30 and cut its interim dividend to 5p.
Heath is not expecting the exceptionals to affect dividends, which it says
it will pay from cashflow. Notwithstanding the loss the group expects a
final dividend at the level indicated in the interim statement of 11p net,
giving a total for the year of 16p.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930423

