FT933-12583

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (3): UK
activity fails to sustain a bright start to the year - A downturn in
prospects


   By ANDREW TAYLOR


OPTIMISM that the worst UK construction recession in memory might be
loosening its hold has evaporated since Easter.
The revival in the UK housing market, which contractors and building
material producers hoped would presage a more general recovery in
construction, has weakened as consumer confidence has deteriorated.
Inquiries from potential purchasers have slowed as concern about the state
of the British economy has failed to ebb. The outlook for other areas of
construction also remains weak. Private investment in factories, shops and
offices is unlikely to recover until other manufacturing and service
industries see some improvement.
The general consensus among contractors and building material producers is
that the industry is either bumping along, or, only very gently, floating
off the bottom. They are still waiting for indications that a more enduring
revival is about to take root.
Overbuilding during the late 1980s means that office construction is
unlikely to recover even when other areas start to improve. Office building
by the end of this year is expected to be running at almost half the peak
level achieved in 1990.
Industry forecasts* suggest that the fall in total construction output,
including repair and maintenance work, could be restricted this year to just
0.5 per cent depending on the strength of the recovery in the private
housing market.
This would follow output declines of 5.5 per cent in 1992 and 9 per cent in
1991 according to the joint forecasting committee of the construction
industries. The committee, which includes representatives from government,
contractors, building material suppliers, banks, building societies and
large industrial customers, is forecasting only a 0.5 per cent rise in
construction next year.
Companies, therefore, are desperately concerned that ministers should not
seek to cut public spending on construction as they battle to reduce a
public sector borrowing requirement that is forecast to reach Pounds 50bn
this year.
Sir Robbin Biggam, chairman of BICC, the engineering group which owns
Balfour Beatty, the construction company, says a reduction in government
spending on road programmes, or the curtailment of projects such as the
extension to the Pounds 1.8bn Jubilee underground in London, would ensure
that any tentative recovery would be 'halted in its tracks'.
The underground extension has been delayed by differences between the
government and bankers of the failed Canary Wharf Docklands office over the
private sector's Pounds 400m contribution. Contracts for large parts of the
development have been agreed in principle. It is one of the very few big
projects where construction could start almost immediately. To lose the work
would be a serious blow.
Work is so short that profit margins on many construction jobs remain low to
non-existent with contractors bidding at prices that barely cover expected
costs. In some cases jobs are being taken at a projected loss with
contractors hoping to make up margins by making claims against changes in
design and contract specifications which occur on many jobs. Construction
lawyers are likely to be very busy over the next few years.
Increased prices for plasterboard, structural steel, glass and concrete,
announced earlier this year, are adding to the concerns of contractors,
already working on very low margins.
Sir Brian Hill, president of the Building Employers' Confederation, the
largest employer organisation, warned earlier this month: 'Our markets are
suffering from a lack of consumer confidence caused by political and
economic uncertainties, speculation about possible tax increases and a
continuing fear of unemployment.
'This is having a particularly severe impact on the private housing market
which, having shown an improvement in prospects in the spring, has now
faltered with reservations and house sales falling since the beginning of
May.'
A confidential survey of sales returns by 15 of the country's largest
housebuilders, compiled by the Housebuilders' Federation, reveals a sharp
fall in visitors to show houses since the beginning of May.
Net reservations - sales on which deposits have been paid, less
cancellations - rose by about 10 per cent during the first two weeks of June
compared with the corresponding weeks last year. Weekly sales this spring
were running more than 35 per cent higher than last year.
At one stage during a four-week period at the end of March and the beginning
of April, net reservations were as much as 50 per cent higher than last
year.
House sales traditionally slacken during the summer and builders hope that
they will see a return to much higher levels of demand in September and
October. Comparisons ought to look good against last autumn, when house
sales plummeted as interest rates fluctuated wildly ahead of Britain's
decision to withdraw sterling from the ERM.
Builders, nonetheless, remain very nervous. They are concerned that some of
the steam appears to have gone out of the market after a good start to the
year.
Until the UK housing market starts to enjoy a more consistent revival, it is
hard to see other areas of construction recovering. A recovery in general
contracting may not occur until 1995. Trading conditions are likely to
remain tough. Building material producers, however, may be helped by lower
costs and higher prices as conditions start to ease.
*Construction Forecasts 1993-94-95; Pounds 50; Construction Forecasting and
Research, 39 Kingsway, London WC2B 6TP.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930723

