FT933-10209

FT  05 AUG 93 / The scapegoat butts back: The UK Treasury has gone on the
offence against critics in defence of its role


   By JOHN WILLMAN


Criticised by many, loved by few, Her Majesty's Treasury is one of the
favourite targets of UK public life.
Industry alleges that it is biased towards the City and blames it for the
decline of British manufacturing. Business leaders accuse the Treasury of
refusing to allow the much-needed investment in infrastructure that would
improve international competitiveness. Economists charge it with
responsibility for UK economic decline - including mismanagement of
sterling.
Within Whitehall, the Treasury is the all-purpose scapegoat for ministers
and mandarins alike. It is the bank that loves to say 'no', the department
that counts the pennies and ignores value for money. Rare is the minister
who cannot find some role for the Treasury in explaining away departmental
policy failures.
In an unusual riposte, Sir Terry Burns, permanent secretary at the Treasury
since 1991, has attempted to answer his department's critics. Today, he
releases a spirited defence* of the Treasury in which he strongly rebuts
many of the criticisms and explains how those that he believes are
well-founded have been addressed.
Sir Terry acknowledges that much of the criticism of the Treasury's role
relates to its powerful position at the heart of Whitehall. Its tasks
include functions that in most other countries are divided between an
economics ministry, a finance ministry and a separate budget office to
control public expenditure. It also manages civil service pay, supervises
the financial services industry and is responsible for economic forecasting.
Managing the economy is the Treasury's highest-profile role, although it
absorbs less than one-fifth of the department's 1,400 civil servants. That
role has often come under fire, most recently after the events surrounding
sterling's ignominious departure from the European exchange rate mechanism
in September 1992. There has been an intense debate over the Treasury's
responsibility for monetary policy, with increasing support for handing it
over to an independent central bank.
Sir Terry can see the attractions of such a move, especially since the
European Community intends to place monetary policy in the hands of an
independent European central bank as a step on the road to monetary union.
He denies that there is a strong Treasury orthodoxy against an independent
central bank (or on any other issues). But he is at pains to set out the
complications involved in a change that he believes has assumed totemic
significance among commentators.
'The demand for greater independence of the central bank has come to be the
most popular single answer to the problem of inflation that was once
reserved for the ERM.' But there are advantages, he says, in elected
politicians - rather than unaccountable central bankers - making decisions
about, for example, the trade-offs between inflation and growth. ' 'Not the
government' is not a guarantee of wisdom,' he observes.
Much of the popular wisdom about the Treasury's alleged incompetence stems
from the record of its forecasters. Although their predictions have been no
worse than others over the longer term, their forecasting errors attract
widespread attention.
Sir Terry says that he is 'amazed' at the importance given to the forecasts
outside the Treasury's Great George Street headquarters. Its predictions are
an important input into policymaking, but not the only one - and ministers
are well aware of their frailty. 'Meanwhile, the other 1,400 people in the
central Treasury suffer the frustration of seeing their efforts judged by
the forecasts of 30 or so economists,' he adds.
A more recent subject for attack has been the Treasury's alleged bias
against manufacturing industry. Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the
Confederation of British Industry, is one who has criticised the Treasury
for its attitudes to business in the past.
Sir Terry accepts that there have been too few direct contacts between
Treasury staff and industry in the past. This may have meant that officials
have not always asked questions about the implications of economic policy
for business. It also meant that industry was often ill-informed about
Treasury thinking. 'We can do more to explain the background to decisions,'
he says.
Treasury officials are now encouraged to spend time in industry, and a panel
of industrialists has been created to offer advice. A 'supply-side' unit has
also been set up to give greater salience to business concerns in Treasury
deliberations.
These steps are welcomed by Mr Davies: 'The Treasury has always had an
interest in thinking about what a decision means for the financial markets.
Now they are trying to think about what it means for manufacturing
industry.'
Within Whitehall, the Treasury exerts powerful control over public
expenditure. No department can spend money without its agreement which, as
Sir Terry drily observes, 'means it has a keen interest in much of the
business of every department'.
In departments and agencies, that interest is often seen as a central grip
which stifles innovation and encourages counting of candle ends. Even though
the government is committed to delegation of financial management to the
lowest possible level in the public services, the Treasury is often seen as
reluctant to let go.
Chief executives of government agencies complain that, while they are given
performance targets to meet large budgets and responsibility over them, they
are constantly second-guessed by Treasury officials questioning decisions.
Treasury accounting rules are also needlessly inflexible, according to the
chief executive of one agency. 'I have very little discretion about moving
money from one purpose to another, or rolling over unspent money from one
year to another,' he says.
Many Treasury officials feel uncomfortable about delegating responsibility
for spending money to departments and agencies. From experience, they
believe that departments are often less rigorous in controlling expenditure.
At the top of the Treasury, there is a strong collective memory of 1976,
when loss of control over public expenditure led to a sterling crisis and
the intervention of the International Monetary Fund. As young high-flyers,
many had to tighten their hold on public spending at the behest of the IMF,
and are determined not to repeat the experience.
Sir Terry Burns is not scarred by that memory - he joined the Treasury from
academia only in 1980. He says there has been a move to a more strategic
approach to public expenditure, in which the Treasury helps to determine
priorities, sets targets and monitors progress. Increasingly, departments
are left to ensure that targets are met.
'This all involves the Treasury much less in the details of programmes and
rather more in the bigger question of priorities,' he says.
It is that strategic role for the Treasury, as a sort of head office of
Whitehall plc, that Sir Terry is anxious to defend. Rather than dividing the
Treasury into separate ministries for economics and finance, for example, he
wants it to continue to pull together 'all the strands of economic
policymaking across the government's programme'.
Sir Terry doesn't expect much thanks for this - as King James said of
treasurers: 'If they do good service to their masters, (they) must be
generally hated.' But he is prepared to accept that the Treasury must adapt
to changing circumstances and develop a clearer focus on its objectives.
* Some Reflections on the Treasury, to be published by Edward Elgar in the
autumn in a collection of essays to mark the 60th birthday of Sir James
Ball, professor of economics at the London Business School

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930805

