FT933-9904

FT  06 AUG 93 / International Capital Markets: Bonds find home in
Indonesia's finance family


   By WILLIAM KEELING


   JAKARTA


INDONESIA'S bond market has often been regarded by investors as the Jakarta
stock market's poor relative.
Last year, however, companies raised more finance through bonds than through
equity issues, and an active secondary market is emerging.
Until 1990, most bond issues were valued at less than Rp50bn (Dollars 24m),
carried fixed interest rates, and were bought primarily by state pension
funds which held them until maturity.
A 1991 hike in interest rates prompted companies to consider alternative
ways of raising finance. The need has become more acute with banks
restricting new credit as they grapple with non-performing debt.
The market received a boost last October when PLN, the state electricity
company, issued a five-year Rp300bn bond worth more than all the bonds
issued in 1991. The company plans a further Rp600bn to Rp900bn issue by the
end of this year.
Banks have also started issuing bonds to increase their tier-two capital to
meet new capital requirements, raising more than Rp900bn in the last year.
And, for the first time, private companies regard bonds as attractive
financing instruments. Indah Kiat, a leading pulp and paper company, and
Citra Marga, a road construction company, for example, are preparing issues
of Rp150bn and Rp275bn respectively.
Since early 1991, most issues have carried a maturity of five years with a
six-month fixed interest period, before floating at 100 to 150 basis points
above the average of the state banks' deposit rates. Bonds are a
considerably cheaper source of funds than the banks, which maintain a spread
of up 700 basis points between deposit and lending rates.
'The bond market has been expanding exponentially,' says Mr Karl Bohn,
director of Sigma Batara Securities, who estimates the market's
capitalisation has grown by Dollars 850m to about Dollars 2bn in the last
year and will increase by a further Dollars 750m in the next six months.
Brokers have seen increasing foreign interest in Indonesian bonds. There is
no restriction on foreign ownership of bonds. But on the stock market
foreigners are limited to 49 per cent of a company's listed shares.
Most bonds carry annual interest rates of about 15 per cent. Even given the
likelihood of currency depreciation the bonds offer an attractive rate of
return relative to main currency deposit accounts.
Mr Steve Kenny, senior technical adviser at Niaga Securities, anticipates a
situation where a 'foreign investment bank will take a large share of an
issue, such as PLN, and then place it with offshore investors'.
Bapepam, which regulates the capital markets, has responded to the
heightened interest in bonds with a campaign to boost secondary market
trading.
Brokers estimate secondary market activity has grown from almost zero in the
middle of last year to about Rp75bn a month. Trade is conducted almost
entirely off-market, allowing traders to avoid the official transaction fee
and capital gains tax.
Bapepam is holding talks with brokers - about 10 houses are actively dealing
in bonds - on the market's structure and whether trade should be conducted
over-the-counter or via a trading floor.
Brokers are also campaigning for a central clearing house which would
provide safeguards against possible fraud - all bonds are issued as bearer
bonds.
Despite some problems the momentum of the market is unlikely to be slowed. A
new law requiring companies to set up pension funds should, for instance,
increase demand for bonds.
Banks have been eager buyers of bonds: Awash with deposits but afraid to
lend, bonds have provided them with a low risk means of making a return on
their funds.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930806

