FT934-11628

FT  30 OCT 93 / Letters to the Editor: Government must heed public in local
government changes


   From Councillor JOSIE FARRINGTON


Sir, David Curry may well believe what he says about the benefits of
reorganising local government (Personal View, October 28), but the public
does not - as polls carried out for the Local Government Commission in the
first phase of the review so graphically illustrated. He should stop to
consider the democratic implications of what he advocates.
By endorsing unitary councils, he and the government are pre-judging the
will of the people and the outcome of the review. Despite government's
claims that the wishes of the public would be of utmost importance in
finding a new council system for England, it is becoming patently obvious
that so long as ministers get what they want out of restructuring, then the
public can just be ignored.
What kind of democracy do we live in when a secretary of state can launch an
independent commission to examine an issue, gauge public opinion on it and
then just disregard what people say? And when people are to be denied the
choice of whether they have Pounds 1bn spent on local government
reorganisation?
The will of local people must be heard in the local government review. By
effectively limiting the choices of the public to what the government thinks
is right, the government is ignoring the very people it claimed it would
heed. Local democracy will suffer. And the public will have to foot the bill
for bringing in unitary councils without being given much freedom to choose
if they actually want to change their councils, and how.
If the government - unlike the people in tranche one areas, the
Confederation of British Industry and Sir John Banham, chairman of the LGC -
is so sure of its proposals for changing local government, then it should
let them be judged fairly in the court of public opinion. If the people
demand change, then so be it. But if they decide change is unnecessary, then
the government must heed their views. To do otherwise would be an assault on
their democratic rights and would call into question the independence of the
commission and the validity of the review.
Josie Farrington,
policy committee chair,
Association of County Councils,
66a Eaton Square, London SW1

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931030

