FT934-11240

FT  02 NOV 93 / Cells crisis looms, prisons chief says


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


POLICE CELLS, former military camps and a floating prison may be used to
tackle a growing accommodation crisis in Britain's jails, Mr Derek Lewis,
director-general of the Prison Service, said yesterday.
He told the service's conference in Blackpool that he was 'on the verge' of
using emergency accommodation.
Mr Stephen Shaw, director of the Prison Reform Trust, said Mr Lewis's
statement was 'the clearest warning to the home secretary of the dangers he
is running with his prison policy'. Mr Michael Howard, home secretary, has
called for a law-and-order crackdown, claiming at the Tory party conference
last month that 'prison works' and that his plans were likely to increase
the prison population.
Mr Lewis said pressure on accommodation would lead to delays in some of the
service's plans to refurbish prisons. Decisions on which projects would be
deferred would be made during the next few weeks.
He warned that overcrowding increased the risk of security and control
problems. Recent incidents of unrest in prisons had shown that 'there are
limits to how far or fast we can push the service without incurring
unacceptable risks'.
The service, he said, had a duty to accommodate those sent to prison by the
courts. But it had an equal duty to make it clear if it believed the size of
the prison population, resources or any other factor made it impossible to
achieve its goals. The rate of growth in the population threatened the
Prison Service's ability to look after prisoners with humanity and help them
lead law-abiding lives, he said.
Bibby Line, the shipping company, said it had been discussing the
possibility of floating prisons with the government for the past couple of
months. 'We have been discussing with the government as one of the many
options they are looking at.' But it added: 'There has been no firm
decision. We have also been looking at possible sites.' Two Bibby ships are
already being used as prisons in New York.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931102

