FT932-6843

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (15): Recession proves a drag on
the anchor - The D-Mark presents a deceptive picture


   By DAVID WALLER


THE Deutsche Mark has strengthened during the past eight months, in keeping
with its status as anchor currency within the European exchange rate
mechanism and 'safe haven' for investors in troubled times.
On a real trade-weighted basis, it has appreciated by 5 per cent since last
summer, having risen from 92.6 in July to 97.1 in April, according to an
index produced by the Bundesbank - inflicting a substantial loss of
competitiveness on the German economy.
The overall picture conceals a loss of value against the US dollar. As
German interest rates have fallen and the economy has slipped into
recession, investors have been attracted to the US currency by the prospect
of economic recovery and higher interest rates. The D-Mark has fallen by 16
per cent since the dollar hit a low point in early September.
It also disguises a steep appreciation against European Community
currencies. Here, the increase to February was closer to 10 per cent,
reflecting the devaluation of the Italian lire and sterling against the
D-Mark. The change will be even steeper after the recent devaluation of the
Portuguese escudo and the Spanish peseta.
Economists predict a change in perceptions of the D-Mark: its value against
the US dollar is set to decline further, and the currency is expected to
lose its relative strength against currencies within the ERM.
'It will be at the bottom end of the ERM grid, if not at the outright
bottom,' says Avinash Persaud, currency economist at the Union Bank of
Switzerland in London.
This reflects two factors: poor fundamentals for the German economy, and a
resurgence of a degree of harmony on foreign exchange markets within Europe.
The attractions of the currency were especially high in the second half of
last year. German interest rates were at very high levels as the Bundesbank
struggled to stifle the inflationary forces unleashed in the aftermath of
German reunification. While the high rates were the cause of currency
turmoil, they also guaranteed the appeal of the D-Mark when other currencies
were subjected to waves of speculative selling on foreign exchange markets.
Now that there have been a number of exchange rate realignments, the
tensions inherent within the ERM have been diffused, thereby removing the
conditions under which the D-mark has 'safe haven' status.
During the current year, the attractions of the D-mark have diminished with
each cut in German interest rates.
Although inflation is at more than twice the Bundesbank's long-term annual
target of 2 per cent, more rate cuts are expected, with the Discount rate
likely to be down to 5 or 6 per cent by the end of the year. Each cut
weakens the appeal of the D-Mark - but the German economy is sinking into
its worst recession since the second world war.
Another disadvantage is that Germany's political establishment has not
provided any concrete solutions to the problem of public-sector debt. Alison
Cottrell, at Midland Global Markets Research in London, calculates that the
total figure this year - including debts associated with the Treuhand, the
government's privatisation agency for the former east Germany, and state-run
industries - could amount to DM231bn, more than 8 per cent of GDP.
Ms Cottrell believes the German government's ability to tackle this issue is
further blunted by the prospect of a crop of regional and federal elections.
She says, however, that the downside risks for the D-mark versus other
European currencies are muted: 'Other countries will cut their rates as
well. In a European context the D-Mark will be soft but stable.' Her
estimate is that the D-Mark could move against sterling to around DM2.55 in
a year's time.
By contrast, Ms Cottrell predicts further weakening against the US dollar.
The extent will depend on the scale of the economic recovery in the US, but
she is predicting a rate of DM1.65 to the dollar in six months time, and
DM1.70 a year from now.
According to Thomas Mayer, chief economist at Goldman Sachs in Frankfurt,
there are striking parallels between the development of the German economy
since reunification in 1990 and that of the US in the 1980s under President
Reagan. These point to substantial, if slow, depreciation of the D-Mark
against the dollar.
While Reagan hoped to stimulate a 'supply-side' revolution in the US by
cutting taxes, the elimination of central planning in the east was likewise
expected to induce an economic revolution. Instead, Mr Mayer argues, both
countries got a short-lived demand boom. The result in both cases was high
inflation and fiscal expansion.
'Like the US in the 1980s, Germany is becoming a 'twin-deficit country',' he
contends. 'That is, a country with high and rising public sector as well as
external (trade) deficits. . . In the US (this situation) put downward
pressure on the exchange rate and kept interest rates high during most of
the 1980's. With 'twin deficits' likely for most of the nineties, we expect
the exchange rate of the D-mark to ease and long-term bond yields to rise
from present levels in the intermediate future.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930526

