FT932-3095

FT  16 JUN 93 / Patten rapped on class change


   By JOHN AUTHERS


MR JOHN PATTEN, the education secretary, plans to remove restrictions on
school overcrowding, according to a letter leaked by the Labour party.
In the letter, written in April to Mr David Hunt, then Welsh secretary, he
says the costs of maintaining minimum standards for educational premises 'go
well beyond any realistic prospect of the capital expenditure which is
likely to be made available for improving existing buildings'.
He says that these standards, first established in 1981, would be
'deregulated', allowing schools to put more pupils into classroom space than
they could before.
The letter continued: 'The most contentious and potentially expensive
aspects of the present regulations relate to the minimum area standards for
teaching accommodation, and these I propose to deregulate along with the
area requirements for school land.'
In a draft reply to a parliamentary question, he makes clear that the
central core of requirements for safeguard-ing health, safety and wel-fare
would be maintained. The Department for Education refused to comment on the
content of the letter. However, it said a need for an extra Pounds 2bn on
school buildings had been identified in 1986. Local education authorities
had invested this amount in buildings by the end of 1990. A formal
announcement of the government's plans is expected by the end of next month.
The letter provoked an angry response from teachers and opposition
politicians.
Ms Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary - who leaked the letter - said:
'Mr Patten says in his letter that opponents will probably accuse the
government 'of a failure to protect educational standards'.
'He is quite correct. I do make such an accusation - and for the very good
reason that this is indeed an obvious and reckless disregard for standards.'
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and
Lecturers, said the plans gave the term 'crammer' a whole new meaning.
'Working in slum conditions isn't going to improve either quality or
morale,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930616

