FT934-11514

FT  30 OCT 93 / Books: Words, words, words


   By WILLIAM ST CLAIR


SHAKESPEARE: THE EVIDENCE. UNLOCKING THE MYSTERIES OF THE MAN AND HIS
WORK
by Ian Wilson
Headline Press, 498 pages, Pounds 19.99
WHAT DO we think we know about the author of Hamlet - assuming it was
Shakespeare who wrote the plays? The answer is: a great deal, but some of it
is wrong.
The main facts of his life are well authenticated. Born in
Stratford-upon-Avon shortly before April 26 1564, he married, had several
children, and moved to London. He wrote poems, was an actor, and a
playwright. From money made from investing in the theatre, he bought land at
Stratford and died there in 1616. A few years later two of his colleagues
published an edition of his collected plays.
All this can be discovered from official records of baptisms, marriages,
burials, and from property documents, wills, books and manuscripts. Samuel
Schoenbaum, an American scholar, reprinted most of them in 1975.
But the facts have not been enough. From the beginning of the Shakespeare
mania in the 18th century, the plain story has been filled out with invented
gossip, anecdotes drawn from the plays, speculation, and forgery.
Tourist sites are still encrusted with a layer of nonsense, perpetuated by
misleading disclaimers. Gaps in the chronological record have been elevated
into 'lost years' with the implication that something sinister must have
been going on.
Over the centuries Shakespeare has attracted dozens of pseudo-scholars and
cranks, sure that they have uncovered a deep secret. Those who believe that
he did not write the plays and try to give the credit to Bacon, Oxford,
Marlowe, or others, have no more evidence than their own discomfort that a
mere provincial could have known so much, but they continue to claim
attention.
Ian Wilson's Shakespeare, The Evidence, Unlocking the Mysteries of the Man
and his World, like his earlier study of the Turin shroud, is intended for a
popular readership and assumes little prior knowledge. The book contains
helpful summaries, a family tree, transcriptions of key documents, and is
excellently illustrated. But is our excitement at the sleuthing increased by
the knowledge that Stratford parish register measures 17 1/2 in by 7 1/2 in
and consists of 335 pages with the Shakespeare entry towards the bottom of
page five? Is Hamlet, above all, one of the most cracking ghost stories of
all time?
Wilson's book is better than his misleading title implies. He rightly
resists the common temptation to reconstruct Shakespeare's personality from
the speeches of his characters in the plays. He sometimes tells us more than
we need about the earls and lords and other better-documented men and women
who were Shakespeare's contemporaries, and he piles 'arguably' on
'arguably.' But, for the most part, he is sure-footed in picking his way and
judicious in his judgments. His book is a reliable guide to what is true,
what is relevant, what is guesswork, and what is false in Shakespeare
biography.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931030

