FT932-6847

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(13): Myth of the panacea interface - Human machine interaction


   By TONY QUINN


EVER since someone connected a television screen to a computer, the search
has been on for a computer that is easier to use. The major development of
the past decade has been the launch of the 'user friendly' Apple Macintosh.
The use of a mouse to control a 'desktop' has since spread to IBM-compatible
PCs in the form of Microsoft's Windows.
Each succeeding generation of microprocessor has brought the interface
between machine and man that much closer. The launch of the latest portable
computers - personal digital assistants - has introduced a new challenge to
the desktop, that of the notebook and pen.
PDAs such as E0's Communicator and Apple's Newton have no keyboard. Instead,
you write on the screen and the handwriting is translated into neat computer
text. Mr Hermann Hauser, chairman of EO Europe, describes the Communicator
as an 'active book'. The philosophy, he explains, 'uses the metaphor of the
book. The page itself is an effective unit of information; it is numbered
and grouped into chapters.
'Using the Communicator is just like using a notepad. It is like a hook
because it can present a lot of information without your having to input
anything. The active part comes from being able to edit and reformat the
information. Also, you can link parts together using a hyper-text system and
use multimedia with voice annotation and video.'
The Communicator screen looks like a notepad and has a 'book shelf' along
the bottom. Pages are 'turned' by touching the screen with the pen to the
left or right.
Mr Hauser compares the idea to the Macintosh. 'The Apple desktop metaphor is
successful and now it is 10 years old. It is good for the work it does, but
the book opens up to more people and is easier to use. For example, there is
no loading and saving of files. Instead, you go to part of the book. Saving
still goes on, but it is hidden from the user.'
But the pen has its limitations. Mr Charles Brennan, chairman of the British
Computer Society's interest group on human computer interaction, comments:
'The use of pens is touted by some as an improvement, but it's really a
solution to the fact that you can't fit a keyboard on a small portable. It
introduces as many difficulties as it solves.'
One problem is how to represent the volumes of data which computers can
access. One compact disc can store 600 times as much information as a floppy
disc, enough for a thousand novels. 'The book metaphor doesn't solve that,
nor does the desktop,' says Mr Brennan. 'You have to go beyond the real
world. You cannot look at a library and know where to go - you have to use
the computer as a support system.'
Researchers are already using virtual reality techniques to represent large
amounts of information as three-dimensional spaces. For example, the human
brain can be modelled as a structure for doctors and then 'flown around'
with heat or light used to highlight areas of inflammation.
As well as looking for new designs, work is concentrating on methodology and
standards. There are three major strands to this.
The first strand is building in 'usability'. Mr Paul Seaton of System
Concepts in London has worked on this under a project partly funded by the
DTI. 'At present, a lot of bespoke system development for big corporates is
done in-house. The development kits are promoted as being able to do the
whole job, but there's a lot more to it. Psychology and ergonomics are
concepts which are alien to these people. Companies such as Microsoft and
Apple recognise this, but in-house developers don't'
Existing system design methodologies leave the human interface to last, he
adds. 'You must move away from the technology and support the task, not
impose extra complications such as codes and jumping between screens to do
something that can be done on a single sheet of paper.'
The second strand is finding ways of assessing usability. Mr Martin Maguire
of the Husat Institute at Loughborough University says researchers there
have adopted four criteria:
User performance: usually measured by the time taken to carry out a task;
User satisfaction: responses to a questionnaire produce scores for
efficiency, control, learning, helpfulness and satisfaction;
Cognitive workload: breathing and heart rates are taken to measure stress
and mental effort. This is particularly important for safety-critical
systems, such as for air traffic control;
Analytic: a computer model of the user interface and tasks is built to see
how well the system performs. This can be done without the need for user
trials.
These measures would be applied by software developers, or by companies
commissioning software as a way of testing performance.
The third strand is the establishment of formal standards and trying to tie
in usability to open systems and total quality management. A European
directive which came into force this year (90/270/EEC) already contains
requirements relating to usability. Also, a working group is developing an
international standard (ISO 9241) dealing with software ergonomics and the
man-machine interface.
Ultimately, however, software developers have to work harder to understand
people. 'You can't solve usability by a panacea interface,' says Mr Brennan.
'You need to approach the big picture; recognise the organisational aspects,
the way people work and address the tasks that need to be done.'
* As part of the DTI-run Usability Now scheme which ended last year, an
information centre was set up on ergonomic issues. Contact Richard Wilson,
Scottish HCI Centre, Department of Computer Science, University of Glasgow,
Lillybank Gardens, Glasgow G12 8QQ. 041-339 8855.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930526

