FT934-8750

FT  13 NOV 93 / Markets: Alas, some fairy-tales end in tears - London


   By PETER MARTIN, financial editor


Walt Disney Presents THE LITTLE SHAREHOLDER or The Prince and the Paupers
The film opens in a bustling 18th century marketplace in the little French
town of Marne-La-Vallee. In the background, maids are hanging bedclothes out
of windows, housewives brushing doorsteps, bakers carrying trays of freshly
baked loaves. Chickens peck around the edges, dogs chase one another
underfoot.
Enter Prince Michael of Hollywood.
Sings:
'Far, far away in the USA
We built a World, a giant fun-house
Where millions come to play and pay
Now's Europe's chance to love the Mouse.'
Chorus:
'You get rich, we get rich
We all get rich together.'
Michael (murmurs):
'As long as it doesn't rain.'
(aloud):
'Come, my friends, stump up your cash. We'll build a brave new fun-palace
right here in Europe. In fact, we'll call it Euro Disney - and you'll own 51
per cent]'
Excited villagers crowd around him, showering him with gold coins. Suddenly,
the cheerful hubbub is interrupted by a jarring crash, a puff of smoke, and
the entry of the Wicked Fairy.
Fairy: 'I am ze spirit of European culture] 'Ow dare you insult me wiz your
'orrible Mouses] I lay a triple curse upon you: ze scorn of French
intellectuals, ze protests of revolting French farmers, and ze rain of
summer 1993.'
She disappears in a fresh puff of smoke and a crash of cymbals. The screen
dissolves, and we move forward through time - to this week.
We are still in Marne-La-Vallee, but it now looks quite different. Glossy
new hostels surround the marketplace. The ramparts of a Magic Castle tower
over the square, decorated with battered inflatable Mickey Mouse figures.
Chambermaids, housewives, butchers and bakers sit on their doorsteps,
looking glum. A humble serving girl comes to the front of the crowd, dressed
in rags. She is clutching a crumpled share certificate.
Little Shareholder (sadly):
'Long years ago we put our money where our Mouse was.
We paid eight quid a share for Mickey's home.
Now Euro Disney's talking to its bankers
They wonder if they'll ever see their loan.'
Chorus:
'Prince Michael, we feel lost, abandoned, sore]
Have we been told the worst or is there more?'
Prince Michael appears talking into the telephone on a giant video screen in
the corner of the square.
Michael:
'Can't you see I'm busy building a new theme park in the US? It's bad enough
I'm having to make provisions against the debt your company owes me. I'm
certainly not in the mood to listen to any whingeing Europeans. Don't call
me - I'll call you.' (Hangs up abruptly.)
Chorus:
'Euro Disney, Eurotunnel:
Euro frenzy's had its day.
Here's a rule for our investment:
Sadly, grand dreams do not pay]'
There were other unhappy fairy-tales this week. Take the story of The
Disappointed Merchant Bankers, or Virtue Unrewarded. In any well-regulated
fairyland, the higher-than-expected profits that both Warburg and Hambro
reported would have been enough to push their shares to new heights.
Instead, both shares fell. Warburgs saw its interim profits treble and
raised its dividend from 5.25p to 6p, but its shares fell 20p on the day, to
857p.
It has a double reason to feel aggrieved: the adverse stock market reaction
was partly a response to an act of virtue, a proper breakdown of the sources
of its revenues. Brokers' analysts decided that this showed all too clearly
that a high proportion of the bank's business came from profits from its
trading desks, a potentially unstable source of earnings. The shares closed
the week at 833p, down 57p.
The Unhappy Little Builder was another of the week's dismal tales, in the
form of Costain's rights issue. It was taken up by only 28 per cent of its
shareholders, leaving much of the stock in the hands of the underwriters,
where it will hang over the shares for months. They closed the week at 26
3/4 , down 2p.
There were some cheerful fables also: Lloyd's and the Fairy Godmothers, for
example. A clutch of investment trusts have been launched to provide
limited-liability for the insurance market, and though some of the wilder
estimates of how much they might raise have been disappointed, it looks as
though investors will find at least Pounds 750m of capital for Lloyd's in
this way.
That's a sum that would have been regarded as the merest fantasy a few
months ago, and it creates a small new quoted sector for investors to
consider. So far, there has been little secondary-market interest: those
trusts floated so far, such as HCG and Delian, have seen very thin trading.
Hiscox Insurance Select, which plans to be a specialist insurer, focusing on
such areas as insuring houses and pictures for the 'carriage trade', has
seen a bit more interest.
For the market as a whole, the fairy-tale continues. Even lacklustre results
or gloomy trading statements from blue-chips such as Unilever, Shell and
National Power, failed to dismay it this week. The FT-SE 100 index stayed
safely around the 3,100 mark, closing at 3,099.1, up 13.5 on the week.
The sleeping giant - the US bond market - continued to stir in its sleep,
however. There was a particularly loud snore from the US on Wednesday,
caused by fresh inflationary fears and a disappointing Treasury auction.
Though the fairy-tale continues to promise a happy ending, it has carried
darker, Brothers Grimm overtones since last week's fall.

The Financial Times


London Page II

931113

