FT933-10098

FT  06 AUG 93 / Gold price plummets in US as bullish mood evaporates


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


GOLD lost 2 per cent of its value in five seconds of hectic trading on the
New York Commodity Exchange yesterday, falling from about Dollars 393 a troy
ounce to Dollars 384.
The previous bullish sentiment evaporated after reports that the Bank of
China had sold about 6 tonnes - or 193,000 ounces - in London early
yesterday. There was also selling by Arab and Swiss syndicates which made
the market very nervous, traders said.
Nervousness turned to a stampede as soon as trading started on Comex in New
York, as some investment funds sold as much gold as fast as they could,
triggering more selling by funds which use computer programmes to limit
their losses.
Gold's sudden and sharp fall dragged down other precious metals, as well as
sending gold company shares plummeting.
Gold steadied in the afternoon and closed in London at Dollars 388.25 an
ounce, down Dollars 13.25 from Wednesday's close.
There was renewed selling at midday on Comex, however, and the August
contract closed in New York at Dollars 377.2, down Dollars 22.
Gold has risen from a seven-year low of Dollars 327 an ounce in January.
Only six days ago, the US funds used the uncertainties created by what
appeared to be the virtual collapse of Europe's exchange rate mechanism to
push the price through the Dollars 400 an ounce level.
Some analysts suggested yesterday's fall was no more than a healthy
correction after a speedy price rise. If gold could climb back to Dollars
395, the bull market would remain intact, they argued.
Others were more cautious and pointed out that the US investment fund buying
which had propelled gold upward might be reversed.
Mr Ted Arnold, metals specialist at Merrill Lynch financial services group,
said: 'On the basis of underlying physical demand for gold, the price should
have topped out long ago and fallen back by at least Dollars 50 an ounce.'
He pointed to a 'collapse' in demand for physical gold in the crucially
important Asian and Middle Eastern markets, which accompanied the build-up
of options trading activity on Comex.
He added: 'We remain convinced that the huge gap between physical offtake
and the paper market can't last forever. One day paper market prices will
have to fall and fall sharply.'
Lex, Page 14
Government bonds, Page 21
Commodities, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930806

