FT933-5186

FT  04 SEP 93 / World Stock Markets: Paris takes breather after scaling new
heights - The recent rally in equities has been driven by hopes of lower
interest rates


   By DAVID BUCHAN


After scaling record heights in late August, French equities started
September by having a breather, and taking profits. Having gone over the
2,200 level earlier in the week, the CAC-40 index closed yesterday at
2,156.09, a week's fall of 1.3 per cent.
This may be just as well. If the market continued dizzily upwards, the
government of Mr Edouard Balladur might over-price its forthcoming
privatisation offers.
One of these is Rhone-Poulenc, whose president, Mr Jean-Rene Fourtou, said
last week that, given the economy's bad state, he could not understand what
was driving the market so high.
Certainly, the boom has been particularly spectacular since the end of July.
On the last day of that month, when the monetary crisis coincided with
settlement deadlines, a record FFr12bn (Dollars 2bn) worth of shares was
traded in just one session. The previous record had been FFr8bn on March 26,
just before Mr Balladur's conservatives swept into government.
During August, some FFr90bn worth of shares were traded, or three times the
level a year earlier. The CAC-40 index put on nearly 5 per cent in the last
week of August.
To the professed puzzlement of Mr Fourtou, the bourse seems to be reading
any worsening of the macro-economic news as simply accelerating a reduction
in interest rates. But the surge on the market has also been part of a
general boom on European exchanges, reflecting expectations that the
continental recession is now bottoming out and that, with the corset of the
European exchange rate system at last loosened, interest rates in Germany's
partner countries can be sharply reduced.
'The French authorities now have flexibility in their monetary policy,' says
Mr Piers Butler of Baring Securities in Paris. 'They have not used it yet.
But it is only a matter of time before prevailing economic conditions,
unemployment which is still rising and consumption which is still stagnating
obliges them to do so.'
Only a month after it emptied its reserves in a vain attempt to maintain the
franc's parity within an unchanged exchange rate mechanism, the Bank of
France is still trying to restock its coffers with D-marks at a reasonably
strong exchange rate in terms of francs.
But one minister particularly close to Mr Balladur says that the
government's new watchword in monetary policy is 'pragmatism', and hints
that once the central bank has replenished its reserves, it may well start
slicing official interest rates. One institution, the Caisse d'Epargne in
the Paris region, has already gambled on this by slashing three percentage
points off consumer credit charges to its clients last week.
Interest rate cuts would not only help equities directly by boosting the
share-issuing companies, but also indirectly by reducing the attractiveness
of competing investments, such as Sicav money market funds and bonds.
The Balladur bond issue brought in FFr110bn to help finance public works and
housing and to give the government bridging finance before it gets the
receipts from its privatisation programme.
Not only did 'Ballabond' subscribers finance their investment by moving as
much as FFr80bn out of Sicav funds, but much of the bond issue may end up in
equities because of the special provisions encouraging holders to convert
bonds into shares of privatised companies.
Some FFr1,000bn still remains in Sicav money funds. If only 10 per cent of
this were to move into equities, it would have 'a very considerable effect'
on the relatively small proportion of shares regularly traded, says Mr Marc
Loneux, head of research at Bacot Allain Warburg.
The summer boom pushed the bourse's market capitalisation to FFr2,335bn by
the end of August, according to Mr Herve de Laitre of the Societe des
Bourses Francaises (SBF) which runs the Paris market. But Mr Loneux reckons
that only about half of these shares, just over FFr1,000bn, 'float freely',
with the rest held long-term.
The Paris market has also drawn fresh interest from abroad, particularly the
US, in spite of the fact that foreigners already own a third of all French
shares. 'The British moved in heavily a year ago', says Mr Butler, 'but we
have recently seen more money arrive from the US where a number of
institutions are underweight in foreign, especially European equities'.
There is thus plenty of liquidity at the moment. With the government aiming
to get around FFr40bn for the sale of its stakes in Banque Nationale de
Paris (BNP) and of Rhone-Poulenc, 'privatisation will only soak up a part of
this liquidity this autumn', says Mr Loneux.
Whether the market will be able eventually to absorb smoothly all 21
companies on the privatisation list, worth a possible FFr300bn, is another
matter.
But if privatisation is an overall success, it would add 13 per cent to
bourse capitalisation, says Mr de Laitre, compared to the 5.3 per cent
increase created by the conservatives' last privatisation programme in
1986-7.
It should also swell the number of individual domestic investors, which fell
from 6m to 4.5m in the last year as people took advantage of high interest
rates attached to Sicavs.
The government has stepped in to help and has exempted investors from the
bourse tax on transactions of less than FFr50,000 and put a maximum ceiling
of FFr4,000 on this tax.
'It is another blow to this tax, which we hope one day will die altogether',
says Mr de Laitre.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930904

