FT934-8872

FT  13 NOV 93 / Accord clears the line for sale of railways


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


THE way to the privatisation of the German railways was cleared last night,
with a hard-fought compromise negotiated by Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the
prime ministers of Germany's 16 federal states.
A row over how to finance the future of local commuter rail services, which
might be threatened by privatisation, had to be taken to the ultimate German
political summit to break the deadlock.
Now plans for the creation of a privately-constituted Deutsche Bahn AG can
go into effect next year, leading to the eventual creation of three
independent companies to run passenger transport, freight transport, and the
rail infrastructure.
Last night's deal was greeted by the German industry federation (BDI) as a
'victory for commonsense,' after the federal government had agreed on new
measures to help finance the cost of local transport in coming years.
The deal means that the 16 states will in future have a share in the planned
oil tax, to be introduced next year to finance the railways' reform. The
combined Deutsche Bundesbahn, in west Germany, and the Deutsche Reichsbahn
in east Germany, need the finance to service a DM70bn (Pounds 28bn) debt
burden.
Cross-party agreement, and the acceptance of the federal states, was needed
for the rail reform, which requires changes in the German constitution.
In 1995 and 1996, Bonn will provide DM14.5bn for the states to subsidise
commuter services, including DM8.2bn from the oil tax, which comes into
effect on January 1. The total federal subsidy, including the oil tax
element, will rise to DM15.3bn in 1997, and as much as DM17.3bn by the end
of the century.
The figures suggest that the federal government has had to pay handsomely
from future revenues, in order to buy the agreement of the states to the
rail reform plan.
The privatisation is planned to take place over 10 years but the national
system will only be responsible for inter-state and cross-border travel,
leaving the loss-making commuter services in the hands of the state
governments.
Mr Matthias Wissmann, the transport minister, said the negotiations had been
carried out 'without any ideological debate.' He hopes to introduce the
amended bill on rail reform in the Bundestag this month, with the hope of
having final approval by the beginning of December.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931113

