FT934-8439

FT  16 NOV 93 / Argentina's president eyes a second term: Mr Menem's hope of
changing the constitution has come a step closer


   By JOHN BARHAM


A DEAL with an old rival has improved President Carlos Menem's chances of
standing for re-election when his term ends in July 1995.
Mr Menem signed an agreement at a Sunday evening summit with his predecessor
Mr Raul Alfonsn, now leader of the opposition Radical party. In return for
Mr Alfonsn's promise of Radical support for a lifting of the ban on
successive presidential terms, Mr Menem will abandon a plebiscite scheduled
for next Sunday on constitutional reform.
Opinion polls say the government would have taken 65-68 per cent of votes,
leaving the Radicals with another crushing defeat, their fifth since 1987.
Despite the disastrous end to his 1983-89 term as president, when
hyperinflation forced him from office five months early, Mr Alfonsn remains
the only Radical leader of national stature. He clearly hopes to be the
candidate to challenge Mr Menem in 1995.
The Peronists dominate the Senate, which has already voted two-thirds in
favour of changing the constitution. But the Peronists lack a majority in
the lower chamber of deputies, making an agreement with the Radicals
essential.
The salient points of the accord are:
Changing the constitution to allow re-election of the president for a second
term. The six-year term to be cut to four years.
Creation of a 'co-ordinating minister' - or prime minister - as link between
government and congress. Mr Menem yesterday said he would offer a Radical
this job.
Greater independence of the judiciary. Selection of judges to be by
independent panel, not by government. Opposition politicians would head
semi-autonomous bodies like the audit office, whose independence would be
entrenched in the constitution.
Curbing the president's right to issue decrees with force of law.
Reform of the constitution along these lines is far from a fait accompli. Mr
Alfonsn must still deliver the Radical vote he promised Mr Menem, and last
night Mr Menem said he might still hold a plebiscite if the Radical party
reneged on the deal.
Assuming Mr Alfonsn can rally the required support, elections must be held
for the constituent assembly that would write the new constitutional text.
Some observers worry the assembly could declare itself sovereign and exceed
the terms of the Menem-Alfonsn accord.
Mr Menem's unquestioned control of the Peronist machine ensures he would be
its candidate in 1995 and his current high standing in the polls would make
him almost assured of a second term. Furthermore, his deal with Mr Alfonsn
may further divide the already fractured and demoralised Radicals.
Radicals say the agreement could actually strengthen their chances of
victory in 1995. Some believe the government's market-oriented economic
policies will unravel soon, making Mr Menem an easier opponent than other
Peronists.
Younger Radicals hope another electoral defeat would sweep Mr Alfonsn's old
guard from the scene, allowing a younger generation to win the 1999
elections.
The business community is divided. Some say Argentina's political immaturity
requires Mr Menem to stay in office until 1999 to maintain economic reform.
Others want a smooth handover to a new administration that would maintain
his economic policies.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931116

