FT932-6617

FT  27 MAY 93 / UK Company News: A new line for selling insurance - The
industry's increasing use of direct sales by telephone


   By RICHARD LAPPER


NEWS THIS week that Rollins Hudig Hall, one of the world's biggest insurance
brokers, and General Accident are joining forces to launch SelectDirect, a
new telephone-based service to sell home and motor policies, has served to
signal the growth in so-called 'direct' insurance business.
The new venture is one of a number by UK insurance companies and brokers in
recent months. It responds to the inroads into the motor insurance market
made by direct writers in the last two years. Direct writers sell insurance
through a combination of telephone sales and mass media advertising,
bypassing the broker, the industry's traditional middle man.
By the end of this year nearly two million motorists will be insured by the
three biggest direct writers - Direct Line, Churchill, and The Insurance
Service.
Direct Line, launched in 1986, confidently expects to be the biggest motor
insurer in the country by the end of the year and is making handsome profits
for its parent, the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Churchill, launched by Switzerland's Winterthur, in 1989, says it is now
making profits, as is The Insurance Service, the direct writing subsidiary
of Royal Insurance.
According to a survey to be published next month by GSR, the London research
company, direct writers currently account for 20 per cent of the Pounds
6.1bn motor insurance market. GSR predicts that the market share of direct
writers will rise to 40 per cent by 1998.
The managers of direct writing companies say that recent growth of direct
sales indicates the public is increasingly prepared to buy insurance by
telephone.
Mr Richard Hill, chief executive of TIS, says direct telephone sales are
ideally suited for low margin insurance products such as motor insurance.
'You wouldn't sell cheques or credit cards by a broker. Why sell motor
insurance that way?'
SelectDirect's formation reflects an increasing recognition among brokers
about the popularity of telephone sales.
RHH, whose US parent Aon Corporation took over Frank B Hall and its UK
subsidiary Leslie & Godwin last year, is following in the footsteps of three
other chains of telephone-based brokers: AA Insurance, Swinton Insurance,
which is owned by Sun Alliance, and Safeguard.
But unlike these three competitors RHH does not intend to establish a
network of high street branches, which it believes will add substantially to
its cost base.
General Accident's involvement in the new venture reflects its commitment to
telephone-based sales. Along with Eagle Star and Royal Insurance, GA is one
of the three big UK composite (multi-line) insurers to have established its
own direct writer. GA 1-2-1 now underwrites 17 per cent of General
Accident's motor insurance book.
A fourth composite, Guardian Royal Exchange is also widely expected to
follow suit within the next 12 months. GRE's subsidiary in the Irish
Republic - PMPA Insurance - is a successful direct response company. Mr
James Morley, finance director, acknowledges the trend towards direct sales
in motor insurance. 'It is more a question of when rather than whether
although we have not reached a definitive view that the time is right.'
Two other composite companies - Commercial Union and Sun Alliance - are also
thought to be increasing the proportion of direct motor business.
Legal & General is also examining the possibility of a new direct insurer,
while other direct writers include Prospero, the subsidiary of Provincial
Insurance, Preferred, a subsidiary of Denmark's Topdanmark and Touchline,
which is owned by GAN, the large French company.
Underwriters at Lloyd's of London - which has a 15 per cent share of the UK
motor market - are also active in the market. Earlier this year Admiral, a
service company managed by the Hayter Brockbank agency, began a direct
operation in January from a new base in Cardiff.
Admiral aims to have between 45,000 and 70,000 policyholders by the end of
the year, but according to Mr David Stevens, marketing manager, it is is
focusing on relatively small 'niches' such as drivers who are under 25 but
have clean driving records.
By contrast, companies such as Direct Line, Churchill and The Insurance
Service are aiming to win a much wider share of the market. Direct Line
intends to attack the home insurance market. In the motor market, all are
selective about the sort of motorist they will insure. Even so, Mr Hill says
TIS is prepared to insure four out of five motorists.
Mr Martin Long, chief executive of Churchill, says the main thing is 'we
have not set out to be a niche player. We've set out to become one of the
UK's largest motor insurers very rapidly. We plan to be big.'

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930527

