FT934-10172

FT  06 NOV 93 / Markets: BT unhappily reverses charges - The Bottom Line


   By ALAN CANE


IT HAS been a good week for BT's customers. Cheaper calls on Saturday and
Sunday next year will put Pounds 125m back in their pockets as the first
tranche of a guaranteed Pounds 500m worth of price cuts.
For investors, however, the future seems neither so certain nor so
encouraging. The company issued a carefully worded but clear warning on
Thursday along with its interim results that there was no certainty that
dividend growth at today's 8 per cent or so can be maintained. The news took
more than Pounds 500m off BT's market value as brokers marked the shares
down.
BT's half year figures, were at the top end of market expectations with
pretax profits up almost 50 per cent at Pounds 1.5bn. The interim dividend
was 6.65p, a healthy 8.1 per cent up on last year's allotment.
The sting came in chairman Iain Vallance's gloss on the numbers: 'Future
dividend policy will need, more than ever, to take account of continuing low
inflation, harsher regulation, tougher competition and emerging long-term
needs and opportunities'.
Analysts were yesterday still mulling over what Vallance was trying to
signal to the market. Laurence Heyworth at Robert Fleming saw it as a
warning to those who had tended to forget that BT remains a regulated
utility in spite of all the exciting possibilities in the convergence of,
for example, telecommunications and entertainment.
He drew a parallel with the water and gas industries where the trend is
towards tighter regulation and lower rates of return: 'Capital expenditure
is now flat at about Pounds 2bn a year. Why should the regulator allow BT to
report ever- increasing profits and dividends if it is not reinvesting in
its network?'
Other analysts pointed out there seemed no reason why in the short term at
any rate dividend growth rate cannot be maintained at generous levels.
Tressan MacCarthy at Panmure Gordon said: 'Either BT is hinting that it has
found another use for the cash or it is trying to put pressure on the
regulator.' The chart suggests that after some earlier volatility, the
relative dividend yield is set on an upward path.
Under the terms of its licence BT is bound to keep price rises for its
principal services within the terms of a formula which is the rate of
inflation minus 7 1/2 per cent. These conditions were set when inflation
rates were significantly higher; a direct result is the Pounds 500m that BT
has to return to its customers. BT has been making clear that it finds the
burden irksome.
Robert Millington at BZW pointed out, however, that BT has a remarkably
strong balance sheet for an international company with about Pounds 1bn of
free cash flow.
On balance, analysts believe that private investors should hold the stock
rather than taking profits now. Chris McFadden at Smith NewCourt is bullish
about BT's prospects: 'In the long term, I am very happy with BT. It is the
ideal stock for private investors, solid and with exciting elements in its
future strategy.'
Deciding an investment strategy, however is complicated by BT's dual nature.
This is especially true for those with part-paid shares who have seen a good
return to date but must pay a further Pounds 1.40 a share on March 1 next
year.
On one hand, BT is a large competitor in one of the fast-developing markets.
It is a sound company which couples strong management with good products and
aggressive market strategies. Among the possibilities are BT branded
products in entertainment and further development in business data
communications. The purchase of MCI to provide BT's face in the US has
significant potential. All of this will absorb some of BT's cash pile but it
will also, in time, provide the next generation of profits. On the other
hand, the company is not a bank but a regulated utility. It faces stiff
competition in its principal markets while regulatory burdens show no sign
of easing.
The cautious, believing that UK equity markets have had a good run, might
think that selling is a safe option, while those bullish about the
telecommunications business could seek more exciting candidates for
investment.

The Financial Times


London Page II

931106

