FT933-12704

FT  23 JUL 93 / Support for franc as ERM faces turmoil


   By JOHN RIDDING, PETER JOHN and STEPHANIE FLANDERS


   PARIS,, LONDON


PRESSURE on the European exchange rate mechanism intensified yesterday as
the Bundesbank intervened heavily to support the French franc while the
Spanish, Portuguese and Danish currencies slid down the ERM currency grid.
The franc held its ground, hovering just over a centime above its ERM floor
and closing at FFr3.418 against the D-Mark. In late trading in New York it
was at around FFr3.4085.
The Bank of France did not confirm reports that it was buying francs to prop
up the currency, but Mr Christopher Potts, economist at Banque Indosuez in
Paris, estimated that the bank had spent up to DM10bn (Pounds 3.8bn)
yesterday in its attempts to support the currency.
The peseta, which only recently was at the top of the European monetary
system ladder, crashed through its ERM central rate of Pta79.11 to reach new
lows against the D-Mark, before closing at Pta79.84. In New York it was
around Pta79.65. The escudo closed in Europe at 100.25 against the D-Mark,
having begun the week at 97.10. In New York it was around 99.94.
The Danish krone appeared in danger in early trading yesterday but recovered
to close in London at DKr3.8805 against the D-Mark.
Market attention focused on the franc, however, prompting the French central
bank to take a significant step against speculators by suspending its five
to 10 day lending facility, replacing it with overnight funds at the same
7.75 per cent interest rate.
The decision will make it more difficult for speculators to borrow francs
with the intention of selling and repurchasing them more cheaply after any
devaluation.
The French authorities also suspended the facility in January. The overnight
interest rate was then raised by 2 per cent. Currency analysts said that the
battle against the franc had entered a new and more serious stage. 'Until
now it has been something of a phoney war,' said Mr Potts at Banque
Indosuez. 'Today, for the first time we have seen very heavy selling
pressure.'
Mr Edmond Alphandery, the French economy minister, yesterday reaffirmed the
government's commitment to the franc's current ERM parity.
In an interview published in Le Figaro, he said: 'The markets have to
understand that our determination is total.
'The priority is monetary stability. The cornerstone is the maintenance of
the parity between the franc and the D-Mark.'
Yesterday's move by the French central bank was seen as just one step in the
defence of the franc.
Editorial Comment, Page 19
Lex, Page 20
Currencies, Page 29

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930723

