FT932-13514

FT  23 APR 93 / Strikes may face fresh legal curbs


   By JOHN AUTHERS and RALPH ATKINS


A RADICAL plan to impose severe limits on public-sector strikes is being
considered by the government as a way of thwarting the threatened teachers'
boycott of school tests this summer.
The proposal would mark a significant tightening of Britain's trade union
laws and set the government on a fresh confrontation course with the union
movement.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, employment secretary, is backing a proposal that would
end immunity from court action for strikes intended principally to frustrate
the carrying out of statutory duties. An amendment could be made to the
Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill which reaches its final stages
in the House of Lords on Monday.
A government decision on whether to legislate will depend on today's Appeal
Court ruling on Wandsworth borough council's case against the National
Association of Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers. The union is
boycotting preparation of the school tests.
Mr John Patten, education secretary, is expected to give a first government
response when he addresses the Secondary Heads' Association conference in
Southport.
The disclosures came in a letter dated February 26 from Mrs Shephard to Mr
Patten and leaked to the National Union of Teachers. The tone of the letter
suggests that the government has devoted a great deal of effort to drawing
up tough options for heading off strikes by the teachers - and perhaps
public sector strikes in general.
Mrs Shephard's letter says disputes could be outlawed, 'where the principal
or sole demand is that workers should not be required to do work which is
necessary in order to carry out a specific statutory duty on the employer'.
It says disputes would not be rendered unlawful if trade unions demanded a
pay rise in return for doing extra work required by statutory duties.
It was unclear last night the extent to which Mrs Shephard had won cabinet
backing or whether her proposals could be introduced in time to allow this
summer's tests to go ahead.
Last night's disclosures provoked angry protests from teachers' unions. Mr
Doug McAvoy, NUT general secretary, said the letter revealed a 'sinister
government plot'. Legal experts suggested that Mrs Shephard's proposal would
be difficult to enforce, and lead to a mass of litigation.
Anger over Shephard letter, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930423

