FT933-10215

FT  05 AUG 93 / Arts: Hell is other movies - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


TOM AND JERRY THE MOVIE (U) Phil Roman
TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES 3 (PG) Stuart Gillard
THE SNAPPER (15) Stephen Frears
NUIT ET JOUR (15) Chantal Akerman
PUERTO ESCONDIDO (15) Gabriele Salvatores
The RSPCA - Royal Society for the Protection of Cartoon Animals - should be
out in force this week. Tom And Jerry The Movie and Teenage Mutant Ninja
Turtles 3 subject a cat, a mouse and four half-shell humanoids to
indignities more frightful than the worst we ever visited on our own pets.
Even small children would draw the line at stretching their favourite doggy
or moggy on a Procrustean rack. But the cinema thinks nothing of taking
beasties who originated in short, sprightly cartoons (Tom and Jerry) or
comic-strips (Turtles) and extending them sinew by creaking sinew into
feature length and/or triple sequelitis.
The Andrews Theory on this goes as follows. Hollywood cannot understand the
concept of small. If something is small and successful, the laws of nature
are being broken and that item must be made large and successful. If a
Hollywood mogul found a Faberge egg on his desk he would, with righteous
artistic indignation, set about turning it into a geodesic dome.
Tom And Jerry The Movie is 90 mirthless minutes in which the feline and
rodent who once gladdened our hearts by chasing each other round the
booby-trapped ideal homes of America - showing the Id alive even within the
suburban Super-Ego - cosy up together to rescue an orphan girl (sic) and
tearfully to reunite her with her missing father (etiam sic). It is as if
Tom and Jerry had wandered into a lost Lillian Gish movie. Not even the
film's two best turns - a suave, George Sanders-accented villain and a
skateboarding dog - can stop all hands going down with the ice-floe.
Turtles 3 is something stranger, eerier. Is conceptual stupidity becoming an
elemental force in modern cinema? The four shell-backed heroes who delight
in pizzas and New York slang (actually more like LA Valleyspeak migrated to
Manhattan) are here teleported to 17th century Japan. Here there is no pizza
supplier; no encouraging environment for cries of 'Excellent]' or
'Cowabunga]' (though of course everyone speaks English); and no sign of a
plot worth the name in writer-director Stuart Gillard's script about
time-hopping Samurai.
I came closer to something resembling an after-death experience with this
film than with any other I remember seeing. A tunnel of blackness seemed to
open up, followed by unearthly choirs singing of a luminous dimension in
which the movie would end and one would find celestial quarantine from lines
like 'I'll melt you into a steaming puddle of puke' or from watching four
amphibians dance, fight, crack jokes and fall over.
Like last week's Last Action Hero, TMNT3 is dementedly self-referential and
cine-referential. Note the turtle who rescues a child from a burning
building and cracks 'Eat your heart out, Kurt Russell' (see Backdraft, Act
2, Scene 3). But unlike the amiable Arnie adventure, it is less postmodern
than pushbutton-Pavlovian. If nothing else will trick the filmgoer's mouth
into a grin, goes the makers' thinking, perhaps we can try the tired
invocation of rival filmic favourites. But in a context this arch and
involuted already, Hell, as Jean-Paul Sartre once almost observed, is other
movies.
The Snapper, directed by Stephen Frears from Roddy Doyle's script of his own
novel, has nothing to do with turtles: except by psycho-behavioural analogy.
When, if you are a single Dublin 20-year-old (Tina Kellegher) made pregnant
by an older married man, should you stick your head out from under your
shell and tell your family?
If you do, Mum will make silent gaping motions like a distraught guppy.
Younger sister, wearing shaving-cream beard and toy soldier costume, will
carry on her Ruritanian bandleader practice. And Dad will go comprehensively
spare: spluttering patriarchally one moment, rushing to the library the next
to swot up sex-and-birth manuals.
Already shown on television by the BBC (who produced it), The Snapper now
gets a late cinematic Caesarean and bursts into the larger light of the
movie screen. It is not quite happy there. The TV-movie's natural foetal
postures - cramped framing, sitcom comic set-ups, close-knit gossip sessions
between Sharon and her chums at the pub - get scared by all the new space
around them. And author Doyle, who had a proper movie birth in the
all-singing-and-dancing The Commitments, must here cleave more prosaically
to his original story's straight and narrow.
But you cannot fault Colm Meaney's performance as Dad, which alone eats up
all space available to it. This paterfamilias has no idea how to react to an
unravelling domestic world, so he tries every different reaction in turn.
Anger; sorrow; bewilderment; scientific research; denial. ('The uterus is
pressing into my bladder' says the girl. 'Stop it, Sharon, I don't want to
hear things like that.') Finally, he just tries being himself and the Meaney
face - a comic chunk of wood with features nervously chipped into it - warms
into a glow of fatherly compassion as touching as it is well-observed and
unsentimental.
Nuit Et Jour is a readimix French art movie for those who are too young ever
to have seen the real thing. (The country virtually stopped making them
years ago.) Cabbie Jack (Thomas Langmann) loves pretty gamine Julie
(Guillaine Londez) and they live in a Paris flat big on colour co-ordination
and small on social life. ('Perhaps we ought to meet someone,' he suggests.
'Next year,' she replies). Their amour and bonheur are, however, enough for
them. As the voice-over crooningly if runically explains, 'They used to make
love almost in their sleep and that 'almost' was very important.'
The voice-over is female and the film was written and directed by the
once-reckonable Chantal Akerman (Jeanne Dielmann, Toute Une Nuit). But the
poor woman has obviously been knocked on the head by a pile of women's
magazines falling from her overcrowded bookshelf. This winsome nonsense
might have been penned by Sylvie Krin with a little help - for what is a
French film without pretension? - from Marguerite Duras. I especially winced
at the scene where an interior wall is knocked down on the grounds that
'everything will then be clearer'.
Ah, possibly. But then again perhaps not. These characters would not
recognise clarity if it jumped up and bit them. Outside the window is a
painted backdrop of Paris: so Pirandellian. Inside, the blue pillows are set
off against red floral wallpaper to match the lovers' own two-tone clothing
(he blue, she red). And when Julie succumbs to a fling with another man,
Jack's fellow cabbie Joseph, we start wandering about a Paris that resembles
a vast Toytown film noir.
For this is the world of designer existentialism. Here moods, emotions and
sexual identities are defined by playblock colours and pinbright symbolism:
that sort of sophisticated naivete, winking even as it dispenses wisdom,
that came in and should have gone straight out again with Les Parapluies de
Cherbourg.
In a difficult week you might try Italy's Puerto Escondido, written and
directed by Gabriele Salvatores. As in Signor S's Mediterraneo, a small
group of characters seek a world out of time but find time and and the world
catching up with them. Banker Mario (Diego Abantuono) flees Milan for
Mexico, to escape a homicidal police commissioner who took a mysterious
pot-shot at him in the bank's loo.
But malefactors turn friendly. (As Mediterraneo pointed out, our only true
enemy is ourselves). Soon the smiling cop comes West to join Mario's other
new friend, a crook who robbed him and then befriended him. And added to the
genially self-destructive mix are a girl (Valeria Golino), a bedraggled
fighting cock called Tyson and a storyline so picaresque it makes Don
Quixote seem like a O Henry story. Very slow but very (if you have the time)
engaging.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930805

