FT934-8710

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (10):
Skis, the long story


   By DAVID GOLDSMITH


THE BEST skis complement your skills rather than frightening them away. Many
skiers would be better off on different skis, or different lengths than they
are using.
Tricky situations tend to reveal the true character and substance of skis.
In a mogul field, railway sleepers are not the handiest form of transport.
On ice it is best not to have bananas on your feet. Simple precautions can
make skis more user-friendly:
Always try out a new ski length by renting it before committing yourself to
purchase.
Make your skiing preferences - piste or off-piste, bumps or long cruising
runs - clear to the shop, as well as your abilities.
Avoid buying racing skis unless your skiing techniques include the ability
to carve, rather than skid, your turns.
Whatever you are buying or renting, make sure that the ski edges are
super-sharp. Most people have skis with blunt edges - the equivalent of bald
tyres on a wet road. An adequately sharp ski edge will produce fine shavings
from the face of your fingernail.
Likewise, make sure the skis are waxed every few days.
It is now 20 years since the greatest revolution in ski sales. The compact
ski (160cm to 180cm long) took average ski lengths down 20cm at a stroke.
The principle worked for millions of people at the time, and it is still
relevant today.
There is no inherent disadvantage or shame in taking a relatively short
length of ski. The only real compromise is a slight lack of stability at
speed - not something that most recreational skiers (who typically reach a
maximum 20 to 25 mph) experience in any case.
An echo of the compact ski reverberated in the hills last winter in the
unusual shape of the Atomic Powder Plus. The Fat Boy, as it has become
known, has the special virtue of a much greater surface area. More than 50
per cent wider than a normal ski, it floats very easily in deep, and
especially deep and heavy, snow.
Volkl and others have now copied the concept. The Volkl version - bright
yellow and called the Explosiv - is a better compromise for edge-to-edge
performance on piste, where the Atomic is so fat it is sluggish to turn.
A quite different type of short wide ski - the parabolic - is being
experimented with by two manufacturers at present: Kneissl and Elan.
Parabolic skis have a very wide tip and tail but an extremely narrow
(narrower than a slalom racing ski, in fact) waist. This means that they
turn very sharply, especially at low speeds. It means great responsiveness.
SKIS THAT WORK
Rossignol 7XK: Giant slalom-type ski. One of the finest I have used. Calm at
speed, responsive when needed. Excellent assured edge grip.
K2 TRC: Reliable torsion-box constructed ski. Good for harder snow but also
excellent off-piste. Also, the LTP, an attractive reliable ski pitched at
female skiers.
Salomon Super Force 9 3S or 2S. Monocoque (single shell outer surface) ski.
Very good, light and responsive, for tough runs, bumps and powder. The 3S
makes shorter turns, the 2S longer turns.
Volkl Renntiger. A long-established classic mid-market model, good value,
reliable carve and glide. Suitable for intermediates and good skiers.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

931113

