FT932-6864

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(4): Massively parallel challengers - The new supercomputer battleground


   By PAUL TAYLOR


UNTIL a few years ago the market for supercomputers, the behemoths of data
processing, was a relatively sedate affair involving just a handful of
American and Japanese companies led by Cray Research of the US.
But new approaches to supercomputing using alternative technologies threaten
to turn it into a fiercely competitive battleground and upset the
established order.
Cray still dominates the world market for traditional supercomputers with
around two-thirds of the installed base, according to Ms Jane Doorly of
Dataquest, the information technology market research group.
She believes Cray's Japanese rivals Fujitsu, NEC and Hitachi, have not made
inroads into the North American or European markets because Cray also
dominates the software side of traditional supercomputing.
Cray's most powerful machines, the Y-MP C90s, can cost more than Dollars 30m
each and are capable of processing up to 16bn calculations in a second.
They are used in universities for academic research, by government agencies
for example for weather forecasting, and increasingly by industry for
design, modelling and other functions which can provide a competitive
advantage.
These supercomputers achieve their fast calculation speeds by using one, or
a small number of high-power data-processors, 16 in the case of the Y-MP
C90, to work through computer code using a technique known as 'vector
processing'.
Because these traditional supercomputers use costly custom-made processors,
they are expensive and performance improvements are coming more slowly as
designers try to wring more speed from individual processors.
By using different techniques and cheaper standard technology about a dozen
companies including Intel, Kendall Square Research, Thinking Machines,
nCube, NCR and MasPar Computer in the US, and Britain's Meiko Scientific and
Parsys, are building machines which promise to be more powerful than
traditional supercomputers, but cost much less.
This new generation of supercomputers works by linking hundreds or thousands
of smaller off-the-shelf processors - often reduced instruction set
computing (Risc) microprocessors - using a technique known as 'massively
parallel processing' (MPP).
Unlike vector processing systems which tackle each part of a job in
sequence, one at a time, parallel systems divide the problem into small
parts and share it out among lots of processors which then work
simultaneously.
The industry is sharply divided over the technical merits of the two
systems. The supporters of MPP machines claim they offer greatly improved
price/performance value and will ultimately replace the monolithic-style
vector processor.
Critics argue that they are still largely unproven and that they are much
more difficult to programme than vector processors. 'Parallel processing is
not mainstream, it is for niche applications,' says Ms Doorly, 'there are
still lots of technical problems.'
The main problem remains the lack of software to run on the machines.
Currently, only about two dozen applications run on MPP supercomputers and
only a handful of those have gained widespread acceptance. Software
developers are reluctant to write applications for a fragmented market of
competing standards.
So far, multi-processor based supercomputers have mostly only challenged
Cray's lower powered machines. But some competitors have begun to combine
elements of both parallel and vector techniques to challenge Cray's
top-of-the-range models.
In particular, Fujitsu's VPP500 supercomputer, unveiled last autumn,
combines the two approaches in a technology predictably called 'vector
parallel processing'. The VPP500 has enabled the Japanese company to take a
spectacular lead in the race to build the world's most powerful computer.
Fujitsu, in the supercomputer business since 1977, has half of the Japanese
and 23 per cent of the world market. It claims its supercomputer is capable
of up to 355bn calculations per second. It comprises from seven to 222
vector processors, each roughly equivalent to a conventional mid-range
supercomputer arranged in parallel. Fujitsu believes it can sell 50 units
over the next three years at between Dollars 10m and Dollars 50m a unit.
That may well depend on whether the VPP500 fulfils Fujitsu's ambitious
performance claims - experts warn that Japanese supercomputers have a
reputation for running faster on paper than when solving real problems.
However, Cray has acknowledged that it faces new competitive pressures and
is struggling to cut costs. Last year sales fell by 8 per cent to Dollars
797.6m. The group reported a Dollars 14.9m loss, after a Dollars 42m
restructuring charge to cover job cuts, compared to a Dollars 113m profit
the previous year.
Cray reckons its restructuring moves will cut costs by Dollars 50m a year
but has also begun to rethink its product strategy. It has introduced
cheaper, less powerful, entry-level, models costing around Dollars 300,000
to compete with the mini-supercomputers made by such companies as Convex
Computer. At the other end of the scale it has begun to answer the challenge
of MPP machines by developing its own, codenamed the TD3, based on Digital
Equipment's Alpha chip which will also combine vector and MPP technology.
It has also established a joint venture with California's Sun Microsystems
to build a machine aimed at filling a niche at the top end of the
workstation market and to create a 'seamless software environment' that will
allow Sun systems and Cray supercomputers to work together with increased
efficiency.
This is important because the supercomputer manufacturers also face a
potential challenge from a technique known as 'clustering'. This involves
linking together separate high-end desktop workstations to form what
Hewlett-Packard calls 'a loosely coupled, parallel supercomputer.'
To develop these systems HP has formed an alliance with Convex Computer, the
Texas-based mini-supercomputer manufacturer. Ms Peggy Heppelmann,
workstation business manager for HP in the UK, says both IBM and
Hewlett-Packard are already selling 'a reasonable number' of workstation
clusters.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930526

