FT934-10232

FT  06 NOV 93 / Let the vroom times roll: Mercedes' motor sport initiative


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


Chancellor Helmut Kohl last month got down to some serious negotiations with
the president from Paris. Sitting opposite him, however, was not Francois
Mitterrand but the urbane and very English figure of Mr Max Mosley,
president of FIA, the Paris-based world governing body of motor sport.
Mr Kohl was arguing in person the case for a second German Grand Prix - at
the Nurburgring in the Rhineland Palatinate where he was formely premier.
Germany once again is taking its motor sport seriously. But then so is the
rest of the world.
Grand Prix, sports and saloon car racing - and more recently North America's
IndyCar championship - are now being beamed regularly by satellite and
terrestrial television channels to more than 100 countries.
At the same time, motor sport is acknowledged as a valuable promotional tool
in the fierce global battle for sales between top international carmakers.
It is not surprising that Mercedes-Benz should this week have unveiled its
own ambitious new motor sport programme. Having acquired an equity stake of
undisclosed size in Ilmor Engineering, a small Northampton-based racing
engine company, the German manufacturer is embarking on a three-pronged
project:
First, in partnership with Ilmor, Mercedes will formally enter Grand Prix
next year as an engine supplier.
Second, Mercedes and Ilmor will in 1995 begin competing in IndyCar racing,
again as an engine supplier in competition with arch-rivals Toyota and
Honda, which will be supplying engines to other IndyCar teams.
Third, Mercedes will from next year start entering its new C-class saloon in
the prestigious German touring car championship.
Ilmor is one of several dozen specialist motor sport concerns that have made
England the acknowledged world leader in motor sport engineering and the
home of most Grand Prix teams. It was started by engineers Mario Illien and
Paul Morgan, both formerly with engine maker Cosworth, and is already a
substantial force in Grand Prix and IndyCar racing. In Grand Prix, Ilmor
supplies engines to the Swiss Sauber team, lying sixth in the world Formula
One championship in its debut year.
Mercedes' re-entry to the world of motor sport after an absence of almost 30
years, might be seen as extravagant given the extent of its financial
problems: deep losses are forcing it to cut 30,000 jobs in its commercial
car and truck operations.
But Mr Norbert Haug, Mercedes' motor sport director, dismisses as wildly
excessive the Pounds 20m the company is rumoured to be spending on touring
car competition. 'It is nothing like that. No way do we have anything like
that - it is impossible for us,' he says.
While Mr Haug will not give precise figures, he makes clear his view that,
through a series of partnership arrangements such as the Ilmor link-up,
Mercedes has found a bargain way to re-enter motor sport.
For example, in touring car racing, Mercedes builds the cars but the
vehicles are raced in a variety of external sponsors' liveries. This defrays
the costs for Mercedes, while giving sponsors relatively cheap worldwide
exposure.
'We have worked it out - we get back five times as much as we put in,
measured by the TV time and space in newspapers and magazines we get if we
had to buy it,' says Mr Haug.
Success for Mercedes in motor racing should allow it to meet several targets
in terms of broadening its traditional market for commercial vehicles. Some
45 per cent of the company's commercial car sales are inside Germany, where
it is anxious to lose its conservative image and attract the younger buyers
who have been flocking to the sporty 3-Series cars of rival BMW.
In North America, where its sales have been falling in the face of fierce
competition from Japanese up-market brands such as Toyota's Lexus, Mercedes'
IndyCar involvement is designed to attract a broader spread of customers and
to underpin the start of production of its sporty four-wheel-drive vehicle
in Alabama in the mid-1990s.
Traditionally, Mercedes' US customers have been the well-heeled middle
classes who place a premium on the European prestige carmaker's heritage.
But IndyCar more closely reflects the soul of America. It is a much larger
church in which preoccupation with so-called European 'heritage' is less
important, and which is far more receptive to the technologically advanced
but heritage-free Japanese models.
Mercedes motor sport involvement should help drive home chief executive Mr
Helmut Werner's message that the company can no longer regard itself as the
provider of exclusive products at premium prices.
The company, he says, must cut production costs, price its cars more
competitively and slug it out in the marketplace like anyone else.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931106

