FT933-12641

FT  23 JUL 93 / The Maastricht Vote: MPs who decided to defy the whips


   By DAVID OWEN


THERE were angry scenes last night in the division lobbies as tempers frayed
in a tense House of Commons.
At one point the count was stopped because of a dispute over whether an MP
was entitled to vote or not.
Tory Euro-rebels complained about government 'strong-arm tactics', with one
claiming that a Tory whip tried literally to pull a dissident to support Mr
Major.
Mr John Wilkinson said: 'There was an attempt by the deputy chief whip to
pull, physically, Bill Walker (MP for Tayside North) with whom I was walking
out of the lobby. Bill Walker has been a very sick man. He very bravely
travelled to London to cast his vote and I thought it was disgraceful
behaviour.'
A total of 15 Tory rebels joined the opposition ranks in this first vote
which was announced as tied 317-317. Miss Betty Boothroyd, the Speaker, then
cast her vote for the government.
They were: Sir Richard Body (Holland with Boston), John Butcher (Coventry
South West), Bill Cash (Stafford), Teresa Gorman (Billericay), Toby Jessel
(Twickenham), Edward Leigh (Gainsborough and Horncastle), Tony Marlow
(Northampton North), Richard Shepherd (Aldridge-Brownhills), Sir Trevor
Skeet (Bedfordshire North), Walter Sweeney (Vale of Glamorgan), Sir Peter
Tapsell (Lindsey East), Sir Teddy Taylor (Southend East), Bill Walker
(Tayside North), John Wilkinson (Ruislip Northwood) and Ann Winterton
(Congleton).
A further eight Conservatives did not vote. They were: Rupert Allason
(Torbay), Nicholas Budgen (Wolverhampton South West), Sir George Gardiner
(Reigate), Christopher Gill (Ludlow), Warren Hawksley (Halesowen and
Stourbridge), Sir Ivan Lawrence (Burton), Barry Legg (Milton Keynes South
West) and Michael Spicer (Worcestershire South).
The vote for the Labour amendment was made up as follows: Labour 267,
Liberal Democrats 21, Conservative 15, Plaid Cymru 4, SDLP 4, Democratic
Unionists 3, and Scottish National Party 3. The following voted against the
amendment: Conservative 307, Ulster Unionist 9, Popular Unionist 1.
On the second vote, MPs rejected the government's motion by 324 votes to
316.
This time the number of Tory rebels rose to 23. The previous 15 were joined
by: Nicholas Budgen, James Cran (Beverley), Iain Duncan-Smith (Chingford),
Sir George Gardiner, Christopher Gill, Sir Ivan Lawrence, Barry Legg, and
Michael Spicer. One Tory and one Democratic Unionist did not vote. They were
Rupert Allason and Rev William McCrea (DUP Mid Ulster).

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930723

