FT933-12791

FT  22 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Looking to be a bigger wheel - AirBoss
Ground Engagement's expansion plans


   By ANDREW BAXTER


AIRBOSS Ground Engagement, which makes a unique puncture-proof
wheel-and-tyre system, is launching a new phase of expansion that could
generate rather more City interest than normal for a company with 19
employees and two years of losses.
AirBoss will begin volume production at its Didcot factory in the next few
weeks of a new size of tyre designed for the front of backhoe loaders, or
for all four wheels of a dumper or articulated wheel loader.
The AirBoss tyre, launched in 1991, has already made tracks in the market
for skid-steer loaders, small multi-purpose machines such as the European
market-leading Melroe Bobcat.
The tyre comes in slot-together non-pneumatic sections bolted to a
specially-designed rim, and is marketed as the answer to punctures.
But according to Mr Andy Helby, AirBoss managing director, 'It bugged us
that we only had a tyre for skid-steers. We knew that we'd be unlikely to
get rich like that.'
The entrance of Abingdon-based AirBoss into a much bigger potential market
might look like something of interest only to construction equipment
insiders, but its corporate history suggests otherwise.
AirBoss is the wholly owned trading subsidiary of Select Industries, known
until 1991 as Courtwell Group. Courtwell was formerly the Bear Brand hosiery
group, and was created in early 1990 when Bear Brand bought Leisure
Investments for Pounds 80m.
In May 1990, Leisure Investments, whose interests included the Aspinall
casino in London and the Lingfield racecourse, went into receivership.
Courtwell sold its remaining businesses and became a cash shell with Pounds
3m.
After examining about 60 business prospects, Courtwell settled on the new
Australian-invented tyre system, and in 1991 obtained the European licence
from Perth-based AirBoss.
The result is that some 14,000 former shareholders in a range of activities
including casinos and hosiery now hold shares in Select, whose only business
is the Abingdon company.
So far, investors have not had much to show for their shares. Select
incurred pre-tax losses of Pounds 1.36m and Pounds 1.18m in 1992 and 1991
respectively, and paid no dividends.
Yet, helped by the good prospects for the wheel system, Select made a
successful Pounds 4.5m rights issue last year to fund the continuing
development of new wheel sizes. AirBoss, which retains rights to most of the
rest of the world apart from North America, is injecting a further Pounds 5m
over the next three years to increase its stake in Select to 50.5 per cent.
Mr Edward Vandyk, the former Courtwell chairman who is now chief executive
at Select, says he does not expect the group to be profitable until late
1994 at the earliest.
Shares in Select are currently traded under rule 535(2), but Mr Vandyk says
the company has applied to join the Unlisted Securities Market to have a
more 'credible' market position.
But it does not need to raise new money, and still has to receive Pounds 6m
of the money already raised. 'This is the sort of project that has to be
equity financed,' says Mr Vandyk.
Select's turnover has already jumped from Pounds 91,000 in 1991 to Pounds
465,000 last year, and is running at a higher rate again this year as the
tyre's advantages become better known and AirBoss develops its European
sales network.
AirBoss is talking to a number of backhoe loader producers about the tyre
system, but recognises that it needs between 20 and 25 wheel sizes to
exploit fully the construction equipment market.
The challenge for AirBoss will be to speed up new product development, in
co-operation with AirBoss in Australia.
'The big wheels need a lot of R&D,' says Mr Helby. 'We started with
scaled-up versions of the smaller wheels, but there are different challenges
as the segments rub together . . . but we do expect to get quicker.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930722

