FT934-8737

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Talks set over mortgages - Lenders
and advice bureaux to thrash out problem of those who fall behind with
payments


   By ALISON SMITH


THE Council of Mortgage Lenders is to meet with the National Association of
Citizens' Advice Bureaux within the next month to discuss a NACAB report*
into mortgage arrears and repossessions. The report, published this week,
makes wide-ranging recommendations for changes to legislation, county court
rules, and to the code of practice dealing with the behaviour of lenders
when borrowers fall behind with payments.
The CML, which represents building societies and centralised lenders such as
banks, has said it will look closely at the proposals and consider revising
its guidance to members.
Drawing on evidence produced by almost 250 CAB offices during 1993, the
report highlights examples of individual cases where the existing safety
nets provided by mortgage protection insurance and social security benefits
have not worked properly. CAB offices deal with an estimated minimum of
10,000 mortgage arrears inquiries every month.
The study says mortgage protection policies can often exclude cover for
unemployment and illness - among the most common reasons for people falling
into mortgage arrears. In one example, a CAB client who was a miner warned
his insurance company he was threatened with redundancy. The company then
withdrew the cover and offered an alternative policy which excluded
redundancy.
The report recommends that the Financial Services Act should be extended to
include the sale of mortgage protection policies, and that there should be
regulation of the charges that can be made when a borrower is in arrears. It
also argues that, in some circumstances, such borrowers should be able to
sell their properties on the open market at a shortfall, with an undertaking
to repay the shortfall over the outstanding period of the mortgage at the
lender's normal unsecured rate of interest.
In one of the NACAB case histories, a man who was unable to keep up mortgage
repayments after losing his job found someone who offered Pounds 45,000 for
his house - but the building society refused to let the sale go through for
less than Pounds 50,000. The house was later repossessed and sold for just
Pounds 29,000 leaving the original borrower some Pounds 21,000 in debt.
NACAB also is concerned that people sometimes do not realise that, even
after their home has been repossessed, they may still be liable for other
costs, such as interest charges for the period before the property was
resold.
While the CML is cool about some of the recommendations, it also has
concerns in some areas such as insurance policies. Insurance is seen as
particularly important because of signs that the government is keen to
encourage people to take out private insurance to protect mortgage payments
instead of seeking to rely on social security.
Ann Abraham, NACAB's chief executive, said: 'CAB evidence clearly
demonstrates the failure of voluntary regulation and the urgent need for
statutory controls in this area, particularly if the government plans to
shift the burden of protection from social security to the insurance
industry.'
*Dispossessed: CAB Evidence on Mortgage Arrears and Repossessions is
available at Pounds 6 from NACAB, Myddleton House, 115-123 Pentonville Road,
London N1.
FIXED-rate mortgages continue to be an attractive option, although borrowers
should be wary of compulsory insurance-related products and high arrangement
fees.
Two of the lowest fixed-rate deals on the market come from Cheltenham &
Gloucester building society and BNP Mortgages, the UK lending arm of Banque
National de Paris. Both are offering 6.99 per cent fixed for five years,
with an early redemption penalty of six months' interest. Neither offer is
tied to the purchase of insurance-related products and both are portable.
The C&G mortgage (7.3 APR) has an application fee of Pounds 250, but
applicants who are interviewed in a branch will have a Pounds 50 reduction.
Borrowers must have a 10 per cent deposit although existing C&G borrowers
need provide only 5 per cent. The arrangement fee on the BNP offer is Pounds
295, which will be charged only on completion of the mortgage and not on
application. The 6.99 per cent rate (7.8 APR) is for those with a deposit of
15 per cent. A larger loan will attract a higher fixed rate of 7.75 per cent
(8.1 APR).

The Financial Times


London Page IV

931113

