FT932-6862

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(5): Not for use by amateurs - The role of the workstation


   By MICHAEL DEMPSEY


THE computer workstation grew out of the need to juggle daunting figures on
a desktop and in a realistic timeframe. In the early 1980s the first option
for vast calculations was a very large mainframe or supercomputer. Their
processing power is still called upon for resource-hungry design in
aerospace, for instance. But impressive performance comes with a price tag
of over Pounds 1m.
From the outset, the computer workstation was designed to be affordable. The
software that unlocked the door to cheaper scientific computing was the Unix
operating system, which has now made the breakthrough into commercial
respectability. But in 1982 it was the province of the technical fanatics
who characterised California's Silicon Valley. Initially unfriendly to the
common user, Unix offered the right environment for engineering
applications.
Sun was the start-up company that came to symbolise the rise of the
workstation. It embodied all the cliches of the West Coast IT entrepreneurs.
Launched by enthusiastic programming fiends in jeans, it was the antithesis
of the blue chip hardware manufacturer. The market for powerful workstations
exploded, taking Sun to a turnover of over Dollars 3bn, with 550,000 units
shipped in under a decade.
Mr Bill Passmore, Sun's northern Europe vice-president, pinpoints labour
savings as a crucial factor in the rise of the workstation. 'Suddenly,
companies found they could design an aircraft wing by putting a Pounds
30,000 a year designer in front of a Pounds 30,000 computer.' By displaying
complicated computer modelling packages on a desktop, the workstation cut
out the connection to a mainframe. This bypassed the teams of specialist
programmers needed to keep large systems up and running.
More powerful chips have diminished the size of the workstation, abolishing
the storage cabinet under the desktop. But the prospect of greater power led
some users to apply workstation technology indiscriminately. In the late
1980s boom banks began to invest heavily in purpose-built dealing rooms.
Some sites were kitted out with a powerful workstation at every dealing
position, which proved an expensive error.
To have sophisticated software running at high speed is only of value if the
user knows how to bring that power to bear on his job. In many dealing rooms
90 per cent of staff are quite happy with a conventional PC running a
commonplace spreadsheet such as Lotus 1-2-3. The workstation makes sense
only if it is driven by the right user.
The dramatic expansion in the capabilities of the humble PC has shadowed the
advance of the workstation. With the arrival of the 486 series chip, and its
successor Pentium just around the corner, the PC is well and truly in
workstation territory. Windowing software and graphics have boosted the
worth of advanced applications running on standard office equipment.
Mr Chris Sarfas, desktop marketing manager at Digital Equipment in the UK,
admits that Dec's workstation products have superficial rivals in the PC
world. 'The key differential has always been high performance, but the PC of
today outperforms the workstation of three years ago.
'The primary advantage of the workstation over the PC is for the power user,
the designer or top-end financial dealer. A PC can take a live video window,
but it can't do that and run five other screens incorporating a live data
feed.'
There is a growing convergence between PCs and workstations, aided by
software that combines ease of use with first-rate graphics. The workstation
market starts just beyond the price bracket of top-end PCs, at around Pounds
5,000 a unit. But top specification systems can cost Pounds 60,000. At this
level the workstation is intruding on the preserve of mid-range computing
and killing off the super-minicomputer of the 1980s.
Not all workstation manufacturers have mirrored Sun's meteoric performance.
Earlier this year Next Computer abandoned workstation production after two
years. Shedding half its workforce, Next declared it would concentrate on
developing software to complement the latest generation of computer chips.
it seems that Next was squeezed out by the market clout of established
producers and the blurring of identities between PCs and its workstation
products.
The workstation may be harassed by the PC, but it is still upwardly-mobile.
The key to harnessing workstation technology lies in remembering its roots.
It came about as a precision tool for professionals with a
processing-intensive job. They are still the right candidates for a
workstation's capabilities and price tag.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930526

