FT932-6805

FT  27 MAY 93 / Resurgent Delors seeks to rekindle Euro-enthusiasm


   By ANDREW HILL


   STRASBOURG


MR Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, yesterday made his
boldest attempt this year to relaunch the European Community's drive towards
deeper political and economic union.
In a speech to the European parliament he urged the EC to press ahead with
the next phase of economic and monetary union and the streamlining of
decision-making powers, now that the Danish had voted in favour of the
Maastricht treaty on European union.
Mr Delors criticised the 'beggar-my-neighbour' policy of competitive
devaluation of individual currencies, and urged the EC to support the
putative single European currency, the Ecu, which remained 'a sad orphan'.
'We must try to recover the euphoria which was evident at the birth of the
Community and was still alive until very recently,' said Mr Delors, who has
been keeping a comparatively low profile for the last year. Mr Delors said
he was still deeply concerned by the grave economic crisis in Europe, and
the situation in the former Yugoslav republics, but in political terms 'the
train is back on the tracks'.
The Commission president also ended the year-old taboo on discussion of
institutional reform of the Community by saying it was time to draw up a
'blueprint for a greater Europe'.
Last year's vote against Maastricht in the first Danish referendum was
partly blamed on fears that EC decision-making would be amended once new
members joined the Community, in order to limit the use of national vetoes.
Mr Delors said yesterday that the EC would be 'groping in the dark' if it
pressed on with the admission of Finland, Norway, Sweden and Austria,
members of the European Free Trade Association (Efta), without considering
how a greater Europe would work. 'We must have a Community which is
political, efficient in its decision-making and which can constantly deepen
its own sense of unity,' he said.
Mr Delors said discussion on the shape of a future European union could
'start today', a rebuff to the British view that reforms will have to wait
until after enlargement of the EC. Mr John Major, the British prime
minister, has said the EC should have the new members in place before any
further consideration is given to institutional change.
Gatt's priorities, by Delors, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930527

