FT934-10167

FT  06 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Lloyd's funds' mixed fortunes


   By RICHARD LAPPER


MUCH publicity was given earlier this week to the setbacks of plans to
introduce limited liability capital to the Lloyd's insurance market. Johnson
Fry, the financial services company, announced on Tuesday it was scrapping
its Corporate Insurance Recovery Trust, a 'fund of funds' that aimed to
invest across a range of Lloyd's investment trusts and companies.
Charles Fry, chief executive of Johnson Fry, said that the company had
simply run out of time and had been unable to meet its minimum funding
target of Pounds 15m, raising only Pounds 8m from investors. A number of
funds have scaled down their targets for capital raising, mainly because of
the difficulties in finding sufficient space on what they consider to be
'good quality' Lloyd's syndicates. CLM Insurance Fund, sponsored by Barclays
de Zoete Wedd and CLM Advisers, a subsidiary of Sedgwick Group, the brokers,
reduced the scale of its placing and offer for subscription to Pounds 110m,
compared with earlier estimates of Pounds 200m.
News that two Lloyd's members' agencies - Sturge and London Wall - were
abandoning their plans to list investment trusts on the stock market, added
to the mood of pessimism in some quarters. Yet on the whole Lloyd's efforts
to raise corporate capital must be judged a success so far. Institutions
such as pension funds and life assurance companies are continuing to sustain
their interest, albeit at relatively modest levels.
By the end of this week, 10 investment trusts and companies had published
prospectuses and raised more than Pounds 500m from institutional investors.
Three other trusts are expected to follow suit next week. Lloyd's should be
able to count on up to Pounds 1bn in corporate capital for 1994.
Most of the funds are also offering individual investors the chance to
participate. This is partially because stock exchange regulations stipulate
that investment trusts raising more than about Pounds 30m must usually raise
at least 25 per cent of their capital from the retail market. Some funds -
especially smaller ones - are limiting their offers for sale to
intermediaries such as private client stockbrokers. But others are
advertising directly to the public.
These include CLM Insurance Fund and London Insurance Market Investment
Trust (LIMIT), both of which advertised in the press this week, after
issuing their full prospectuses.
CLM has even opened a share shop at Lloyd's allowing investors the
opportunity to buy its shares over the counter. LIMIT, which is sponsored by
James Capel and Samuel Montagu, placed an issue for Pounds 280m with
institutions but is making some Pounds 70m available to private investors
through a clawback.
Investors in CLM and LIMIT must pledge at least Pounds 1,000. A smaller
scheme, Syndicate Capital Trust, sponsored by Rafael Zorn Hemsley, offers
individuals the chance of investing a minimum of Pounds 500. Shares in the
trust, which will support about 15 syndicates, are being marketed by
ShareLink Investment Services.
Angerstein (sponsored by NatWest Markets), Nelson (backed by Lazard
Brothers, Cazenove and Octavian), Masthead (an investment company sponsored
by Hambros and Murray Lawrence) and Premium Trust/Premium Underwriting
(sponsored by Noble & Co and Wellington, the members' agents) are also
offering their shares directly to the public. Premium insists that investors
subscribe a minimum of Pounds 3,000.
New London Capital (sponsored by Warburg) and Delian Lloyd's Investment
Trust (sponsored by Hill Samuel) aim to raise most of their funds through
private placements with institutions. But they will consider applications
from private investors willing to commit at least Pounds 20,000 to the
funds.

The Financial Times


London Page III

931106

