FT932-7085

FT  26 MAY 93 / Balladur makes jobs his top priority


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


FRENCH PRIME Minister Edouard Balladur yesterday acknowledged a change of
emphasis in economic policy, confirming measures to promote economic
recovery and to fight unemployment through a record FFr40bn (Pounds 4.73bn)
state loan, out of which an extra FFr10bn would be spent on preserving jobs.
Mr Balladur acknowledged that this constituted a change in tack from his May
10 budget which focused largely on raising taxes and cutting public spending
with the aim then of keeping this year's budget deficit to FFr316bn. But he
told parliament that the country's economic plight was 'more difficult than
we could have foreseen even a few weeks ago'.
Members of Mr Balladur's centre-right coalition acknowledged he had shifted
economic gears in only a few weeks.
'The government has no doubt realised it lacked audacity because it is now
proposing to play its 'joker' card - that is a large national bond issue,'
Mr Philippe Auberger, parliamentary budget chief and a member of Mr
Balladur's Gaullist party, said.
The new job-creating measures will involve increasing the number of places
in work schemes by 200,000 to a total of 650,000, as well as providing more
financial incentives for employers to take the young on as apprentices and
to hire the long-term unemployed.
The switch in government priorities arises less from a change in its overall
forecast on the economy - which even on May 10 it estimated would see a
contraction in gross domestic product of 0.1 per cent this year - than from
new forecasts of unemployment. It now believes that the number of jobless,
set in March at 3.1m (10.7 per cent of the work force), will rise by another
350,000 this year.
Mr Balladur yesterday sought to reverse the widespread feeling that the rise
in unemployment was inexorable. He went on to criticise certain companies
for their 'unacceptable' practices in 'dispatching' people to the dole
queue, and he called on state-owned companies to be 'exemplary' in seeking,
whenever financial and market conditions allowed, to avoid redundancies.
On May 10 Mr Balladur had said he would spend FFr12.9bn this year to promote
employment, both directly through payroll tax cuts and work schemes and
indirectly through more spending on public housing and infrastructure
projects. But since then he has been intensively lobbied by employers and
unions to beef up his recovery programme.
The FFr40bn bond issue is designed to tap some of the FFr1,200bn of savings
now in money market funds and to put it to more productive use. To attract
individual investors away from popular money market accounts, Mr Balladur
said the bonds could be converted into shares in the privatised groups and
would carry tax breaks. Mr Balladur stressed that it would only represent a
momentary surge in state borrowing, until the planned sell-off of
state-owned companies started in the autumn. Today the government is to
unveil its privatisation bill, listing companies it plans to sell.
French banks yesterday continued the downward trend in interest rates by
cutting base rates by 0.2 points to 8.8 per cent. Yesterday's cut follows
Monday's announcement that the Bank of France was trimming its leading
interest rates by 0.25 percentage points.
Editorial comment, Page 19
Capital markets, Page 27

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930526

