FT934-11506

FT  30 OCT 93 / Arts: Why we should privatise the RSC


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


THE Royal Shakespeare Company has had a good year. As it unveiled its
1992/93 accounts in Stratford this week, it revealed an operating surplus of
Pounds 128,906, a return of 0.48 per cent on total costs of just over Pounds
26.5m. Many of its productions in both Stratford and London have been
playing at more than 80 per cent of capacity audiences - a fine record by
any standards, especially during recession.
The results of the Royal National Theatre, the nearest analogue to the RSC,
are less satisfactory. It reported an operating loss of Pounds 565,000, or 2
per cent of turnover. But there is no point in making invidious comparisons.
Theatre has its ups and downs. In 1990/91 the RNT had an operating surplus
of Pounds 310,000.
Yet even if the RSC and the RNT had made profits of Pounds 1m apiece, there
would still be bleats about what is to come, just as there were at the RSC's
annual meeting of its Court of Governors on Wednesday. Sir Geoffrey Cass,
chairman of the council, warned of difficult decisions ahead in the light of
possible government cuts in the arts budget.
Prince Charles, who as patron of the RSC chaired the meeting, went along
with him in general terms. He could not understand, he said, why Britain is
so bad at appreciating what it is really good at.
The problem is the subsidy. At the RSC it is down to 38.79 per cent of
costs, against 42.12 per cent in 1991/92. Just over Pounds 8m of it comes
from the Arts Council and another Pounds 1.4m from the Corporation of
London. Those are substantial amounts. The RNT is subsidised even more: in
1991/92, 44.4 per cent of its income came from grant in aid. The fear is
that if the subsidies decline, or even at best stand still, the quality and
variety of the two big subsidised theatres will go down with them. That is
the conventional wisdom.
Yet the more one hears the arguments and looks at the figures, the more one
wonders if the conventional wisdom can be right. For a start, we have been
here before. Laments about a financial crisis in the arts are part of the
landscape. Even if the government bows to the lobbies and allows a little
more money for the arts than it otherwise might, there is no reason to
believe that we shall not be here again within a year or two.
Is it not time for at least the two big theatre companies to break away from
the system? It cannot be done overnight. The subsidies are so fundamental
they would have to continue for a while. But there are possibilities for the
longer term.
Remember that the government will shortly have extra money available for the
arts from the national lottery. It could allocate part of that to pay off
the accumulated deficits of of the RSC and the RNT once and for all, then
set a deadline for when the subsidies would stop, after tapering off on the
way.
It would be a great help if the theatres could could have some ideas of
their own. For example, I can see no insurmountable reason why the RSC and
the RNT should not be privatised. This is not a hostile capitalist device
and indeed is not much different from becoming a co-operative. Many people
might want to buy shares: actors, theatre-goers, impresarios, even the
public. You could revert to the old BP solution where the state held just
over half the shares and the rest were privately owned, or the other way
round. There are masses of variants, including a management buy-out.
Yet for anything like that to happen, there will have to be one radical and
early change. This is in the attitude to seat-pricing. The idea is around
that going to the theatre is expensive. In its annual report, the RSC notes
that the highest priced seat for the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in Stratford
is Pounds 30, the lowest Pounds 4.50. At the Barbican the range is from
Pounds 20 down to Pounds 4.50. Overall, the subsidy per paid admission is
Pounds 9.54.
Somehow it has become fixed in the collective mind that those top prices are
extravagant. That is nonsense which must be challenged. The basic question
is how much it costs to put on a good show plus some profit, just as it is
for the production of any other consumer good.
If you believe that Pounds 30 is excessive to watch a delightfully
professional RSC performance of Love's Labour's Lost, such as opened in
Stratford this week, think of the frivolities on which you might otherwise
be spending your money: Pounds 60 for a second rate dinner in London, Pounds
30 for a haircut and another Pounds 20 for a book of unread political
memoirs. Something has gone badly wrong between cost and price.
Of course, cheaper prices would remain for students, pensioners and the
unemployed. But the idea that prices in general should be kept artificially
low by subsidy is already damaging and will become even more so as the
subsidies fail to increase. It is a bit like British Rail, where nobody
seems to know any more how the pricing system works and any attempt at a
rise is resisted.
This is the real downward spiral. Unlike BR, the theatre is still efficient
enough to begin to reform itself. It will not do so by bleating.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931030

