FT934-11163

FT  02 NOV 93 / Baltic Exchange to sell London head office


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE WORLD'S oldest shipping market, the Baltic Exchange, is to sell the
freehold site of its City of London headquarters and move to alternative
accommodation in the City.
The Baltic will also look at other proposals to develop the grade 2 listed
building, which was badly damaged in an IRA bomb attack in April 1992.
Mr Jim Buckley, chief executive of the Baltic, said the 91-year-old
exchange, referred to as the 'cathedral of shipping', no longer meets the
needs of the shipbrokers, who buy and sell space on ships for bulk cargoes,
ranging from oil to phosphate.
The exchange's decision to leave the building follows two tough years. Last
year's bomb destroyed many of the small offices that surrounded the trading
floor, severely reducing the exchange's rental income and leading to a sharp
reduction in staff numbers.
Even before the bombing, a growing number of brokers had started to conduct
business by telephone, making the exchange uneconomic. Only about 400
brokers regularly work on the trading floor, compared with about 1,000 20
years ago.
Hillier Parker, the estate agent, has been appointed to find a buyer for the
40,000 sq ft site. Mr Nick Baucher, partner at Hillier, is confident of
making a sale, even though a buyer will have to pay between Pounds 12m and
Pounds 15m to complete restoration work, including the rebuilding of a
granite facade.
Mr Baucher, who expects at least part of the site to be used for an office
block or hotel, said: 'We are selling a piece of land that is in a very good
position in the City.'
The marble-clad 13,000 sq ft exchange with its Rhodesian walnut floor is a
'wonderful space' that could be converted for use as a food hall or night
club.
With land prices now about a fifth of their levels of five years ago, Mr
Baucher expects UK property companies and institutional investors to show
interest. Hillier Parker will also market the property overseas.
Hillier Parker will advise the exchange in its search for new premises,
which will provide members with better information technology facilities and
other services.
The Baltic's 1,700 individual members, representing 600 companies, earn
Pounds 800m of commission income a year on deals worth tens of billions of
pounds. The exchange accounts for more than half the world's bulk cargo
chartering business - buying and selling space in oil tankers and in
dry-cargo vessels carrying commodities - and an even larger share of ship
sale and purchase contracts.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931102

