FT931-3948

FT  12 MAR 93 / Sirens shatter suburban calm


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


AT THE END of Milan's new third metro line, itself the subject of
investigations into kickbacks to political parties, is the southern suburb
of San Donato, developed over the past 30 years into the operating
headquarters of the Eni group.
The site is next to the city's ring motorway and minutes from Linate
airport, from which Eni operates a twice-daily private shuttle to Rome. It
is ideal for a concern with its top management in the capital but its
subsidiaries and day-to-day operations in Milan.
San Donato, developed by Eni's Immobiliare Metanopoli property arm, is an
odd jumble of modern office blocks set in ample grounds within a nondescript
dormitory town.
On Wednesday night the tranquillity was shattered by flashing blue lights
and sirens as the chairmen of three of the five Eni subsidiaries based at
San Donato were arrested. Cleaners were told to drop their mops as
magistrates and the Guardia di Finanza fiscal police moved in to seal
offices in the Agip, Snam and Saipem blocks.
By yesterday morning, a full search was under way as staff, first kept
waiting outside, gradually returned to work after clarifying details of the
information and documents in their offices. Material judged useful was set
aside for collection in offices which remained sealed.
The focus of magistrates' attention appeared to be financial, particularly
documents relating to group accounts or payments abroad, according to one
official. That would accord with recent allegations that Eni, with its vast
foreign network, has for years been a source of illegal funds for Italy's
political parties, with payments said to have been made through a complex
financial network into foreign accounts.
While staff may not be entirely displeased that the Milan corruption
investigations have finally focused on Eni, a group dominated by the
discredited Italian Socialist party, there is clear concern about the future
now that Mr Gabriele Cagliari, Eni's chairman, and the heads of four
subsidiaries are being held in Milan's San Vittore prison.
Attention has been concentrated on the headquarters of Snam, Eni's biggest
subsidiary in terms of sales, and the one that provides property and
communications services for the whole group.
By late yesterday, investigations had also been completed in its penthouse
14th floor, used by senior executives when visiting from Rome.
Snam is also the parent company for Immobiliare Metanopoli, which has big
plans for the further development of the San Donato site.
Last year, former president Francesco Cossiga came to open the sparkling
fifth palazzo, now housing Agip's headquarters.

The Financial Times


International Page 1

930312

