FT932-13512

FT  23 APR 93 / Kohl and Balladur present the face of unity


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


MR Edouard Balladur, the French prime minister, came to Bonn yesterday
studiously refusing to request any gestures of solidarity from his
colleague, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, above all in the minefield of monetary
policy.
In the event, he still came away with a small present from Frankfurt - a
quarter percentage point cut in the Bundesbank's discount rate - and many
warm words from the chancellor to help his early honeymoon in office.
Even on the Gatt trade liberalisation talks, where positions between the two
key European partners are furthest apart, there was not a word of direct
criticism from Mr Kohl over the new French government's refusal to accept
the compromise agreed between the EC and US on easing agricultural
protection.
He also won tacit support - according to French officials - for his idea for
a new European security conference to underpin the ending of the Cold War,
and for his successful start to the process of cohabitation with President
Francois Mitterrand.
Neither Mr Balladur nor Chancellor Kohl was informed of the Bundesbank's
move before the end of their talks, thus deliberately stressing the
independence of the German central bank from the Franco-German negotiating
process.
The French prime minister was told of the decision on the German rate cut as
he left the chancellor's office in his official car.
The French premier yesterday said both sides had agreed to seek to develop
joint policies, and joint initiatives, in the economic and monetary fields,
'to ensure currency stability'.
He gave no hint of what the content might be.
There was certainly no sign of the 'political initiative on monetary
co-operation' mooted in Paris before the recent elections.
A senior French official said later that there was no initiative because
there was no need for one: 'It is working out well,' he said, 'even better
than three weeks ago'.
As for monetary co-operation, it was already the firmest element in the
entire European Monetary System.
Both leaders were at pains to emphasise the vital importance they accord to
the Franco-German alliance, and to discount the slightest suggestion that a
new government in Paris might cause any upset in their co-operation.
Mr Kohl described it as 'the most valuable experience' for both countries in
the second half of the 20th century.
For his part, Mr Balladur stressed that his very first trip from Paris as
prime minister was quite naturally to Bonn.
The two met for a lunch in Bonn last December for what officials agree was a
crucial session of getting to know each other better, on the assumption that
Mr Balladur would become prime minister. One important message from Mr Kohl
at that time was for France not to demand changes in Bundesbank policies
from Bonn.
As for Gatt, Mr Balladur left Mr Kohl in no doubt that he will hold out for
a better deal for French farmers.
'We are not softening,' his spokesman said.
'Just because we are not threatening to use our (EC) veto, and are willing
to negotiate further, does not mean we will roll over.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930423

