FT932-7127

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (1): A long way still to go -
Since coming to power last year with a less than overwhelming mandate,
President Fidel Ramos has nevertheless managed to prompt a renewal of hope
among Filipinos and foreign investors alike. But it is far too early to talk
of optimism on the troubled economic front


   By VICTOR MALLET


IT is hardly surprising that Filipinos spend much of their time looking back
nostalgically to the 1950s when their economy was one of the strongest in
Asia: the present is often too depressing to contemplate.
As if it were not enough to have watched the dynamic, export-driven
economies of their south-east Asian neighbours one by one overtaking the
Philippines, the inhabitants of the capital Manila are now being subjected
to the added humiliation of all-day power cuts and a surge in kidnapping and
violent crime.
Visit the office of a Filipino businessman or government official in Manila,
and the chances are that you will find him cursing and sweating in the
summer heat without the benefit of air-conditioning. The previous
administration of Mrs Corazon Aquino, who toppled the late dictator
Ferdinand Marcos in 1986, neglected to invest in new power stations.
The arrival of Mr Fidel Ramos in the Malacanang presidential palace has
prompted a growing number of Filipinos and foreign investors to look to the
future with renewed hope, although it is too early to talk of optimism.
The cigar-chewing President Ramos, the general who as armed forces chief
protected Mrs Aquino from seven attempted coups d'etat by right-wing
military rebels, was her chosen presidential candidate in the May 1992
elections. He won with only 23 per cent of the vote, beating six rivals
including Mrs Miriam Santiago, the anti-corruption campaigner, Mrs Imelda
Marcos, the dictator's flamboyant widow, and Mr Eduardo Cojuangco, a Marcos
'crony.'
Since coming to power in June with this less-than-overwhelming mandate, Mr
Ramos has successfully consolidated his support among Filipinos by touring
the country and addressing public rallies; by attempting to make peace with
a variety of rebels, including the right-wing military officers, the
communists and the Moslem separatists in the south; by reshuffling the
leadership of the notoriously corrupt police force (some of whose officers
were accused of taking part in the kidnappings of ethnic Chinese and foreign
businessmen) and appointing Mr Joseph Estrada, the vice-president and former
film star, as head of an anti-crime force; and above all by making alliances
in the Congress which had so often stymied his predecessor Mrs Aquino.
This congressional support allowed Mr Ramos to grant himself special powers
in April under the Electric Power Crisis Law to deal with the electricity
shortage.
He will be able to push through new power station projects and to bypass the
country's notoriously slow procedures for screening bids and granting
environmental clearance certificates. The new law also gives him the right
to raise electricity prices - an option previously blocked by a Supreme
Court ruling - and thereby satisfy International Monetary Fund and World
Bank conditions for a new international lending programme.
The public debate over the new law, conducted with a vigour and openness so
lacking in most other south-east Asian countries, goes to the heart of the
Philippine dilemma.
On one side of the argument are the disciplinarians, including many
businessmen, who believe that the Philippines should pay more attention to
discipline and law enforcement than to the kind of freedom and democracy -
characterised by interminable lawsuits - that the country inherited from the
US, the former colonial power.
These disciplinarians nodded approvingly when Mr Lee Kuan Yew, the founding
father of Singapore, expounded his gospel of authoritarianism on a recent
visit to Manila at the invitation of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and
Industry; they also generally approve of the granting of special powers to
Mr Ramos to deal with the electricity crisis, and would probably agree with
the local newspaper columnist who joked that the Philippines suffers from
being a member of a special kind of NATO: 'No Action, Talk Only.'
On the other side are the libertarians. They fear that such special powers
could be the thin end of a wedge which might eventually open the door to a
new dictatorship, thus throwing away the hard-won gains of the uprising that
put an end to the Marcos era. The waiving of regulations on bidding, they
add, is an invitation to further corruption.
President Ramos's relaxed and undictatorial demeanour - as well as the
evident and urgent need both to crack down on crime and build new power
stations - has helped to calm such fears. If anything, his supporters want
Mr Ramos, known as 'Steady Eddie' because of his methodical ways, to move
quicker to restore the country's fortunes.
Notwithstanding the lack of new power stations, Mrs Aquino did attempt in
her last two years in office to restore the health of the Philippine economy
with a series of measures liberalising imports and foreign investment rules,
and Mr Ramos has been able to build on that in an attempt to compete with
capital-hungry Indonesia, China and Vietnam for foreign investors.
Following the departure of US forces from their bases in the Philippines,
and the associated loss of hundreds of millions of dollars each year in
revenue, Mr Ramos has assiduously courted Japanese and other Asian investors
with a round of overseas visits.
In August last year he dismantled foreign exchange controls on current
transactions, and in an effort to boost the economy this year the
administration has embarked on a 'pump-priming' exercise of doubtful value
whereby government departments were supposed to weight their spending on
roads, housing and other infrastructure towards the first half of the year.
After zero economic growth and a poor performance by the agricultural sector
last year, the government initially aimed for a 4.5 per cent rise in real
gross domestic product this year, but most businessmen and diplomats regard
the target as unreachable because of the crippling blow to industry
delivered by the power crisis on the principal island of Luzon. At best,
they say, the economy is likely to grow by two per cent; that compares with
a population growth rate of 2.4 per cent and would mean that the average
Filipino will continue to get poorer in 1993.
But the economy is showing a number of promising signs, so much so that the
peso actually strengthened for a time following the foreign exchange
liberalisation as dollars from overseas workers, tourists, property
speculators and stock market investors flooded into the market.
The relatively strong peso has made life even harder for exporters, but they
can at least take comfort from the fact that inflation has been restrained
below 10 per cent and worker militancy has decreased. The outflow of dollars
to service the country's Dollars 30bn of foreign debt has fallen to below 20
per cent of export earnings, and the World Bank has redesignated the
Philippines as a 'moderately indebted' (rather than 'severely indebted')
developing country.
After frantically buying dollars to control the rise of the peso, the
central bank has Dollars 6bn of reserves and has been buying back Philippine
debt at a discount on the international market; there is a further Dollars
5bn of foreign exchange in the commercial banking system.
In February, the Philippines successfully borrowed Dollars 150m on the
eurobond market after an absence of more than a decade, and hopes to borrow
more. Negotiations are due to resume shortly with the IMF for an extended
fund facility of Dollars 800m-Dollars 1bn over three years, which would pave
the way for a delayed Paris Club rescheduling of bilateral debt and other
borrowing agreements.
'This will be our last programme involving a special relationship with the
IMF, where we are in effect wards of the IMF,' said Mr Ramon del Rosario,
the finance secretary, in an interview with the Financial Times. 'We are
approaching a situation where we can be back on our own.'
OUTSIDE the capital, some areas - notably on the island of Cebu and along
the industrial corridor south of Manila - have succeeded in attracting
foreign investors and developing export industries.
Mr Ramos, however, will face many obstacles as he struggles to achieve his
aim of achieving double-digit economic growth by the end of his term in
1998. Although the country is probably more stable politically than at any
time in the last decade, and some Filipinos have started to whisper that the
days of coups d'etat are over, it would take a bold pundit to stake his
reputation on such a prediction.
A large backlog of work also remains to be done in building and repairing
the country's physical infrastructure, not just for power stations but also
for roads and water supply. Economists estimate that the government's per
capita real spending on infrastructure has fallen by about 40 per cent in
the last decade; the traffic jams in Manila seem as bad as those in Bangkok
 -and Manila does not have the excuse of an economic boom.
Unsustainable population growth is another problem in this predominantly
Roman Catholic country. As a Protestant, Mr Ramos (with the help of his
condom-waving health minister, Mr Juan Flavier) may find it easier to tackle
the issue of family planning than would a Catholic, but an open
confrontation with the powerful Catholic church would be risky for the
president.
Last, but not least, there is the environment. Deforestation has contributed
to erosion and thereby to the silting of dams and a reduction in the output
of much-needed hydro-electricity. Of the top five manufacturing industries
identified as particularly beneficial to the economy on the grounds of
export potential, employment and other factors, two - wood processing and
fish processing - are directly dependent on effective environmental
protection which does not yet exist in the Philippines. The valuable tourist
trade also depends on a clean environment.
In Manila today, pedestrians hold handkerchiefs to mouth and nose to try to
filter out the dust and diesel fumes from the filthy air they are forced to
breathe. From Taipei to Bangkok, that seems to be a price Asian
city-dwellers are prepared to pay for increasing prosperity. The Filipinos
have got the pollution; they are still waiting for the prosperity.

The Financial Times


London Page I

930525

