FT931-4202

FT  12 MAR 93 / Gulf widens at the top in Moscow


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


MOST of the people who are trying to run Russia spoke on the second day of
the Eighth Congress of Peoples Deputies yesterday - and presented starkly
different visions of the country's future. Standing before a nervy, easily
roused house, they dispensed with any effort to compromise or soothe in
favour of bitter, personal attacks and mutual attribution of blame.
Never less than tense, often ugly and irresponsible, the debate showed how
wide is the gulf now between the levels of Russian power. President Boris
Yeltsin, insisting on his own primacy as the only popularly elected
official, demanded that the presidency be strengthened and that his
government be given full control of the country's main financial
institutions.
'Don't you understand', he asked the deputies, 'that when the legislative
power tries to eliminate the power of the president, this destroys the
constitutional structure of contemporary Russia, contradicts the peoples'
will?'
It was a speech poorly delivered, without conviction, receiving no applause.
By contrast, Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin gave a strong, emphatic
performance, underscoring that it was 'strong presidential power that is a
guarantor of reforms' - but insisting that the government could not be a
'pale shadow' of the president. 'The government cannot see through economic
reform unless it is given effective means for managing the economy.'
Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary speaker who has in past congresses
emerged in the role of a reluctant mediator, has in this session cast aside
any effort to do so.
In a fluently bitter, largely extemporised speech, he attacked both
president and prime minister equally, repudiating the agreement to hold a
referendum reached at the December Congress with Mr Yeltsin as 'the work of
the devil', defending the deputies as honest toilers in the legislative
vineyard while the president's men 'swagger before the microphones, blaming
us for this, that and the other'.
He called for the resignation of Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy prime
minister in charge of privatisation, threatened to block ministerial
salaries and said that parliament would not pass the government's budget.
Sarcastically, he asked Mr Chernomyrdin who was in charge of his cabinet -
expressing the disappointment felt by many of the centrist deputies that the
prime minister, seen on his election as a moderate, had gone over to the
radical reformers.
In brief appearances at the end of the session - after Congress had already
approved in principle a draft resolution cancelling the referendum and
ending a moratorium on making further incursions into the presidential
powers - Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the central bank chairman, and Mr Valery
Zorkin, president of the Constitutional Court, both essentially sided with
the Congress.
The debate ended with the tension unresolved: the crucial, final vote on a
draft resolution dividing the powers not yet taken, and no official word on
whether Mr Yeltsin would bow to another unfavourable compromise or take the
'decisive measures' he and his circle have hinted at. But even now, it is
clear that the crisis has only deepened.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930312

