FT933-12829

FT  22 JUL 93 / Arts: Daphne's secret love - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Daphne and Gertie] Even if you have not read the recent biography of Daphne
du Maurier, you may well have heard that its hottest revelation is the
passionate friendship that at one time developed between du Maurier and
Gertrude Lawrence. (What a shock] Those of us who were born after Lawrence's
death had never even thought of linking their names. Du Maurier was not,
after all, a character in Star, the naff Lawrence bio-pic of my youth.) Here
is the play that brought the two women together. Du Maurier wrote it, as a
response to another love-affair, in a fortnight in 1948; Lawrence was the
actress selected to play the leading role. It ran at the Aldwych for 15
months; Lawrence - who died in 1951 - never again acted on the London stage;
du Maurier wrote no other play.
Now September Tide returns to London for the first time in 43 years. A
romance with a difference, its action occurs in 1948. Stella Martyn, a
widow, is visited in Cornwall by her daughter Cherry and her new son-in-law,
Evan Davies, a talented painter. Stella, a romantic woman and loyal mother,
is possessed by old-style values ('Thank Heaven I had Puritan parents who
brought me up with a pre-1914 mentality'), whereas both Cherry and Evan are
somewhat Bohemian. She believes in marriage based on love, while they are so
modern as to sleep in separate rooms. (Daughter to mother: 'Your generation
thinks of nothing but sex.') But Evan falls seriously in love with his
mother-in-law, and Stella discovers reluctantly that she feels the same way
about him. What happens after that (ie all Act Two) I shall not disclose
here.
Though I can imagine this forming the basis for a good movie, as has so much
of du Maurier's fiction, September Tide steers too close too often to
dramatic cliche. 'What are you trying to tell me?' 'Everything. Nothing. All
I know is the world has become a different place.' A storm arrives with such
convenient timing that Cherry has to spend a night away from home. Everyone
keeps up the romantic-novel view of Cornwall as a place where men are men
and women have the wind in their hair.
But the cliches it sets up: Stella makes the kind of entrance that great
actresses used to love, with a basket full of roses, but promptly knocks
over Evan's painting box. And in general the text has more wit, and a
stronger period sense, than the current cast reveals.
Susannah York, for all her loveliness and bloom, never looks like a woman
who harks back to pre-1930 music or manners, and she makes Stella so
sensible and ordinary that she irons over the role's dry and debonair
humour. (On hearing from Evan that Cherry is a mediocre painter: 'What a
blessing she did not go in for singing. Such an expensive training. The art
school was comparatively cheap.') Moment by moment, York makes sense of the
role; but as a whole her Stella is so middle-of-the-road that she knocks the
wind out of this story's sails.
Brendan Coyle has the right brooding intensity for the role of Evan. As
Cherry, however, Francesca Hunt overdoes the bright eyes and teeth; and
overdoes the upper-middle-class combination of hearty manners and pinched
little voice. None of the other roles is remotely three-dimensional in
conception or performance.
At the King's Head, Islington, London N1.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930722

