FT932-13280

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (16): Interest-rate
prospects divide investors - Venturing further along the yield curve may
lift returns, but it also risks exposure to inflation / Gilts


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


WITH AS much as Pounds 50bn of gilts to sell in the new financial year, the
government is keen to encourage greater participation by retail investors,
at a time when the current low level of deposit rates has made the quest for
higher returns more urgent for many investors.
Last month, the Bank of England published a * guide for the small investor,
designed to explain the workings of the market. In addition, the government
has increased the maximum that can be invested in gilts via the National
Savings Stock Register at the Post Office from Pounds 10,000 to Pounds
25,000, and has expanded the range of gilts available to retail investors to
include all stocks.
However, the strong rally in the gilts market in the first quarter of the
year has brought gilt yields at the short end of the market down to
relatively low levels. Five-year gilts are currently yielding around 6 3/4
per cent, around the same level as deposit rates.
Some investors are now being tempted to venture further along the yield
curve and buy longer-dated gilts, in order to improve returns, given that,
unlike many other markets, the gilts market still has a positive yield curve
(that is, yields rise in line with the lengthening of maturity).
Ten-year gilts offer yields one percentage point higher than five-year
gilts, and even longer maturities carry greater rewards. However, investors
buying longer-dated gilts are also risking exposure to potential increases
in inflation.
The UK bond market is currently divided between bulls and bears.
Although five-year yields have fallen substantially, investors who believe
that there is a further one point cut in base rates to come could still
decide to position themselves to benefit from a rally. The September short
sterling futures contract on the London International Financial Futures &
Options Exchange reflects expectations of  1/4 point cut in the base rate by
September, suggesting that the market has not discounted the full effect of
any further cut.
'At the moment the market is assuming that rate cuts are off the agenda, but
there is a residual feeling that there is still a point to come off,' said
Peter Fellner, a bond economist at NatWest Capital Markets.
The bulls believe that there is room for another rate cut to 5 per cent, and
that the slender economic recovery in the UK economy will not spark
inflationary pressure. With the headline rate of inflation at 1.8 per cent,
yields are relatively attractive. The bulls believe that, even in an
economic recovery, core inflation will remain under control at below 3 per
cent. If long-term inflation is held down, the prospect of gaining a higher
yield from longer-dated gilts is attractive.
But the bond market bears argue that the gilts market is at the end of an
extremely strong rally, that base rates have hit their lows and will start
to creep up again as the economic recovery gathers speed. In this scenario,
the UK could end up with a core inflation rate of 4-5 per cent. Further,
there is some scepticism about the government's ability to meet its enlarged
funding needs, without yields being forced up.
Last summer, following John Major's election win, there was widespread talk
that the gilts market was set to become a core component of investment
portfolios around the world, like Bunds and US Treasuries. Such hopes were
dashed when sterling came under pressure and then was pushed out of the
exchange rate mechanism, leaving some foreign investors badly burnt by the
currency, not for the first time.
Although the news that overseas investors bought Pounds 1bn of gilts in
February, the largest monthly total in nearly two years, brought some
renewed hopes that foreign demand could help support the market, the buying
appears to have been largely speculative, sparked by the weakness of
sterling, and unlikely to be sustained.
Chancellor Norman Lamont's easing of the funding rule, to allow holdings of
gilts by banks and building societies to count towards the borrowing
requirement, in last month's Budget is expected to have only a marginal
effect.
With large budget deficits projected for several years, the government needs
to attract fresh money. Its eagerness to attract retail investors to the
market - particularly given pressure to keep down the volume of national
savings certificates - is understandable, but should perhaps be viewed with
some caution.
Fund managers themselves are finding the gilts market a tough call
currently. 'In view of the tighter fiscal stance over the medium term, there
is a 50/50 chance of one last base rate cut by year-end before interest
rates begin to ratchet up again,' according to fund managers at Julius Baer
Investments.
The promise of bond markets at the start of the year has been fulfilled in
the first quarter, perhaps to a greater degree than some had expected. With
recovery already under way in the US, and the UK apparently in tow, there is
an argument for looking at markets whose economies are still declining, such
as the Bund market.
Some UK retail investors are turning again to the index-linked gilts market,
which has the attraction of offering fixed real yields.
* Investing in Gilts, A guide for the small investor, is published by the
Bank of England, Threadneedle Street, London EC2R 8AH. Tel 071 601 4540.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

930423

