FT932-13535

FT  22 APR 93 / Technology: Company snapshot


Nature of business: ICI Fibres is Europe's leading manufacturer of nylon
products such as those used in skiwear, carpets and ladies' tights. ICI
Acrylics is a supplier to the paint, sanitaryware, sign-making and
automotive industries, producing innovative materials such as Perspex,
Asterite and Avron.
ICI Fibres is about to be handed over to Du Pont of the US in exchange for
Du Pont's US acrylics business. In a separate deal, ICI is to hand its west
European polypropylene business to BASF of Germany in exchange for BASF's
acrylic units in Germany and Spain.
Turnover: ICI Fibres has a turnover of pounds 600m. ICI Acrylics (pre Du
Pont and BASF acquisitions) has a turnover of pounds 300m per annum.
Key personnel: At ICI Fibres: Scott Davidson, managing director; Dennis
James, IT director; Steve Hamlett, finance director. The same trio fulfil
similar functions in the reorganised ICI Acrylics.
TECHNOLOGY FILE
Software: The Business Information System (BIS), implemented at ICI Fibres
in 1992, is based on the 4GL Focus, from Information Builders. BIS evolved
from two previous prototype executive information systems (EIS) written
initially in PC Express, subsequently refined using a combination of
Lightship, and Lotus 123. The existing system is operational at ICI Fibres,
now used by more than 20 managers in the UK, Belgium and Germany.
Hardware: PC front-ends on 386- and 486-based colour laptop computers
connected to an IBM mainframe via the communications network. Data is stored
on the mainframe and distributed to local PCs. There is automatic download
of data sources from core accounting systems.
Suppliers: West London-based Executive Information Solutions, a 15-strong
specialist EIS company, advised ICI Fibres on the business and management
process.
Cost of system: The consultancy costs in developing the BIS were pounds
220,000 for ICI Fibres and pounds 150,000 for ICI Acrylics. This includes
the review of the IT infrastructure, but not hardware and software
components.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930422

