FT932-6552

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (2): Economic transformation is under way -
Inequalities emerge and risks are high as the private sector economy
develops


   By EDWARD BALLS


DESPITE the chaos, confusion and acrimony which continually dog the
government's halting attempt to embrace market reforms, Russia's economic
transformation is under way.
Accelerating economic and social change is readily apparent in the bustling
street markets and newly fitted office blocks, both in Moscow and regional
urban centres. But signs of this emerging private sector economy have yet to
be reflected in the government's state-sector dominated economic statistics.
Indeed, a casual glance at the official economic record would suggest that
the Russian economy has stood still or even moved backwards over the past
year:
Measured industrial output fell by 18.6 per cent last year and may still be
falling;
Inflation continues to fluctuate between 20 and 30 per cent a month as the
government and central bank pump out credits to loss-making state
enterprises at very low interest rates;
There are few signs of the unemployment and bankruptcies which many
observers believe will be needed if industry is to be restructured;
The domestic oil price is still less than a third of world prices, while
other energy prices are even lower; and
Measured living standards per head fell by a half in 1992 compared to the
previous year, with the hardest hit being pensioners and other people who
depend on state incomes. Since 1985, the average pension has fallen by a
quarter relative to the average wage.
But the statistics omit an important element of the Russian economic story:
the growth of an unofficial, unmeasured, often anarchic, but increasingly
significant private economy, which appears to be liberating a vibrant,
entrepreneurial streak in a growing number of Russian citizens.
This new activity is not restricted to the capital city alone, although
Moscow is, not surprisingly, ahead of the rest of the country. Street
markets, private banks, unofficial taxi services, new restaurants and stores
selling imported goods are springing-up across the republic.
The growth of this private economy has been encouraged by the liberalisation
of most state-controlled prices last year; the privatisation of over 33,000
small-scale state enterprises in 1992; the government's nascent medium and
large-scale privatisation programme; the removal of many state regulations
on private activity; the withering away of the state's ability to enforce
those regulations which remain; and the seizure and exploitation of state
assets and resources by managers, workers and local bureaucrats.
Russia is, as a result, developing a dual economy: a state industrial
sector, biased towards military production, weakened by the collapse of
trade between Russia and the other republics, dependent on government
subsidies for its survival, but responsible for social infrastructure and
the employment of the mass of the population; and an unofficial, sometimes
illegal, private economy in which most agents are engaged in trade and the
provision of services, rather than production, and in which much of the
economy's Dollars 35-40bn annual export earnings circulate.
The activities of the state sector dominate the official production
statistics and the state budget. Experts at international financial
institutions estimate that the government distributed explicit budget
subsidies equivalent to a little over 20 per cent of gross domestic product
last year, mainly to state enterprises. But the same amount again was paid
to enterprises through off-budget credits from the central bank and the
ministry of finance, channelled through the state banking system at very low
interest rates.
But it is the new private sector, emerging from the black economy of the
former Soviet union and reminiscent of the wild capitalism of nineteenth
century America, which seems to be the main dynamic force that generates and
distributes wealth throughout the economy. This unofficial economy is
serviced by the mushrooming, unregulated private banking system, whose
growing wealth and power is illustrated by the large number of
advertisements for Russian banks, paid for in dollars, which appear in this
survey.
The activities of Inkombank, a new Moscow-based private bank, are typical of
this new private sector. Inkombank has assets equivalent to 212bn roubles,
of which 70 per cent are held as hard currency. The bulk of its activity
consists of finance of commodity exports through its network of
correspondent banks abroad, explains Alexey Kuznetsov, the bank's smart,
young first deputy chairman - 'we finance exports of fertilisers, copper,
aluminium, arms, lumber and construction materials and refined oil,' he
says.
This private, un-regulated economy has space for many smaller fish. Some are
official privatised companies, a sample of which appear later in this
survey. Others are individuals who do extra work in addition to, or instead
of, official jobs. Vladim, a 28 year-old Moscovite, fluent in English and
Italian, earns 18,000 roubles (Dollars 19) a month from teaching. But he
supplements these meagre earnings from taxi driving, at which he can earn
Dollars 20 a day and pays Dollars 60 a month to the local 'mafia', who
control taxi access at the Olympic Penta hotel.
The growth of this unofficial economy partly explains how the government has
been able to maintain support for reform, despite rampant inflation and
falling real wages - 'people do not care too much about their wages,' ways
one senior western official based in Moscow. 'Much of the important economic
activity now occurs outside the wage economy.'
But this dollar-based economy means a growing gap in income and living
standards between those with the power and influence to take, and flaunt,
their share of this new wealth and those who remain dependent on the state
sector for their livelihood. It has also meant growing public resentment of
the associated corruption and illegality.
'Pensioners are not primarily concerned with how badly off they are, or how
hungry,' says social affairs minister Ella Pamfilova. 'Price increases are
only their second priority. Their biggest concern is crime and corruption.'
The government's problem has been to manage the political reaction to this
growing inequality and lawlessness, while keeping the reforms on track. Over
the past year, it appears to have managed the former at the expense of the
latter. Support for reform remains surprisingly strong, boosted perhaps by
the populist mass privatisation programme. But that is partly because the
government, or at least the relevant ministers in the increasingly divided
cabinet of ministers, have failed to take the tough decisions needed to
bring inflation under control.
The reformers have tried to pin the blame for inflation on Mr Viktor
Gerashchenko, the central bank governor, who has been portrayed as an enemy
within, recklessly flooding the economy with inflationary credit. His
stubborn insistence on supplying credits to other former Soviet republics,
to the tune of 10 per cent of Russian GDP in 1992, has certainly made
controlling inflation very difficult. Many reformers argue that Mr Boris
Fyodorov, the finance minister, should take over the central bank governor's
job.
But the responsibility for high and rising inflation belongs as much to the
government. For cutting state subsidies to state enterprises, however
necessary and desirable, means bankruptcies, unemployment and the risk of
social discontent.
Unemployment benefits are minimal, less than a fifth of the average wage,
while many social benefits are still provided by enterprises. In these
circumstances, neither the government nor the central bank have been
prepared to ignore parliamentary opposition and start to cut state
subsidies.
'The central bank should be responsible for monetary policy while the
bankruptcies of state enterprises are a matter for the government,' says Mr
Alexander Khandruyev, a deputy governor at the central bank.
'But if we simply stop credit emissions, then our government would face mass
strikes tomorrow.'
The result has been rapid inflation. Total credit grew, as a result, by
3,140 per cent over the course of last year while prices rose by 2,500 per
cent. The government had some success in raising tax revenue, particularly
from the value-addded tax which now accounts for a third of revenue
collected. But on- and off-budget credits accounted for 40 per cent of GDP
last year.
If anything, the government has moved further away from controlling its
budget deficit in recent months.
Recent monetary data had been relatively encouraging, with the monthly
inflation rate falling to 21 per cent in March from 26 per cent in February
and the growth of central bank credit dropping into single figures. But a
rise in government spending and bank credits in the weeks preceding the
referendum are expected to push inflation back towards 30 per cent over the
next few months.
Mr Sergie Vassiliev, director of the government's Centre for Economic
Reform, confirms that government demands for credits from the central bank
increased in the weeks before the referendum - 'thirty per cent monthly
inflation reflects the government's inability to control its expenditures,'
says Mr Vassiliev.
The central bank and government had agreed in early April that credit
emission in the second quarter should be limited to 3,000bn roubles, of
which 1,300bn roubles would go to the government's budget. But the
consequence of pre-referendum pledges to raise the paltry level of pensions
and the minimum wage, and increase in subsidies to the agricultural and
energy sectors, mean that the government deficit is already expected to be
2,300bn roubles.
The government's failure to curb inflation is therefore a direct result of
its desire to avoid the harsh distributional consequences of imposing tough
budget contraints on the state enterprises, many of which would be bankrupt.
But the resulting inflation is proving to be both an obstacle to reform and
inegalitarian, for two reasons.
First, the inflationary credits are not tied to industrial restructuring and
thus allow the state enterprises to avoid commercial realities. So long as
state enterprises continue to receive credits at negative real interest
rates, they face no incentive or necessity to restructure.
According to various western financial institutions, neither macroeconomic
stabilisation nor enterprises restructuring can proceed without a
rationalisation and reduction in the volume of state subsidies.
Second, high and unstable inflation is one reason why the flow of investment
into Russia has so far been negligible. No sensible investor wants to hold
rouble assets.
The result is an artificially low exchange rate, falling towards 1,000
roubles per dollar, which leaves the average wage equal to a mere Dollars 30
a month and makes imported goods too expensive for most citizens.
The reformers are relying on western aid to square the circle by
substituting western budget support for inflationary central bank credits.
The government's financial programme envisages that total available credit
will fall from 40 per cent in 1992 to 17 per cent of GDP by the final
quarter of this year. But total domestic credit falls to 7.2 per cent of
GDP, consistent with a monthly inflation rate of 5 per cent, while western
aid fills the gap.
Western officials appear increasingly sympathetic. Officials from the Group
of Seven industrialised countries say they are determined not to see a
repeat of last year, when much of the original Dollars 24bn aid package was
not disbursed because the Russian government was unable to meet the IMF's
tough financial conditions. At their meeting in Tokyo four weeks ago, the G7
foreign and finance ministers announced a headline figure of nearly Dollars
44bn of assistance to Russia over the next year from the IMF, the World Bank
and in bilateral aid.
Senior officials at the group of seven industrialised countries envisage
that budget support could become available over the next few weeks following
recent negotiations between the reformers and the International Monetary
Fund.
The IMF is now offering each former Soviet republic fast disbursing aid -
labelled a 'systemic transformation facility' - half of which would be paid
immediately to any government demonstrating a 'credible' reform strategy.
For Russia this facility will provide Dollars 3bn.
G7 officials list four key conditions which should be met before funds can
be released:
Strict limits on central bank credit creation;
A rise in interest rates;
Significant reductions in all state subsidies;
A viable budget programme that is consistent with low inflation.
By helping the government to manage its distributional dilemma, the western
hopes to help the reformers fight off the threat of hyperinflation and start
the difficult process of restructuring and slimming the military sector,
while the nascent private economy continues to grow. The challenge for the
west is to ensure that aid does substitute for central bank credits, rather
than merely adding to their sum, and is closely tied to industrial
restructuring.
That, according to World Bank officials, means ensuring that general
subsidies are cut so that the social safety net supports the unemployed
rather than loss-making enterprises, while remaining subsidies to large
military enterprises are time-limited and linked to specific transformation
plans.
The G7 strategy is risky. Senior officials at both the World Bank and the
IMF fear that, however committed the reformers in Moscow, their inability to
control inflation combined with Russia's lack of market infrastructure mean
the western money will be wasted. They are worried that the reputations of
both the World Bank and the IMF will be damaged in the process.
Certainly, if aid is to materialise and reforms are to progress, the Russian
government will have to be considerably more bold, and willing to take
greater political risks than it has been in recent weeks during which
President Boris Yeltsin's economic appointments have seemed to suggest he is
less than fully committed to reform. But if it works, western aid might, in
the words of one senior western official, 'grease the wheels' of Russia's
economic transformation by 'buying time for the invisible hand to do the
work.'
By injecting dollars into the economy through government channels, the west
hopes to enable the reformers to control inflation and mitigate the growing
inequality that the developing private sector economy is bringing.
The risks are high - that is the nature of the G7's gamble.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                          THE G7 AID PACKAGE
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Bilateral governments
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Public debt rescheduling                             Dollars 15bn
Export credits and guarantees                        Dollars 10bn
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
International Monetary Fund
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Systemic transformation facility                      Dollars 3bn
Stand-by loan                                       Dollars 4.1bn
Currency stabilisation fund                           Dollars 6bn
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
World Bank
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
World Bank loan commitments                         Dollars 3.4bn
Import rehabilitation loans                         Dollars 1.1bn
Oil sector loan                                     Dollars 0.5bn
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
European Bank for Reconstruction and Developm't.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Small and medium enterprise fund                    Dollars 0.3bn
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

930527

