FT932-6800

FT  27 MAY 93 / Fyodorov bares all on Russia's economic woes


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THESE are the days of living dangerously in the Russian economy, but they
are also the days of unusual candour, at least as far as Mr Boris Fyodorov,
Russia's deputy prime minister in charge of the economy, is concerned.
On Tuesday night he delighted and awed Russian and foreign economists with a
candid snapshot of life in the upper echelons of the Russian government.
He admitted, for example, that everyone 'apart from poor people on the
street' was shifting out of roubles into dollars, legally and illegally, and
acknowledged that 'I would do the same'.
The government was 'failing in its public duty' to protect people and their
currency, and when it took two months to effect a money transfer in roubles
and a day or two in dollars, lawlessness was perfectly understandable. 'We
have a very small stick, and no carrots,' he added.
Mr Fyodorov was breathtakingly self-confident. He disclosed that today he
will propose to the cabinet that no promises for extra expenditure be
honoured by the government. That would stop politicians, including President
Yeltsin, from making populist gestures in an election campaign sure to be
forthcoming.
Mr Fyodorov clearly identified the government's lax populism as being more
dangerous than the parliament.
'It's not so bad,' he said of the parliament, which is public enemy number
one as far as Mr Yeltsin is concerned.
The government is, according to Mr Fyodorov, riven with dissension. Even
within his own ministry he spends much of his time 'stopping people putting
forward proposals the opposite of those I am fighting for'.
One of the most valuable pieces of advice he had received, he said, was from
Professor Jeffrey Sachs, the government adviser from Harvard University, to
the effect that any agreement reached had to be signed on the spot. Mr
Fyodorov says he now gets central bank officials to sign any deal as soon as
it is reached.
Though he hailed the recent agreement between the government and the central
bank which will allow the government access to the first Dollars 1.5bn
(Pounds 972m) tranche of the Dollars 3bn 'systemic transformation facility'
put up by the IMF, he clearly does not trust Mr Victor Gerashchenko, central
bank chairman, to fulfil it. 'It is a gentleman's agreement,' he said.
'Let's see how many gentlemen there will be in the central bank' - recalling
that Mr Gerashchenko had recently said that he (Mr Fyodorov would soon
'crawl to him' for more credits.
Mr Fyodorov does not believe in greater economic integration in the
Commonwealth of Independent States.
'You cannot believe in a union like this. So far I have not seen any
documents which say that there is any economic integration. . . I welcome
with pleasure the introduction of new currencies. We are pretending there is
a rouble zone when in fact there is none.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930527

