FT932-13415

FT  23 APR 93 / Management: Nice little earner - Companies and staff have
much to gain and little to lose from tying pay to profits


   By LUCY KELLAWAY


Nine hundred and ninety five accountants cannot be wrong when it comes to
spotting a good financial deal. When Stoy Hayward asked its 1,000 employees
whether they would like to receive up to one fifth of their salary in
profit-related pay, only five were doubtful.
Accountants are not best known for risk taking, and at Stoy Hayward they
have signed up to a scheme that appears to have little downside. If the
company hits its profits target, employees will be better off by Pounds
1,600 a year. If the company exceeds its target, employees get their share
of the extra. If it does worse, the scheme can protect employees so that in
net pay terms they are probably no worse off than before.
Stoy Hayward is just one of 4,000 UK companies that have introduced
profit-related pay since it became available in 1987. This week the UK
government announced that more than 1m people are receiving PRP, and the
publicity generated has caused the telephones at the Inland Revenue to ring
incessantly. More and more companies want to know how they take advantage of
a scheme.
The original idea was that by linking pay to profits, companies could make
their wage costs variable. Employees would be given an incentive to work
harder, and in good times would reap the rewards, while in bad times would
share the pain.
Roger Young, head of the Institute of Management, purrs over the latest
figures. 'It is very encouraging to see how profit-related pay is taking
off. We need to keep our cost base as flexible as possible.'
It is not clear, though, whether the scheme, which allows companies to pay
employees up to Pounds 4,000 tax free, is working entirely as the government
intended. In August the Inland Revenue closed a loophole which made it easy
for companies to pay out PRP almost irrespective of their performance. But
even with this route closed, the wizards at the accountancy firms appear
able to come up with schemes to do more or less what companies want.
'If you design the scheme carefully you can safeguard employees when profits
fall,' says Sue Bartlett from consultants R Watson & Sons. Most companies
re-submit a new plan every year: those that can predict their profits will
be able almost to choose how much they pay out. Companies with more erratic
profits can limit the effect that these fluctuations have on pay, and they
can also put a cap on profits above which no further bonus need be paid out.
The promise of a big saving on the payroll - which might typically be around
6 per cent - is particularly attractive during the recession. 'Companies are
using these schemes instead of a pay rise,' says Bartlett.
This can be done in two ways, either by introducing PRP as a bonus paid in
addition to existing salary, or by getting employees to swap part of their
salary for a PRP.
A company that has taken the latter route is Asda Property, which is not
paying out any more money this year but has introduced a salary sacrifice
scheme instead. There are no fixed rules on how the tax savings are shared
between companies and employees, but Asda has passed on the full benefit to
give employees a 4-5 per cent net pay rise.
The scheme works so that each month the company pays the same net pay to its
employees as before, distributing the extra at the end of the financial year
when the final profit figure is known. If the company badly misses its
target, and has therefore paid out too much over the year, the Inland
Revenue recoups the money from the employer, not the employee.
'You won't get employees involved if there is too much to lose,' says Paul
Huberman, finance director. 'They won't agree to anything that would mean
their monthly pay would fall, as they've got commitments to meet. After all,
I can't blame my secretary if our profits go down.'
However, because employees stand to gain if the profits go up, he says the
scheme has focused their attention on the company's performance. The scheme
has also proved popular because it gives the same benefit to all employees.
Most of the big companies with PRP have used it as a more tax-efficient
vehicle for paying bonuses than existing schemes in which a profit-related
lump is paid out at the end of the year. The largest company to do so is
Boots, whose scheme covers 56,000 employees. The tax break has given a boost
to the old arrangement - a bonus that previously would have been worth 6 per
cent is now worth closer to 10 per cent. 'The scheme gives our workforce a
greater stake in the business. It means they switch the lights off at night
and don't keep the machinery running,' says Alan Hainsworth, renumeration
manager. It also may have lessened pay claims, he argues.
The Halifax Building Society operates a similar scheme, which has paid out
an annual bonus of between 2 and 10 per cent of employees' salaries over the
last five years. According to David Thornborow, an assistant general
manager, 'staff see that it is not a static give-away every year'.
Some companies have shunned PRP because they prefer incentive schemes based
on individual rather than group performance. But at both Boots and Halifax
the scheme is seen as an addition rather than an alternative to individual
incentives.
The flexibility of PRP means that a suitable plan can be designed for most
companies - at least for those that are making profits. Those that have
little to gain from them are those with very low-paid workers  - who pay
little tax anyway - or with profits so volatile that they are impossible to
predict. Companies may need to adjust pension funds to include expected PRP
as part of final salary.
So far, very large companies have held back from salary sacrifice schemes.
The main problem, according to Brian Friedman of Stoy Hayward, is one of
communication. 'We wrote to everyone setting out the terms. We then
published a booklet about it. We invited staff to briefings, and we ran a
help line to deal with individual inquiries.'
The accountants themselves were convinced. They are now setting out to
convince their clients.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930423

