FT933-10084

FT  06 AUG 93 / Mediators suspend Geneva peace talks


   By LAURA SILBER and ROGER MATTHEWS


   GENEVA, WASHINGTON


INTERNATIONAL mediators yesterday suspended peace talks on Bosnia for three
days, apparently to step up pressure on Bosnia's Moslem President Alija
Izetbegovic and his divided delegation.
They postponed the Geneva talks even after Bosnian Serb leader Radovan
Karadzic agreed to withdraw Serb forces from strategic heights overlooking
Sarajevo and to open two routes into the besieged city.
'We agreed to open the city of Sarajevo as soon as possible,' Mr Karadzic
told reporters in Pale, the mountain stronghold above Sarajevo.
Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, the peace envoys, last night said
they would invite Mr Karadzic and his Croat counterpart, Mr Mate Boban, to
attend talks on Monday, said a spokesman.
The envoys are apparently reluctant to resume talks if Mr Izetbegovic and
his country's multi-ethnic presidency remain split.
They seem to be seeking assurance that the parties press forward with talks
on the republic's ethnic partition.
At the same time, they hoped to wait until Serb forces withdrew from key
heights, said Bosnian officials. Diplomats believe that Mr Izetbegovic is
holding out in the hopes of western intervention against Serb targets
besieging Sarajevo.
The chance for reviving the talks, stalled for four days, were raised when
Mr Haris Silajdzic, Bosnia's foreign minister, said his president would
return to the negotiating table if Serb forces withdrew as agreed from the
key heights above Sarajevo.
At the same time, it appeared unlikely that General Ratko Mladic, Bosnian
Serb commander, would immediately withdraw and hand over control of the
strategic points on Mounts Bjelasnica and Igman to United Nations peace
keepers.
Serb leaders said two routes running through Serb-held territory would be
opened for use by UN military, relief and commercial traffic.
One of the proposed routes would run north to Moslem-held Zenica, central
Bosnia, and the second route would run southwest to Mostar and the Adriatic
Sea.
However, it would operate at the mercy of Moslem adversaries, because it
cuts through territory held by Serbs and Croats.
Meanwhile Mr Abdul Satar, foreign minister of Pakistan, lashed out at
western moves to 'reward the aggressor'.
Roger Matthews adds from Washington: The US dilemma over its response to the
Bosnia conflict was again highlighted yesterday when Mr Marshall Freeman
Harris, senior State Department official responsible for monitoring the
crisis, resigned in protest at government policy. Mr Harris wrote in his
letter of resignation that he could not serve a government 'that accepts the
forcible dismemberment of a European state and will not act against genocide
and the Serbian officials who perpetrate it'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930806

