FT931-4107

FT  12 MAR 93 / Arts: Hakewill's Grand Tour


   By SUSAN MOORE


Napoleon's fate was finally sealed in the summer of 1815, and the British
could once again descend on Italy. One travelling companion sure to be in
demand was an up-to-date guidebook. In the spring of 1816, the enterprising
James Hakewill, architect, set sail from Dover with his wife. He had already
established a reputation as an author and artist with his History of Windsor
and its Neighbourhood, which capitalised on George III's extensive
improvements to the castle, and he would go on to publish A Picturesque Tour
of Jamaica and the even less likely Abattoirs of Paris.
The fruits of his year-long travels on the continent were some 300 careful
topographical drawings. In A Picturesque Tour of Italy, published in parts
by John Murray between 1818 and 1820, Hakewill's aim was to 'bring together
correct portraits of those places which attract the notice of the traveller
in Italy', taking in 'picturesque' prospects, notable architecture and sites
rich in historical interest. It also provided interior views of public
sculpture and picture galleries.
Hakewill, unlike his publisher, had great ambitions for his project. On his
return he commissioned the likes of Turner, Copley Fielding and John Varley
to make watercolours for the engravers from his pencil drawings. Murray
would have none of the extra expense, and refused all the watercolours bar
Turner's. In the end, only 36 out of the proposed 60 engraved views were
used, and the remainder of the plates comprised the outline engravings after
Hakewill's museum interiors. The publication proved a financial flop, and
Murray was obliged to sell the Turners in order to recoup some of his
losses.
It has taken 175 years for all of Hakewill's Italian drawings to make it
into print. Thanks to the Cartieri Miliani-Fabriano and the Instituto
Poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato, the entire group has been fully catalogued
and published with a text in English and Italian; and Hazlitt, Gooden & Fox
has a selection of some 70 sheets on display in London. (Twilight of the
Grand Tour, by Tony Cubberley and Luke Herrmann, is available from The
British School at Rome, 31-34 Gordon Square, London WC1H 0PY, Pounds 60, or
from Hazlitt's during the show in return for a donation of Pounds 25 or more
to the School's development appeal.) Hakewill now offers his public an
unique document of post-Napoleonic Italy - and of the last years of the
Grand Tour.
The Grand Tour, which would take in at least France and the Alps as well as
the Classical South, had been deemed an essential part of a gentleman's
education since the early 18th century. Hakewill's Tour catered for the
educated and high-minded. It is tempting to see its most innovative
contribution, the outline drawings of the sculpture galleries of the Vatican
and the Capitol, as a response to the Antique statuary excavated in
increasing numbers in the environs of Rome and Naples. The belief of the
painter, archaeologist and dealer Gavin Hamilton that 'the most valuable
acquisition a man of refined taste can make is a piece of fine Greek
sculpture' still held true in the early 19th century. What had changed, as
Hakewill presumably was only too aware, was that the travellers who came to
genuflect at the feet of the Laocoon or the Apollo Belvedere were no longer
predominantly those who could afford to acquire Greek and Roman antiquities.
The age of middle-class travel had dawned.
If Hakewill's drawings at time seem mechanical and formulaic, it ought to be
remembered that these are first and foremost working drawings, intended to
provide as much information as possible to the watercolourist and engraver.
Not infrequently, however, they achieve their own kind of careful poetry,
and a penetrating, neo-Classical clarity reminiscent of Eckersberg's views
of Rome.
*****
A poetical view of the grey-green garden of the Villa Pamphili in Rome at
dusk by the incomparable John Robert Cozens; Turner's perfunctory evocation
of a double rainbow over the Falls of the Rhine at Schaffhausen; and
Callow's hoary 'Bay of Naples - Early Morning' present markedly different
interpretations of the hallowed sites of the tourist itinerary, and are
among the highlights of Agnew's 120th annual watercolour exhibition.
This year's selection embraces artists from Gainsborough to Augustus John.
Recent rediscoveries include a Hoppner pencil and red chalk portrait of
exceptional delicacy, and a small Turner sketch in which the sea, under a
blood-red sunset, almost boils with shoals of mackerel driven to the shore.
The high point of the 1993 show, however, is the wall of nine Samuel
Palmers. A previously unrecorded watercolour over pencil, 'Ploughing with
Oxen, with a Village in the Distance', has been convincingly attributed to
Palmer's visionary Shoreham period.
John Hakewill (1778-1843): Drawings for A Picturesque Tour of Italy
continues at Hazlitt, Gooden & Fox, 38 Bury Street, SW1, until April 8.
English Watercolours and Drawings continues at Agnew's, 43 Old Bond Street,
W1, until April 2

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930312

