FT933-10086

FT  06 AUG 93 / Mediators reluctant on restart of talks


   By LAURA SILBER and ROGER MATTHEWS


   GENEVA, WASHINGTON


THE FUTURE of the Bosnian peace talks in Geneva yesterday remained uncertain
despite a pledge by Bosnian Serb leader Mr Radovan Karadzic to withdraw his
forces from strategic heights overlooking Sarajevo and to open two routes
into the besieged capital.
'We agreed to open the city of Sarajevo as soon as possible,' Mr Karadzic
told reporters in Pale, the mountain stronghold above Sarajevo.
International mediators Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg last night had
not yet decided whether to recall Mr Karadzic and his Croat counterpart, Mr
Mate Boban, to attend peace talks today in Geneva, said a spokesman.
The peace envoys are apparently reluctant to resume the negotiations,
stalled for four days, if Bosnia's President Alija Izetbegovic refuses to
proceed with talks on the republic's ethnic partition. Diplomats believe
that Mr Izetbegovic is holding out in the hope of Western intervention
against Serb forces besieging Sarajevo.
Mr Haris Silajdzic, Bosnia's foreign minister, said yesterday his president
would return to the negotiating table if Serb forces withdrew as Mr Karadzic
had announced from the key heights above Sarajevo.
However, it appeared unlikely that General Ratko Mladic, Bosnian Serb
commander, would immediately withdraw and hand over control of the strategic
points on mounts Bjelasnica and Igman to UN peacekeepers.
Serb leaders said two routes running through Serb-held territory would be
opened for use by UN military, relief and commercial traffic. One of the
proposed routes would run north to Moslem-held Zenica, central Bosnia, and
the second would route would run southwest to Mostar and the Adriatic Sea.
Roger Matthews adds from Washington: The continuing US dilemma over its
response to the Bosnia conflict was again highlighted yesterday when the
senior State Department official responsible for monitoring the crisis
resigned in protest over government policy.
Mr Marshall Freeman Harris, the Bosnia desk officer, wrote in his letter of
resignation that he could not serve a government 'that accepts the forcible
dismemberment of a European state and will not act against genocide and the
Serbian officials who perpetrate it.'
At a meeting with top aides last Saturday President Bill Clinton approved a
plan for using air strikes to protect Bosnian Moslems. However, with
European allies reluctant to follow the US lead and Mr Clinton preoccupied
with domestic issues while Mr Warren Christopher, secretary of state, is in
the Middle East, the Bosnia issue has this week slipped down the
administration's immediate agenda.
Although Mr Harris was not a central figure in the formulation of US policy,
his resignation may help to reverse that process. A year ago Mr Harris's
predecessor resigned in similar circumstances.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930806

