FT932-62

FT  30 JUN 93 / International Company News: Northern suffers from purchasing
switch / A look at problems facing the Canadian telecoms group


   By BERNARD SIMON and MARTIN DICKSON


NORTHERN Telecom has a history of skidding on an oily patch every few years.
The Canadian telephone equipment maker has been fortunate, however, to find
a new driver each time with the skill to straighten the wheel and put down
the pedal for another burst of speed.
Northern is now in just such a skid. Following a 27 per cent drop in
first-quarter earnings, it announced last week it expected a loss in the
second quarter and 'significantly' lower earnings for the year as a whole.
Its share price has tumbled 28 per cent in the past two days to CDollars 34.
True to form, a new driver - in this case, two new drivers - have taken the
wheel. The appointments of Mr Jean Monty, who took over as chief executive
from Dr Paul Stern last March, and Mr Bradford Butler, named to replace Dr
Stern as chairman last week, give a clue to how Northern plans to deal with
its latest problems.
Mr Monty, an astute and personable Quebecer, was previously head of
Northern's sister company, Bell Canada, the country's biggest telephone
utility. Bell is not only a big Northern customer, but is about the same
size as each of the US regional operating companies on which Northern
depends for sales of its computerised telephone switches.
Mr Butler is a former chief executive of Procter & Gamble, the US consumer
goods group. He is described by a fellow-director at Northern as 'a great
people guy' with excellent contacts in the US.
Dr Stern's legacy was to broaden Northern's international base. He led
Northern into the acquisition of STC, the UK telecommunications group, and
forged a valuable joint venture with Matra of France.
But his abrasive style and emphasis on international growth have hit
Northern's core business in North America. Mr Michael Arellano, analyst at
Northern Business Information in New York, says the company 'might not have
had these problems if customer service and software quality had been given
more attention over the past four years.'
Northern ascribes its difficulties to lower-than-expected sales of switching
equipment. But this sits awkwardly alongside indications from US local
telephone companies that they are pushing ahead with substantial capital
investment programs which are little changed from previous years, or in some
cases larger.
BellSouth, the 'Baby Bell' serving the south-eastern US, says it plans to
spend Dollars 3bn a year over the next three years on capital equipment -
roughly the same as last year. Nynex, which serves the north-eastern US,
says it expects capital spending to be at around Dollars 2bn a year for some
time.
Pacific Bell, which serves California, is spending Dollars 1bn over the next
five years to replace analogue switches - the computers which route calls -
with digital equipment, a Northern speciality. That is some Dollars 330m
more than it would normally spend on switching equipment in a five-year
period.
At the same time, increasing competition in the US local telephone market
should provide more customers for switching equipment.
Northern has been slow to latch on to some of the fastest-growing areas of
telecommunications, notably transmission, cellular and wireless. It is
between 12 and 15 months behind its rivals in bringing key fibre-optic
transmission products to market. Northern predicts that transmission
products will eventually contribute as much as switching equipment to its
business, but they made up only 11 per cent of revenues last year, compared
with 50 per cent from switches.
Another challenge is the trend among US local telephone companies to place
equipment contracts with fewer vendors. Nynex is expected shortly to
announce which of four equipment suppliers - Northern Telecom, LM Ericsson,
American Telephone & Telegraph and Siemens - has won a bid to supply 3.5m
lines of digital switching.
Mr Romy Tomlinson, managing director of technology selection at Nynex, says
the company is trying to minimise the number of vendors in order to lower
operating costs. Fewer vendors means less money spent on training people to
use the equipment, fewer problems of matching different suppliers'
equipment, and less inventory.
The move to fewer suppliers has contributed to fierce pricing pressure in
the North American market. Equipment vendors seem willing to cut prices to
ensure they are on a telecommunications company's buyer list, because if
they miss out they will have a hard time getting back on the list and may
then have to offer either extremely keen prices or next-generation
equipment.
The arrivals of Mr Monty and Mr Butler signal that Northern's priority will
be to snuggle up again to the US telephone companies. 'Northern is going to
attack the world a little differently under Monty than it did under Stern or
(previous chief) Fitzgerald,' predicts one of the company's directors.
Mr Monty's plan of action is likely to become clearer between now and July
27, when Northern publishes second-quarter earnings. At least one, and
possibly more, significant announcements are expected. One move may be to
shift resources to faster-growing products, with a consequent reduction in
switching capacity. Part of the second-quarter loss will probably comprise a
hefty write-down to reflect this adjustment.
Some recent initiatives have yet to achieve top speed. The Matra alliance,
for instance, links Northern with a leading supplier of radio systems. A
cellular venture with Motorola in North America is still getting off the
ground. But provided Mr Monty and Mr Butler are as deft as their
predecessors, it could be just be a matter of time before Northern pulls out
of its latest skid.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930630

