FT932-13376

FT  23 APR 93 / Compact car with designs on success: Christopher Parkes
reports on changes aimed at overtaking Japan


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


LONGER by a matchstick's length than its executive predecessor, and replete
with two dozen new features as standard, the marketing motto for the
Mercedes-Benz compact C-class is that it offers customers more car for their
money.
According to Mr Klaus-Dieter Vohringer, director in charge of passenger car
production, buyers will get up to 20 per cent more value at prices basically
unchanged from those of the outgoing 190 series.
Technically and cosmetically refined, the C-class is the fruit of
manufacturing and management innovations with which Mercedes hopes to
transform its prospects in the global quality car market.
It is the first practical example of the group's new pricing policy. The
range embodies a principle new to Mercedes which states that before any work
starts a new product will be priced according to what the market will bear
and what the company considers an acceptable profit. Then each component and
manufacturing process will be costed to ensure the final product is
delivered at the target price.
Under the old system of building the car, adding up the costs and then
fixing a price, the C-class would have been between 15 per cent and 20 per
cent dearer than the 10-year-old outgoing 190 series, Mr Vohringer said.
Explaining the practical workings of the new system, he explained that
project groups for each component and construction process were instructed
without exception to increase productivity by between 15 and 25 per cent.
And they had to reach their targets in record time.
One result was that development time on the new models was cut to 40 months,
about a third less than usual. But the most important effect, according to
Mr Vohringer, has been to reduce the company's cost disadvantages vis-a-vis
Japanese competitors in this class from 35 per cent to only 15 per cent.
The time taken to build a car has been cut from 45 man-hours to around 35.
Collaboration with outside suppliers has resulted in Mercedes making less of
its own parts and also speeding up assembly. Complete electrical wiring
harnesses, for example, are now supplied from outside on a just-in-time
basis, ready to be inserted in one process into the bodies. Door interiors
are also shipped complete for one-step installation. Where Mercedes used to
produce 48 per cent of parts, it now makes around 42 per cent.
Dashboards and controls, built in a separate assembly shop, are also
installed in one action instead of being bolted and screwed together
piecemeal on an assembly line comprising rolling platforms in place of a
conveyor system. Body assembly is robotised; side panels come in one piece
rather than five parts.
Quality controllers have been moved from the end of the production line,
where jams built up. They now work as members of each assembly team.
Group work has been introduced at every level of the Mercedes product cycle
and six management layers have been thinned to four. According to Mr
Vohringer, this improved efficiency and collaboration with suppliers have
each contributed 50 per cent of cost efficiencies.
The main task is to launch a new and still relatively costly car into
crowded and depressed international markets. In Germany, which routinely
absorbs almost half Mercedes' compact class output, total industry sales are
expected to fall 20 per cent this year. Yet the company is committed to
producing 100,000 C-class cars and will step up production to 200,000 in
1994 compared with a recent annual average output of 180,000 for the old 190
series. Some executives even hope production can be cranked up to 250,000 in
1995, even though most forecasters reckon European car markets will still be
weak.
In the meantime, Mercedes has to tackle the introduction of similar changes
throughout the rest of its range. Three-quarters of the passenger car output
and most of its profits come from the middle-range executive classes and the
luxury S-class. But it has ground to make up. Japanese competitors have a 15
per cent cost advantage over Mercedes' new compact model and are not
renowned for standing still.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930423

