FT934-8713

FT  13 NOV 93 / Fashion: Jaeger, a fashion classic is reborn - Brenda Polan
meets Jeanette Todd, the driving force behind the rejuvenation of a famous
name


   By BRENDA POLAN


THE JUDGES of the Classics section in last month's British Fashion council
award had a knotty problem. Two of the nominated companies whose clothes,
while in some ways classic, were once dull and worthy had produced
collections in 1993 which were seriously desirable by even the most
fashion-conscious of women.
Marks and Spencer's progressive upgrading of the fashion content of its
clothes has been gathering pace over several years now, while Jaeger's
transformation has been accomplished in just a year. If companies can be
compared to seagoing vessels, then M&S is a lumbering supertanker and Jaeger
a nimble liner.
Even so, as Jeanette Todd, Jaeger's design director, reflects, turning a
liner still takes time and a lot of ocean. 'You can't,' she says, 'do it an
a sixpence.' However, she has done it on a half-crown. So this year, the
award went to Todd and her team.
Jeanette Todd is one of the most engaging people in the fashion industry.
Her personal style turns heads. She is small, round and very blonde, wears
simple clothes and flamboyant accessories such as large pieces of costume
jewellery, Isadora Duncan scarves or eccentric hats. When prevailed upon to
offer an opinion, it is usually a trenchant one, often a provocative
understatement.
At her most dead-pan, when her voice drops to a mutter and the Scots accent
can just be detected, she is occasionally misunderstood and she finds the
company of those not sharp enough to understand irksome. Then she can be a
little frightening.
She is also a designer of exceptional talent whose commercial judgment is
impeccable. She understands the balance women seek between fashion content,
comfort, durability, helpfulness and cost. Revamping Jaeger was the job most
of London's senior designers coveted. It was not really a surprise when
Todd, head of the Burton Group's design studio and creator of the Principles
range, got it.
There is a wonderful solidity about the idea of Jaeger. It is so very
British, dressing the stalwart ladies of the suburban middle class for whom
looking smart is important but getting value is more so. They know they can
rely on Jaeger.
'It was terribly important,' says Jeanette Todd, 'not to lose that core
customer. She is very precious to us. It was a matter not of radically
changing the range, but of stretching it so that it could encompass the
taste of the women who currently shop at Nicole Farhi, Whistles and DKNY at
Harvey Nichols. She's probably thirty-plus, though she might be younger, a
gregarious, confident person, well-informed, certain of her own taste and
quick to question what fashion proposes. If there is, for instance, a
fashion colour around, she won't wear it.'
Change is evident in this winter's clothes, in a loosening up of the line,
more relaxed proportions, a fluidity and swing to jackets and coats and a
wider choice of simple basic knitwear pieces which Todd's new customer would
put under her jacket while a core customer might prefer a blouse.
It is a tentative step forward. In order to gauge just how far the range can
be stretched, however, Jeanette Todd has introduced a small additional range
at Jaeger's flagship store in London's Regent Street. Labelled Jaeger
London, it is a step or two more sophisticated and reflects the company's
new ability to get a garment from sketch pad to shop rail in between eight
and 12 weeks.
'We can react first to new information,' says Todd. 'Based on forward
fashion trends, what we see happening elsewhere in the world and on what we
know is selling well in our own shops, we can give the customer what we are
pretty sure she wants. This first London range, which is not being produced
in enormous quantities, is a trial. Does something this sharp and immediate
appeal to our customers? Can it pull in new customers? I won't panic if it
doesn't work. You have to test your limits or you never know where they
are.'
To produce Jaeger London she has piled a tough task on to what has already
been an arduous year, albeit one crowned with peer-group approbation.
Easiness is the key to the range: neutral colours of chocolate, mole, grey,
cream and black; simple shapes in leather, suede, wool jersey, flannel,
gaberdine, tweed and lambswool. In design terms it exploits the contrast
between body-hugging garments and generously capacious ones. 'I like the
interplay between tight and loose,' says Todd.
In some ways it is essentially a country look - but it one which works in
the city as well. 'A lot of people are looking for these kinds of clothes,'
says Todd. 'There is much less formality in the way people dress than there
was a couple of years ago. People are not as worried about key outfits.
Then, people were prepared to be uncomfortable in tight clothes to look
right. I don't think anyone wants to put up with discomfort now.'
Todd's early training, after Edinburgh College of Art and the London College
of Fashion (a Distinction Diploma) was with Jean Muir, the couturier, John
Cavanagh, and Murray Arbeid but her heart was in the mass market. She made
her career heading design studios for Courtaulds, Steinberg and the Burton
Group where, as well as functioning as group director of design management,
she was seconded, in 1986, to the Debenhams board as fashion director.
Consequently, when she tells you what she thinks woman want, it is based on
wide experience. Comparing her present target audience with the huge and
varied one she had at Burton she calls it 'a very narrow target.' And narrow
targets can be harder to hit.
'Exactly,' she says. 'But you have to have the courage of your convictions;
in many cases timidity is what limits what you do. On the other hand, I
would not start taking risks with the core business. And, when we feed back
into the design process what we learn from Jaeger London, I won't be.'
All clothes from the Jaeger London Collection available from Jaeger, 200-206
Regent Street, London W1. tel: 071-734-8211.
Pictures by Clive Warwick. Make-up by Karen Miller. Hair by Gari Gianasi at
Premier.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

931113

