FT932-3269

FT  15 JUN 93 / Re-peg to D-Mark, Europe told: Currencies move urged by BIS
to prevent rise of protectionism


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Correspondent


   BASLE


EUROPE must re-peg its currencies to the D-Mark to head off growing
protectionist pressures, Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy, general manager of the
Bank for International Settlements, said yesterday.
Speaking after the Basle-based bank's annual meeting, Mr Lamfalussy said the
present arrangement, in which Britain and Italy were no longer in the
European exchange rate mechanism and the currencies of Sweden, Finland and
Norway were floating, was 'not sustainable in the longer term'.
In a gloomy annual report, the BIS, owned by 32 central banks mainly in the
industrialised world, said the gradual recovery under way in developed
countries was unlikely to bring high unemployment down sharply.
The report highlighted difficulties caused by slow growth and high
government deficits in many advanced nations, together with the 'enormous'
potential for conflict in the slow progress of Uruguay trade round talks.
In linking the ERM turbulence of the past year with trade, Mr Lamfalussy was
underlining how some nations in the ERM - notably France - believed
devaluation of the pound and lira enabled the UK and Italy to boost growth
at the expense of other European nations by helping export competitiveness.
Mr Lamfalussy said devaluation of several European currencies in the past
year could 'cause problems' among their trading partners.
'If someone could prove to me that floating currencies are compatible with
relatively stable real exchange rates then my argument wouldn't hold - but
in the past this hasn't happened,' he said.
The BIS said this year would see 'further declines or at best a levelling
out' in the economies in continental Europe, while signs of recovery in the
US remained 'fragile'.
In unusually strong comments on those out of work, the bank said:
'Especially in continental Europe, where 40-50 per cent of the unemployed
have been without work for 12 months or more, unemployment constitutes a
structural problem which cannot easily be resolved through faster output
growth.'
The report laid the blame for high unemployment on 'high minimum wages and
social taxes which raise labour costs, inflexible wage structures and real
wages, restrictive work regulations and low labour mobility'. It warned that
'effective solutions become more difficult as time passes and the long-term
unemployed progressively lose contact with the labour market'.
In view of the wide gap between government spending and borrowing in many
countries, the BIS said 'very few' nations could boost economic activity by
fiscal means.
Only Ireland and Japan of the main developed countries were likely this year
to avoid an increase in the ratio of overall government debt to gross
domestic product.
BIS report analysis, Page 6 Editorial Comment, Page 19 See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930615

