FT932-7141

FT  25 MAY 93 / Money Markets: Lower French rates


   By PETER MARSH


THE Bank of France set the tone for lower interest rates throughout Europe
by shaving a quarter point off its intervention rate, writes Peter Marsh.
The French authorities' freedom for manoeuvre was helped by the continuing
weakness of the D-Mark which gave further signs of losing its role as the
key currency within the European exchange rate mechanism.
At the close of trading last night in Europe three-month interest rates in
four countries - the Netherlands, Belgium, France and Ireland - were below
the corresponding figure in Germany.
This unusual state of affairs highlights how some countries are finding they
can institute easier borrowing conditions, without necessarily having to
wait for the Bundesbank to pave the way.
The Bank of France cut its intervention rate to 7.5 per cent from 7.75 per
cent at a securities repurchase tender held yesterday.
In Belgium, the central bank took similar action, cutting its seven-day
advances rate by 10 basis points to 7.2 per cent following the cut announced
last Wednesday in its central rate, also by 10 basis points to 7.2 per cent.
Signs that lower interest rates across Europe will become increasingly
necessary during the rest of the year were underlined by a gloomy statement
from Mr Philippe Maystadt, Belgium's finance minister, warning of 'negative
growth' for the European Community.
With German three-money money being quoted at 7.5 per cent, the equivalent
rate in the Netherlands last night was 6.93 per cent. In Belgium, France and
Ireland, the corresponding interest rates were 7.12 per cent, 7.31 per cent
and 7.44 per cent.
The monetary authorities' room to reduce borrowing rates in these countries
is directly linked to yet more signs of D-Mark fragility. The German
currency, third from the bottom in the ERM grid, has a divergence indicator
of minus 23 per cent against its central Ecu rate, compared with plus seven
per cent two weeks ago.
In Britain, the Bank of England provided the money market with Pounds 950m
of early assistance after forecasting a liquidity shortage of around Pounds
1.25bn. The Bank bought Pounds 950m of bills for resale to the market. Later
on, the Bank took total assistance for the day to Pounds 1.4bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930525

