FT934-11699

FT  29 OCT 93 / London Stock Exchange: Price war fears hit Sainsbury


   By JOEL KIBAZO, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and CHRISTINE BUCKLEY


FOOD retail stocks dropped dramatically as talk of a renewed price war was
heard amid frantic trading, which by the close accounted for nearly 10 per
cent of yesterday's total market turnover.
J. Sainsbury, the UK's biggest supermarket group, was the focus of the
market speculation as strong rumours did the rounds that it was about to
launch a raft of price cuts on non-perishable goods. The story, which
suggested the move was imminent, came as the market opened and sent all the
leading stocks tumbling in hectic trading.
'This is the day when everyone has been selling everything in the sector,'
commented one harassed market-maker. But another dealer said there were
still plenty of buyers to be found. 'Investors are finding healthy yield
values at these levels,' he added.
Others took a different view, and there were reports that previously
positive brokers were backtracking and advising clients to sell. The sector,
which has been the worst performer in the London market this year, has
recently undergone a rerating as some analysts have considered the decline
overdone. However, one leading food salesman said yesterday: 'The recovery
has been called too early. The news flow will remain negative for some time
yet.'
Yesterday's talk once again focused investors' minds on price pressures in
the industry, highlighted by the weakness in the sector in the previous
session following the victory by Costco, the US discount warehouse chain, to
open its first site in the UK,
After refusing to comment to analysts for most of the session, Sainsbury
finally issued a denial to the press shortly before the end of the day's
trading. By then, the shares had tumbled 14 to 402p in turnover of 9.8m, the
highest in two years. Tesco dropped 9 1/2 to 206 1/2 p in volume of 16m and
Argyll Group fell 8 to 296p with 6.4m dealt. Elsewhere, Iceland retreated 9
to 175p and Kwik Save 14 to 651p.
Asda found some support as a block of 12.3m went through the market at 53.5p
and was sold on at a penny higher. There was also an institutional visit.
The shares lost 1 1/4 to 55 1/2 p on turnover of 38m.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

931029

