FT934-8873

FT  13 NOV 93 / Washington drops charges against Gallo


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE US government has dropped its charges of unethical conduct against Dr
Robert Gallo, the Aids researcher who is credited with co-discovering the
human immuno-deficiency virus with France's Institut Pasteur.
Doubts over who discovered what and when have clouded the question of who
should receive both the glory and the profits from the discovery of HIV and
the development of a test to detect it.
The Office of Research Integrity in the US Public Health Services yesterday
announced that it was dropping charges that Dr Gallo had failed to give
proper credit both to Institut Pasteur and to other US scientists.
Dr Lyle Bivens, the office's director, repeated the substance of the
allegations against Dr Gallo but said that he was withdrawing the charges.
He said that this was because a ruling last week by an appeals board of the
Department of Health and Human Services on a case brought against one of Dr
Gallo's associates had 'established a new definition of scientific
misconduct.'
The office had originally found Dr Gallo and his associate guilty of
scientific misconduct in a report issued a year ago.
No-one questions that Dr Gallo and his team at the National Institutes of
Health near Washington made a significant contribution to knowledge about
HIV, and was the first to prove that it was the cause of Aids.
But Dr Gallo has acknowledged that the virus on which he based his HIV test
was in fact based on a sample sent to him by Professor LucMontagnier's team
at the Institut Pasteur.
Yesterday's announcement leaves unclear the fate of the 1987 agreement in
which the French and US governments agreed to share the proceeds of the HIV
blood test, which are estimated to have exceeded Dollars 50m (Pounds 34m).
While negotiations have never really re-opened, France has raised questions
about the equity of an agreement reached on the basis of misleading
information.
A number of other investigations of Dr Gallo's conduct, both by district
attorneys in Maryland and Washington, by the Department of Health and Human
Services and by Congressman John Dingell, are still under way.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931113

