FT934-8715

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (7):
Long live langlauf


   By DANIEL GREEN


PEACE. No lift queues, no maniac snowboarders. Communing with nature, a
sense of exploration, a sense of history, low-cost winter luxury.
Cross-country skiing should be more popular than it is.
While downhill skiers search for a resort that has not been turned into a
Torremolinos of the mountains, langlaufers know where to look. For them,
cross-country is what skis were invented for. Downhillers strap space-age
slabs of wood, plastic and aluminium on to their elephantine boots and are
left at the mercy of the ski lift. Cross-county skis are feather-light. They
are lapped on the underside to they do not slip backwards. The shoes are
more like trainers than plaster casts.
Each step you take glides you several metres forward; it is like wearing
seven league sneakers. And you can go just about anywhere.
Unfortunately, only a handful of resorts cater properly for cross-country
skiers. Many claim to, but it does not take long on a wind-blasted circuit
on a bare mountain in Tignes to realise that there are better ways to
travel.
What langlaufers need is trees, rivers and lakes. The best resort in Europe
is probably Seefeld, in the Austrian Tyrol. Twice host to the Winter
Olympics cross country events, Seefeld has 200km of mostly wooded tracks
sprinkled with mountain huts for rest stops. Unlike most resorts, it has a
specialist cross country school.
But Seefeld is for specialists. Those wanting interesting downhill runs and
good cross country routes could look to nearby Kitzbuhel, although the runs
are less wooded. Francophiles should avoid the purpose-built Alpine resorts
and head instead for the tranquillity of the Jura or Massif Central.
If that sounds too quiet, try Switzerland's Davos. Or St Moritz, where you
have a choice of lakeside wooded trails at the foot of the 3,300 metre
Corvatsch mountain.
The Mecca for cross-country skiers is Norway, the natural home for what is
still called by many Nordic skiing. Oppdal, 120km south of Trondheim, has
186km of trails including five floodlit tracks over 11km. With equipment
rental so cheap, and roast reindeer on the menu, what are you waiting for?

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

931113

