FT934-10294

FT  06 NOV 93 / QMH non-executive directors resign


   By ANDREW JACK, PEGGY HOLLINGER and MAGGIE URRY


THE TWO remaining non-executive directors to survive a reshuffle in June at
Queens Moat Houses, the hotels group which last week reported losses of more
than Pounds 1bn, resigned abruptly yesterday amid allegations that they had
been misled over the company's financial position.
Mr David Howell, MP and former cabinet minister, and Mr John Gale, a retired
senior executive with National Westminster Bank in the US, departed after a
week of questioning over the directors' responsibilities in the running of
the company under previous management.
Mr Howell said: 'I have sought to perform my non-executive duties
conscientiously throughout my appointment and particularly during an
extremely difficult period for QMH in recent months. In certain significant
matters I believe non-executives were clearly misled.'
QMH last week released figures restating a Pounds 90.4m pre-tax profit for
1991 as a Pounds 56.3m loss, and alleged that the company had in the past
paid illegal dividends without adequate resources.
The company said the two non-executives had previously agreed to requests
from the new board to stay on to assist with management changes and
restructuring. These changes followed months of negotiations with bankers.
'With this phase under way (they) have agreed to stand down,' the company
said.
Separately, Morgan Grenfell, now the merchant bank for QMH, revealed the
extent of a breach of the deed of its debenture stocks after a revaluation
of the properties which provided security for the bonds. The 1991 accounts
show the company has Pounds 215m in mortgage debenture stocks secured
against assets including 27 of the group's hotels.
The deeds require that the security should be worth at least 150 per cent of
the nominal value of the stock outstanding. But the valuation by Jones Lang
Wootton received by the trustees on Thursday showed security of only 67 per
cent of the value - a shortfall of Pounds 178.5m. The trustees would
potentially have the right to demand repayment of the bonds.
The company has appealed to stockholders to waive temporarily this breach of
the trust deed.
A meeting is scheduled to be held soon to seek their approval.
The tell-tale signs that set alarm bells ringing, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931106

