FT932-13502

FT  23 APR 93 / EBRD Annual Report: Overspend at bank put at 20% - Bank
fails to gain from sterling's decline


   By DAVID MARSH and ANDREW JACK


THE European Bank for Reconstruction and Development's accounts show
spending on overheads last year exceeded its budget by 20 per cent in terms
of European Currency Units.
The bank insists that its costs - most of which are paid out in the British
currency - were in fact less than budgeted when measured in sterling.
Overhead expenses net of government grants came to Ecu50.7m, compared with
the budgeted Ecu42.1m, up from only Ecu12.2m in the bank's start-up year in
1991.
At the Ecu exchange rate at the beginning of 1992, the budgeted figure for
last year was the equivalent of Pounds 30.1m. At the Ecu rate at the end of
1992, the actual amount spent was the equivalent of Pounds 40.4m.
Despite this, EBRD officials said yesterday that, compared with the original
sterling figures forecast for 1992, spending showed a slight fall.
EBRD officials said yesterday that the difference between the sterling and
Ecu calculations partly reflected the impact of procedures for depreciation
of capital spending. It said the discrepancy was also due to transactions
carried out at the start of each year to translate the bank's income -
denominated in Ecus, and accruing in a variety of currencies - into sterling
for spending during the year.
This practice of 'hedging' its Ecu income is meant to avoid exposing the
bank to foreign exchange risks. In fact, it meant that the EBRD failed to
benefit, as it would otherwise have done, from sterling's sharp fall against
European currencies towards the end of the year.
The bank's overall administrative costs, including personnel costs, totalled
Ecu96.2m last year, slightly higher than the budgeted Ecu95.2m.
The relatively small overshoot reflected the impact of lower-than-budgeted
personnel costs, which amounted to Ecu45.5m compared with the budgeted
Ecu45.5m - a fall which was presumably due to the decline of sterling during
the year.
Mr Jacques Manardo, the principal accountant responsible for EBRD's audit,
yesterday said he was fully satisified with the internal controls operated
by the EBRD. 'It's a small, well managed operation. I don't perceive any
lack of transparency,' he said.
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu won the audit for the EBRD after a competitive
tender among the leading international accountancy firms.
The audit is co-ordinated from London, although the audit report is signed
from Paris because that is Mr Manardo's base.
The lead partner on the audit is Mr Brian Smouha, liquidator of the
collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International and a banking partner
with Touche Ross, the DTT affiliate in the UK.
There are another four auditors in London, and about six more overseas, with
auditing of loans and operations in eastern Europe co-ordinated by an
accountant in DTT's Budapest office.
The accounts are prepared in accordance with international auditing and
accounting standards, modified to meet the structure of the bank and certain
EC regulations.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930423

