FT934-11510

FT  30 OCT 93 / Arts: Wits at a wedding - Opera


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


EVERYTHING about English National Opera's 1991 staging of Figaro's Wedding
is shaped by Jeremy Sams's lucid, sassy translation. The first two acts
strike me as among his very finest work. His wit often complements that of
da Ponte's Italian libretto - a barbed, knowing wit that connects to the
spirit of Mozart's opera and the original Beaumarchais play; I love
Susanna's little post-Rousseau feminist remark to the Countess in the Act
Two finale 'We think we are free, but we are always in chains.' Yes, very
free, and marvellously refreshing.
But Sams's tone is unyielding. When his characters have no humour, their
parlance grows less original and closer to operatic cliche ('And my joy has
turned to woe'). It is also during the opera's latter acts that Sams draws
attention to his own skill as a rhymester (army, barmy) and his needless
modishness ('Bye bye, nice to have seen you'). With such strokes he reveals
his distance from the tenderness at this opera's core.
Sian Edwards conducts. Pacing is good, orchestral timbre attractive, words
generally clear. But pathos is missing, and the larger ensembles lack
sparkle. None of the singing has great musical distinction, but Cathryn
Pope's Susanna carries the opera along with a charming mixture of delicacy,
robustness, directness and humour. Arwel Huw Morgan is a worthy,
communicative Figaro, though amid this cast he looks too old. Curiously, his
finest moment occurs simply in listening to Susanna's aria - motionless in
pain, only inches away from her in the dark.
Amid the rest of the cast, only Donald Adams as Doctor Bartolo is
outstanding - a self-important old buffer who suddenly melts into paternal
warmth. Margaret Marshall's elegant Countess gave a very strained account of
both arias. Edgy, pushy singing and lively, inelegant acting from Peter
Sidhom's Count, Ethna Robinson's Cherubino, and Anne Mason's Marcellina. If
embellishments are to be added, they should be more precise; but several
appoggiatture were missed.
Graham Vick's production has been revived by Bill Bankes-Jones. The story
becomes vivid - how well the eye is repeatedly drawn to Cherubino's
commission - and has many revealing touches of manners, such as the way
Figaro and Susanna stand to attention in the Countess's bedroom. Indeed,
every iota of Susanna's comportment is fresh and convincing. But not
everything else rings true. Though I was impressed by the violence with
which the Count treated the Countess in private, it seemed false to their
previous behaviour.
The stand-and-deliver method used in several big arias often detracts from
the drama. When Barbarina sings her 'I have lost it' solo, you want to cry
'Then keep on looking]' Richard Hudson's sets are ghastly. One bright colour
per surface: sheer green versus sheer mauve, and so on. Why seven doorways
in the garden wall? This isn't Bluebeard's Castle. And the doorways are so
narrow the Countess has to enter sideways.
Lord Goodman, a former chairman of English National Opera's board, was 80
this year. His birthday, and his presence on opening night, were marked by
the company's new general director, Dennis Marks, whose curtain speech of
congratulations contained the World's Longest Sentence.
ENO, London Coliseum. Performances until December 16. Original production
sponsored by the Woolwich Building Society.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931030

