FT934-10267

FT  06 NOV 93 / Wyvern Crest have much to lose from proposed EC directive


   By JIMMY BURNS and STEWART DALBY


WYVERN CREST, a supplier of business books by mail order, is among the
companies which believe they have much to lose from the proposed EC
directive, Jimmy Burns and Stewart Dalby write.
Mr Michael Herbert, managing director, yesterday called the directive
'mind-bogglingly inappropiate'.
The company, which is based in Ely, Cambridgeshire, trades as Wyvern
Business Library. It is a small concern with a growing client base in
mainland Europe where it makes more than 20 per cent of its sales. It
insists that all overseas customers and many UK ones pay for books with
their order. The company sells more than 100,000 books a year and half of
its turnover is on a cash-with-order basis.
Mr Herbert believes the directive would have a 'devastating effect', cutting
profits and undermining Wyvern's advertising strategy which operates on the
basis of very narrow margins.
'The directive would mean killing a viable economic activity by a
bureaucratic stroke of the pen,' he said.
He added that it would lead to a significant cut in payments coming in, and
would become a 'charter for fraudsters'.
Mr Herbert said the company would be faced with no choice but to end its
European business altogether because of the legal complexities of chasing
non-payment across borders.
National newspapers is one industry that could be badly hit by the
directive. Mr David Pollock, director of the Newspaper Publishers
Association, said: 'I estimate that hundreds of millions pounds worth of
advertising could be lost if this directive is accepted. Newspapers like the
Daily Mail and the Daily Express have a substantial proportion of their
advertising from distance selling.'
Mr Colin Fricker, legal services adviser to the Direct Marketing
Association, said: 'One industry which will be severely hit will be travel.
Think of how many holidays are booked with the money being paid up-front.
This directive, if accepted, will just encourage bad debts.'
Royal Mail said it regretted the directive because it could be
self-defeating. 'This directive could result in a lowering of standards in
distance selling, because companies will start mailing from outside the
Community,' it said.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931106

