FT933-12691

FT  23 JUL 93 / Serb onslaught delays peace talks


   By LAURA SILBER


   GENEVA


INTERNATIONAL mediators Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg yesterday
postponed peace talks in Geneva until Sunday following intense Serb
bombardments of Sarajevo and other enclaves in Bosnia.
Mr Alija Izetbegovic, Moslem president of Bosnia, earlier yesterday said he
could not attend peace talks while his capital was under attack.
'Unfortunately, up to this moment, there are no signs that attacks are
diminishing,' he said in a letter to the peace envoys. 'The offensive around
Sarajevo also is not diminishing. As I am writing this letter, the city is
being intensely shelled.'
The Serbs renewed their barrage early yesterday morning from positions on
the hills surrounding the city, UN officials said. They also reported return
fire from the besieged Bosnian defenders.
At the same time, Serb forces were stepping up attacks on Brcko,
north-eastern Bosnia, in a push to widen their land corridors running across
northern Bosnia and linking Serbia with Serb-held territory. In his letter,
referring to Serb attacks on Brcko, Mr Izetbegovic said 'surface-to-surface
missiles have been used today, which is a new negative element. Casualties
and damage are enormous.'
UN monitors yesterday confirmed reports that regular units of the Croatian
army were fighting across the Bosnian frontier in Mostar, the south-western
city. The UN Security Council and the European Community have repeatedly
warned Croatia it could face punitive sanctions, like neighbouring Serbia,
if it continued to back the violent carve-up of Bosnia.
Croatia, in particular its powerful defence minister Gojko Susak, who
controls Croat policy in Bosnia, has so far ignored international warnings
and denied that Croatia has despatched its troops. Bosnian radio reported
two battalions of the Croatian army was fighting in Mostar reinforcing the
Croatian Defence Council in its attempt to seize control of the area and
expel tens of thousands of Moslems from the city.
The postponement of the talks is not likely to improve the position of Mr
Izetbegovic, who has been under pressure to come to the negotiating table
for talks on the republic's three-way ethnic partition.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930723

