FT932-7014

FT  26 MAY 93 / Management: NatWest publishes its principles


   By ANDREW JACK


A strongly worded 10-page document has been sent to more than 90,000
National Westminster Bank employees in the last few weeks. It lays out the
details of one of the more ambitious codes of conduct so far launched by a
British company.
It says NatWest's priorities are integrity in its dealings, delivering
customer satisfaction and creating opportunities for staff. It touches on
conflicts of interest, criminal activities and accepting entertainment.
It is, as Neil Hartley, one of the executives most involved in its
development, says 'like putting up a white backcloth against which you can
measure everything.'
NatWest first published a 'set of principles' in 1986. When it restructured
in 1990, it decided to revise the guidance. Hartley insists that the changes
were not triggered by the Blue Arrow affair.
At a time when the aim was to 'empower' more managers and decentralise
control, Hartley says that there was an ever greater need to maintain a
'bedrock' of common NatWest culture.
A senior group of executives began working on the new code in the autumn of
1990. 'There was an air of anticipation that the whole thing could be agreed
and implemented within three months,' says Hartley. 'It took us over two
years.'
He says the previous principles were in parts contradictory and generally
difficult to implement. They gave no idea of the bank's priorities. 'They
could only work in an organisation driven from the top,' he says.
NatWest hired John Drummond, head of Integrity Works, an ethics consultancy
based in London, to help develop the new code. Drummond stressed three
points: the need for commitment from the most senior levels in the bank; to
involve as many people as possible in the drafting process; and to make it
clear that the code would be monitored and enforced.
More than 600 people were consulted during 1991 at all levels in the
company. Discussion continued in 1992 as more reorganisation delayed the
formal launch of the new code.
'There was very little scepticism,' Drummond says. 'The fact that
organisations present themselves as ethically mute is irrelevant. People are
very interested in talking about ethics.'
Consultation lead to several changes. The tone became less intimidating.
Accountability was increased with an annual report to the board on progress
with the code.
A confidential hotline was launched to help with enforcement, which has
taken more than 60 calls since it opened in April.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930526

