FT931-3987

FT  12 MAR 93 / World Stock Markets: Portuguese equities aim to catch up
with bonds - Lisbon is more hopeful for 1993


   By PETER WISE


Although Lisbon's BTA index has fallen back from a 1993 peak of 1,779 at the
end of last month, closing yesterday at 1,692, investors still hope that the
subdued Portuguese bolsa could shine in 1993.
Mr Jose Carlos Pestana Teixeira, managing director of the Lisbon stock
exchange, says: 'There is enough confidence in companies, confidence in the
market, confidence in the economy and confidence in the currency for a
marked recovery.'
The market could do with a boost. The BTA index has fallen more than 50 per
cent since its last peak in October 1989 when it reached 3,705. Small
investors, scalded by the 1987 crash in global equities, have never returned
and the stock exchange has not been the market choice for companies to raise
capital.
Bonds, however, have risen sharply, particularly since the introduction last
year of primary dealers, who underwrite and market issues, with bond trading
accounting for 80.50 per cent of total turnover on the stock exchange last
year. But shares languished, with the BTA index falling 17 per cent on the
year.
Analysts believe that the elements are in position for at least a moderate
turnround. Government claims that the Portuguese economy is an 'oasis' in
Europe may be far-fetched, but forecast GDP growth of 1.8 per cent in 1993
will still put the country above the European average, expected to be well
under 1 per cent.
Until now, says Mr Rocha Correia, of brokers Independente, the Portuguese
stock market has reversed the text book rules and fallen significantly while
the economy improves; it has also shown itself perverse by falling in
parallel with interest rates. Market watchers are now hopeful that these
trends will revert to normal, bringing more activity back to the share
market.
Agreement at the Edinburgh summit to double EC funds for the four poorer
members - Spain, Ireland, Greece and Portugal - will pump more money into
the country for badly-needed infrastructure.
'This makes the construction sector an obvious choice for investors,' says
Mr Jose Peixoto of Totta Dealer. 'But competition is fierce, especially over
price, and investors should exercise careful selectivity within the sector
for companies with sound finances.'
In this context, some engineering and metallurgical companies are also
coming to the fore: Somague, Engil and Celcat being mentioned.
Another key sector to watch, according to Mr Jose Fonseca Goncalves,
financial analyst of Totta Dealer, is banking, particularly the big three:
Banco Comercial Portugues, Banco Totta e Acores and Banco Portugues de
Investimento. In fact, it was the better than expected performances by these
banks in 1992 that spurred January's rise in the index.
Distribution is a third sector where companies are succeeding as the
Portuguese grow more affluent. 'As there are no food companies quoted in
Portugal, distribution is a good investment for a situation in which wages
are rising and inflation falling,' says Mr Fonseca Goncalves.
Another important factor working in favour of the market has been the first
full year of use of the reforms that constituted Portugal's 'big bang' in
September 1991.
The 1991 reforms introduced two unlisted securities markets in Lisbon and
Oporto for small and medium sized companies.
Continuous trading has expanded from an original three companies to 59.
Eventually all companies listed on the main market, some 200, will be
brought in, and the dealing timetable will be extended to allow US investors
to intervene directly in the Lisbon market.
But the key benefit continuous trading has brought is greater transparency
and liquidity,' says Mr Pestana Teixeira. 'It is proving a vital tool in the
recovery of the market and is bringing about a dramatic change.'

The Financial Times


London Page 37

930312

