FT934-8780

FT  13 NOV 93 / International Company News: Umberto Agnelli quits as deputy
chairman at Fiat


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


THE long-whispered redistribution of roles within Italy's powerful Agnelli
family was confirmed yesterday with the resignation of Mr Umberto Agnelli as
deputy chairman of Fiat.
The move is due to be formalised at a special Fiat shareholders' meeting on
Monday called to approve changes to group statutes regarding retirement
rules for executives.
In September, Mr Agnelli, who was expected to take over as chairman from his
elder brother Giovanni (Gianni) next June, suffered the embarrassment of
seeing his brother announcing that Fiat would change its retirement rules to
allow him (Gianni Agnelli) to stay on for an additional two years as
chairman.
The news followed a number of setbacks for Mr Umberto Agnelli, who has
always tended to be overshadowed by his better known and more charismatic
elder brother.
Observers have for some time been claiming to see cracks in the outwardly
solid Agnelli family structure. Apart from Fiat, Italy's biggest private
company, the immensely rich family controls Ifi and Ifil, two quoted
financial holding companies, and a string of other interests including
Turin's Juventus football club.
However, while the latest move may indicate the first step in a separation
of interests, clear interpretation of its significance has been masked by
other developments.
The most notable is the continuation of the Agnelli family line at Fiat
through the appointment of Mr Umberto Agnelli's 29-year-old son Giovanni to
the board. The newcomer, who has won his managerial spurs in a number of
executive positions outside the group, marks the fourth generation of
Agnellis at Fiat following its foundation by the family in 1899.
In a further step, seen by some as a face-saving solution, Mr Umberto
Agnelli will take on executive responsibilities as managing director of Ifi.
The latter company is the linchpin of the Agnellis' diverse business
interests.
He will remain in charge of Ifil, the holding company which under his
chairmanship has become one of Italy's biggest corporate success stories in
recent years.
The developments leave unchanged the ownership of the family holding
company, Giovanni Agnelli & Co, which controls Ifi.
Only in the event of a reorganisation of the former's complex structure
might it be possible to decypher the state of relations within the Agnelli
family and to what extent, if at all, a divorce is under way between the two
brothers.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931113

