FT932-6825

FT  26 MAY 93 / Dams make a desert of north-east Nigeria: Construction of
irrigation projects provides no economic benefit


   By PAUL ADAMS


HEAVY RAINS in June have been the signal for generations of farmers,
fishermen and herdsmen of Nigeria's north-east arid zone to prepare for the
annual floods.
But this year around 2m people in Yobe and Borno fear that the floods will
not come. If the federal government carries on building dams in the north,
their traditional way of life and diverse natural habitat face extinction.
Upstream dams near Kano have at least halved the flood water in the
Hadejia-Nguru wetlands and work has begun on a much larger dam at Keffin
Zaki on the Jama'are river in Bauchi state which could turn the fertile
Yobe-Komadougou basin into a desert.
In April last year Dr Bukar Shaib, head of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency (Fepa), drafted a letter to President Ibrahim Babangida
asking him to halt this project. It contained a proposal to set up a
co-ordinating authority for water resources in the Hadejia-Jama'are-Yobe
river basin.
The letter warned that unless water was 'properly co-ordinated at the
federal level, conflicts will arise between the five states within the basin
and there will be very serious desertification and ecological problems in
Jigawa, Yobe and Borno states.
'Without such co-ordination the EC delegate to Nigeria cannot recommend the
continuation of the North East Arid Zone Development Programme on which the
EC is spending about Dollars 50m in the next five years.'
Dr Shaib cited a report by agricultural experts that 'the Keffin Zaki dam
project should be shelved unless a full and independent study of the
environmental impact of the dam and irrigation schemes downstream proves
their economic benefit to all users.'
The letter was despatched via Mr Abubakar Hashidu, then agriculture
minister, who comes from Bauchi state, but it did not reach the president.
Months later Mr Hashidu awarded the Keffin Zaki dam contract to Julius
Berger Nigeria for an estimated N12bn (Dollars 482m). The decision was taken
without any study of the environmental impact or economic benefits.
Annual floods in the wetlands and Yobe river downstream are vital to the
economy of north-east Nigeria because they re-charge the water supply of the
region up to Lake Chad and provide surface water even in the long dry
season. Yobe and Borno states account for most of Nigeria's livestock,
notably the Fulani cattle.
The flooded areas produce crops all year, of which the most valuable is
rice. Last year operation of the Challawa dam severely reduced the flood,
already lowered by Tiga dam, and nearly all the rice crop failed in the
Hadejia river area.
Fisheries worth about N50m and the trees, reeds and mud used for timber,
fuel and building are dependent on the floods. The wetlands are home to 260
species of birds including many which migrate for the European summer and
part of the area has been made a wildlife sanctuary.
Drought in the 1970s led to a programme of building irrigation dams, which
the government has since pursued despite poor productivity and increasingly
alarming consequences downstream.
Mr Isa Mohammed, the present secretary of state for agriculture responsible
for water resources, declined to discuss the issue.
In the past 20 years the government has invested Dollars 3bn in schemes
which have impounded enough water to irrigate about half a million hectares
and yet only about 70,000 hectares are being irrigated - an overall cost of
Dollars 43,000 to irrigate each hectare. Yet scientists estimate that the
net annual benefits of land use in the natural wetlands are 12 times higher
than on the Kano river irrigation project upstream.
The governors of Yobe and Borno states are seeking an interview with the
president in Abuja to put the case for their region.
'The dam would be a disaster for Yobe and Borno,' according to an adviser to
the governor of Yobe state. 'Keffin Zaki dam would be shallow with a very
high evaporation rate. It is supposed to irrigate 85,000 hectares in Bauchi
state, but they do not need it and the downstream states do.'
The proposed dam would also cut the water supply to the arid zone of
neighbouring Niger along its south-eastern border and reduce the flow into
Lake Chad, which is already drying up fast as a result of dams built in
Cameroon and further south.
The contractors are mobilising on the dam site but construction has not yet
begun. Dr Muhtari Aminu-Kano, director of the Hadejia-Nguru Wetlands
Conservation Project, is working with the Nigeria Conservation Foundation
and other groups to change official policy and remains optimistic.
'But if adequate planning is not done and we do not keep the wetlands wet,
we will lose all the crops, livestock, fish and fuel-wood that have been
produced in this area and people will move en masse to the south. The
question we have to ask ourselves is: can this country cope with that kind
of dislocation?'
As part of its search for debt relief from official creditors, Nigeria has
been advised by the IMF to review projects which contribute little to the
nation's economic revival. The Keffin Zaki dam scheme is arguably a good
place to start.

The Financial Times


International Page 7

930526

