FT934-8693

FT  13 NOV 93 / Sport: The new boys prepare for the rough stuff - As the
Whitbread fleet sets sail for the roaring forties, Keith Wheatley looks at
the skippers / Sailing


   By KEITH WHEATLEY


SCIENTISTS who run tank-testing programmes to evaluate hull models for ships
and yachts have an expression for real life. They call it 'full-scale'. Nine
lightweight W60-class yachts in the Whitbread race today go 'full scale'
amid the ice and gales of the Southern Ocean on the 7,500 second leg from
Uruguay to Western Australia.
These water-ballasted sloops blast downwind at around 25 knots. As yet there
is no collective experience of how the boats will perform surfing down waves
the size of apartment blocks ahead of a 40mph wind for nearly a month. Chris
Dickson is one of the few people with a clear idea.
Dickson skippers Tokio, first leg winner from the W60 class. Earlier this
year the crew took Tokio deep south from their Auckland base into the world
of bergs and albatross. 'We had several days of 55 knots of breeze across
the deck. One of the guys had done three Whitbreads and said he had never
seen conditions like it,' said Dickson, at 32, arguably the world's top
sailor but taking part in his first round the world race.
'I surprised myself that I didn't mind the wet, cold and discomfort,' said
the Kiwi helmsman who is seen by some as the archetype of the 'attache-case
skipper'. This mythic figure moves airport-regatta-airport, in an aura of
detachment.
If anyone is seen as part of this breed it would be Britain's top sailor
Lawrie Smith. He was gazetted as the replacement skipper for the
pan-European W60 entry Intrum Justitia just a few days ago.
Like her original skipper, Intrum had a disappointing leg. Roger Nilson is
now in Stockholm recovering from a knee injury which obliged him to withdraw
from the race. Intrum finished in Punta del Este lying fifth in her class,
poor in relation to her known potential.
Nilson is a doctor by profession, rather than a full-time sailor. Nilson is
a Whitbread veteran, one of the old guard. He has completed four Whitbreads.
Smith, 36, is simply a flat-out racer he won five dinghy world championships
and skippered an America's Cup yacht by the age of 22. This is his second
Whitbread.
Smith's arrival to turn Intrum around is a measure of how this race has
changed. The 'hand, reef and steer' of the seamanship manuals has become
32,000 miles raced through appalling conditions virtually in sight of one's
opponents.
'It used to be 'safety first' and we'll worry about the opposition later,'
said Smith. 'Now it's 'Get the spinnaker up and to hell with the
consequences'.' He started this Whitbread in the radical maxi-ketch Fortuna,
but she withdrew after the giant mizzen gennaker ripped the aft mast out of
the yacht in a gale off Ushant - just two days out from Southampton.
Spinnakers and the size thereof has rather a heated subject on the dockside
at Punta. Three years ago race officials, anxious to protect the prestigious
80ft maxi class from the potential humiliation of a defeat by their new
little W60 sisters, took a policy decision: they would 'speed limit',
through technical regulation, the smaller yachts.
Angry W60 sailors refer to it as 'towing a bucket'. On this leg, for
instance, the W60s will be restricted to spinnakers half the size of the
masthead kites they used on Leg One. Safety is the ostensible reason but in
every previous race the decision over how much sail to carry safely has
rested with each skipper.
'We've thought about arguing it through but we're not so stupid as to fight
a losing battle,' said Dickson. 'If a W60 wins coming into Perth I expect
they'll invent new restrictions before we set off on the third leg. I am
quite bitter about it.'
Official plans to have a maxi as overall winner only just avoided Dickson
subversion on leg one. He finished just three hours behind Kiwi rival Grant
Dalton at the helm of the 84ft ketch New Zealand Endeavour. So keen is
Dalton to reduce weight aboard that the yacht's interior remains unpainted
in order to save 30kg or so. The black carbon fibre finish resembles a
minimalist Manhattan apartment - with about as much comfort.
Dickson's weight-saving campaign is aimed more at the crew. 'It's
democratic. Every one was given a choice whether they brought seaboots or
shoes,' explained the skipper. 'It was hard on Jacques Vincent who lost a
shoe over the side on Day Three but we lent him footwear when appropriate.'
Asked whether it was true that in a regime worthy of a U-boat commander,
Dickson had banned books aboard Tokio, the skipper replied: 'There are
several volumes. We're all now familiar with the water-maker manual and the
emergency signals at sea,' added the man who found Japanese humour much to
his taste during two years heading the Nippon America's Cup challenge.
Wild-eyed and elated after winning the Heineken trophy for the W60 class in
the first leg, Dickson stepped ashore and declared that on the evidence so
far, 'The Whitbread is three times more exciting than the America's Cup.'
'He only thinks that because he's never won the America's Cup,' growled his
old opponent Dennis Conner, skippering Winston which finished fourth into
Punta. 'Let's talk again in 32,000 miles time and see who looks bright?'

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931113

