FT934-10171

FT  06 NOV 93 / Markets: It's a bird] It's a plane] It's a chicken] - London


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


THE SKIES over the City were dark this week with the wings of chickens
coming home to roost. For months, the big question about European equity
markets has been how they would react to a rise in US long-term interest
rates.
Now we know the answer: badly. The yield on long-term US bonds rose from
just under 6 per cent a week ago to around 6 1/4 per cent by Friday. In
response, London's FT-SE 100 index dropped 2.7 per cent on the week, closing
at 3085.5, after falling 63.5 on Friday alone. Other European bourses did as
badly.
Why has a relatively small rise in interest rates on the other side of the
Atlantic translated into a drop in European equities? Probably because the
rise threatens the twin forces that lie behind the past year's global rally:
the belief that sustained low inflation opens the door to ever lower
interest rates; and the flood of US money out of savings accounts and into
mutual funds, particularly those investing abroad.
This gush of dollars has been the crucial extra fuel for the rally in
European and emerging stock markets. The fear this week was that it might
dry up, ending the phase when investors in European stock markets could put
their critical faculties on hold.
On the most bearish view - that of Panmure Gordon's Robin Aspinall - UK
stocks could retrace all the gains made since August 1992, which would take
the FT-SE 100 index back to around 2,270. He is pretty much on his own:
other brokers, pointing to the lack of big selling on Friday, see this
week's developments as a passing correction, not the start of a bear market.
Still, even if the roosting chickens do not plan to stay, their return was a
brisk reminder of how markets work.
Some of those chickens were frozen. Supermarket shares fell sharply on
Wednesday in reaction to price cuts by Sainsbury on 300 own-label products.
For months, investors have been worrying about the outlook for the food
retailers' traditionally sky-high margins in the face of consumer price
resistance, the emergence of discounters, and the growing saturation of the
UK market.
On Wednesday came Sainsbury's response: lower prices and a recognition that
the company's growth will increasingly have to come from outside its core UK
food business. Food retailing shares fell 3.6 per cent on Wednesday, with
Sainsbury down 15p at 385p.
The next day, the rot spread to the food manufacturers, after David
Sainsbury's pronouncement that prices of branded products would 'have to
come down very significantly to compete.'
He went on: 'We're clearly now back in a period when people are again
talking about discounting and price wars.'
These are some of the stock market's least favourite words. But they are
ones that investors will increasingly have to come to terms with, if the
Bank of England gets its way. Serious price competition seems to be one
factor the Bank is counting on to keep inflation low.
The Bank's quarterly inflation report, published on Tuesday, says 'there is
a slight possibility' that underlying inflation, currently 3.3 per cent,
will 'briefly' rise above the government's 1-4 per cent target range in the
first half of next year.
After that, however, the Bank expects inflation to fall, even though the
economy will be picking up. How will this unusual combination of events be
accomplished? Thanks to 'the continuing output gap, moderate growth of
nominal demand, and slow growth in broad money and credit'.
In practice, those factors will only be converted into lower inflation if
they lead to sustained and intense price competition. The signs here are
mixed. Three quarters of British companies responding to the CBI survey last
month said they expected their prices to stay the same over the next four
months.
But whenever companies do get a chance to raise prices, they jump at it. In
the export market, for example, devaluation has allowed UK companies to
raise their sterling prices while keeping their foreign currency prices
unchanged.
Though manufacturers' UK prices have risen by less than 3 per cent over the
past year, sterling prices for their non-EC exports have risen by more than
14 per cent. 'Both the speed and extent to which export prices have
responded are surprising,' says the Bank.
A sluggish UK recovery and growing competition among retailers may prevent
UK companies from doing at home what they have successfully achieved abroad
 -but it will certainly not stop them trying.
There were other roosting chickens in sight this week. The 1p a share bid
for Ferranti being mooted by GEC led to predictable unhappiness by small
shareholders. Normally, in such circumstances, disgruntled shareholders get
short shrift, but Ferranti's complex capital structure, with five classes of
shares, amplifies their chance of making their voices heard. Without a 90
per cent vote in favour in each of the four important classes, GEC will not
be able to force recalcitrant investors into surrendering their stock.
The week's largest and most unsavoury chicken was the fate of Queen's Moat
Houses, the hotel chain which announced late last week that it was restating
its 1991 and 1992 accounts. A fresh valuation of the property value of the
hotels put them at Pounds 861m, compared with the Pounds 1.35bn estimated by
a different firm of surveyors only four months before. This week's chickens
included an investigation by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
into just how this could happen; and the departure of those of Queen's
Moat's non-executive directors who had stayed on after the change of
management earlier in the year. None of this will help the group's luckless
shareholders: the shares remain suspended, since March, at 47 1/2 p.

The Financial Times


London Page II

931106

