FT932-3078

FT  16 JUN 93 / 'A degree of cautious optimism is fully justified'


Extract from the chancellor's speech:
I stand before you not as a Londoner: my whole life has been spent in the
industrial Midlands, where I have acquired a deep and abiding respect for
all those engaged in the difficult business of commerce.
I strongly believe that commerce is an important civilising influence. I
also believe that too many people in this country still tend to forget that
it is commerce alone which generates the prosperity which enables government
to raise the living standards and hopes of all of the British people.
That is the key principle which will guide my hand as chancellor.
When I am judged in due course as chancellor, I should like to be remembered
as a chancellor who helped British industry and British commerce through
another difficult period and again helped in my own small way to make a
difference to the wealth-creating capacity of the nation. Or perhaps, more
simply, as a chancellor under whom the British businessman and woman and
their workforce were able to earn a better living.
As I see it, the objectives of economic policy over the period ahead are
threefold:
To keep inflation within the established target range of 1 to 4 per cent,
bringing it within the lower half of that range by the end of this
parliament.
To restore the public finances to better health and back towards balance
over the medium term.
To sustain the recovery and ensure that it is a durable one.
Those aims are complementary. We will not achieve sustainable growth and
steady recovery unless we maintain low inflation. And we cannot have a
healthy economy without healthy public finances.
I do not underestimate the task. Designing policy to deliver all three
objectives will be a formidable undertaking. But in some ways I face a
better combination of circumstances than perhaps any other finance minister
in the European Community.
A degree of cautious optimism is far from foolhardy - it is fully justified.
Above all, it is justified because of the dramatic progress we have made in
getting inflation down. My commitment to maintaining that low inflation is
second to none. And my political instincts reinforce my political duty.
I have the good fortune to have inherited a position in which inflation is
at a 30-year low. As a result, we have been able safely to reduce interest
rates to their lowest level for 15 years. I am not going to squander that
inheritance by embarking on policies which allow inflation to return.
But low inflation cannot be the sole end of economic policy. It is necessary
 -absolutely necessary - but on its own, low inflation is not enough.
Growth, employment and a better standard of living are the ultimate goals to
which every aspect of economic policy must contribute.
We politicians spell out our objectives to create a vision. The more
difficult question is how the government can best contribute to its
attainment.
Let me start with monetary policy. It is still less than a year since
sterling's membership of the ERM was suspended and a new monetary framework
was put in place. That is a very short time in the annals of monetary
history.
But one thing is already clear. The conduct of monetary policy outside a
fixed exchange rate system is very much an art, not a science. As in other
countries, including the US and Germany, discretion and judgment are
unavoidable features of policymaking.
As always, there are some who want us to name the indicator which we regard
most highly, and for movements in that lodestone to be followed
automatically by a change in the stance of policy.
I do not believe that life can ever be so simple. Since it is not, I shall
continue to follow a policy of paying regard to a range of indicators,
including the growth of both narrow and broad money in relation to their
ranges, the signals coming from movements in asset prices, and the behaviour
of the exchange rate.
As long as we remain outside the ERM - and I do not expect that the
circumstances in which we might return will apply for quite some time - it
will be essential to review, on a consistent basis, month by month, the full
range of evidence available.
The issue of an independent central bank has important parliamentary
implications and will no doubt now be the subject of more parliamentary and
other debate. I have no intention of rushing into or anticipating that
debate.
But I can say that all my decisions on monetary policy, their nature and
their timing, will be based on objective economic judgments and will be
firmly guided by the best advice I can obtain.
The thriving, growing, competing economy I want to see also depends
crucially on our ability to reduce borrowing and restore sound public
finances. No Conservative chancellor can accept for long the need to borrow
Pounds lbn a week to finance the deficit.
Debt is debt, whether the result of the recession or not. And all debt has
to be serviced. In the space of four years, government debt interest
payments are expected to rise by over Pounds 10bn - that is an extra Pounds
10bn that cannot be spent by the government on schools, on hospitals, on
training or on science.
The fact is that the recession does not account for all the deterioration in
the public finances. And I have made it clear in everything I have said
since I took office that we cannot rely on recovery alone to bring borrowing
back towards balance.
No prudent chancellor can ever regard taxation as something which can only
ever be reduced. My own instincts are tax-cutting instincts, but if we are
to keep the level of taxation down, it is essential to maintain a tight rein
on public spending.
The government has already announced measures to reduce the deficit - by
controlling spending and increasing revenue - but if I judge that further
action is necessary, I shall not hesitate to take it.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930616

