FT932-13345

FT  23 APR 93 / International Company News: Trelleborg denies financial
difficulties


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   STOCKHOLM


SHARES in Trelleborg, the Swedish mining and industrial group, fell sharply
yesterday for the second day in succession as investors reacted to reports,
strongly denied by the company, that it was facing acute financial
difficulties.
Trelleborg 'B' stock, the most traded shares, fell by SKr4 over the day to
close at SKr49.50, having at one point dipped to SKr47.50. The shares have
lost more than 12 per cent of their value since Tuesday, when the B stock
closed at Skr56.50.
Trelleborg issued a strongly-worded denial of a front page story in
yesterday's Svenska Dagbladet newspaper which alleged that it was
negotiating with its bankers, including Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken, over
its debts following problems meeting its interest payments.
The company, which is struggling to recover from heavy losses in 1992,
described the report, and similar rumours in the stock market, as a lie. 'We
have not been in any discussions with our banks about our loans or their
terms,' a spokesman said.
Trelleborg was hit hard last year by recession in its domestic and
international markets, falling metal prices and a foreign currency loss of
SKr765m as a result of the devaluation of the Swedish krona. It scrapped its
1992 dividend after reporting a SKr1.6bn (Dollars 215m) loss after financial
items.
Yesterday, it blamed speculators for manipulating its stock price to make
gains on options due for redemption in June. It said it had several times
been the victim of similar speculative dips in its share price in recent
months. In February, it weathered a wave of rumours ranging from reports
that it had exhausted its capital to speculation that Mr Kjell Nilsson,
chief executive, was ill.
But analysts said investors were not convinced that the latest reports were
baseless and were worried that Trelleborg had cash-flow problems that were
prompting concern by the banks. One said Trelleborg shares were not yet on a
crisis valuation. 'If there really is a problem, there is more downside to
come,' said one.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930423

