FT931-4084

FT  12 MAR 93 / Rail link to Heathrow poised for go-ahead


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


BRITISH RAIL and BAA, the privatised airports operator, are poised to
announce a go-ahead for the delayed plans to build a Pounds 300m express
rail link between Paddington in London and Heathrow airport.
The line, due to open in 1996, will cut existing journey times between
central London and Heathrow from an hour or more to 16 minutes. The one-way
fare is likely to be about Pounds 7 at today's prices.
It is understood that Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, wishes to refer to
the scheme in his Budget next week.
BR and BAA have resolved their long-standing differences over the funding of
the line and have signed an outline agreement which now has to be ratified
by the Treasury before an announcement can be made.
Approval is likely to be just a formality because the government is keen to
hold up a successful example of how the public and private sectors can work
together in financing trans-port infrastructure projects.
The go-ahead will be particularly warmly welcomed by Mr John MacGregor,
transport secretary, who needs some positive news to counter gloom over
delays to the Jubilee Line extension to Docklands in London and controversy
over the privatisation of BR.
Under the plans, the Heathrow Express will run for three quarters of the
16-mile journey on existing BR lines from Paddington. A private-sector
consortium led by BAA will build and operate a spur taking the trains from
BR's tracks to the airport.
Late last year the plans had looked on the brink of collapse because of a
bitter dispute between BR and BAA over how the line was to be financed.
BAA said BR was demanding too much money for the use of its tracks, while BR
said BAA was trying to skimp on its contribution to the project.
A compromise is understood to have emerged after intervention by Mr
MacGregor who called a meeting with Sir Bob Reid, BR chairman, and Sir John
Egan, BAA's chief executive.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930312

