FT934-8786

FT  13 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Egit threat to undo two investment deals


   By PETER PEARSE and QUENTIN PEEL


   LONDON, BONN


THE EAST German Investment Trust yesterday threatened to undo two investment
deals it had struck in the privatisation of two former east German
companies.
Responding to reports in the German media that the Treuhandanstalt agency
had suffered damages of DM100m (Pounds 40.6m) in the privatisation of
Markische Baustoff-Service (MBS) and Haushaltgerateservice (HGS), Egit said
it would take the action 'in order to avoid even the appearance of unlawful
enrichment on the part of the company'.
Egit said it would offer to sell MBS back to Treuhand for the full purchase
price, and that it would seek refund on its down-payment on HGS.
The current investigation by judicial authorities in Berlin into certain
Treuhand employees, past and present, led to reports in the media about the
activities of Egit, Ermgassen & Co, its investment manager, and Dr Olav
Ermgassen, a director.
Acknowledging that Egit's statement could be seen as an over-reaction, Mr
Ermgassen said: 'We cannot be pulled through the dirt. The press rumours are
bad news for a company with blue-chip investors and worse bad news for those
companies in which we invest.'
The Treuhand agency in Berlin yesterday insisted that it was satisfied with
the Egit's performance in all the 22 east German companies in which it has
direct or indirect participation.
'Up to now all the contractual obligations (of Egit) have been maintained as
far as purchase prices, investments and jobs are concerned,' the Treuhand
said in a statement. More than 6,500 workers are employed in the companies
in which Egit has an interest, and the contracts provide for an investment
of DM480m in the coming years.
Mr Wolf Schode, representing Treuhand, said he was 'astonished' at the Egit
move, because the company had only two days ago requested an extension of
the Treuhand guarantee covering borrowing by MBS and HGS until the end of
the year.
The investigators confirmed that 51 premises were raided last Tuesday in the
investigation against the former Treuhand employees, who are accused of
profiting illegally from the sale of various companies and properties.
The Berlin judicial authorities said nobody at Egit itself was involved.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931113

