FT933-10025

FT  06 AUG 93 / Data protection scope widened


   By RACHEL JOHNSON


BUSINESS-to-business mailing lists are covered by the Data Protection Act,
the data protection registrar ruled yesterday.
Mailing lists increasingly contained personal data and were vulnerable to
abuse, said Mr Eric Howe, the registrar, who is seeking stronger safeguards
against the 'black market' in personal data.
Mr John Lamidey, assistant data protection registrar, said: 'The direct
marketing industry has sometimes felt that the act does not affect
business-to-business lists because they do not contain personal data.'
He said this argument was no longer tenable as business-to-business direct
marketing became more sophisticated and personalised and the volume of
direct mail rose from 251m items in 1980 to 610m last year.
The new guidance is aimed at ensuring that marketing organisations using
business-to-business lists obtain and process personal data 'fairly and
lawfully'. Such lists are compiled by brokers for companies seeking new
customers to target for products.
When personal data on such lists are processed with reference to the person
concerned - rather than the company or job the person holds - the data comes
within the scope of the act, the registrar said.
'For example, John Smith, finance manager of The Widget Production Company,
identifies a particular individual. If that data is then processed so as to
produce information about 'John Smith' rather than 'the finance manager'
then it is processed by reference to the data subject and comes within the
scope of the act.'
This means that the individuals concerned must be told at the time data is
collected who the data user is, what are the uses to which the data may be
put and to whom the data may be disclosed.
Mr David Clark, of Ibis Information Services, a broker which compiles lists,
said the guidance would not constrain Ibis's business because it mostly
processed data 'by reference to some characteristic of the company rather
than the individual'. The company is registered under the Data Protection
Act.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930806

