FT933-12561

FT  23 JUL 93 / Arts: Rising to a challenge - Music


   By MAX LOPPERT


The newest project on the London South Bank, which all this week fills the
Queen Elizabeth Hall and Purcell Room, will surely raise the spirits of
people unafraid of challenge in artistic experience. It is a summer festival
of modern arts, dominantly musical but with representation of dance and
film, and piloted by an artistic director who is him- (or, as may be, her-)
self an important creative force in those modern arts.
The series is planned as an annual event, with each time a different
director: this year the composer George Benjamin as programme-inspirer, next
year the composer Louis Andriessen. The umbrella title may rather be arty:
Meltdown, described in the advert-speak of the (cumbersome, ill-designed and
hard-to-read) programme as 'the white heat of creativity unleashed upon the
atmosphere - the fusion of art worlds into something new and totally
different'.
However, the chance to engage through this format with the mind, the tastes
and, indeed, the music of someone as profusely gifted, youthfully
stimulating and ebulliently communicative as Benjamin seems to me just about
irresistible - as the first musical item on the week's schedule proved.
This was a concert by the London Philharmonic in the QEH, proceeded by a
platform interview with Benjamin, and concluded with the first performance
of a new Benjamin work, Sudden Time.
The programme was itself a shapely, coherent entity which placed the new
work alongside pieces by Benjamin's two teachers - Messiaen (the London
premiere of the exquisite 1991 miniature Un Sourire) and Alexander Goehr
(the trenchant, subtle, substantial variations-set Metamorphosis/Dance, of
which the LPO gave the first performance 19 years ago).
Sudden Time, as Andrew Clements reported on this page last Saturday, marks
Benjamin's release into new creativity after a period of drought. Its
central examination - which the composer elucidated both in interview and in
a brief start-of-concert illustrated talk - is the difference between clock
time and psychological time. Across the work's short but abundantly filled
span, phrases of evenly pulsed shape are dispersed and then retrieved in
various parts of the large orchestra, while elsewhere contrasting and
sometimes contradictory activities are set up.
Sometimes conflict flares up, sometimes periods of near-stasis take hold,
but the sense of bubbling exploratory vigour remains potent throughout. In
testing out this notion of (to put it crudely) freedom versus rigid order,
Benjamin appears to have released in himself a flood of generous,
free-spirited invention.
The fast-moving linear patterns out of which the music is predominantly made
create a musical environment that, in its seductive harmonic ambiguities and
sound combinations, seems to bear a distinctly French-leaning aspect, to
look back affectionately and fastidiously on some of the key Diaghilev
ballet-scores - Firebird, Jeux, Daphnis. The scoring is complex, with
fascinating trouvailles (such as the brief consort of four alto flutes
topped by two tiny, high recorders) yet wholly unwasteful; a gently
unfolding viola line at the close suggests a prospect of reconciliation.
Any new initiative begins well that has so remarkable and exhilarating a new
work as its first offering. Benjamin himself conducted it with energy and
precision; the only cloud on the evening was the dull, colour-draining
time-beating of Franz Welser-Most in the Goehr and Messiaen.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930723

