FT934-10045

FT  08 NOV 93 / National Insurance shake-up urged


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


FAR-REACHING reforms to the national insurance system could be recommended
by the Commission on Social Justice set up to advise the Labour party on the
future of Britain's welfare state.
The commission says in a report published today that the present system is
failing to offer comprehensive social insurance to protect people in hard
times.
Only 30 per cent of the unemployed receive unemployment benefit, while fewer
than one in three retired women qualify for the full national insurance
pension based on their own contributions.
Ms Fran Bennett, the report's author and former director of the Child
Poverty Action Group, says entitlement to these benefits largely depends on
national insurance contributions paid on earnings. Contributory benefits
have less stigma than means-tested ones and are less intrusive.
But they fail to cover many people outside the labour market such as lone
parents and the disabled. They have also been reduced in value over the
years, with the removal of earnings-related supplements.
The contributory principle may be less relevant in the modern world, the
report says. Contributions based on full-time employment patterns do not fit
the needs of a workforce which is working more flexibly. Equally, the
boundary between employment and unemployment - when benefit will be paid -
is less clear.
Increasingly the unemployed, sick and elderly must rely on means-tested
income support if they have no other source of income. And new
non-contributory benefits have been introduced for children and the
disabled.
The report outlines five options, from abolition of the contributory system
to restoring the value of contributory benefits so that they provide
adequate replacement income in times of need.
Sir Gordon Borrie, chairman of the commission, said that the commission
would be designing a welfare system which provides security for people in
the next century. 'The status quo is not an option,' he added. 'Either we
reform social insurance or abolish it.'
Social Insurance: Reform or Abolition? Commission on Social Justice, 30
Southampton St, London WC2E 7RA. Pounds 2.95.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931108

