FT934-8835

FT  13 NOV 93 / Industry leads improvement in trade


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Correspondent


THE VALUE of exports hit a record in August while import growth has
flattened, with a particularly good trade performance by manufacturers.
The deficit with the rest of the world on all merchandise goods - the
visible trade deficit - came out in August at Pounds 419m, the lowest
monthly total for 6 1/2 years.
In August the trade deficit on manufacturered goods was Pounds 26m, the
lowest figure since July 1991 when there was a small surplus.
Excluding oil and erratic, high-price items such as ships, gems and
aircraft, export volumes grew 2.5 per cent in the three months to August
compared with the previous three months. In the same period the equivalent
measure of import volumes was flat.
In the year to the June-to-August period export volumes excluding oil and
erratics rose 3.5 per cent. The corresponding measure of import volumes grew
just 0.5 per cent.
The seasonally-adjusted figures from the Central Statistical Office result
from large revisions to data now thought to be flawed due to problems with
the new Intrastat system.
Instrastat was introduced in January to provide a new way of gathering trade
data within the European Union after the abolition of EU customs barriers.
It is based on collecting statistics from individual exporters and importers
rather than customs staff.
In August the value of exports came to Pounds 10.39bn, 5 per cent higher
than the Pounds 9.91bn in July. Imports fell 1.5 per cent to Pounds 10.81bn
from Pounds 10.98bn.
Between June and August the deficit was Pounds 2.41bn, after Pounds 3.04bn
in the three months to July. The last time the trade deficit for a full
quarter was lower was in the second three- monthly period of 1991 when it
was Pounds 2.02bn.
The deficit with non-EU nations in August was Pounds 729m, after Pounds 744m
in July, while August saw a surplus of Pounds 310m on trade with the rest of
the EU. The CSO said this last figure was the biggest monthly number 'since
about 1980'.
On manufactured goods, the deficit in the first eight months of the year was
Pounds 3.9bn, after Pounds 7.3bn in the whole of last year and Pounds 3.6bn
the year before.
The revisions to earlier data by a six-strong team of CSO officials centred
on altering the system of seasonally adjusting the figures from Instrastat.
The office also revised downwards its earlier figures for price increases
for both exports and imports, covering 10,000 classes of products. The CSO
believes prices of exports excluding oil and erratics rose 10 per cent in
the year to the last three-month period, while import prices on the same
basis rose 11 per cent. Prior to the revisions the office had believed
prices were rising faster, especially for exports, and had a correspondingly
lower figure for volume growth.
In the three months to August values of exports excluding oil and erratics
rose 2 per cent on the preceding three months and 14 per cent on the same
period 12 months previously. Equivalent imports rose 11 per cent and zero
respectively.
In the June-to-August period exports of finished goods rose 3 per cent
compared with the previous three months, and 17 per cent on a year
previously. Imports of similar products fell 1.5 per cent between the two
periods and rose 13 per cent over the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931113

