FT933-5239

FT  04 SEP 93 / Brown attacks tax relief for share options


   By DAVID OWEN


THE GOVERNMENT should abolish tax relief on executive share options, Mr
Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, said yesterday, launching a fresh
Labour assault on boardroom perks and remuneration.
Speaking just three days after Mr Norman Lamont, the former chancellor,
rejoined NM Rothschild & Sons, the merchant bank, as a non-executive
director, Mr Brown also called for a 'decent interval' to elapse before
former cabinet ministers were allowed to accept private-sector
directorships.
Mr Brown said ministers had not spoken out against boardroom 'excesses'
because so many former members of cabinet were themselves among the
beneficiaries.
'This new and cosy City cabinet - many privatising industries or awarding
privatisation contracts from the cabinet room one day and then involved in
running them from the boardroom a little later - cannot command confidence
or credibility,' he said.
Former ministers singled out by Mr Brown for 'walking straight from the
cabinet room into the boardroom' included: Lord Tebbit, the former trade and
industry secretary; Lord Walker, the former energy secretary; Lord Lawson,
the former chancellor; and Sir Norman Fowler, the former transport
secretary.
Earlier this week it was announced that Sir Norman, now Tory party chairman,
was to resign as non-executive director of Group 4 Securitas, the
international group of security businesses, from next month.
Group 4 - and Sir Norman's involvement with the company - hit the headlines
in April when four men escaped or were wrongly released within days of Group
4 starting work as the first private-sector company to run services
escorting prisoners between prisons and courts.
The company, which won the contract to run the Wolds remand prison on
Humberside, is likely to be among the bidders for new business arising from
the government's decision to contract out the management of a further 10
prisons to the private sector.
Referring to a Labour survey of directors' pay increases, Mr Brown said
boardroom remuneration in leading companies had gone up by 90 per cent more
than average wages in the last five years.
Speaking in Wolverhampton, he highlighted share options held by senior
executives in the electricity industry which he said could yield a 'Pounds
45m handout'.
Tax relief on executive share options was likely to cost the exchequer about
Pounds 250m over the next five years, he predicted.
Mr Brown added: 'But, more than legislation, it will require the pressure of
public opinion that values fairness and dislikes unfairness that will
eventually tame these boardroom excesses.'
Few prizes, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930904

