FT933-5129

FT  04 SEP 93 / Books: Thrills at turn of leaf


   By JDF JONES


MISS SMILLA'S FEELING FOR SNOW by Peter Hoeg Harvill Pounds 15.99/Pounds
9.99, 410 pages
WHITE BUTTERFLY by Walter Mosley Serpent's Tail Pounds 7.99, 272 pages
SPY'S HONOUR by Gavin Lyall Hodder & Stoughton Pounds 15.99, 383 pages
DECIDER by Dick Francis Michael Joseph Pounds 14.99, 278 pages
IT'S GOING to be a wonderful autumn for thrillers. Pile the logs on the
fire, take down the whisky bottle, and send the wife to bed. (Correction
where need be: send the husband to bed ..)
Miss Smilla's Feeling For Snow is a remarkable and not-to-be-missed
demonstration of the potential power of this genre. It's a novel, of course,
not a 'thriller' - but that has to be said of all good thrillers, because
the word, so inappropriate to the boring bulk of them, devalues the
exceptions.
Peter Hoeg is a young Danish writer and he has imagined the most fascinating
protagonist - a 37-year-old half-Eskimo woman, living alone in Copenhagen,
who realises, thanks to her 'feeling for snow', that there is something
wrong about a Greenlander child's apparently accidental death.
Miss Smilla pursues the mystery with the passion of the outsider and the
expertise of her northern upbringing, loving the snow and understanding it
as 'a symbol of the light of truth'. The finely detailed descriptions of her
investigation, which takes her deep into the Arctic, triumphantly creates a
world that is new to us, shocking, moving. The first half of the tale, set
in Copenhagen in winter, can scarcely be faulted: the second half, involving
a buried meteorite, Lovelock's Gaia Hypothesis, Nazi expeditions, parasitic
tapeworms, becomes more conventional, over-extended, a bit of a
disappointment. But Miss Smilla is a character you never met before.
I spotted Walter Mosley's first - Devil in a Blue Dress - on these pages a
couple of years ago and I insist again that he's a big talent. Here, after A
Red Death (just out in Pan) is the third of his chronological sequence of
the adventures of Easy Rawlins, the black private eye in post-war Los
Angeles, who operates in mean streets where not even Philip Marlowe dared to
go.
Raymond Chandler, you remember, wrote in a famous essay about those same
streets that his hero would have to be 'the best man in the world'. (Note
what must have been a deliberate reference in John le Carre's latest
best-seller to his villain being 'the worst man in the world'.) Easy Rawlins
is a splendid, lazy, cowardly, trouble-evading black man who loves children
and booze and is amassing a secret fortune in real estate, and yet he is
unmistakeably a moral figure -you can believe that he actually is 'the best
man in the world'.
Here, in White Butterfly, Easy has reached 1956 in Watts and is dragged in
to help track down a serial killer. His best friend is still the villainous
Moose, and Easy is still a family man, tending his garden, but this time
he's a bit too deep into the bottle and his marriage is on the skids, so
it's a darker story than before.
Years ago Gavin Lyall wrote superior, laconic thrillers about battered
freelance pilots flying battered small planes out of remote and battered
airstrips. He then got into a conventional Whitehall/spook series about a
not-very-interesting Major Maxim. His new idea, in Spy's Honour, is to go
back to the earliest days of the Secret Service, before the First War. This
1913 yarn of bumbling amateur spies in a pre-Sarajevo drama deserves to work
better. My notes read, in order -'Promising' - 'Preposterous' - 'Too long' -
'Confusing' - 'Boring' ..
There is nothing either helpful or positive to be said about the new Dick
Francis. Decider is his thirtysomethingth racing thriller, though this time
it doesn't have much about horses. The subject is a family drama about
ownership of a racecourse. The prose is as clumsy as ever, the characters as
stereotyped. His fans will not object.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

930904

