FT932-6560

FT  27 MAY 93 / London Stock Exchange: Equity gains extended in steady trade


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


A GOOD response to yest-erday's Pounds 3bn auction of government bonds
helped UK equities extend this week's recovery, although trading volume
remained unexciting. Once again, it was left to a handful of selected stocks
to provide the features as well as the backbone of the FT-SE 100 Index. A
batch of large deals after the official close featured a 9 per cent stake in
Trade Indemnity, the corporate insurer, sold at 47p a share, and also 5.8m
shares in British Gas and large blocks of Prudential, Guardian Royal
Exchange and GEC.
The early part of the session saw share prices moving narrowly, often
responding to stock index futures. Equities turned firmer when the outcome
of the gilt-edged auction was disclosed, although they waited for a clear
lead from bond prices before edging higher. A further boost came when New
York opened firmly, moving further above a testing level.
The stock market closed at the day's best, with the final reading of 2,846.9
on the FT-SE 100 leaving a gain of 9.2. While there was no rush of buying,
Seaq volume increased in the final hour to record a daily total of 626.8m
shares; Tuesday's 591.2m was worth Pounds 1.29bn in retail business.
Second line issues followed slowly in the wake of the blue chips. At the
close, the FT-SE Mid 250 Index was 2.8 ahead at a new peak of 3,175.5.
Non-Footsie business made up around 53 per cent of the day's Seaq turnover.
The success of the gilt-edged auction and firmness in sterling revived some
of the more optimistic hopes for a reduction in UK base rates, in spite of
yesterday's absence of change in German repurchase rates. But few UK market
strategists expect a rate cut within six weeks or so; any hopes for an
earlier cut are 'thinly based', commented Mr Richard Kersley at BZW, who
sees little economic evidence to support them.
Attention was also paid in the market to growing hints that Mr John Major
plans to reshuffle the members of his government, perhaps this weekend.
Overall, however, strategists found little reason yesterday to reformulate
their views on the outlook for UK equities. There was some relief that the
gilts auction was now out of the way in a stock market where lack of
institutional liquidity has become a significant problem. Rights issues now
total around Pounds 5.5bn this year.
The Footsie is still rooted firmly in the middle of its trading range, with
little indication yet that confidence in economic recovery has become strong
enough to call for a rerating of equities. However, the lower end of the
range, at around Footsie 2,790, is now seen as a more reliable basis for the
market rebound when it comes.
The gloom overhanging the brewery sector deepened after the annual meeting
of shareholders at Guinness disappointed traders. Store and consumer stocks
tried to edge ahead at the close.
The Footsie was helped by firmness in the oil sector as both blue chips and
second line energy shares benefited from a series of largely unrelated
corporate developments. The banking and property sectors appeared to brush
off the misfortunes of Speyhawk, the City of London developer which went
into receivership this week.

The Financial Times


London Page 50

930527

