FT933-12576

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (8): A growth
track - but from 1994 - The Netherlands


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


THE DUTCH construction industry is poised for a return to growth in 1994,
boosted by the prospects of several big public sector infrastructural
projects, particularly in railway construction.
Overall, production in the construction sector showed a further 1 per cent
decline in 1992 and is projected to fall by more than 3 per cent this year
as worries about the likelihood of recession lead many companies to put off
investment.
But recovery seems set to take hold, albeit cautiously, next year, helped
both by expectations of higher economic growth for the Netherlands as a
whole as well as by the government's aim to improve the country's
infrastructure.
However, the Netherlands' three biggest construction companies - Hollandsche
Beton Groep, Volker Stevin and Boskalis - are so international in
orientation that their fortunes will also depend crucially on the state of
the construction market in other countries including Britain, which appears
to be climbing out of recession, and Germany, which is still in the grips of
economic malaise.
HBG and Boskalis will also be affected by the outlook for the global
dredging sector, where overcapacity appears to be waning and prices are
firming.
Last year, this international outlook meant that all three construction
groups posted higher profits, despite the continued weakness of the domestic
market.
The Dutch government's plans to invest more heavily in infrastructural
projects over the rest of the 1990s look likely to help not only the entire
sector but also those companies which specialise in railway construction.
Although new procurement rules in Europe mean that some of this work will go
to competitors in other companies, Dutch construction firms are expected to
benefit most from the orders in the pipeline.
The biggest but also the most controversial project is the proposed
construction of an all-freight railway line linking the port of Rotterdam to
the German border. The Fl 6.2bn (Dollars 3.3bn) 'Betuwe Line', named after
the fruit-growing region through which it will pass, is designed to enable
Rotterdam, the world's largest port, to retain its traditional role as a
conduit for goods passing to and from Germany's industrial Ruhr area to the
sea. Con- struction is set to begin in the mid-1990s, with the railway
itself due to open in the year 2000.
However, a vociferous 'Not In My Backyard' campaign by local residents could
force the government to search again for new ways of keeping disruption and
nuisance to a minimum. One proposal, vigorously opposed so far by the
government, is to put the entire 72-mile railway line under ground. This
would inevitably push up costs, but the additional work would be welcomed by
the Dutch construction industry.
A second railway project is the planned construction of the high-speed TGV
train link between Brussels and Amsterdam as part of a wider effort to
connect the capital cities of north-west Europe. Work on widening train
stations and putting down new tracks has already begun, but controversy
still surrounds the exact choice of route south of Amsterdam and Amsterdam's
Schiphol Airport. Opposition by environmentalists to the TGV passing through
a nature reserve is not expected to lead to any major delays in
construction.
Besides these big projects, the public sector is also expected to pour more
money into new ministry buildings, schools and hospitals as well as into
roads and tunnels, some of which will be partly funded by the private
sector.
A major project aimed at doubling the size of Schiphol Airport by the first
decade of the next century is already under way, providing additional
support to companies operating in the public sector and generating related
orders in road and tunnel building.
These public projects in the non-residential market will buoy the sector in
1994 as private sector investments in office buildings and industrial sites
slowly begin to revive, supplying a second motor for the industry's growth.
Residential construction - which has been virtually flat in the past couple
of years, with a projected drop in 1993 likely to cancel out 1992's small
rise - is not expected to play a big role in the recovery, at least not in
comparison with the stimulus provided by infrastructural projects.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930723

