FT934-8507

FT  15 NOV 93 / Risk and Reward: Study says consumers could benefit from use
of derivatives


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


DERIVATIVE instruments are still an unfamiliar concept to most ordinary
consumers in the UK. But the growth of the wholesale derivative markets in
recent years has had a considerable, if indirect, impact on the retail
market.
The most obvious development for UK consumers has been the ready supply of
fixed-rate mortgages at a time of low interest rates. By using the options
market, mortgage lenders have been able to offer mortgage holders the chance
to lock in lower interest rates and fix their expenditure over a period of
several years, without themselves taking on exposure to fluctuations in
interest rates.
But are consumers really getting a good deal? Mr Andrew Dobson, an
independent consultant and former investment banker, thinks not. In a study
called Derivatives for the Retail Client, published by the Centre for the
Study of Financial Innovation, an independent think-tank, he argues that
derivative instruments should play a greater role in reducing risk in the
retail market.
In the case of fixed-rate mortgages, for example, terms are not favourable:
the fixing tends to be of short duration, and with high penalties for
cancellation. Further, the consumer can only purchase the fixed-rate
mortgage from the existing mortgage provider.
Consumers, especially in the UK, have learnt the risks of mortgage debt the
hard way: many saw interest rates rise steeply at the end of the 1980s while
the value of their properties dipped.
While the advent of partial fixing is an improvement, Mr Dobson advocates
something more radical: that consumers should enter into two transactions, a
loan and a hedge against changes in interest rates, which they could shop
around for, and which could be refinanced or adjusted independently. He
believes it would be more efficient to 'separate funding from interest rate
management', as is done in the capital markets.
Further, he suggests the creation of a financing instrument or futures
contract based on an index of house prices, which would enable homeowners to
protect themselves against house price movements. Such an instrument, he
said, would also interest expatriates temporarily out of the housing market
or people saving to buy houses.
Mr Dobson also suggests that derivatives have applications in the field of
personal pensions, given the current trend away from salary-based company
pensions towards personal pensions. There is a shift of risk away from the
company towards the individual, yet, Mr Dobson notes, the individual does
not have access to derivative products to help manage those new risks.
Another potential application put forward by Mr Dobson is the hedging of
consumers' commodity-type expenditure, such as electricity, gas and
telephone bills.
He points out that while those in employment have a natural hedge in the
form of income likely to respond to inflation, those with fixed incomes may
wish to hedge these expense streams. Such a product could take the form of a
price guarantee instrument, which did not require full payment up-front, or
fully prefunded energy units.
So why, given that the technology already exists, has a retail market for
derivatives not yet developed? According to Mr Dobson, one reason is that
the wholesale markets, where derivative instruments are developed, are
isolated from the retail side of the business.
More fundamental is the fear that the risks involved in derivatives could
lead to large-scale losses for consumers, possibly because they have been
sold the wrong products.
However, Mr Dobson argues that 'the techniques and equipment already exist
to make such trades no harder to negotiate and record, and no more dangerous
to the client, than traditional lending or deposit-taking transactions'.
But given the fears of regulators about the risks involved in derivatives in
the wholesale market, it is hard to imagine them embracing the notion of
placing these complex and potentially dangerous instruments in the hands of
consumers.
Derivatives for the Retail Client; Centre for the Study of Financial
Innovation, 18 Curzon Street, London W1Y7AD; Tel 071-493 0190

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931115

