FT933-9955

FT  06 AUG 93 / Bulls on bonds get set for another charge: Tracy Corrigan
and Sara Webb on a surging market


   By TRACY CORRIGAN and SARA WEBB


The bull market in European bonds, which began back in 1990, has been given
a fresh lease of life by the shake-up of the exchange rate mechanism last
weekend.
This year's sharp decline in yields - already ahead of forecasts - had
convinced many experts that the rally was nearing an end.
But, even before the ERM crisis, it was becoming apparent that European
interest rates needed to fall substantially to give foundering economies a
chance to recover, especially as most countries had low inflation.
The initial conclusion of this week's reassessment seems to be that, far
from petering out in the third quarter, the bull market in European bonds is
set fair for another year.
'People are progressively revising down their interest rate targets and that
process is likely to continue,' said Mr Phillip Saunders, fixed interest
investment director at Guinness Flight.
The markets which are set to benefit most from the slackening of ERM
strictures are the higher yielding ones, such as Spain and Italy, since
their interest rates have the furthest to fall.
'We've taken our 12-month forecast for 10-year Italian government bond
yields (currently 9.2 per cent) down to 8 per cent,' said Mr Michael Burke,
an economist at Citibank. 'We had pencilled in a target of 8 3/4 per cent,
which was already way below the consensus in the market.'
There may be lessons to draw from the persistent bull market in US bonds,
which has also defied analysts' expectations. 'US bond yields are still
falling, 10 quarters into a recovery, and conditions here (in Europe) are
going to be rougher if anything,' Mr Saunders observed.
In Europe, it seems that continental governments are unlikely to follow the
pattern set by the UK, where rates were cut rapidly following sterling's
departure from the ERM last September.
'It is very noticeable that there has been no stampede to cut interest rates
dramatically,' said Mr Roger Gray, head of fixed interest and currency at
Rothschild Asset Management.
A gradual easing of rates is less likely to increase inflationary pressures.
Furthermore, the UK experience of devaluation - higher import prices have
been absorbed without boosting inflation - has helped to calm nerves.
'We are in an era of disinflation - it might be too early to say deflation,'
says Mr Michael Burke, an economist at Citibank, who points out that the
latest economic data shows that prices are falling in the UK, France,
Ireland and Scandinavia.
The effect is that the outlook for longer-dated bonds appears increasingly
positive. Although short-term rates will fall more sharply than long-term
rates, longer-dated bonds will still benefit from any rally.
Consensus is also growing that real interest rates will have to fall. So
far, real yields on bonds have fallen less than nominal yields. While
inflation has declined, official interest rates have been held up to support
currencies. Mr Paul Abberley, head of fixed income at Lombard Odier, expects
real yields to fall substantially 'for real recovery to take place'.
In a floating exchange rate environment, investors are likely to change
their emphasis from nominal yields to real yields.
'In the old ERM grid, nominal yields tended to converge but in the new
set-up there will be something more akin to real yield convergence,'
according to Mr Jeremy Hale, European economist at Goldman Sachs.
Fund managers are either remaining heavily invested in Europe, or increasing
their exposure. Some traders reported heavy flows into gilts and
Euro-sterling bonds this week from US fund managers, who are not frequent
buyers in the gilts market.
Evidence that fund managers are preparing for a further ally in European
bonds is provided by their heavy weighting in these markets. Allocation
based on the JP Morgan government bond index is around 35 per cent, but most
fund managers are overweight in Europe - one London-based manager said he
had 85 per cent of assets invested in European bonds.
Capital Markets, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930806

