FT932-7074

FT  26 MAY 93 / Spanish Elections: Enemy of the people-in-power - A Spanish
editor becomes bad news for the government


   By PETER BRUCE


THE MAN most responsible for forcing Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain
to call a snap general election on June 6, and for the fact that he may lose
it, is a journalist, not a politician.
Mr Pedro J. Ramirez, an obsessed, nimble-brained self-publicist, has been a
thorn in the side of the Socialist government for years. He sees Mr Gonzalez
as a silver-tongued constrictor who has wound himself around the great
institutions of state and crushed the beginnings of democracy.
'It is irrelevant to me who wins the election as long as it is not
Gonzalez,' he says. 'Victory again would make Felipe a dictator.' Mr
Ramirez, 41, is the darling of intellectuals who once supported Mr Gonzalez
but who have not been able to stomach the grubbiness of government.
Democracy should have been full of earnest, incisive debate, close elections
and new ideas.
It has been none of those things, but Mr Ramirez tirelessly chases his dream
of clean politics, and just before the last election, in October 1989, he
crafted the weapon he needed. Sacked as editor of the Madrid daily, Diario
16, in March 1989 - for insulting the Socialists - he decided to become his
own boss, and in seven months created, staffed and financed his own
newspaper, El Mundo.
Practically every stone in the mountain of political scandal that has
brought Mr Gonzalez so close to defeat has been put there by El Mundo.
Opposition parties regularly use its editorials as the starting point for
parliamentary initiatives and, in the process, El Mundo has become the third
biggest national daily newspaper in the country, after the pro-government El
Pais and the right-wing ABC. It claims to sell nearly 250,000 copies a day.
Rivals contest this, but last year El Mundo, now with a big Italian
shareholder, made its first operating profit.
El Mundo's growth, especially among young urban readers, has frightened
established titles.
Mr Gonzalez and Mr Ramirez were once on good terms, but the editor says Mr
Gonzalez failed to keep his promise to open up Spain. Soon after coming to
power in 1982 the Socialists began co-opting people and institutions, he
says.
Spain's constitution encourages this. Socialist parliamentary majorities
have given them the majority of votes in the selection of supreme court
judges and control of the boards of the public television and radio
services.
They have changed the way the law works. Once, unpopular new legislation
could be challenged and stopped in its tracks until the slow-moving
constitutional court ruled. Now, new laws can be be applied until the court
says otherwise, thus blunting one of democracy's important checks and
balances. To quieten the press the Socialists also want to criminalise
defamation.
But it was the discovery of GAL, a group attacking sympathisers of the
Basque terrorist group Eta in exile in France, that finally made him and the
prime minister deadly enemies. At Diario 16 and El Mundo, Mr Ramirez pursued
what he assumed was a state-financed dirty war, supported by a crusading
judge, Baltasar Garzon. Now Mr Garzon has become a Socialist candidate and
Mr Ramirez cannot contain his dismay: 'Its like Robin Hood taking a job with
the Sheriff of Nottingham.'
Mr Ramirez' obsession has produced some outstanding journalism, documenting,
among other things the GAL investigations, the Filesa scandal in which the
Socialists appear to have raised funds illicitly from business, and the
Guerra affair, where the ex-deputy prime minister's brother ran a business
empire from a free government office.
Mr Ramirez is happy to admit he is helping the conservative Partido Popular
in this election but insists this is only because they are the only
opposition capable of winning. He is generous to the Communists, too,
because they weaken the Socialists on the left.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930526

