FT934-10289

FT  06 NOV 93 / UB Plasma scandal seen as 'isolated aberration'


   By CLIVE COOKSON, Science Editor


'BLOOD and the products made from it can never be completely safe,' says Dr
Harold Gunson, medical director of the UK National Blood Authority. 'The
nature of blood means that it may carry infections.'
Yet Dr Gunson and his European colleagues who are responsible for the safety
of blood supplies insist the risk of infection from a contaminated product
is less now than it has ever been. They regard Germany's UB Plasma scandal
as an isolated aberration.
The European blood industry, which has an estimated turnover of Pounds 1.5bn
a year, is a complicated mixture of private, public and charitable
enterprises. The UK, France, Belgium and Netherlands have relatively
centralised collection systems, run by the state or the Red Cross. They rely
on volunteers to give blood or plasma (the protein-rich liquid in which
blood cells float).
In the fragmented German system, however, state agencies, the Red Cross and
companies such as UB Plasma all collect from paid donors. A German typically
receives DM35 (Pounds 14.20) per donation.
Some of the blood or plasma is used directly for transfusion and some is
processed into a range of medicines such as factor VIII, immuno-globulins
and albumin. For example, Immuno AG, an international pharmaceutical group
based in Austria, incorporated material from UB Plasma in products sold in
several European countries. These were withdrawn from sale yesterday.
In the UK, the Medicines Control Agency told doctors that Immuno was
recalling eight batches of immuno-globulin and albumin.
'This measure is purely precautionary and is to ensure total patient
safety,' said Dr Kenneth Calman, the government's Chief Medical Officer.
'There is no evidence that HIV has been transmitted by these two products.'
But Europe as a whole produces only half of the 6.3m litres of plasma it
consumes each year. Most of the remainder is imported at a cost of Dollars
650m (Pounds 430m) a year from the US, where it comes from paid donors.
The EC has been committed since 1989 to eventual 'self-sufficiency through
voluntary unpaid donations', on the grounds that volunteers are less likely
to be infected with organisms such as HIV, the Aids virus. Although little
has been done yet to implement the policy, the EC is under pressure from the
European Parliament to take stronger action to boost local production and
phase out imports
The commercial sector is lobbying strongly against import restrictions. It
says regulations imposed by the Food and Drug Administration mean that
procedures for screening donors and eliminating infection from plasma are
superior in the US.
But, in principle, all industrialised countries now maintain similar safety
precautions for blood products. The first barrier is to make sure that
donors - whether paid or not - have neither a medical history nor a
lifestyle associated with high risk of infection. Questionnaires and
interviews are designed to exclude drug addicts and homosexuals.
Then the fresh plasma or blood is tested for syphilis, hepatitis B and C,
and HIV. These tests are not infallible. Dr Gunson estimates that there is
about a 'one in a million' chance that HIV will escape detection in any
given donation; there is a period of several weeks after an individual has
been infected with HIV, during which the antibody tests used for the virus
give a negative result.
Since HIV testing started in 1985, there has been only one known case of
contamination in the UK. It resulted in two Scottish patients becoming
infected with HIV.
If the plasma is processed into medicines, further safety precautions are
taken, including 'pasteurisation'.
But Dr Robert Westphal, medical adviser to the International Federation of
Red Cross Societies in Geneva, says viruses occasionally slip through even
the current pasteurisation techniques. He worries too about new unknown
viruses. 'Remember the early 1980s, when we didn't know that Aids was caused
by the HIV,' Dr Westphal warns. 'What's out there now?'
In the long term, the only way of guaranteeing that blood products are free
of contamination will be to make them artificially from non-human
ingredients. That will not happen on a large scale until well into the next
century.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931106

