FT931-4232

FT  11 MAR 93 / Cuts urged in tobacco and alcohol taxes


   By PHILIP RAWSTORNE


MR NORMAN LAMONT, the chancellor, yesterday faced growing demands for a cut
in excise duties on alcohol and tobacco in next week's Budget.
A report from the free-market Adam Smith Institute said present 'excessive'
rates of taxation are costing the economy Pounds 20bn a year. 'If the
chancellor wants to close his budget deficit he should be reducing taxes on
alcohol and tobacco, not putting them up,' it said.
At Westminster an all party group of MPs protested against 'unfair taxation'
of Scotch whisky and other spirits, while the Brewers Society said beer
sales fell last year to their lowest level since 1970. It called for a
staged reduction in 'the unacceptable tax burden on the British beer
drinker'.
High taxes combined with the recession depressed beer production to 32.25m
barrels, a decline of 3 per cent or 800,000 pints a day, the society said.
'The prospects for 1993 are far from good as the flood of duty-paid imports
from France continues to undermine British pubs, off-licences and jobs,' the
society added.
Within two months of the start of the single market duty-paid imports were
already equivalent to almost 10 per cent of beer drunk at home, the society
said.
The Adam Smith Institute report, by Mr Barry Bracewell-Milnes, a tax
economist, suggested that the economic loss from alcohol taxation because of
the distortion of competition amounted to Pounds 7.57bn a year. That was
equivalent to a quarter of the gains expected from membership of the
European single market.
Because UK duties were so high - 13 times the amount of VAT on a bottle of
spirits - consumers sought to avoid them by shopping abroad, Mr
Bracewell-Milnes said. Retailers in south-east England were facing ruin and
the chancellor's tax-base was shrinking as a result.
He said that while the chancellor might still be better off by putting 1p on
a pint of beer, he could raise an extra Pounds 1.22bn by slashing the tax on
spirits by 60 per cent. He could also gain a little extra by reducing tax on
wine.
He added that the government should welcome any opportunity to move to a
lower-duty regime. Alcohol and tobacco taxes hit poorer families harder than
the well-off and were inefficient tools for attempting to improve public
health - 'like trying to reduce road accidents by doubling the price of
petrol'.
Scottish and Newcastle Breweries is to axe 270 management and staff jobs in
Scotland and northern England in the next six months.
A Disorderly House. Adam Smith Institute, 23 Great Smith Street, London SW1P
3BL. Pounds 29.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930311

