FT933-12737

FT  22 JUL 93 / International Bonds: Guilder interest prompts Fl 1bn issue
from Denmark


   By SARA WEBB


SOVEREIGN and corporate borrowers yesterday tapped the international bond
market in various sectors, with some keen to take advantage of demand for
the more stable European currencies in view of recent turbulence in the
exchange rate mechanism.
The Kingdom of Denmark launched a Fl 1bn, five-year deal which was priced to
yield 20 basis points over the new state loan - the 6 1/4 per cent bond due
1998.
ABN-Amro, the lead manager, said Denmark wanted to take advantage of strong
investor demand for guilders. The government recently raised Fl 9bn with its
new five-year state loan, and the lead manager felt there was still demand
for this maturity.
With both the French franc and Danish krone under attack, some investors are
keen to switch into the core currencies of the D-Mark and the guilder, and
the latter is seen as enjoying better economic fundamentals with a low
inflation background. The bonds held their yield spread at around 20 basis
points.
In the equity-linked sector, SG Warburg Group launched a 15-year convertible
bond which was increased to Pounds 91m from Pounds 80m to meet very strong
demand from continental and UK fund management groups.
Although the share price fell back, participating banks said there was very
little evidence of investors switching out of the equity to buy the
convertible bonds, adding that the issue attracted a 'different class of
investors' to the traditional equity investor. The steady pound and strong
UK bond background apparently attracted continental investors.
The convertible bond was issued at par and rose to trade at 102.5 on the bid
side, as demand far outstripped supply. SG Warburg pointed out that
restrictions on the total size of the deal meant that the issue could not be
raised further.
Against other recent Euro-sterling convertible bond issues, the Warburg deal
has a relatively low coupon of 6.5 per cent. The conversion price was set at
Pounds 8.54, giving a conversion premium of 18 per cent over where the stock
was trading at launch.
The Kingdom of Sweden launched a Pta20bn reverse floating rate note, the
first time such an instrument has been issued in this currency according the
BBV, lead manager. The deal was increased from Pta15bn with the coupon fixed
at 10.75 per cent for the first year and thereafter allowed to float at 18
per cent minus six-month Libor.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930722

