FT934-8690

FT  13 NOV 93 / Books: In search of Utopia


   By JDF JONES


PARADISE DREAMED
by Pamela Neville-Sington and David Sington
Bloomsbury Pounds 18.99, 322 pages
I HAVE for years been fascinated by the Freelanders. Almost certainly you
have never heard of them, and they do not rate any reference in this
wide-ranging book about utopias. The 'International Freeland Association'
flourished briefly in the early 1890s, inspired by a moderately-nutty
Austrian economist called Theodor Herzka who preached the abolition of
interest rates and property rights. He sent a pioneer party of his European
followers to East Africa in 1894 to found 'Freeland' on the slopes of Mount
Kenya. The utter failure of this expedition is interesting partly because it
helped persuade the Zionists to turn down the British government's offer of
a territory for 'Israel' in Uganda. It also offers a comment on the fatal
attraction for utopianists of the reality of their dreams.
The Freelanders were just one excellent example (there must have been
hundreds of other such groups over the years), of humanity's chronic search
for utopia, and their story would have usefully illustrated the themes of
Paradise Dreamed. That is to say, they were inspired by the vision of a
single man; they followed a blueprint which had been laid down in extreme
and imaginative detail, however optimistic; they paid particular attention
to their proposed constitution; and they were the extremest of radicals in
that they were emigrants setting sail not to seek their fortune in a
transplanted Europe in the Americas or the Antipodes (as so many did at that
period) but precisely to get away from the system which they had learned to
reject.
More than that - more than the Singtons seem to admit - they were true
utopians in that they were motivated by a despair for their natal society.
This despair is surely a central element to utopianism, from Thomas More to
Aldous Huxley's critique in Brave New World. William Morris, for example,
only wrote News from Nowhere after he had lost faith in his Socialist
movement. I like to think of the Freelanders as some of the first drop-outs
of our modern age.
Pamela and David Sington have produced a helpful survey of utopian thinking,
starting from Hesiod's Golden Age but concentrating on the years since the
Renaissance. This does not pretend to be a work of original thought, and it
often reads too much like a BBC series (as it originally was, for the World
Service), fashioned into a neatly-assembled round-dozen of chapters and
including too many trim one-para summaries of this or that. But the book
serves a purpose: I don't know of a more accessible introduction to the
subject.
Inevitably, we have to be taken through the sources: Plato, Aristotle, More
('one of the founding documents of the modern world'), Campanella, Ledoux,
Bacon, Fourier, Saint-Simon, Diderot and Sade, Edward Bellamy (very keen on
Bellamy - he predicted credit cards), Morris and BF Skinner, and so on and
so forth. And Hawthorne, with this wonderful description of his own Utopia:
he 'has ventured to make free with his old and affectionately remembered
home at Brook Farm as being certainly the most romantic episode of his own
life - essentially a daydream, and yet a fact - and thus offering an
available foothold between fiction and reality'. There you have the creative
tensions in utopianism: daydream/fact, fiction/reality.
The chapters never quite focus on a sustained theme - perhaps that is left
to us. 'Utopias have succeeded in changing the world'. Well, yes, up to a
point. Both the US and the Soviet Union have been inspired by different
versions of utopia, we are told: that is a leading meaning of the 'pursuit
of happiness', and Andre Gide once described the USSR as 'a land where I
imagined Utopia was in process of becoming reality'. But there were deep
distinctions between the European and the American utopian traditions:
crudely put, the European line led from More to Rousseau to Marx and
emphasised the equal distribution of economic resources; the American came
to emphasise 'equality of condition' and therefore 'equality of opportunity'
in which individualism would easily lead on to entrepreneurial capitalism.
Marx may once have observed, of utopias, that 'the man who dreams up a
programme for the future is a reactionary', but that hardly denies him his
place in the utopian galaxy, although his visions were untypically vague and
short on detail.
We are assured by the authors that utopias are frequently realised, if only
in part, and that utopias have been among our principal philosophical and
political guidelines for 500 years. That seems too bold. Some utopias made
sense, others did not; like acorns dropping in profusion, only a tiny
fraction have ever taken root. Coleridge's 'Pantisocracy' came to nothing;
the Freelanders survived only three months in the real Africa of 1894.
Perhaps it would be good to read a more impassioned study. Whose side are we
on, Miranda or Prospero? ''O brave new world/ That has such people in it' -
'Tis new to thee.'' Discuss.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931113

