FT933-12700

FT  23 JUL 93 / Major stakes all on confidence vote: Humiliating defeat for
prime minister - Tory rebels deal blow over Maastricht treaty


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR last night staked the government's future on ratification of
the Maastricht treaty by threatening a general election unless the House of
Commons supports him in a confidence motion later today.
The dramatic decision, endorsed by an emergency meeting of the full cabinet
after a day of anguish for the government at Westminster, followed a
humiliating defeat over the treaty's social chapter.
Last night senior ministers were confident of victory but there was
widespread acknowledgement that Mr Major's political authority had been
further undermined.
It is the only confidence motion tabled by the government - rather than by
the Labour opposition - during the Conservatives' uninterrupted term of
office since 1979 and one of only a handful in modern political history. It
represents Mr Major's last chance to remain as prime minister.
Despite dire warnings, a total of 23 Conservative MPs joined opposition
parties to deny the government the votes it needed to ratify finally the
Maastricht treaty with its social chapter opt-out.
But, as Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, tabled an amendment to today's
confidence motion to force the government to embrace the social chapter,
most of the rebels indicated they would not oppose the government again.
The defeat forced Mr Major to table a confidence resolution for debate later
today which also demands the authority to ratify the treaty with Britain's
opt-out from the social provisions intact. Senior ministers, including Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, immediately warned that if the government
lost it would resign, obliging the Queen to call an election which would
almost certainly result in a Labour victory.
Amid scenes of fury in the Commons chamber and in the lobbies of
Westminster, Mr Clarke and other cabinet members dismissed as 'fantasy' any
suggestion that Mr Major would resign but the government would survive under
another prime minister, if the motion was lost.
The ministers conceded that the vote was the 'last throw of the dice' in Mr
Major's efforts to end the year-long civil war in the Tory party over
Maastricht. But they voiced optimism that the rebels would be forced into
line and the prime minister would survive.
After a day of high drama, Mr Major managed to fight off the Labour party
amendment which might have obliged him to abandon the social chapter
opt-out.
Amid extraordinary scenes of government anger and opposition elation, MPs
were first tied at 317 votes to 317 votes on the Labour amendment. Miss
Betty Boothroyd, the Speaker, then gave her casting vote to the government.
But an alliance of opposition parties and dissident Tory MPs rejected by 324
to 316 the government's call for the authority to press ahead with
ratification.
The switchback voting, which saw hardcore Conservative Euro-sceptics join
with the opposition parties against the prime minister, left a
constitutional stalemate.
The government defeat - which saw 15 Conservative Euro-sceptics lining up
against it in the first vote and 23 in the second as well as a number of
abstentions - came despite an apparent deal struck by the government to win
the support of nine Ulster Unionist MPs.
Ministers appear to have offered the Unionists assurances of the
government's commitment to maintaining Northern Ireland's position in the UK
and to promoting democracy in the province.
Facing opposition calls for his resignation, Mr Major read from a prepared
statement to demand that MPs pass a resolution: 'This House has confidence
in her Majesty's government on the adoption of the protocol on social policy
provisions.'
The legislation enacted earlier this week to give force to the treaty says
the government cannot finally ratify it until MPs have decided one way or
another on whether they want the government to scrap the social opt-out.
The votes came after a day which saw Mr Major and his cabinet colleagues
make a series of desperate but vain pleas to Tory rebels to end the bitter
struggle over Europe which has drained the prime minister's authority.
Some of the Euro-sceptics returned to the government fold to reject the
Labour demand for incorporation of the social chapter but enough continued
to defy the prime minister to deny him victory.
Mr Major earlier issued an unequivocal warning that he was ready to defy the
Commons if it had voted for the social chapter. Accusing his opponents of
cynicism and political opportunism, the prime minister said that failure to
ratify Maastricht would destroy British influence within the European
Community.
In a passionate and emotional debate which saw Mr Smith accuse the
government of creating a 'sweatshop economy' in Britain by rejecting the
social chapter, Mr Major told the Tory rebels that whatever the outcome they
would not wreck the entire treaty.
Mr Smith challenged the prime minister immediately after the vote, accusing
him of using a confidence vote to exclude Britain from the benefits of the
social chapter because he could not win on any other basis.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, warned that his party would
continue to oppose the government. But ministers appeared confident that
they could continue to rely on the support of the Ulster Unionists.
 --------------------------------------------------------------
HOW THEY VOTED
 --------------------------------------------------------------
Party       Con    Lab    LDP    UUP*    Other    Total
 --------------------------------------------------------------
For         306                    9         1      316
Against      23    267     21      0        13      324
Abstain       1                              1        2
 --------------------------------------------------------------
*Ulster Unionist party
 --------------------------------------------------------------
Page 7: The Maastricht vote
Election threatened if vote is lost
Defeated PM says issue must not 'fester'
Unionist deal turns on 'accountable democracy' for Ulster
Opposition parties exploit government's discomfort

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930723

