FT933-5143

FT  04 SEP 93 / Fashion: Making a late splash


   By CHRISTOPHER S. BROWN


JUST BACK from the costa or the plage with the feeling that this year your
swimwear lacked a certain je ne sais quoi? Somehow it didn't convey quite
what a splendid fellow you really are? Somewhere along the line it seemed to
miss?
It is hard for those who spend most of the year in offices and bundled up
against the weather to get it right for the few glorious weeks when the sun
shines and limbs are bared.
But swimming these days is more than just a holiday pastime, for some it is
an all-year-round means of keepng fit. Here Christopher S. Brown helps to
make sure you get it right . . .
SOME BATHE, others swim. Bathing requires little effort, is purely
pleasurable and often takes place on holiday in hot places in saline
solution. Swimming is different. It usually takes place in pools, can be a
year-round activity and is one of the best forms of exercise for overall
fitness.
Sometimes in pools, there are clashes between serious swimmers and
pleasure-seeking bathers, who often mistakenly believe they are swimming.
To enjoy either aquatic pastime you do not need to spend a great deal of
money. Unless you are going to a nudist beach or are joining a swimming club
all you need is a one item of clothing.
The choice is simple - it lies between trunks or shorts. Trunks give the
wearer the 'I know how to swim look' while shorts seem to say 'I'm out for
fun.'
When buying, chose a pair designed for swimming rather than sun bathing and
avoid some of the paler colours which may become transparent when wet.
Trunks are available in so many jewel-like colours that you are bound to
find a colour that suits you. If you swim regularly it is important to
remember to rinse your trunks each time, otherwise chlorine will eventually
perish the fabric.
Look out for the tell-tale white threads, a warning signal that it is time
to buy a new pair.
Most specialist sport shops now stock swimwear throughout the year -
Olympus, First Sport, Lillywhites and Sports Locker are worth visiting. All
stock Speedo products (perhaps the best-known swimwear company of all).
Sports Locker sells a variety of names that are less well-known in this
country including Gazelle, a New York brand, and LASC, unique to Sports
Locker, which produces excellent cotton/lycra mix trunks, more expensive
than Speedo but certainly worth the extra.
Shorts do have one real advantage over trunks - they are kinder to those
whose figures are in dire need of exercise and will give the wearer more
confidence when the time comes to take the plunge.
Although it is now early September, and many of the fashion shorts have sold
out, more and more shops are realising that swimwear is year-round business.
Winter holidays in the Caribbean and the Far East and the popularity of
cruises mean that swimwear departments no longer automatically shut when the
summer hols are over.
If you are looking for swimwear now your first stop should be Paul Smith,
which is still selling 100 per cent, black, cotton shorts in bermuda and
beach lengths and in beautiful photo-print designs.
Next might be a visit to the sports shops. Sports Locker has its own brand
shorts in nine bright colours and Olympus sells shorts in which the Speedo
logo appears only when the shorts become wet.
An even greater surprise, however, is at Asda, where the George Davies
collection includes strips, stars, stripes and spots at reasonable prices.
If you do start swimming regularly then both your eyes and hair will need
protection. Goggles will save your eyes looking as though they have
permanent conjunctivitis and a swimming cap and the use of a shampoo such as
Ultra Swim will stop your hair feeling like straw.
Stockists:
Paul Smith, 41-44 Floral Street, London WC2.
Sports Locker, 17 Floral Street, London WC2, and 53 Pembridge Road, London
W11.
Lillywhites, 24 Lower Regent Street, London SW1.
First Sport, Whiteley, 151 Queensway, London W2 and Shopping Centre, Brent
Cross, London NW4.
Olympus. Tel: 071-409-2619 for list of stores.
Peter Jones, Sloane Square, London SW1.
Asda. Tel: 0532-435435 for list of stores.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

930904

