FT931-3979

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (1): Some opportunities emerge -
But the downturn is also gathering pace. There is a sharp turnaround from
the prolonged, buoyant growth of the 1980s / Overview


   By VANESSA HOULDER


A MOOD of pessimism and uncertainty has gripped Europe's main property
markets, where office values have fallen by nearly a quarter since the peak
of 1991.
But this gloom is, at times, lightened by opportunities that are emerging in
a period of change. The lifting of trade barriers at the start of 1993 and
the dismantling of the Communist system in eastern Europe may open up new
markets, stimulate competition between cities and encourage cross-border
investment.
Even the sharp adjustment of property values is throwing up opportunities
for contra-cyclical investors.
Not so long ago it seemed likely that most of Europe's property markets
would escape the downturns that afflicted the US and Japan. Two years ago,
when the property boom was a distant memory in London, Tokyo and New York,
continental Europe was a haven of stability.
Now the picture looks very different. With the exception of small pockets of
Europe, such as Belgium, the property downturn is rapidly gathering pace.
In the office sector, which has been worse hit than the retail sector,
values have fallen by 23 per cent, according to the Jones Lang Wootton
property index, which includes 14 cities from Berlin to Dublin.
The casualty list is topped by Stockholm and London where office values have
halved. Paris, where values are down by 40 per cent, and Madrid, have also
been badly hit. By comparison, Brussels, Berlin and some German cities -
such as Hamburg and Dusseldorf - have been relatively resilient.
This is a sharp turnaround from the prolonged, buoyant growth of the 1980s.
In the five years to 1990, steep increases in occupier demand, coupled with
low vacancy rates in most markets, stimulated strong rental growth averaging
14.4 per cent a year, according to Jones Lang Wootton (JLW). Capital values
rose even faster, at an average of 17.8 per cent a year. High expectations
about the lowering of trade barriers in 1992 further fuelled this inflation.
In the process, the hierarchy of Europe's office market was overturned.
Paris overtook London as Europe's most expensive office market. Rents in
Milan and Madrid rose beyond those of Brussels. Costs in the newly-emerging
markets of eastern Europe came from nowhere to be among the most expensive
in Europe.
The buoyancy of Europe's property values stimulated a surge in credit and
construction. In cities without rigorous planning controls this led to a
glut of new building and over-inflated asset prices.
Economic slowdown and high real interest rates hit these markets at a
vulnerable stage. Many countries have seen a sharp rise in office vacancy
rates, although - with the exception of the UK - these remain modest by US
standards. The average office vacancy rate in western Europe is more than 6
per cent, according to JLW.
Some commentators believe that, as property markets adjust to changed
economic conditions, the first into recession will be among the first out.
Markets such as Brussels, Milan and Frankfurt, which recently entered the
downward part of the cycle, are further from recovery than the London
property market which has been in recession for the past three years.
If measured by the take-up of office space, London peaked first (1987),
followed by Paris and Amsterdam (1989), Dublin, Lyon, Milan and Munich
(1990), Brussels, Dusseldorf, Frankfurt, Hamburg and Madrid in 1991, and
Barcelona and Berlin in 1992. Rental peaks generally lagged take-up peaks by
at least a year.
But the assumption that markets will recover in the same order as they went
into decline ignores the substantial differences between them. No two
property markets are entirely alike in their structure, legal systems,
planning laws, tax regimes, bank lending policies, and accessibility to
foreign investment.
The behaviour of banks has become one of the greatest influences on the
development of a country's property markets. The severity of the problems of
the Swedish, French and UK markets can largely be blamed on excessive bank
lending.
The banks are also determining the way in which the markets recover. In the
UK, hundreds of property companies have gone into receivership. In France,
banks are more likely to restructure ailing companies or take direct
ownership of their property. In Sweden, the scale of bad property debts has
forced the banks to assume responsibility for large portfolios of property,
which ultimately may have to be guaranteed by the government.
In Germany, by contrast, the banks' relatively cautious lending policies and
tight control over speculative developments is expected to temper the force
of the downturn, even though rents have already fallen by 25 per cent in
Frankfurt. The workings of the market may also influence the severity of the
downturn. Spanish rent controls, which are now being reformed, are believed
to have exaggerated the cyclical swings in the market.
Different lease structures also play a part. The 25-year leases that
characterise the UK property markets have stimulated some parts of the
investment market but added to the stagnation of the letting market.
Conversely, in Paris, shorter leases have encouraged tenants' mobility but
done nothing for the investment market, which has largely evaporated.
Another point of difference concerns the degree of international investment.
Inflows of money from overseas at the peak of the market tended to inflate
asset values, particularly in the case of Japanese buyers in Paris and
London who paid higher prices than domestic investors.
International investment can sometimes help iron out the troughs. In London,
for example, German investors have been notably active. But, on balance,
heavy international investment has tended to increase the volatility of
markets.
Any comparison of Europe's property industries must take into account the
maturity of the markets. The fledgling markets of eastern Europe operate
with different rules from those in the rest of Europe. In the west,
development schemes have been mothballed because of the excess of supply
over demand; in the east, development is being held up by planning disputes,
problems of land restitution and red tape. Only a few markets, such as
Budapest, Berlin and Vienna - which in some respects bridge the gap between
west and east - are in an active phase of development.
Taken as a whole, the upturn in Europe's property markets is some way off.
Generalisations about the markets should be treated with caution, however.
In Europe's worst-hit markets, it will take years to repair the damage of
the late 1980s. By contrast, activity in the most stable, or least mature,
markets may pick up rapidly once the economy returns to health.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930312

