FT934-11412

FT  01 NOV 93 / Management: Make it dramatic for the shareholders - Henry
Wendt, chairman of SmithKline Beecham, offers advice on how to conduct an
annual meeting / Tips from the top


   By HENRY WENDT


The statutory annual general meeting is something of a modern paradox. In
the case of large companies, institutional shareholders holding the majority
of shares seldom attend. Most chairmen are happy to see owners of 2 or 3 per
cent of their shares show up. Since most ballots are cast by post, it is
only in unusual cases that the vote is uncertain. Consequently, there is
rarely true drama or a big decision at the AGM. It shouldn't be any wonder
that many chairmen regard the occasion as a meaningless task to be dispensed
with quickly.
Yet in doing so they miss an opportunity to generate considerable goodwill
and understanding of the company. It is the one occasion during the year
when the board and the management are on full parade and available to all
shareholders for answers to direct and at times penetrating questions. The
attendees are mostly small shareholders who have a strong sense of identity
with the company and are predisposed to be friends. Their attitude is in
many ways governed by what they learn and even more to the point, how they
feel at the AGM.
With that purpose in mind, I believe it helps to think of the AGM as
theatre. Theatre is a form of communication in which complex and provocative
messages are put across to large audiences. Indeed, theatre works best when
there is genuine interaction between the cast and the audience.
Designing the AGM as theatre begins with deciding the messages to be
communicated. Usually, there is a mix of good and bad news. Naturally, the
weight of the mix determines the tone and character of the AGM; celebratory
or firmly resolute.
The next decision relates to the cast of characters. In most situations, the
chairman should resist the temptation to place himself in the starring role.
The AGM is an opportunity to display the strengths of the management and the
board. Opportunities to bring other executives centre stage will certainly
occur during the question-and-answer session, but openings should also be
sought during the formal presentations. The role of the chairman is always
to maintain firm control and leadership of the meeting, while also bringing
forth the personality, character and talents of other cast members. The
audience should leave impressed with the way the management and the board
complement each other and work as a team.
It is useful to consider the stage setting. Most annual meetings tend to be
rather dry affairs. They do not have to be that way. Both colour and sound
can be introduced at little expense, in ways that enhance the primary
messages. Music played at a low background level as the attendees take their
seats helps establish the mood. I often find visual aids to be more of a
distraction than a help, but used to display data they can also introduce
animation and colour. For emotional impact, nothing matches video on a large
screen.
A successful AGM requires an active and energetic question-and-answer
session. Since it is this part of the programme that many chairmen regard
with the most anxiety, it is central to the AGM paradox. Yet it is the
question-and-answer session that creates the lasting impression. A positive
impression is created as much by the way the company responds to the
question as it is by the answers themselves. I will always remember the
occasion when during a particularly long and tense question period a feisty
shareholder suggested that the personnel director get a haircut. The
question - and the somewhat embarrassed response - brought the house down
and changed the entire mood within the room.
The burden is always squarely on the chairman to conduct the question
session in an open, understanding manner. By using his prerogative to
restate and as appropriate, to reframe the question without distorting the
questioner's basic thrust, the chairman can establish the correct tone and
posture for the session.
The question-and-answer session of the AGM provides a unique opportunity to
create positive human chemistry with the company's natural ambassadors.
Next Monday: Sir Colin Marshall of British Airways on how to cope with a
busy business trip.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931101

