FT932-13416

FT  23 APR 93 / Management: Learning to live with a cultural mix


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


DO YOU work for an American multinational which is having trouble
introducing a performance-related pay scheme in its French, German and Asian
subsidiaries, even though it has worked well in Britain, Sweden and the
Netherlands? Is your employer a German company which is struggling to apply
Anglo-Saxon methods of 'change management'? Or do you work for an Italian or
Spanish enterprise which is experiencing schizophrenia over the new 'matrix
management' structure being imposed by its US or British parent?
If so, you're suffering from one of the most underrated aspects of
management: culture clash.
If you tend to read only the best-selling business books, or listen just to
the world's top management gurus, you will either be surprised by these
problems or fail to appreciate their disruptive potential. For your
management ideas will have been formed by a mixture of your own cultural
experience and the dominant American view that there is 'one best way' of
resolving any issue - so that a company with a strong corporate culture will
be able to bridge any national differences among its employees around the
world.
Yet consider the evidence presented in a new book* by Frans Trompenaars, a
Franco-Dutchman who worked in nine countries for Shell before becoming a
consultant to the oil group and several other sophisticated cross-cultural
multinationals, as well as 'learners' such as Mars, Kodak, Heineken,
Philips, ICI and Apple. He has also compiled a database of the cultural
characteristics of 15,000 managers and staff from 30 companies in 50
countries.
His conclusions contrast starkly with the notion that the world is becoming
a 'global village', in which a new generation of international managers will
operate easily across borders. Instead, he argues that what works in one
culture will seldom do so in another.
On performance pay, for instance, Trompenaars finds that people in France,
Germany, Italy and large parts of Asia tend not to accept 'that individual
members of the group should excel in a way that reveals the shortcomings of
other members'. On two-way communication, Americans may be motivated by
feedback sessions, while Germans find them 'enforced admissions of failure'.
On more structural issues such as decentralisation and delegation,
approaches that work well in Anglo-Saxon cultures, plus Scandinavia, the
Netherlands and Germany, may prove disastrous in Belgium, France and Spain.
Some of these differences are pretty obvious, and skilful companies have
learned how to accommodate them. But in many cases, especially where the
local culture bottles up problems by discouraging open criticism, the
gung-ho 'universalist' manager will not even perceive them. All he or she
will notice is general dissatisfaction or poor performance.
Trompenaars distinguishes seven basic, but finely nuanced, dimensions of
culture. Five concern the way people deal with each other. They include:
'universalism versus particularism' (behaviour based on general versus
specific relationships); the slightly different 'collectivism versus
individualism' (group-based versus individual behaviour); a 'neutral' versus
expressive attitude to emotions; and the creation of status through
achievement, versus what Trompenaars calls 'affiliation'; this is similar to
the usual juxtaposition of 'personal' and 'positional' power.
A sixth dimension concerns people's attitude to time, especially the future.
The final one is whether, like most Americans and north Europeans, they
strive to mould their environment, or whether they tend to go along with it
more, like most Europeans and some Asians. Contrary to American dogma,
Trompenaars argues that the second group is better at dealing with change.
These dimensions have combined in various ways to create several types of
corporate culture, Trompenaars concludes, with the home culture dominating
in most multinationals. No organisation consists of just one cultural type,
but the mix between them varies considerably. They include:
Family. Typical of Japan, India, Belgium, Italy, Spain and smaller French
companies. Very hierarchical, and more intuitive than rational. Delegation
is difficult because the leader is a father figure who is seen as knowing
better than his subordinates. Matrix and project structures create problems,
since they divide authority and loyalty. Praise is a better motivator than
money.
Eiffel Tower. Typical of large French companies, plus German and Dutch ones.
Also hierarchical, but much more impersonal and rule-driven. Adapts very
slowly to changing environments.
Guided missile. Typical of the US and, to a lesser extent, the UK. This is
much more egalitarian and individualistic, but also impersonal. It can
adjust course rapidly, but not change it completely.
Where does all this leave the struggling multinational and its 'global
managers'? Above all, Trompenaars advises companies to avoid their usual
blanket application of standard, head office-generated American and north
European ways of managing.
Instead he advocates a 'trans-national' approach: a blend of the best from
several cultures which should be applied differently in each country.
Managers must also be trained in cross-cultural awareness and respect, he
says. They must stop seeing cultural problems as other people's
stubbornness.
Trompenaars underplays the gradual narrowing of cultural differences among
some younger globetrotters. But his prescription is a welcome antidote to
blinkered universalism.
*Riding the Waves of Culture.
Economist Books. Pounds 20.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930423

