FT934-10114

FT  06 NOV 93 / Arts: Idyll of the countryside: true or false?


   By PATRICIA MORISON


NOSTALGIA and romanticism shapes the artist's perception of the countryside
quite as much as that of the prospective clients. So paintings provide poor
evidence for the way in which the countryside has changed over the years.
This is the theme of a thought-provoking and enjoyable small exhibition,
Toil and Plenty; Images of the Agricultural Landscape in England, 1780-1890.
The exhibition is first at Nottingham University Art Centre and travels to
the Yale Centre for English Art in the New Year. If you cannot see the show,
the book by Christiana Payne is extremely interesting and so readable that
it would be an excellent choice for the bookshelves of any country-lover.
In Yale, the exhibition will become a more splendid thing for adding
pictures by names such as Francis Wheatley, Stubbs, and Samuel Palmer from
the Paul Mellon Collection. Despite being much smaller, the Nottingham
version has an attractive and interesting selection of artists: Rowlandson;
Turner (the large oil, 'Ploughing Up Turnips Near Slough' is nearly as
depressing as the title suggests); Peter DeWint; William Collins (father of
the novelist); Ford Maddox Ford and Sir George Clausen.
Several artists appear in an unfamiliar guise. John Martin, famous as the
dotty visionary, was a painter of conventional harvest landscapes, although
his haystooks have a slightly batty touch. Clausen appears as a Social
Realist who in the 1880s, influenced by Millet and Bastien-Lepage, produced
'Winter Work', an impressively tough image of the farm labourers' working
conditions. Photographs used for the painting also show him to have been the
first photographer to take unposed pictures of farm labourers.
At the same period, Helen Allingham painted the conventionally picturesque,
happy, rosey-cheeked family of labourers harvesting a field of golden corn.
Probably she invented her idyllic scene. Even if smallholders might still
have used a sickle, it would be odd for a woman to wield it while her
husband bound the stooks. After reading or seeing Toil and Plenty, you will
look more beadily at country pictures.
Another virtue is that Payne is mercifully dispassionate and
non-doctrinaire. The impression is that she actually appreciates painting,
which is rare with exhibitions selected to illustrate a particular social
historical theme. All too often the artist who subscribes to the 'myth'
(militarism, myth of childhood, patriachy, colonisalism) is condemned for
it.
Allingham, however, is not bashed for being a pedlar of myth and inaccurate
to boot. Nor are other artists who throughout a century of profound agrarian
change chose to paint scenes which delighted their eye and opened their
public's pocketbooks. However, the theme is more complicated than that, and
other values are projected onto the woods and fields.
The view Constable painted from the upstairs window, across his father's
vegetable garden, surely had a personal meaning to him. For other artists,
including Turner, awareness that England was at war imbued the rural scene
with patriotism. For Samuel Palmer and Edward Calvert, whose wood-engravings
perhaps sit slightly oddly in the show, the landscape was the work of a
divine intelligence.
Harvest was not only picturesque but a potent symbol of God's mercy and
man's virtuous toil. The book, rather more than the exhibition, sets the
painted landscape against the political background of social unrest, repeal
of the Corn Laws, vicious Game Laws, and trades union agitation. Life for
the poor in the towns was always worse, but for decades it was a close-run
thing. The harvest festival introduced by the Anglican clergy in the 1840s
was an image of social harmony and honest toil. Its pictorial equivalent was
an art which then as now, showed the countryside as benign, inspiring, and
timeless.
Toil and Plenty: images of the Agricultural Landscape, 1780-1890 (Yale,
214pp; paperback Pounds 19.50 ; hardback Pounds 30). Toil and Plenty is at
Nottingham University Art Gallery until November 14 then at the Yale Center
for British Art, 15 January 15 - March 13 1994.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931106

