FT934-8689

FT  13 NOV 93 / Books: All sacrificial blood and death - By conquering the
Aztecs, Cortes destroyed the most vile society ever devised


   By JH PLUMB


THE CONQUEST OF MEXICO
by Hugh Thomas
Hutchinson Pounds 25, 811 pages
THIS VAST book, the result of long years of reading and note-taking in
seemingly endless archives scattered across cope and America, is densely
detailed. Indeed Lord Thomas is ruthless in the pursuit of detail. Our
knowledge of the Aztecs civilisation or the Mexica, as he prefers to call
them, has grown, especially since the second world war, at an unbelievable
rate. Their language is now read; the structure of their empire understood;
their complex barter systems and the sophistication of their neolithic
society fully understood. Although there are many new discoveries,
fundamentally the story which Thomas tells is that of Prescott, who wrote
his great work on the conquest of Mexico 150 years ago.
Ultimately for the detailed account of the conquest, all historians are
forced back, time and time again, to the letters that Cortes wrote to his
monarch Charles V, King of Spain and to Bernal Diaz's reminiscences in old
age. Naturally Cortes's letters were written to impress, to justify, to
inflate the triumph which Cortes had achieved for Spain. As a lawyer as well
as a conquistador, he was determined above all to give a legal justification
to his conquest, in order to avoid charges of piracy or theft.
So Cortes lined up bunches of Aztecs, spectacular in their feathered
headgear and painted faces, totally mystified as he made them swear an oath
of fealty to Charles V. Of course, it impressed the Indians: they were used
to rituals, indeed their lives were ruled by them. So this ritual, bordering
on the farcical, had indeed significance. It gave Cortes the authority which
he used at once. (It was not much different to buying Manhattan for a few
pence from its native Indians).
The Aztecs had great doubts about who the Spaniards were. They could be
gods, or demons, or just super humans with strange weapons. The horses, not
many, about 17, were fearful; the cannon, very few, terrifying; the razor
sharp steel and impenetrable armour were easier to understand. Great as
these Spanish advantages were, they were as nothing compared with the
supreme authority which Cortes assumed at once.
That stunned and bewildered Montezuma. God or no God, Cortes was
incomprehensible. He paralysed his enemies. Gradually, of course, the shock,
the terror, diminished. And Cortes had fabulous luck, which is always
necessary for heroic enterprises. All of these matters Thomas describes with
measured wisdom, combined on occasion with a sly humour that jolts the
complacency of the reader. His story of the conquest, how it happened and
why it happened, carries total conviction. He makes what seems like a
miracle comprehensible.
Certainly he does what he can for the Aztecs. He quotes some haunting poems
to prove their sophistication, poems that stress the agonising brevity of
life, of love, of success but such poems are common to neolithic or early
bronze age societies - they abound, from the Han to Sumeria.
Against the Aztec practice of human sacrifice and cannibalism, they weigh as
light as a feather. Cortes destroyed the most vile society ever devised by
man. The Aztec's failure in battle was due partly to the priority they gave
to capturing alive Spaniards and their Indian allies, rather than killing
them. They ate all they caught, everything bar the head and torso. Calling
the pulsating heart streaming with blood 'Precious Eagle Cactus Fruit' is
revolting and describing death by being hacked to pieces by a flint knife as
'dying like a flower' is grotesque.
Walking in the great museums in Mexico City nothing - nothing in the world -
is so horrible, so revolting as the constant theme of sacrificial death and
festive cannibalism.
Certainly the Aztecs embroidered beautifully, their feather work
incomparable, their craftsmanship in gold exquisite, but it was an empire
best destroyed and obliterated. The relief of their Indian subjects was
almost as great as that of Cortes when he finally captured Tenochtitlan.
No society has wallowed so deeply in sacrificial blood or devoured with such
gusto the flesh of its victims.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931113

