FT933-12558

FT  23 JUL 93 / Letters to the Editor: Aerospace seeks investment not
subsidy (1)


   From Sir BARRY DUXBURY


Sir, I write to take issue with your interpretation of the House of Commons
trade and industry select committee report on the aerospace industry ('UK
Aerospace', July 22).
The report made clear that the industry is not a lame duck looking for free
handouts. It is a pillar of the UK manufacturing base - and of the British
economy. By exporting 70 per cent of an Pounds 11bn turnover, we make a
substantial contribution to the well-being of this country. However, our
current success is based on investment in high-cost technology almost a
generation ago.
Looking to the future, Richard Caborn and his all-party colleagues chose to
address some difficult questions about the conditions industry needs to
maintain a leading edge into the next century, about how we develop advanced
products for an increasingly competitive market, and about how we can best
use scarce resources.
They also looked at the long-term technology investments made by governments
in competitor countries and judged that UK aerospace was disadvantaged. The
report did not call for subsidies - it called for investment and for a
co-ordinated inter-departmental aerospace research programme. Furthermore,
it acknowledged the government's financial difficulties and sought creative
ways in which that investment could be added to the very high investment the
aerospace companies make in sustaining their technology base.
I recommend that those of your readers whose well-being depends upon the
competitive position of UK manufacturing industry, obtain a copy of the full
report. They will discover that the aerospace issues are more complex than
your editorial suggested, yet if the sensible recommendations of the
committee are adopted, the solutions may be readily achievable.
Barry Duxbury,
director,
The Society of British Aero-space Companies,
29 King Street,
St James's, London SW1Y 6RD

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930723

