FT934-11234

FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of The Slovak Republic (2): Austrians head the queue
 -Foreign investors study pace of privatisation


   By PATRICK BLUM


THE collapse of traditional markets in the former Comecon trade bloc was
felt more acutely in Slovakia than in most of its neighbours.
Short of raw materials and energy sources, and with many of its biggest
companies geared to serve highly specialised markets for heavy engineering
products in central/eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, Slovak
industry faces an uncertain future without heavy investment beyond the
capacity of local resources.
With only about Dollars 320m disbursed since 1990, Slovakia has attracted
only a tiny share of foreign investments in the region. But interest is
growing, especially from neighbouring Austria, and more investments are said
to be on the way.
Faster privatisation is one of the keys to greater foreign investment. But
the sacking of Mr Lubomir Dolgos, the former privatisation minister, without
a replacement being appointed has raised question marks about the commitment
of the government to recovering the momentum lost after the divorce from the
rapid privatisation-orientated Czechs.
Government officials dispute the complaints of opposition parties and
businessmen that privatisation has ground to a virtual halt after the first
round of coupon privatisation which was set in train while Slovakia was
still part of Czechoslovakia. 'We believe we should privatise more quickly
as it is a basic prerequisite for restructuring our economy,' says Mr Ivan
Lexa, state secretary in charge of privatisation.
He rejects criticism that the privatisation process has been slow and prone
to bureaucratic delays. 'Speed is relative. Seen from the perspective of the
World Bank and the IMF, privatisation in Slovakia is considered among the
best. The pace and range of privatisations compare well with other
post-communist countries, but we are looking at improving and speeding up
the process,' he claims.
Since 1990, state assets worth SK120bn (Dollars 4.1bn) have been sold
including about 500 companies with a book value of more than Dollars 3.1bn
which have been disposed of through mass voucher privatisation. The voucher
privatisation programme was launched in 1992, but it is only being completed
now because of delays caused by the division of the former Czechoslovak
state.
As with the neighbouring Czech Republic, Slovakia's voucher privatisation
was considered a success by western analysts, and a second wave of voucher
privatisation is planned for next year. But the government has shifted
emphasis, intending to resort more extensively to standard methods of
privatisation.
Shares in Slovak companies may also be floated on the Prague and Vienna
stock exchange once company accounting has been harmonised with Austrian
requirements, says Mr Lexa.
The new privatisation programme provides for the planned sale of 600
companies with a book value of about SK210bn (Dollars 7.2bn) of which
voucher sales will only account for assets worth SK50bn-SK70bn. Furthermore,
voucher privatisations will only take place in the third quarter of next
year. Until then the government will seek to sell as many companies as
possible by direct sales and public tenders.
'Voucher privatisation resulted in too great a dispersal of shareholders
with small stakes who are not always committed to further investment in
their companies,' Mr Lexa says to explain the shift in emphasis. 'There was
just a change of ownership, but it brought nothing to the state or the
companies. With the second wave we aim to accelerate restructuring. Slovak
industries need new technologies and they must modernise their production.
This requires a lot of money and can only be done with foreign capital,' he
says.
The importance of attracting foreign investors is underlined by the shortage
of capital of the Slovak banks which exhausted their funds in the first wave
of state disposals. Foreign investors will be able to buy up to 100 per cent
of a company's shareholding, and benefit from a wide range of tax and other
incentives. But the authorities will seek a commitment by investors on
further investments to modernise and develop their companies.
Mr Lexa says interest has picked up this year after a slow start. 'In 1992,
and early 1993, opinion about Slovakia was not favourable. We were seen as
backwards and politically unstable, but since then the IMF, the World Bank
and the EBRD have helped to give us recognition. We are also much more
active at targeting investors abroad, and people are getting a clearer
picture of opportunities in Slovakia.'
Officials are trying to market Slovakia as a convenient production and
trading centre with a relatively good transport infrastructure and good
access to both western and eastern markets. Telecommunications, which are
currently very poor, especially inside the country, are being upgraded
through an Ecu227m modernisation programme. The European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is providing Ecu44m and Slovak
Telecommunications Ecu122m with the remaining Ecu61m coming from export
credit agencies.
The project will improve services for 414,000 existing customers and bring
in 200,000 new subscribers. By 1995 all main cities should have a digital
telephone network. Bratislava will be equipped with a combined local,
transit and international exchange and be the focus of a nationwide optical
fibre backbone system.
A recent EBRD study of some 400 small-to-medium size Slovak companies with
500-1,000 employees, identified more than 50 with good prospects for
potential investment in a wide range of sectors. 'People are finding much
greater scope for investment than they expected.' a western consultant says.
The EBRD, which is playing a catalytic role in attracting foreign investment
to Slovakia, is considering investing Ecu10m in a proposed Ecu20m fund to
invest in such companies. It will work alongside the European Community
which plans to put up Ecu5m through its Phare programme, with the rest
coming from elsewhere.
The EBRD is also providing a total of Dollars 125m for the completion of a
new aluminium smelter at Ziar nad Hronom. Over Dollars 185m had been spent
on the 65 per cent finished plant before construction was suspended five
years ago because of lack of funds. The new financing will allow the plant
to be completed with the installation of state of the art technology from
Norsk Hydro which is also taking a Dollars 15m equity stake in Slovalco, the
operating company. The EBRD is also taking a Dollars 15m equity stake in the
company, but the bulk of its commitment is a Dollars 110m loan which will be
used to finish construction, buy the equipment and also close down the
existing, heavily polluting, smelters.
Other investors so far include Volkswagen, with a Dollars 32.5m investment
in an assembly plant near Bratislava for its Passat model; K-Mart of the US
with a Dollars 30m investment in the Prior retail chain stores; Rhone
Poulenc (Dollars 20m); and Samsung (Dollars 11m). Volkswagen is reported to
be planning a further Dollars 25m investment at Bratislava.
The close proximity of Bratislava to Vienna - just over an hour's drive away
 -has encouraged Austrian investors, including Siemens' Austrian subsidiary.
With more than 1,000 Austrian companies established in Slovakia and Dollars
76m invested, Slovakia's western neighbour has both the largest number and
volume of investments, representing about 30 per cent of total foreign
investments. Complex negotiations are continuing with OMV, the Austrian
energy group, which is seeking an important stake in Slovnaft, the Slovak
oil and petrochemical company.
With Austrian plans to up-grade transport and rail links between Bratislava
and Vienna, Austrian investment is likely to continue to grow. The Austrian
commercial office in Bratislava says that in the first half of the year it
has had some 7,000 inquiries, two-thirds from Slovak companies seeking
foreign partners. These developments offer hope for an economy in its fourth
year of deep recession.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

931102

