FT932-13471

FT  23 APR 93 / Warning note as exports lead broad recovery: Confidence at
pre-recession levels - Poor cashflow points to more small-company failures


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


BRITAIN is experiencing a broadly based recovery led by exports but
weaknesses remain that could hinder future growth, the British Chambers of
Commerce said yesterday.
The BCC said its quarterly survey of 8,820 manufacturing and service
companies showed that orders were growing at home and abroad, and that a
growing share of companies expect turnover and profits to improve in the
next 12 months.
But although confidence has returned to pre-recession levels, the chambers
warned that only one in five companies is at full capacity. Investment
intentions remain weak and on balance all except small companies plan to
shed labour in the next three months. Small companies with fewer than 20
workers reported both the strongest improvement in orders and worsening
cashflow problems in the survey, carried out between March 5 and March 26.
According to Mr Richard Brown, director of policy, small companies often
suffer from late debt payments or are unable to obtain working capital.
Their cashflow problems point to further insolvencies to come.
The survey found that the portion of manufacturing companies reporting an
increase of UK orders over the previous three months exceeded those
reporting a decrease by 7 percentage points. This positive balance
contrasted with a negative balance of minus 10 points in the previous survey
when reports of falling orders exceeded rising orders.
The service sector also reported a recovery in home orders with a positive
balance of 12 points compared with zero three months before.
Manufacturers' export orders rose strongly, with the positive balance
widening to 20 percentage points from 12 points in the final quarter of last
year. However, the service sector's export outlook was only marginally
better with the positive balance for orders increasing to just 10 points
from 8 points three months before. Mr Brown said that this was a matter of
some concern.
But Mr Christopher Stewart-Smith, the chambers' president, said the survey
as a whole was the 'most encouraging for some time'.
He said the marked improvement in business confidence to levels last seen in
early 1989 reflected more than expectations of higher sales and profits.
The survey found that the recovery was geographically widespread. In the
manufacturing sector, only three regions - Scotland, the east Midlands and
Northern Ireland - experienced a fall in UK orders, while in the service
sector no region suffered a decline in orders. All regions reported growth
in export orders. The recession is not yet over, according to a survey which
says signs of recovery are being threatened by low consumer confidence and
unemployment fears.
Business Strategies, the consultancy, and Gallup, the market research group,
say that people remain 'very pessimistic'. Worries about the economy over
the next 12 months are higher than they were in the first quarter of last
year.
Chambers of Commerce Survey
Domestic orders improved for the second consecutive quarter while
manufacturing exports grew at the fastest rate for three years. The survey
said companies were beginning to revise investment plans upwards, but
overall levels remain extremely low. There was a small improvement in the
cashflow position of companies. The level of interest rates remains the
number one external factor affecting business in the service sector and the
second most important factor for manufacturing. Confidence about
profitability and turnover has risen and is highest in the home counties.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930423

