FT932-3435

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (1): An economic balancing act - As a
result of its policy of structural adjustment, Tunisia has become a
favourite of the International Monetary Fund. It is also a pilot country for
certain United Nations social programmes


   By MARK NICHOLSON and FRANCIS GHILES


NORTH Africa's smallest nation looks to its neighbours with a peculiar
mixture of pride and unease. Tunisia's ministers, and swelling class of
businessmen and women, point with self-congratulation to the country's
recent economic successes, its political stability and its distinctively
western social policies. The ogre of Islamic fundamentalism has, they claim,
been quashed.
A course of near-Europeanisation is firmly plotted. If only the same held
next door to the west, where Tunisians are profoundly disconcerted by the
threat of incipient guerrilla war in Algeria, or to the east where Libya
continues to ply its own unpredictable, pariah's path]
Such regional uncertainties appear only to harden the government's
determination to set a better, meaning a more western, example. The regime
of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, which calmly ushered out, on the
pretext of 'senility', the post-independence leader Mr Habib Bourguiba in
1987, holds as its primary ambition nothing less than laying eventual claim
to a full place in what it hopes will be an expanded European economic
space.
Much has been achieved. Seven years into International Monetary Fund and
World Bank guided structural adjustment, Tunisia's increasingly open economy
has grown by an average 6.6 per cent in real terms over the past three
years. Absolute poverty has shrunk, according to official figures, from 30
per cent of the population in the 1970s to 6.7 per cent today. As a legacy
of Bourguiba's progressive birth control policies, the population growth
rate has diminished to a regionally unparalleled 1.9 per cent, and the
country is set to reach replacement rate for its economic population in
2025, by which time there will be around 12m Tunisians.
Socially, too, Tunisia aspires to European norms. Perhaps most important is
the role accorded to women, who enjoy better rights to divorce, abortion and
general equality before the law than their counterparts in any other Arab
country - again a legacy of the Bourguiba era. Tunisia's association of
women managers has 2,000 or more members.
Such achievements have made Tunisia a favourite of the IMF, and a pilot
country for certain United Nations social programmes. But they have been won
in a manner which has brought the government little praise for its political
strategy.
In testimony last month before the US House foreign affairs committee, Mr
Edward Djerejian, assistant secretary responsible for Near East Affairs,
praised Tunisia as a 'case study of the positive results of free market
reforms,' but voiced 'serious concerns' about human rights and political
freedom. 'Tunisia has dealt too harshly with some of its political
opponents,' he said. 'Tunisia's human rights record has been marred by
credible claims of torture.'
These claims were raised particularly by Amnesty International following the
government's arrest and detention in May 1991 of almost 300 alleged members
of the now outlawed al Nahda Islamic party, whose leader, Mr Rachid
Gannouchi, is now seeking political asylum in Britain.
The group was accused of plotting the government's overthrow and planning to
attack the president's aircraft with a Stinger anti-aircraft missile. But
the clampdown followed rising concern within the regime at the rising
Islamic challenge in Algeria and the burning of two night watchmen at the
premises of the ruling party. In the view of most western diplomats in
Tunis, the government simply decided to come down as hard as possible, as
soon as possible, on what many consider to have been at best a nascent
threat. 'They wanted to crush the movement while it was still inside the
egg,' says one.
The government, and Tunisia's middle classes, profess themselves confident
that, for the moment, whatever fundamentalist threat there was has been
summarily dealt with. Whatever residual popular support al-Nahda might still
have is almost impossible to judge. Diplomats quote support ranging from
13-20 per cent in the last elections, where independent candidates backed by
al-Nahda were free to run. While the government keeps a tightly policed
clamp on any political manifestation of Islam, however, estimates of present
fundamentalist sympathy are anecdotal surmise.
In fact, the government's weapons against political Islam are not merely
oppressive. Its championing of women is one attempt to create a powerful
social pillar of resistance against what it regards as 'backward' Islamic
thinking.
Among other attempts to attack the possible social causes of fundamentalism,
the ministry of social affairs is also, creating numerous centres of 'social
service and integration'. These are being set up in places of relative
poverty and deprivation to nip 'delinquency' in the bud and better to
understand and address its causes. 'In Algeria and Egypt social policies
have been left to the fundamentalists,' says one official. 'That will not
happen here.'
But the greatest single weapon, the government hopes, will be economic
progress and the delivery to Tunisia's already large middle class of some
tangible rewards from liberalisation. On the macro level, Tunisia has
already brought down its budget deficit to around 2 per cent of GDP from
more than double that in the late 1980s, has freed a majority of producer
and consumer prices, trimmed subsidies, begun to liberalise financial
markets, freed constraints on most imports and courted with increasing zeal
foreign investment, levels of which it hopes to treble over the next three
years.
It has also begun preliminary negotiations with the European Community, with
which Tunisia does almost 80 per cent of its trade, towards a comprehensive
co-operation accord to improve substantially on the financial protocols and
quota agreements which at present determine its links across the
Mediterranean.
The key to its success will lie in achieving its ambitious inward investment
target. To keep pace with its growing workforce, Tunisia needs to create
more than 60,000 jobs a year - and more if it is to make inroads on
unemployment officially calculated at 15 per cent. 'This growth is
possible,' says one banker, 'but only through marginal investment, and this
can come in sufficient size only from overseas'.
The difficult task for Tunisia's technocratic ministers will be to attract
this investment while continuing to expand, and pay for, social policies
which are considered both a political imperative and the natural fulfilment
of the population's increasingly middle class aspirations. For the moment
Tunisia competes directly as a low wage economy with its North African
neighbours, notably Morocco, eastern European countries and, in some
industries, south-east Asia. But, says Mr Nouri Zorgati, the finance
minister: 'We do not want to break records of competitiveness by sacrificing
social standards.' The government is determined to improve its network of
social policies, including, for instance, a minimum wage which rises in line
with inflation. At the same time it cannot afford to lose competitive ground
to the countries of eastern Europe.
To that balancing act should be added, in the minds of many Tunisians, an
additional political imperative: that of taking greater steps towards real
democratisation while at the same time allowing the country's press greater
freedom. At present, President Ben Ali's ruling party, the Rassemblement
Constitutionnel Democratique, holds all 141 seats in the country's
parliament and keeps an iron grip on the political process.
Talks between Mr Hamed Karoui, the prime minister, and opposition parties
are under way with the aim of ensuring at least some non-RCD representation
after general elections next March. The government has conceded the
principle of allowing some seats in the chamber to be elected through
proportional representation, the rest first-past-the-post. This, it is
believed, could return 10-20 opposition MPs. 'The government wants to create
an opposition which is both credible, and controllable,' says one diplomat,
'and that won't be easy.'
But some critics in the country believe the government's present efforts
will fall far short of creating truly representative opposition, accusing
the government of maintaining a 'monochrome' parliament which does an
injustice to the sophistication of Tunisia's educated electorate and to the
kind of debate over its economic reforms many consider vital. 'You can't
talk of economic liberalism and continue with political dirigisme,' says one
critic, who prefers to remain anonymous. 'The model of Pinochet-style
development is dead.'
These critics understand the difficulty of opening up the political system
when the chief beneficiary could be Islamic militants. But many argue that
the government will be able to carry through the next difficult phase of
economic reforms only if these can be fully debated in a freer press and by
a more representative parliament.

The Financial Times


London Page I

930614

