FT934-8410

FT  16 NOV 93 / Radical education report welcomed


   By JOHN AUTHERS


ONE OF THE most ambitious reports on education in England and Wales met with
a broadly positive response from the educational establishment yesterday.
The independent National Commission on Education's proposals are radical and
cover every level of schooling. University heads, the main teachers' unions
and the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties voiced strong support.
However, Mr John Patten, the education secretary, had not been sent a copy
of the report by the end of its press launch and was unable to comment,
although he confirmed that he would take the recommendations seriously.
The commission made numerous proposals, which it estimates could be
introduced at a cost of Pounds 1.4bn.
Nursery education
Universal nursery education should be introduced as the basic building block
for the rest of the system, it says. Within five years nursery places should
be available for all children in deprived areas. By 2010, 95 per cent of
four-year-olds and 85 per cent of three-year-olds should be at school.
Class sizes
Within five years, the commission says, no primary school should have a
class size of more than 30. In inner cities, however, and schools with a
high proportion of children speaking English as a second language, classes
should have a maximum of 20 for the first two years of primary school.
Twenty should be the ultimate maximum size for all primary school classes.
Curriculum/qualifications
All the present qualifications - GCSEs usually taken at 16, and A-levels at
18, along with vocational qualifications - should be put under the umbrella
of a new General Education Diploma (GED). This would have ordinary and
advanced levels, and normally be taken at the ages of 16 and 18.
The age of 14 should become the main educational watershed, rather than 16,
with pupils setting out on a series of GED modules, intended to lead to
advanced level in four years.
The target is that by the year 2000, 90 per cent or more of young people
will be working for 'nationally recognised qualifications' at least until
the age of 18.
Departmental organisation
The commission says education and training have no clear dividing line
between them. To recognise this, and to avoid problems in co-ordinating the
two, it would merge the Department for Education with the training section
of the Department of Employment to create a Department of Education and
Training.
Other bureaucratic streamlining would involve the merger of the National
Council for Vocational Qualifications, the training quango, and the Schools
Curriculum and Assessment Authority, which administers the national
curriculum and its tests.
Local education authorities
The government is already urging schools to opt out of local education
authority control. Under the commission's proposals local education
authorities would be abolished and replaced with education and training
boards which would eventually have a similar remit as Training and
Enterprise Councils. The boards would have less power than local education
authorities.
All schools would therefore have the fiscal benefits and independence of
'opted-out' schools, and these would no longer have separate status.
Higher education funding
The commission favours introducing loans which graduates would use to pay
for their tuition. These would be repaid through a higher rate of income
tax.
Learning to Succeed - A Radical Look at Education Today and A Strategy for
the Future. Heinemann. Pounds 4.95.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931116

