FT934-11558

FT  30 OCT 93 / Markets: Hungry investors tuck in to tasty stocks - Wall
Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


TAKE plenty of low inflation and low interest rates, and add a healthy
portion of low-to-moderate economic growth. Sprinkle with strong bond prices
and improving corporate earnings, and you have the perfect recipe for a
tasty stock market boom.
All of the above ingredients were available this week, and the mix proved a
satisfying meal for hungry US investors, who propelled stocks to another
round of record-setting gains on Wall Street.
A week ago it was the secondary market indices - the Standard & Poor's 500,
the Nasdaq Composite and the American Stock Exchange Composite - reaching
new highs. This week it was the turn of blue-chip and cyclical stocks to
break into previously unexplored territory, as the Dow Jones industrial
average advanced to a record close of 3,687.86 on Thursday.
The key to much of the gains was the third quarter gross domestic product
report. Expecting a 2.7 per cent increase in GDP, analysts were pleased to
see that growth was slightly stronger at 2.8 per cent. Yet two other
elements of the quarterly data that were particularly encouraging.
First, statisticians pointed out that but for the impact of the crop losses
incurred during the summer's devastating floods in the Midwest, the economy
would have grown by an even healthier 3.4 per cent between July and
September. Second, the cost of gross domestic purchase, an important measure
of inflation, rose by only 1.8 per cent in the third quarter, down from the
2.9 per cent rate of growth reported in the previous three months and the
lowest rate since 1986.
The news of moderate growth coupled with low inflation was exactly what the
equity markets needed. Although many share indices have been trading at or
near record highs, there has been a feeling among many analysts that
investors were growing cautious about stocks.
This assessment was based on the fact that recent demand for equities has
been very patchy. Since mid-summer, analysts believe investors have been
'rotating' their portfolios, rapidly shifting funds from sector to sector in
search of value. Just this month, for example, investors were initially keen
on semiconductor stocks in expectation of a revival in the industry's
fortunes. Then, they moved on to financials in the wake of further declines
in interest rates, before news of a bank prime rate cut forced them to
switch back into cyclicals. Later it was the turn of airline stocks to
benefit, as investors kept searching for the next updraft.
On Thursday this approach was abandoned as investors moved into equities on
a broad front, spurred by a rare combination of optimistic economic data and
positive earnings from some big corporations.
There was more to the markets' gains than that, however. Almost half of the
Dow's 23-point advance on Thursday was attributable to one stock - Eastman
Kodak. Late on Wednesday, Kodak stunned Wall Street by announcing that
George Fisher, highly-regarded chairman of Motorola, was joining the company
as its chief executive.
So enthused were investors by Fisher's track-record that they stampeded to
buy Kodak stock in the hope that he would be able to engineer a rapid
turnaround in the faltering company's fortunes. By the close of trading
Kodak shares were up almost Dollars 6 at Dollars 63 1/2 , although the bulk
of those gains were achieved in after-hours trading.
Fisher now has the difficult task of living up to the expectations of
investors who bought Kodak shares and analysts who hailed his appointment
as, in the words of one stockwatcher, 'beyond the dreams of avarice.'
Kodak's coup partly overshadowed what was another good week for corporate
America. Although the week had its share of laggards - Minnesota Mining &
Manufacturing, Phillips Petroleum and RJR Nabisco reported weaker profits -
the balance of earnings data was again bullish. Among those announcing
either narrower losses or stronger profits were IBM, General Motors, Ford,
US Steel, Bethlehem Steel, Delta and United Airlines.
With the bulk of the latest reporting season now out of the way, it is clear
that corporate profitability is firmly established on an upward path. One
compilation of third quarter results published this week showed that 60 per
cent of companies which have reported earnings for the latest period either
matched, or exceeded, analysts' forecasts.
The next quarter should see this trend maintained, especially if economic
growth continues to pick up. After Thursday's GDP report, economists
upgraded forecasts for fourth quarter growth from 3 per cent to nearer 3.5
and 4 per cent.
 ---------------------------------
Monday      3673.61  +  24.31
Tuesday     3672.49  -  01.12
Wednesday   3664.66  -  07.83
Thursday    3687.86  +  23.20
Friday      3680.59  -   7.27
 ---------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

931030

