FT933-5328

FT  03 SEP 93 / International Bonds: Austria establishes benchmark in
long-dated Euroyen sector


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


THE Republic of Austria established a new benchmark in the long end of the
Euroyen market yesterday when it raised Y60bn through an offering of 12-year
Eurobonds.
The issue, which was priced against the World Bank's 10-year yen global bond
in the absence of an underlying Japanese government bond, had a mixed
reception.
Some bankers said the spread on Austria's issue was five basis points too
tight, based on a theoretical 12-year Japanese government bond yield.
However, the lead manager, Yamaichi International, said the pricing was
justified by the quality of the borrower and current demand among investors
for long-dated paper.
The pricing also reflected Yamaichi's view that Japanese interest rates will
be cut in the near future, increasing the attraction of the bonds' coupon of
4 1/2 per cent.
Weakness in the Japanese government bond market yesterday resulted in
Austria's issue being launched at a spread of 13 basis points over the yield
on the World Bank's yen global bond, compared with an intended spread of 17
basis points.
By late afternoon, the spread had widened to 15 basis points. Yamaichi said
that around half of the issue had been placed by yesterday afternoon. When
the bonds were freed to trade they were quoted within fees at 99.68 bid,
compared with an issue price of par.
Meanwhile, two sovereign borrowers are getting ready to launch dollar global
bond issues. Portugal has awarded a mandate to Merrill Lynch and IBJ
International. Italy is expected to announce its offering by the end of
September.
In the dollar sector, Credit Local de France issued Dollars 300m of
three-year Eurobonds priced to yield 18 basis points over the 4 3/8 per cent
US Treasury of 1996. The bonds, which carry a coupon of 4 1/4 per cent,
offered a small yield pick-up over a similar deal launched by General
Electric Capital Corp earlier this week.
Some bankers said the pricing of Credit Local's deal raised questions about
how it had met its dollar funding target, which they said was 20 basis
points below the London interbank offered rate (Libor). However, an official
involved in arranging the deal said that Credit Local's target was less
aggressive and had been achieved through a swap.
Irish Permanent Building Society made its debut in the international bond
market, raising Pounds 100m with a five-year offering of floating-rate notes
(FRNs). The lead manager, UBS, said the notes offered a substantial yield
pick-up over recent sterling FRNs in order to attract investors to this new
name.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930903

