FT932-215

FT  30 JUN 93 / World Trade News: Director-general of unfinished business
reaches end of the line - David Dodwell talks to Gatt's head on eve of his
retirement


   By DAVID DODWELL


   EIGHTEEN months ago a draft agreement


called the Dunkel Draft in deference to the role Mr Arthur Dunkel played in
crafting it - was drawn up in an attempt to break the deadlock in world
trade talks. Today, as Mr Dunkel steps down after 13 years as
director-general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Dunkel
Draft is still unsigned.
In Geneva yesterday the head of the Geneva-based international trade
watchdog was more philosophical than disappointed about retiring before a
Uruguay Round accord has been reached: 'The political winds were never quite
right, never blowing in the same direction for everyone.'
As leaders from the Group of Seven industrial nations prepare to meet in
Tokyo next week, with differences over the need for trade liberalisation
high on the agenda, Mr Dunkel remains optimistic that agreement can be
reached: 'We have come to a phase of secret diplomacy. There are lots of
meetings taking place, and they are based on new ideas.'
Concern that deepening recession, in Europe in particular, provides a
deteriorating environment for settlement of the Uruguay Round are
nevertheless apparent. Mr Dunkel fears the resurgence of the 1930s claim
that protection is needed to protect jobs.
'We thought it was part of the common sense of everyone that in an
integrated world economy, one of the most important sources of jobs is
international trade,' he said yesterday. 'Governments need to remind
protectionists that a tax on imports is a tax on exports.'
Recent US demands for management of trade with Japan are a source of less
concern: 'We know the results of managed trade: just look at Comecon. Are we
really going to manage trade when we have such strong evidence that it does
not work?'
Mr Dunkel is ready to challenge any criticisms that at certain pivotal
moments - such as the negotiating collapses in December last year, or in
Brussels in December 1990 - he failed to manipulate negotiators to make the
final push that might have prevented breakdown.
'I may look peaceful, but some people have come to know that I can be very
rough,' he says, recalling secret sessions called with negotiators either at
his home in Roussin, north-west of Geneva, or in the back room of an Italian
restaurant close to the French border. 'In this process there has been a lot
of bulldozing, keeping the bar open until two in the morning - even physical
boxing.'
If the G7 summit is a success, with leading industrial countries agreeing a
market opening package of tariff cuts in manufactures and services, Mr
Dunkel's successor Mr Peter Sutherland, former EC competition commissioner,
will be presiding within days of assuming office over a hectic push in
Geneva to broaden the G7 deal to embrace all 111 signatories to the Gatt. If
they fail, he faces the potential failure of the Round, and a slide into
protectionism and managed trade.
'I spent my youth in a family that went through the Great Depression,' Mr
Dunkel recalls. 'I have no need to read text books to remember what it was
like.
'That is what frightens me, because attitudes being voiced today are very
similar. The major difference today is that the Gatt exists, and is playing
a full roll as a deterrent.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930630

