FT934-10038

FT  08 NOV 93 / Industrialist predicts mass joblessness


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


SIR GRAHAM DAY, former chairman of British Shipbuilders, PowerGen and Rover,
has painted a gloomy picture of mass unemployment throughout the industrial
world and a growing division between an elite and an unemployable,
semi-literate mass which spends its days watching videos.
Giving the inaugural annual lecture at the South Bank Business School in
London, he said: 'I foresee future new employment opportunities being
accessible by fewer members of society with the rest either working at
subsistence levels or unemployed. Those unemployed in the 21st century may
well be unemployable.'
He said he based this view on what he had already observed. Citing examples
from his time in British industry, he said: 'At the most basic levels of
functional literacy and numeracy society has a problem now.'
He added: 'When broad employment criteria are for more, better and relevant
education and skills, it is relevant that very significant percentages of
society are not even qualified to the extent of the basics.'
He said he did not know how society would deal with the large number of
people unable to participate in the knowledge-based industries. 'Whether the
cry will be for programme enhancement or the organisation of activities
which can fill the time of those who will be unemployed, I cannot say.'
Sir Graham was sceptical of government's ability to create jobs and scathing
about the 'endless diatribe' about state-funded training, which he said was
wholly ineffective if basic education was inadequate.
'From time to time governments mount major training initiatives. Invariably
these are expensive, bureaucratic and of marginal impact.'
He advocated shifting the training burden on to employers but also
recommended penalties on those companies that did not comply.
Sir Graham cited the Pounds 35m a year spent by Rover on everything from
remedial education to doctoral degrees as a reason for its recent success.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931108

