FT934-11345

FT  01 NOV 93 / US Money and Credit: Data could bring back the bears


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


AS EVIDENCE mounts that the US economy is gradually strengthening, bond
yields at the long end of the Treasury market are struggling to hold below 6
per cent.
Last week, the market absorbed a spate of bullish economic numbers
surprisingly well. Prices fell and yields rose, but not by much. The yield
on the 30-year bond ended the week at 5.965 per cent.
However, another round of data is due out this week that will, in all
likelihood, point to a continued acceleration in economic activity, and
analysts are not sure that the market will take much more without cracking.
That investors stood their ground so well last week was partly due to some
discounting by dealers who had sold bonds in anticipation of bad economic
news, and partly because of remarks by Ms Susan Phillips, Federal Reserve
governor.
The third-quarter gross domestic product report had been discounted by the
the market earlier in the week. The 2.8 per cent rise in GDP was roughly in
line with expectations, and at first glance there was little to concern the
market about the figures.
However, a closer look revealed a more disturbing fact: that if it had not
been for the impact of crop losses incurred during the summer's floods in
the Midwest, GDP would have grown by a much more robust 3.4 per cent between
July and September. Once the penny dropped, so did prices, pushing yields
back over 6 per cent.
The selling did not last long, because the decline in prices quickly
attracted buyers. The market was helped by comments from Ms Phillips, who
said that she doubted whether economic growth in the fourth quarter could
match the 2.8 per cent rate achieved in the third quarter.
Although there was nothing especially shocking in that statement, it was
enough to push prices into positive territory, and yields back below 6 per
cent.
The reaction to the Fed governor's remarks highlights the skittishness of
fixed-income investors. Ten days ago bond prices were sent into a temporary
tailspin by an innocuous prime rate cut by Morgan Guaranty.
A week later equally innocuous comments from a Fed official helped spark a
rally. This is not the behaviour of a market that knows where it's going.
With yields at historic lows, and the Fed more likely to make the next
interest rate move an upward one, investors are clearly worried that the
bond market may have reached its peak.
This week's data could prove a turning point for bonds. A raft of important
economic data is due for release, and if the figures are consistently on the
bullish side, the long end of the market could be in for a rough few days.
Today opens with the National Association of Purchasing Management's report
for October, which is expected to record signs of a recovery in nationwide
manufacturing activity. Tomorrow, September's leading economic indicators
are forecast to show an increase of 0.5 per cent, and September
single-family home sales to show a rise of about 4 per cent.
The pace picks up on Friday, when the all-important monthly jobs figures are
published. Analysts expect the national unemployment rate to stay unchanged
at 6.7 per cent, but are predicting a solid 150,000 increase in non-farm
payrolls.
If these forecast prove accurate, fixed-income investors will end the week
with little doubt in their minds that the economy has accelerated away from
the sluggish growth exhibited in the first half of the year. And given that
the recent discounting of good economic news has worked its way out through
the market, there is very little slack left in bond prices.
After last week's struggle to keep yields below 6 per cent, the market may
not have the strength to resist the bears this week.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931101

