FT933-5139

FT  04 SEP 93 / Cookery: Another revival of salad days


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


THIS has been a disaster year in our garden. The courgettes curled up and
died. The white currants refused to fruit. The runner beans failed to run. I
began to despair of enjoying any home-grown produce.
But gardeners are kind-hearted and generous people, well versed in the
charitable practice of visiting the sick and the dying. Word of our
predicament spread and we have received a stream of commiserations, many
from visitors who bring a harvest of offerings from their own gardens.
There have been bunches of the sweetest-ever young carrots, beetroots
ranging in size from ping-pong to tennis ball, the newest of new potatoes,
courgettes, runner beans (yellow-podded as well as green), squeaky-fresh
spinach, armfuls of flat leaf parsley, green coriander and rocket, lettuces
of various shapes and hues, and cucumbers and tomatoes of unparalleled
flavour. Special thanks to Edna and Alex Cross, Louise Mollo, Phoebe
Wickham, Carl Telemacque and, most of all, to Doris and Bob Bennett. As a
result of their kindness, here is a trio of salads we have enjoyed.
ROCKET WITH SWEET PEPPERS AND PARMESAN
Use whatever quantities and whatever ratio of ingredients you like for this
robustly flavoured salad, which makes an admirable appetiser. If you do not
have gardening friends to help with providing fresh ingredients, or if time
is short, a jar of roasted and skinned red peppers preserved in olive oil
can be used instead of peppers prepared freshly at home.
Grill two or three red peppers until the skin is blistered and black all
over and the flesh feels soft underneath. Strip off the papery skins as soon
as cool enough to handle. Discard stalks, seeds and pith and cut the flesh
into strips.
Dress them with fruity olive oil, sea salt and black pepper. Add a dash of
lemon juice, also a smidgeon of very finely-chopped garlic if liked. Toss
and leave to marinate for at least one hour. Overnight is better.
To serve, lay the peppers on a bed of rocket leaves and scatter another
handful of rocket over them. Drizzle the marinade juices over the leaves and
scatter with thinly-shaved curls of Parmesan cheese.
POTATO, TOMATO AND WATERCRESS SALAD
Adapted slightly from Dorothy Hartley's Food In England, this makes a
delicious and useful light lunch dish.
Skin and slice 1lb or so of well ripened and richly flavoured tomatoes. Lay
them in a shallow dish. Season lightly with salt and pepper and sprinkle
generously with chopped mint and chives.
Steam or boil an equal weight of thickly sliced La Ratte or Charlotte
potatoes. Drain well and dress them with a few spoonfuls of well seasoned
single cream (or with a dollop of home-made mayonnaise thinned with milk to
the consistency of single cream).
Lay the potatoes, as soon as cool, over the tomatoes. Scatter a few stoned
and halved black olives here and there, cover with a close carpet of
watercress sprigs, and drizzle a soupcon of olive oil and vinegar over the
whole lot. Two to three parts oil to one part vinegar works well here, and
balsamic vinegar is to be recommended.
MANGO WITH PRAWNS, CORIANDER AND LIME
The essential ingredient here is that elusive commodity, a well ripened
mango. Not, alas, something my gardening neighbours can supply, but easier
to buy (and often cheaper) at this season than at other times of the year.
Allow a handful of North Atlantic prawns per person and one perfectly ripe
mango between four people for a first course.
Shell the prawns, saving the heads and other debris for soup. Season the
shellfish with sea salt, black pepper and freshly squeezed lime juice. Toss
and set aside while you peel the mango and cut its flesh into crescent moon
slices.
Both the scent and the taste of the fruit should be lusciously rich. If it
smells as though wiped with a turpentine rag, abandon it and use a couple of
nectarines instead.
Mix the mango gently with the seafood and its juices, scatter with a little
chopped green coriander, and garnish with wedges of lime.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

930904

