FT932-7076

FT  26 MAY 93 / Spanish Elections: Gonzalez faces struggle


   By PETER BRUCE


   MADRID


THE BANK of Spain cut its official intervention rate from 11.5 per cent to
11.25 per cent yesterday, bringing relief to the Spanish economy, but little
joy to Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez, who late on Monday night took a
hammering in a televised election debate with his inexperienced conservative
challenger, Mr Jose Maria Aznar.
The debate, watched by up to 11m people, was the first ever in Spain and is
likely to have seriously damaged Mr Gonzalez's chances of holding office
after the elections on June 6. Mr Gonzalez's socialists and Mr Aznar's
Partido Popular (People's party) are neck-and-neck in the polls.
Mr Aznar scored point after point against his seemingly poorly prepared
opponent, and most commentators yesterday credited him with having 'won' the
debate, although one extensive listener poll for a nationwide breakfast
radio show declared for Mr Gonzalez.
While that may mean that voters outside the big cities viewed the debate
differently from the country's intellectuals, Mr Aznar, almost without
interference, was able to attack Mr Gonzalez's two open wounds: the economic
recession - with 3.3m people unemployed and three peseta devaluations in
nine months - and corruption allegations against the ruling party.
Mr Gonzalez tried to counter by insisting that life in Spain had improved
immeasurably since the socialists came to power in 1982, but he made little
impact. Mr Aznar focused attention on the government's poor economic record
in its third term of office and sidestepped all of the prime minister's
attempts to make him detail his economic policies. The prime minister has
never before looked so vulnerable in public.
The two men will meet for one more TV debate next Monday. It is likely that
Mr Gonzalez's advisers will be working on his basic television performance
techniques before then. The prime minister, who considers himself a natural
communicator, believes that such theatrical skills are a waste of time -
such that he barely even looked at the camera on Monday night. Mr Aznar,
however, glued himself to it, his only weakness being a perhaps too
confident air.
The socialists, meanwhile, were thrown into further choas in the
Principality of Asturias just before the debate when the region's socialist
leader, Mr Juan Luis Rodriguez-Vigil resigned, the victim of a massive
confidence trick.
Hoping to boost socialist chances in the region on June 6, Mr
Rodriguez-Vigil hurriedly announced last week that his government had
secured a Saudi-led Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.9bn) investment in a new oil
refinery. But the region had been negotiating with a middleman who has since
vanished and the Saudi investors say they know nothing about the refinery.
Analysts in Madrid said yesterday they did not believe the quarter point cut
in the Bank of Spain's benchmark rate would have much effect on the election
result.
It is the second cut this month - the first, of one-and-a-half points,
brought official rates down from 13 per cent to 11.5 per cent after the 8
per cent devaluation of the peseta on May 13.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930526

