FT934-11645

FT  30 OCT 93 / Collective view backs farm tenancy reform: A general desire
for new agricultural legislation


   By ALISON MAITLAND


MRS JANE Jenner-Fust, a Gloucestershire landowner, would like her son to
have the option one day of taking over the dairy farm she lets to a young
tenant farmer on her 1,500-acre estate near the River Severn.
But her son is only 15 and has not yet decided on a career. If in the
meantime she lets her tenant stay when his Ministry of Agriculture licence
runs out in 2 1/2 years, the farmer will be entitled to tenure for life.
'He's a very good farmer and I'd like to be able to give him 15 years to get
on with it uninterrupted, and without feeling the axe is going to fall,'
said Mrs Jenner-Fust. 'But if I let him farm on a permanent basis, then I'm
cutting our own throats.'
Cases like hers prompted Mrs Gillian Shephard, the agriculture minister, to
announce plans earlier this month to reform legislation on agricultural
tenancies, which is seen throughout the farming industry as a mockery.
Under the 1986 Agricultural Holdings Act any tenancy longer than two years
entitles the tenant to stay for life. As a result, landlords resort to a
range of short-term arrangements, licences and loopholes - such as
agreements of between 13 and 23 months - to get round the law.
Mr Marshall Taylor, who farms a 300-acre dairy enterprise on the Crown
Somerset Estate in the Quantock hills and is vice-chairman of the Tenant
Farmers' Association, said: 'The current situation is just hand to mouth.
Land is being farmed short-term, which is neither good for the land nor the
farming business.'
The legislation also means young farmers without a private income or a farm
to inherit find entry into the business barred. Land is too expensive and
tenancies are too few.
Tenants farm 26 per cent of Britain's 213,000 agricultural holdings,
covering about 15m acres, or 37 per cent of the agricultural land.
Both landlords and tenants want reform, but they will probably have to wait.
Mrs Shephard made clear that her proposals were jostling for space in a busy
parliamentary timetable, so the earliest that legislation is likely to be
enacted is 1995.
She also needs to be sure her proposals will not split the government's
supporters. In spite of consensus on the need for change, her blueprint has
not met universal approval.
Mrs Shephard's plans, which would affect only new tenants, are to create a
new form of farm business tenancy to encourage diversification and to allow
contracts to be freely negotiated between landowners and tenants, subject to
three safeguards.
These would ensure tenants were fully compensated for improvements, that
either side could settle compensation disputes by arbitration rather than
through the courts, and that tenants received a minimum of one year's notice
to quit.
Not surprisingly, the Country Landowners' Association, whose 50,000 members
range from the Duke of Westminster and the Duchy of Cornwall to small
landowners with less than 100 acres, fully supports the Shephard plan.
Mr Nick Way, the association's political adviser, said: 'Landlords want
flexibility. Some of the institutions will let for long periods. Some
landowners will want to let for intervening periods if they've got a
successor who will be ready to take over in a few years' time. Some will
want to let to a new entrant for a short period in case it goes wrong.'
But the National Farmers' Union is sharply critical of the lack of
protection for tenants against ever-increasing rents.
Mr Ian Gardner, the union's policy director, said: 'In an industry like
agriculture, which has a staggering up and down record of profitability,
we'd be very worried about the implications for rural society of one-way
rent reviews.' The union wants a statutory clause stating that rents should
be reviewed according to prevailing market conditions, so landlords do not
hold all the cards.
The union has to be sensitive to the demands of its tenants' committee,
which represents nearly a third of its 97,000 members. Twelve years ago
tenants who felt the union was failing adequately to represent their
interests set up the Tenant Farmers' Association, which has 3,500 members.
The association argues for flexibility on the length of tenancies, rather
than a fixed minimum term. Mr Taylor said: 'We wouldn't want to be in a
position of having locked farmers long-term into holding land in difficult
times.'
The union has recently softened its earlier insistence on 15-year minimum
tenancies, which suggests the differences in the industry are more tactical
than strategic.
But even if these differences can be overcome the government will face
demands for further reforms, which landowners say are crucial to encouraging
more land to be put on the market. They want compensation for any fall in
land value resulting from tenant farmers leaving and taking their European
Community sheep quotas with them.
The Country Landowners' Association would also like the Treasury to extend
100 per cent relief from inheritance tax to landowners who let farms.
Given the state of government finances they may have to wait some time for
that too.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931030

