FT932-6571

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (13): Room for more cost-cutting -
Industrial companies are responding to foreign competition


   By JOHN BARHAM


INDUSTRIALISTS say their message is at last getting through to Mr Domingo
Cavallo: market forces alone will not be enough to transform Argentina's
obsolete and uncompetitive industry. Mr Cavallo does seem to have begun
shifting away from a laisser-faire to a more interventionist approach.
The main changes are:
Loans bearing below-market interest from the government's Banco de la Nacion
Argentina (BNA) worth Dollars 4.5bn this year, will be targeted mainly at
exporters, small businesses and farmers.
Companies can import capital goods duty free, at a saving of at least 10 per
cent. Domestic capital goods makers are entitled to a 15 per cent subsidy.
Last October's imposition of a 10 per cent surcharge on all imports (now
waived for capital goods), a move specifically designed to increase
industry's protection from imports.
However, Mr Cavallo is quick to deny that these changes represent a shift
back towards statism. His point is that having achieved macro-economic
stabilisation, the government is now able to turn its attention to
micro-economic issues that it previously had to ignore.
Mr Cavallo's efforts to redirect bank lending to industry and create a
broader capital market are encountering considerable obstacles.
Despite the government's greater interest in industrial policy, businesses
are aware that there will be no return to pretectionism. They see Mr
Cavallo's refocusing as little more than fine tuning.
The corporate scene varies immensely. Industries insulated from external
competition such as cars, or those in the service sector, such as
telecommunications, or those in the booming consumer goods market, are
reaping vast profits.
But exporters or companies facing import competition - especially from
Brazil - must contend with an uncompetitive currency and one of the world's
freest trade policies, despite a hefty rise in import duties last year. The
paper and pulp, steel, textile and petrochemicals industries are suffering
the most, but Mr Cavallo has rejected demands for special breaks for these
industries.
Companies are responding by aggressive cost cutting and productivity drives.
IBM, for instance, has been able to maintain its 6 per cent margin on its
exports of magnetic tape units and printers. All staff are on some form of
performance-related pay. Still, Mr Ricardo Martorana, IBM's president, says
there is still room for yet more cost cutting.
Even a medium-sized company like SICA, a family-owned electrical company, is
biting the bullet. Mr Cesar Wengrower, its vice president, says he has had
to cut his workforce by a 20 per cent and boost sales by 20 per cent to hold
his margin at 7 per cent of sales.
The car industry remains the big exception to the government's free market
principles. The industry is protected by import duties of 20 per cent and
quotas limiting import penetration to 9 per cent of the market.
Manufacturers may, however, import cars and pay a token 2 per cent duty.
Individuals can also import cars, but facea 20 per cent tariff. the effects
of import liberalisation can be seen on the streets of Buenos Aires, where
imported cars, once rarities, are now a common sight.
Trade in cars between Argentina and Brazil is carefully controlled.
Bilateral car trade is set at 40,000 units a year, and trade between the two
countries must be balanced. However, recession in Brazil and boom times in
Argentina led to a 20,000 vehicle shortfall in Argentine exports to Brazil.
Mr Edward Orsini, vice-president of Autolatina, the Volkswagen-Ford joint
venture with factories in Argentina and Brazil, says Argentina's car regime
is no more restrictive than other countries. And, as elsewhere, car industry
policy is a delicate issue because car companies employ many people.
The corollary of protection is regulation: for example, car companies may
now be able to import more, but they must balance their trade, no easy task
when Argentina's productivity still lags leading markets by about 30-50 per
cent.
However, the car industry is making progress in closing the productivity
gap. Autolatina has been able to hold its margins steady for the last two
years, despite sharp increases in labour and other fixed costs.
The industry's output last year hit a record 261,942 units, up from just
99,639 in 1990, the worst year on record. Mr Manuel Antelo, president of
CIADEA, the smallest of Argentina's three carmakers which makes Renault cars
under licence, says 'this bonanza will last for many years'. He says that
Argentina could be building 500,000 units a year within three years.
The recovery brought Autolatina into the black in 1991 for the first time in
a decade. CIADEA expects a Dollars 80m-100m 1993 net profit on sales of
Dollars 1.4bn. Improved trading conditions are drawing companies back to
Argentina.
In May, General Motors announced it would invest Dollars 100m in a pick-up
truck plant in Argentina, 15 years after quitting as the country sank into
political anarchy. CIADEA, GM's local partner plans investments of its own
of about Dollars 150m in 1993-94.
Industrial investments like these are desperately needed to shore up
Argentina's lopsided trade structure: 70 per cent of its exports are primary
goods, but nearly all its imports are industrial products.
Most of the investment seen in the last two years has taken the form of
incorporating new equipment rather than greenfield expansions. Trade data
show that imports of capital goods in 1992 rose to Dollars 3.87bn, twice the
previous year's level and the highest figure in over 20 years.
Just as important, companies need to develop modern management techniques.
One Argentine executive commented: 'Private company management leaves a lot
to be desired. Managers are complacent: they must change their mentality.
The changes that Cavallo is trying to bring require new management skills.'

The Financial Times


London Page 39

930527

