FT934-11636

FT  30 OCT 93 / Leading Article: Monetarism in retreat


REMEMBER the days, not so very long ago, when fighting inflation was the
sole aim of monetary policy, when fixed rules were thought the best guide to
monetary policy and when fine-tuning demand by using fiscal policy was a
cardinal sin? Times have changed. Slow growth is now the number one enemy
for most policymakers, discretionary monetary policy has replaced fixed
rules, and fiscal-activism, where possible, is positively encouraged.
Monetarism is out of fashion - Keynesianism is back. US officials, in both
the Bush and Clinton administrations, have led the new rhetoric, repeatedly
calling for lower interest rates in Europe and tax cuts in Japan. And
Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan was one of the first to spot that
slow growth and indebted banks, rather than inflationary pressure, were the
main threats to economic stability. The Fed cut short-term interest rates
early and sharply before the US recession began, dragging long-bond yields
down to record lows. Mr Greenspan has also ignored the siren monetarist
voices who have argue that double-digit narrow money growth spelt
inflationary dangers ahead. But, for all its lecturing, the US has not been
able to use fiscal policy to stimulate its sluggish recovery. With the US
budget deficit expected to be nearly 4 per cent of gross domestic product
this year, a further fiscal stimulus might well have provoked a rise in
long-term bond yields and choked off America's still sluggish recovery.
Instead, reversing the Keynesian logic, the promise of future fiscal
tightening has been used to keep bond rates down.
Japan, not the US, has been most effective at translating the Keynesian
rhetoric into reality. Blessed after years of restraint with a large
structural budget surplus, the Ministry of Finance has sanctioned three
successive fiscal packages to revive growth, switching a general government
budget surplus of 1.8 per cent of gross domestic product last year to a
deficit of 0.1 per cent next year.
Risky strategy
Yet, so far at least, Japan has little to show for its efforts. Output and
retail sales are still falling, the volume of bank lending continues to
contract and the OECD has already downgraded its forecast for Japanese
growth this year to zero. Not surprisingly, another fiscal package is
rumoured to be in the pipeline: a Y5,000bn (Pounds 31bn) tax cut, to take
effect next April, followed by a consumption tax rise in 1995.
This is a risky strategy: the negative effects of a prospective consumption
tax increase could blunt the stimulative effect of the income tax cut. In
any case, it is doubtful whether fiscal policy alone can revive Japanese
growth. No one can be sure whether Japan's sluggish credit growth is caused
by low demand from its bloated, job-shedding companies, or by restricted
supply of credit resulting from the parlous state of bank balance sheets.
But so long as monetary growth remains sluggish, the outlook for economic
recovery looks poor.
Germany, meanwhile, has experienced a huge and unexpected Keynesian boost,
followed by high interest rates imposed by an unflinchingly monetarist
central bank. As the growth effects of the fiscal boost have dwindled, so
this tight monetary policy has bequeathed a recession which may yet deepen.
Only five of German's six economic research institutes were able this week
to predict a modest economic recovery next year. The Berlin-based, and
Keynesian-leaning, Deutsches Institut fur Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW)
produced its own minority report predicting a further fall of 0.5 per cent
in output in the western Lande, after a 2 per cent fall this year.
Inflation-fighting
The DIW report called for lower interest rates and public investment to
revive the economy. But, like the US, Germany does not seem to have room for
a further Keynesian stimulus. This year's public sector borrowing
requirement is already expected to reach 7.5 per cent of GDP, a third higher
than the largest US deficit in the 1980s. More encouragingly for growth in
Germany and Europe, the Bundesbank appears to be edging away from its
earlier monetarist rhetoric. Bundesbank President Hans Tietmeyer used a
speech this week to reaffirm his inflation-fighting credentials. But less
than a week earlier, he justified a surprise half-point cut in German
interest rates by emphasising the need to stimulate the German economy,
while downplaying the fact that broad money growth is still running outside
its target range.
There is one European capital which is defiantly refusing to enter the
pro-growth era. Since the collapse of the exchange rate mechanism this
summer, the French government has continued to link its monetary policy to
that of Germany by trying to maintain a stable D-Mark-franc exchange rate.
In so doing, it has refused the significant cut in interest rates that
France's low inflation rate justifies. As a result it continues to pay a
heavy price in terms of depressed growth and high and rising unemployment.
In Paris, at least, monetarism lives on.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931030

