FT933-9926

FT  06 AUG 93 / International Company News: Austrian banks loosen the knots
 -Ian Rodger looks at Creditanstalt's planned sale of industrial holdings


   By IAN RODGER


IF Austria were a big industrial power, the US government and the European
Commission would have long since forced it to unwind the tight connections
between its two top banks and the country's leading industrial companies.
More than in Germany, more even than in Japan, the financial-industrial
networks in Austria are astonishingly close knit.
However, this week's announcement by Creditanstalt-Bankverein, the country's
second-largest banking group, that it intended to sell off most of its
industrial holdings indicates that change is at last on the way.
Bank Austria, the country's other large banking group, has said that it
would streamline its large industrial holdings.
In fact, Bank Austria has been adding to its holdings, taking over this year
much of the large investment portfolio of Wiener Holding, a sprawling
conglomerate which, like Bank Austria, is controlled by the city of Vienna.
Even before that move, Bank Austria's industrial portfolio was impressive.
Last year, the industrial companies that it controlled either through
majority or large minority share stakes had combined turnover of Sch33.4bn
(Dollars 12.8m), cash-flow of Sch1.7bn, and employed nearly 21,000 people.
Among its holdings were large stakes in the leading construction groups
Bauwesen and A. Porr; AKG, the specialist electronic equipment maker; the
Lenzing textile group; the Perlmooser cement group and the JM Voith turbine
and paper machine maker.
For its part, Creditanstalt boasts a 74.3 per cent stake in Semperit, the
tyremaker; 71.2 per cent of Steyr-Daimler-Puch, the motor group; 72.5 per
cent of Treibacher Chemische Werke; 63.8 per cent of Universale-Bau, the
construction group; and 59.4 per cent of Wienerberger Baustoffindustrie, the
building materials group, among other things.
These holdings are, to a large extent, the result of Austria's unusual
industrial development. Until the collapse of the imperial government in
1919, entrepreneurship was largely sponsored by the banks. After the second
world war circumstances favoured the banks. The Russians were determined
that industrial companies would not fall back into Nazi hands, and so tended
to allow only the government and government-controlled banks to buy them up.
(The Austrian government holds 75 per cent of the votes in Creditanstalt.)
Thus, the main commercial banks, Creditanstalt and Landerbank, which merged
with a savings bank group to become Bank Austria two years ago, became,
along with the state and city governments, the main owners of industry.
For a long time, this fitted comfortably with the tight social partnership
that guided Austrian political and economic life. The banks were important
vehicles for ensuring that jobs at all levels and contracts of all sizes
could be shared fairly among the Blacks (conservatives) and the Reds
(socialists).
The portfolios were useful in providing the banks with a steadily growing
store of hidden reserves. Under Austrian accounting procedures, equity
holdings can be stated in the balance sheet at cost.
Outside estimates put Creditanstalt's hidden reserves on its industrial
portfolio at about Sch4bn while those of Bank Austria may be worth Sch6bn.
However, in recent years, not only has the social partnership been coming
under strain, so have the banks.
Burdened with heavy losses following ill-fated international expansion in
the 1980s, Creditanstalt and Bank Austria have had to realise profits on
their industrial holdings to balance their books.
For example, at the end of 1991, Creditanstalt sold its stakes in three
Austrian brewers for Sch1.5bn. Last year, it covered much of its Sch5.7bn in
provisions by crystallising the capital gains on its controlling stake in
Wienerberger.
This was done in a curious Austrian way by selling it to a subsidiary. A
change in accounting law will soon outlaw this rather murky process which
allows the bank to have its cake and eat it, too.
Analysts in Vienna say that by the end of next year Bank Austria may well
have had to crystallise the capital gains on all its industrial holdings to
cover the costs of its merger and bad loans.
Meanwhile, the capital market environment has changed. Both banks actively
promote their shares to international investors, but they are finding that
portfolio managers in the UK and the US do not like banks having large
industrial holdings.
Creditanstalt has seen the writing on the wall, and has declared that it
will run down its industrial portfolio over the next few years.
Mr Guido Schmidt-Chiari, the chairman, says the bank will probably still
hold on to minority positions in companies with which it has a strong
commercial relationships. 'We will be a nearly pure bank, although perhaps
not as pure as a UK clearer,' he said on Tuesday.
Bank Austria's policy is less clear. Privately, directors indicate that the
bank will gradually sell off the portfolio, but publicly they have to be
sensitive to the socialist leanings of their main shareholder and so they
say they will only streamline or optimise their holdings.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930806

