FT934-10025

FT  08 NOV 93 / Management: The chance to strike it rich - Savings to be
made in the second stage of the UK electricity market's deregulation


   By MICHAEL SMITH


It is not often that companies get the chance to save thousands of pounds a
year. Yet that is the opportunity which will shortly be on offer to managers
of a wide range of UK organisations from schools, hospitals and nursing
homes to ordinary, medium-sized businesses.
On April 1 next year the second stage of the government's deregulation of
the electricity market comes into operation. This will enable about 45,000
organisations to shop around between different power suppliers, rather than
purchasing exclusively from their regional electricity distributer as they
are required to do at the moment.
Since electricity privatisation three years ago, the freedom to choose has
only been available to managers of sites which use more than 1MW of
electricity. There are about 5,000 of these intensive energy users in the
country.
Contracts already being offered to the others suggest that price cuts of up
to 10 per cent are achievable. But at least some of them will suffer as they
struggle to get to grips with the complexities of electricity trading.
'People are inevitably going to be bamboozled,' says Ken Green, commercial
manager for electricity and water purchasing at Imperial Chemical
Industries, who has gained wide experience in shopping around for resources.
'There is a complicated pricing regime in electricity and some people may
end up paying more for their power than they need, or even more than they do
now. It is worth management putting in extra time to make sure that savings
are made and retained.'
To qualify for participation in the deregulated market next April, a site's
maximum demand must exceed 100kW, based on demand over a three-month period.
Nobody knows exactly how many sites are eligible; 45,000 is only an
estimate.
According to the executive of the electricity wholesale pool (through which
power is traded), any site with an annual bill exceeding Pounds 10,000 is
likely to qualify. Established businesses should be able to find out if they
are eligible from their regional electricity company, or they can hire a
portable meter.
New sites will be judged on energy consumption of similar premises, although
they may have to drop out of the competitive market if their demands prove
to be below the 100kW threshold.
If a site is eligible its managers have three options. They can:
Buy supplies directly from the wholesale market. The advantage of this is
that it can save money by cutting out the middleman. In addition, buying
from the pool enables a company to respond quickly to half-hourly changes in
the pool price, perhaps by cutting demand when prices are high. But buying
directly from the pool is inevitably risky. Pool prices are volatile; in
April this year they rose more than 10 per cent on average.
Stay with the local company, either on a contract negotiated to suit an
organisation's needs or on existing tariffs. Among the 5,000 already in the
deregulated market, only about a third have chosen suppliers other than
their local company, according to a survey by Offer, the industry regulator.
Nor does staying with the 'host company' necessarily suggest a lackadaisical
approach. Companies can elect to have a pool-related, rather than
fixed-price, contract and all the risks that go with that.
Brian Acott of the Inenco consultancy group says some companies eligible to
join the deregulated market in April have been offered contract terms which
would lead to them paying more than their current annual bills based on
existing tariffs.
In some cases this is because regional electricity companies have yet to
finalise their proposed contracts for medium to large customers.
But contract terms - that is, non-tariff arrangements - are not necessarily
suitable for all customers. Green says sites which need to buy all of their
power at times of peak demand may be better off staying on existing tariffs.
Purchase on contract from a power company other than the local monopoly
distributer, again either at a fixed price or one that is related to those
in the wholesale pool.
Early negotiations for the 100kW to 1MW market indicate that bigger
customers, particularly sites which are part of large, nationwide companies,
have the widest choice of terms for contracts.
In theory, the two generators in England and Wales, the two Scottish
companies and all of the regional electricity companies are among suppliers
eligible to offer contracts, but there is no uniform desire to do so.
Offer's survey found that in the 1MW-plus market in England and Wales,
Eastern, East Midlands, Northern, Seeboard, Southern and Yorkshire account
for almost the entire trading by regional companies outside their areas. The
remaining six have little or no involvement outside their areas.
Big sites tend to favour the generators and are more likely to have
pool-related contracts, according to Offer. The regional companies are more
likely to be found at smaller sites.
Unless a company is happy to stay on tariff terms with the local monopoly
distributer, it will need to start planning soon for next April's changes.
Participating in the deregulated market will necessitate the appointment of
an approved operator to install a meter capable of measuring half-hourly
electricity usage and recording it. This should be done by February 1.
In addition, enough time must be left between now and next April to
negotiate a deal with a new supplier and terminate existing agreements which
often have three-month notice clauses.
'Organisations need to start preparing now if they are to get the most out
of deregulation,' says Margaret McKinlay, pool chief executive.
However, companies are being advised both by the pool and Offer to think
carefully before they sign their agreements. Some power companies have been
offering discounts on this year's power prices in exchange for long-term
contracts.
Offer says that such contracts may be anti-competitive. It has told
offending supply companies to amend the contracts, but is warning consumers
that it may not be able to help in other disputes once contracts are signed.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
SEVEN STEPS TO CHEAPER POWER
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
 -Find out whether you qualify for the competitive market. If so, start
  negotiating as soon as possible.
 -Don't underestimate the complexity of the electricity wholesale pool.
 -Be persistent and don't just accept the first deal.
 -Don't forget to include meter and connection charges in your
  calculations.
 -Appoint a meter operator by February 1.
 -Sign a connection agreement to ensure a link with the local
  electricity distributer's system regardless of the power's source.
 -Take advice. Offer's regional offices (Tel: 021 456 2100) can
  provide a list of suppliers, meter operators and manufacturers; the
  pool chief executive (Tel: 071 831 4791) is running a one day course
  on December 3 to explain how the pool works; the 100KW Project Team
  (Tel: 071 775 3838) can help on metering and data collection.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931108

