FT932-13262

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (36): POSTScript


   By PHILIP COGGAN


HAS THE smaller companies revival really begun in earnest? There were
certainly signs of a revival in the first quarter of 1993, and that makes
the short-term returns from the smaller company funds for once look
respectable. Notice how the average smaller company unit trust has produced
the same return over one year that it has over five.
It is normally good news for collective fund managers when smaller companies
start to outperform their larger rivals. For a start, it makes it a lot
easier to beat the indices, which are dominated by the largest stocks.
Secondly, the market in small company shares is a lot less efficient (fewer
analysts look at the stocks) and there is thus greater potential for the
smart fund manager to find a bargain.
Over the very long term, smaller companies have been shown to produce
superior returns. But the specific risk of investing in an individual small
company is very high - many are dependent on the prospects of a single
product or customer. The argument for investing via a collective fund is
thus all the stronger.
Unfortunately, as all too often happens, the discovery of the 'small company
effect' altered the rules. Investors piled into small companies in 1986 and
1987, pushing many shares to ridiculous levels. When the crash of October
1987 arrived, it proved impossible to sell the small company holdings. On
top of the problem of unwilling shareholders, small companies were then hit
by high interest rates and the recession. The result was four consecutive
years of small company underperformance, something which had never happened
before in the period since 1955, according to Hoare Govett.
Now at last, with low interest rates and signs of economic recovery,
investor interest is returning to those small companies which have survived
the last few years.
Among the investment trusts which specialise in the field, the one that
stands out is Foreign & Colonial Small Companies. It is first (out of 16) in
the sector over five years, and is also top over three years, second over
two years and third over one year. The result of this fine record is that
the shares trade at net asset value, and so the investor who buys now faces
the risk of a discount widening.
Among the unit trusts in the sector, Edinburgh UK Smaller Companies stands
out as having a top-four performance over all periods from one year to 10
years. Lazard UK Small Companies Growth is also in the top quartile (best 25
per cent) over those periods.
Turning to the trusts with a shorter history, Baillie Gifford UK Smaller
Companies, Royal Life UK Emerging Companies, S&W Smaller Securities and
Thornton UK Smaller Companies have all shown consistently good relative
performance records.

The Financial Times


London Page XXXV

930423

