FT932-13447

FT  23 APR 93 / Health dangers ruled out at waste plant


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM, Wales and West Correspondent


THE hazardous-waste incin-eration plant of Rechem International in south
Wales has been confirmed as a source of PCB and dioxin contamination after a
two-year study. But the levels detected are stated not to pose any
significant risk to the food chain or to health.
The plant, set up 20 years ago close to residential areas in the Panteg part
of Pontypool in Gwent, has long been the source of controversy, most
recently when there were plans - subsequently abandoned - to ship hazardous
waste to it from Germany.
The Pounds 432,000 survey, published yesterday, is described by the Welsh
Office, which commissioned it from the University of East Anglia, as the
most sophisticated environmental study of PCBs ever undertaken in the UK.
It concludes that PCB (polychlorinated biphenyls) and dioxin levels in the
Panteg area are normal for urban areas in the UK, with the exception of a
limited area in which they reach levels seen in contaminated industrial
sites.
Two areas of heavy contamination were found within the Rechem site, although
one might be due to a historical source, an old transformer station. Another
zone of heavy contamination was near the plant's lagoon. No evidence of
unacceptable contamination in foodstuffs was found except for duck eggs from
a property close to the plant.
Mr David Hunt, Welsh secretary, said yesterday: 'I hope the study's findings
will go a long way towards reassuring people in the Panteg area that their
environment and health is not being put at any significant risk.' The report
recommended that there should be further monitoring of soil, air, grass and
food and he had asked for this to take place.
Mr Manu Mehta, chief executive of the local borough council, Torfaen, said
its initial response was that it was pleased there was not a great deal of
cause for concern, but a public inquiry was still needed.
The Panteg Monitoring Project. Environment Division, Branch 3, Welsh Office,
Cathays Park, Cardiff CF1 3NQ. Pounds 25. Concluding remarks and
recommendations section free.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930423

