FT934-11507

FT  30 OCT 93 / Arts: The future of Britain's art treasures? It's a lottery
 -Off The Wall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


FOR ANYONE interested in Britain's heritage this was the week of the bad
news and the good news. The bad news came first. On Tuesday the annual
report of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art bewailed yet
again the important national treasures sold abroad during the past year.
The next day came the good news, with the National Heritage Memorial Fund
reporting how it spent its money saving for the nation everything from Old
Masters to rare tracts of countryside.
But, as the Reviewing Committee points out, 'it is an ill wind that blows
nobody some good'. The collapse in the art market over the last three years
has reduced the flow of masterpieces seeking export licences, and only 20
objects were important enough to attract the attention of the Committee in
1992-93 as against 47 in the previous year. Of course British museums and
art galleries are still unable to raise the cash to keep important works in
the UK, and of the 15 objects that the Committee temporarily barred from
leaving the country eight eventually left.
Inevitably they were the most valuable, and included grand Old Master
paintings by Guido Reni, Ribera and Bellotto. There was absolutely no chance
that a British institution could find the Pounds 11m needed to match the
Getty Museum's offer for Turner's vibrant seascape 'Von Tromp going about to
please his masters'. The Committee would have been prepared to let it go
without a struggle but for the fact that it was being sold by Royal Holloway
College. Its export was delayed for six months to show how much the
committee disapproved of the college selling works bequeathed to it in
perpetuity by its founder.
Not that Royal Holloway showed any signs of repentance. This week it did it
again, and is Pounds 3.5m richer after dispensing with a Gainsborough
landscape. The mysterious new owner said he was willing to loan the picture
back occasionally to the College which suggests that it was bought by Sir
Andrew Lloyd Webber, who lives nearby and is the only person in the world
currently paying this sort of price for a British picture.
The Heritage Fund, the Government financed safety net to shore up the
nation's heritage - artistic, natural, and industrial - also had a quiet
year. Its main achievement was securing Joseph Wright of Derby's 'An Iron
Forge' for the Tate with a Pounds 900,000 grant. As ever the 67 successful
applications for its aid, out of a reduced total of 163 requests, included
curiosities: a remnant of wildwood in Huntingdon; the turn-of-the-century
wagon of a travelling showman; and 270 films showing the London Fire Brigade
in action during the second world war.
The Fund needs a quiet time. It is frantically preparing for 1995 when it
takes over the distribution of the heritage pot of Lottery money. It has a
staff of seven and in 1994 its annual grant is a reduced pittance of Pounds
7.8m. A year later it will have at least an additional Pounds 75m to
distribute.
Although the Lottery is aimed at capital projects, and much of the money
will go towards restoring country houses, cathedrals, museums, etc, Lord
Rothschild, chairman of the Fund, made it clear that the money can also be
used to keep important works of art in the UK.
There is an obvious danger that crafty owners might try and arrange sales
overseas at outrageous prices in the expectation that the Fund will step in
with matching sums. The Fund is aware of the danger. It is already concerned
at what it considers excessive valuations put on some of the archives of
historical manuscripts which have come on to the market in recent years. It
has made its displeasure known.
In theory, with new EC regulations shortly to come into force to allow the
return of smuggled works of art; the Reviewing Committee in place to delay
the export of treasures; and the Heritage Fund at last better able to help
museums anxious to acquire artworks in danger, the UK's sorry record in
squandering its cultural history should end. It sounds too good to be true.
The Lottery money cannot arrive too soon. There are signs of the art market
recovering its nerve. The last few weeks have seen a spate of high, indeed
record, prices. Not in London, which seems to be slowly slipping away as the
centre of the international trade in art, but in those places overseas where
fortunes are still being made.
The auction houses see their salvation in south east Asia. This week
Christie's brought in Pounds 12m from Hong Kong sales of oriental art and
Sotheby's Pounds 11.5m, with new collectors from Taiwan, Singapore and Korea
often out-bidding the traditional Japanese and Hong Kong buyers. In Europe
Sotheby's made Pounds 3.5m from Greek and Roman coins in Zurich while the
clear out in nearby Regensburg by Princess Gloria of Thurn and Taxis of more
than 6,500 lots of high class tat from her numerous palaces raised Pounds
12.8m, double the estimate. As always bidders were prepared to pay over the
odds for a conventional item with an aristocratic provenance.
Christie's in New York managed an auction record for a photographic image,
when Steiglitz's photograph of the hands of his wife Georgia O'Keefe sold
for Pounds 260,458, while London made some contribution, with a high for an
Islamic artifact, Pounds 2.4m for a bronze lion made in Spain around 1100.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931030

