FT932-7089

FT  26 MAY 93 / SIB to take tougher line on financial regulation: Large says
two-tier system must be made to work better


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


THE SECURITIES and Investments Board is making sweeping changes to the way
it oversees the self-regulatory organisations for Britain's financial
services industry.
The changes are outlined in a report commissioned by the Treasury last
summer in the aftermath of the theft of more than Pounds 440m from pension
schemes controlled by the late Mr Robert Maxwell. Mr Andrew Large, SIB
chairman, was asked to review the entire regulatory system and recommend
changes.
He stopped short of scrapping the two-tier system which relies on
self-regulatory organisations to enforce rules broadly set out by the SIB.
'What I have tried to do is to make what we've got work better,' he said.
The case for scrapping the system was not sufficiently compelling.
Mr Large's report gives a strong boost to the creation of the proposed
Personal Investment Authority, intended to be the SRO for all retail
financial services. The formation of the PIA is central to the success of
the new regulatory regime.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, yesterday gave an unqualified endorsement
of the changes and said he would keep the area under review. 'I will be
prepared to take whatever action is necessary if experience shows existing
powers to be inadequate,' he said.
In his report, Mr Large concluded that it was lax supervision of the SROs by
the SIB - partly at the insistence of the SROs - which led to the Maxwell
affair, widespread mis-selling of life insurance and pensions and
manipulation at the London Futures and Options Exchange.
Under the new system, the SIB will monitor the enforcement activities of the
SROs more closely, including setting performance targets, and making
periodic supervisory visits to both the SRO and to its member companies to
see how well the enforcement system is working.
The SIB, however, will delegate greater rule-making authority to the SROs
after setting out broad standards of investor protection they are expected
to meet.
The SIB also said it would take a higher profile in the enforcement
activities of the SROs, closely monitoring cases it feels are significant
and it will take the effectiveness of enforcement activities into account
when assessing SRO performance.
The board of the SIB will also be reconstituted to emphasise its public
interest. A majority of non-executives will come from outside the financial
services industry.
SRO chairmen gave a cautious welcome to the report, saying tighter
supervision of their activities was inevitable after the Maxwell affair. The
report warns that if the SIB does not get the co-operation of the SROs or if
the new regulatory approach does not work, alternatives will have to be
found.
Mr Large said the SIB wished to reduce its role as a direct regulator and
would encourage those which it now regulates, particularly banks and
building societies, to become members of an SRO. The life insurance industry
has threatened to boycott the PIA unless the banks and building societies
join as well.
Next regulatory chapter, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 19
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930526

