FT932-13487

FT  23 APR 93 / Blackout imposed on HK talks


   By TONY WALKER and SIMON HOLBERTON


   BEIJING, HONG KONG


BRITISH negotiators yesterday imposed a news blackout on details of their
talks with Chinese officials on the future of Hong Kong after three and a
half hours of discussions in a secluded Beijing diplomatic compound.
A British embassy official said after the talks that he was 'not even
permitted to use an adjective' to characterise the meeting.
In Hong Kong Mr Chris Patten, the governor, said that any agreement reached
in Beijing would have to command broad support in the colony and in its
Legislative Council.
Mr Patten told the Legislative Council, Hong Kong's law-making body, that it
was Britain's aim to remain true to undertakings it had made to the people
of Hong Kong about the openness and fairness of elections due in 1994 and
1995.
'We have not travelled this far to abandon those undertakings now,' he said.
The forcefulness of his presentation gave little cheer to those who might be
expecting a British climbdown.
Before the two sides sat down in Beijing, Sir Robin McLaren, Britain's
ambassador to China and head of the British team, described himself as a
'professional optimist', and said that the British side was looking forward
to a 'successful outcome'.
China's chief negotiator, Mr Jiang Enzhu, vice foreign minister, told
reporters that 'the Chinese side has sincerity in the talks and it is my
hope that the talks will yield positive results on the basis of the
important agreement between the two sides'.
This latter was a reference to Beijing's claim that Mr Patten's proposals
for a broadening of democratic reforms in Hong Kong ran counter to
agreements reached with London in the 1980s about the transition to Chinese
rule in 1997.
Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency, quoted Mr Jiang as saying that the
two sides had agreed that the talks would be based on the Sino-British Joint
Declaration, the principle of convergence with the Basic Law and relevant
agreements reached between the two countries.
Differences of interpretation over these documents and agreements lie at the
heart of the bitter dispute that has developed between Beijing and Mr
Patten.
British officials in Beijing expect the first round of Hong Kong talks to
last between three and four days, but a resolution of the problem could take
months. They are warning that a successful conclusion is not guaranteed.
Britain will be seeking agreement on a specific plan for legislative reform
that is acceptable to Legco, to Mr Patten, and is reasonably faithful to
London's aims of broadening popular participation in the political process
before 1997.
Solving the Sino-British row over Hong Kong is crucial to the reunification
of the mainland and Taiwan, a senior Chinese official was quoted as saying
by a Beijing-controlled newspaper.
'If the problem with Hong Kong could be resolved satisfactorily, it will
have extremely important effects on the reunification of both sides of the
Taiwan strait,' Mr Li Ruihuan, a Communist party politburo member, told Hong
Kong's Wen Wei Po.
Beijing has said it wants to use the 'one country, two systems' formula of
Mr Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, for Hong Kong's return to China
as a model for the reunification it hopes for with Taiwan.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930423

