FT934-8753

FT  13 NOV 93 / Trade boost for recovery hopes: Export outlook brightens as
monthly deficit shrinks to 6 1/2-year low


   By PETER MARSH and PETER NORMAN


A SHARP drop in the UK visible trade deficit in August raised hopes
yesterday that exports would play a more important role in sustaining
Britain's economic recovery.
The Central Statistical Office said the gap between visible exports and
imports was Pounds 7.61bn in the first eight months of this year. This
followed a Pounds 1.5bn reduction in earlier estimates of the deficit
between January and July as a result of improvements to the system for
collecting data.
The trade deficit fell to a seasonally adjusted Pounds 419m in August, the
lowest monthly total for 6 1/2 years, from Pounds 1.06bn in July. The UK
recorded a surplus in the month of Pounds 310m on trade with the rest of the
European Union - the highest surplus since the start of the 1980s. The data
gave a more encouraging view about trends in the UK's trade deficit - which
until yesterday had been thought to have been increasing because of a
slowdown in exports and a pick-up in import growth.
Further positive news about the sustainability of the upturn came from a
rise in manufacturing output in September after a sharp decline in car
output in August.
Government statisticians admitted that a question remained over the accuracy
of the export and import figures, which are based on the trouble-prone
Intrastat system for collecting trade figures across the European Union.
Even so, the London stock market interpreted the trade data as helpful to
the recovery outlook. The FT-SE 100 index of leading shares, helped by a
firm opening on Wall Street, closed just 0.6 lower at 3,099.1, after falling
25 points earlier in the day.
The pound finished in European trading nearly 1 pfennig higher at DM2.5075
and half a cent up at Dollars 1.483. It also rose in New York, and in late
trading was at DM2.5148 and Dollars 1.49225. Long-dated gilts jumped 1 point
on theories that the slowdown in imports showed weak demand pressures and
consequently indicated little risk of an inflationary surge.
The Treasury greeted yesterday's economic news as 'encouraging', although
warning against reading too much into the August trade figures. Indications
that the economy is continuing on a recovery path may increase the chances
that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, will risk tax increases in the
Budget on November 30 without worrying that they will hold back the upturn.
The manufacturing data, however, held out little hope of any sharp increase
in factory production. Although manufacturing output increased a seasonally
adjusted 0.4 per cent in September, the recovery was insufficient to prevent
a 0.1 per cent decline in manufacturing output between the second and third
quarters.
By contrast, output of production industries, which include the energy
sectors as well as manufacturing, increased by 1 per cent in the latest
quarter.
Export values were a record in August, continuing a strong trend since the
start of the year.
Industry leads improvement in trade, Page 6
Currencies, Page 13
London Stocks, Page 15
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931113

