FT934-8816

FT  13 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Trade hitch for markets


TO MOST investors, whether in the United States, Britain or elsewhere, next
week's vote in the US House of Representatives on the North American Free
Trade Agreement (Nafta) seems a rather remote affair. The possibility of an
adverse outcome is not being allowed for in a market whose chief worry is
still that the low point in the US interest rate cycle may have been
reached. Certainly, in itself, the success or failure of this regional trade
deal cannot have more than a marginal impact on global investment returns.
Yet if Nafta were lost, it could prove to be an important turning point for
the markets.
The present high level of both bond and equity prices around the world owes
as much to perceptions about longer term changes in economic structure as to
short term views about the state of the economic cycle. While valuations
have come to look more and more speculative by historic standards, they have
derived increasing support from the belief that the forces of disinflation
will prove to be much stronger than expected; and that a global economic
upturn will receive an unprecedented demand boost in the second half of the
1990s as three to four billion people in the newly industrialising countries
are absorbed into the global economy.
There is little doubt that the economies of Asia, Eastern Europe and Latin
America will provide an increasingly buoyant market for the developed
world's capital goods and will contribute to higher living standards in the
West by exporting low cost consumer goods.
As a highly competitive source of supply they will also act as a powerful
restraining influence on prices in the tradeable goods sectors of the OECD
economies. The outcome of this disinflationary growth should be an increase
in global living standards that would have much in common with the period of
growth and falling prices in the late 19th century.
Sheltered
Yet this benign scenario is substantially predicated on continuing trade
liberalisation, without which the newly industrialising countries will be
constrained in their ability to pursue the kind of export-led growth
hitherto enjoyed by the dragon economies of Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and
South Korea. And since trade is a positive sum game, it is not just the
developing countries that stand to lose if the climate is more restrictive.
Protectionism would ensure that producers in the low growth economies of the
developed world would be sheltered from competition. Downward pressure on
prices would thus slacken. Efficiency would suffer. If Nafta fails next
week, the immediate impact will be felt in emerging markets where much of
the froth in the global bull market has lately been concentrated.
The fall-out would be particularly heavy in Mexico, which last year
attracted nearly Dollars 9bn of equity capital from the US - not much less
than the sum US investors pumped into the world's second largest equity
market in Japan. But there would be wider ramifications, not least because
of the threat to the Uruguay round for which the deadline has been set at
December 15.
The Clinton administration's position would be weakened; and that weakness
would coincide with continuing uncertainty about the position of the French
government, whose readiness to give in to populist pressure over the Air
France strike might be replicated in its dealings with the French farmers
over the Gatt.
Balance
Equity markets would suffer from the initial blow to business confidence.
And a rise in global bond yields, as the disinflation story confronted a
setback, would inevitably rub off on equity prices too. A more protectionist
trade climate would be most unlikely to put an end to economic growth. It
would merely be a dampener. But coming after a long period of very full
stock market valuations, a change in trade policy would have
disproportionate psychological importance.
For the best part of 15 years the world has been in the grip of a powerful
tendency towards globalisation and liberalisation. The balance of power in
economic matters has shifted away from governments towards markets. The
result has been a much faster pace of change, with considerable strains
being felt in the labour markets of many OECD countries.
Defeat for Nafta might be taken in the markets to imply that this beneficial
shock to the supply side of the world economy was coming to an end and that
politicians were successfully reasserting control over markets in response
to the clamour from those who have found the pace of change too painful. The
symbolism would be powerful. That is not to say that it will happen; and
since a shift towards protectionism would ultimately be bad for everyone's
living standards, it should not be allowed to happen. The victory of US
vice-president Al Gore over the maverick protectionist billionaire Ross
Perot in this week's television debate offers modest grounds for hope. Next
Wednesday's vote is certainly no mere technical matter. It should be watched
with some trepidation.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931113

