FT934-8397

FT  16 NOV 93 / SIB proposes rules for commission disclosure


   By ALISON SMITH


LIFE INSURANCE sales agents will still have limited discretion about when
they tell a prospective client their sales commission, provided that this is
done in writing before any proposal is signed, under draft proposals from
the Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief watchdog.
Guidance on how the proposals would work and two examples of how information
about policies and commissions might be made available to potential
investors was issued with draft rules for consultation yesterday.
The board was told by the Treasury in late July to submit draft proposals to
it by the end of the year. These were to address how all sales agents -
independent advisers, authorised representatives and those based at banks
and building societies - could accurately portray to prospective customers
the commission on sales.
The life insurance industry has vigorously resisted disclosure of
commissions.
In one respect the board's draft goes beyond the Treasury's instructions, by
proposing that the requirement to disclose commissions should apply not only
to life insurance but to term assurance policies as well. These are taken
out for protection rather than for investment, and policyholders surviving
beyond the period of their policies do not receive any payment.
As commissions for selling these policies are lower than for selling life
insurance, disclosure is not so controversial.
The draft has been sent to about 200 organisations, including major life
offices, banks, building societies, and consumer bodies, with responses due
by November 25.
Board officials intend to combine the conclusions of this consultation with
the results of market research on the presentation of information to
potential buyers before proposals are put forward for agreement at a board
meeting next month.
Methods of disclosure
The consultation papers cover two ways of providing information about the
commission and other aspects of the policy, both of which are still the
subject of market research. Either way, or a combination of the two, could
be the final result.
In each, the information would have to be given in writing and before a
proposal or application form was signed, though agents could hold initial
discussions with a potential customer without giving an exact commission
figure.
The two methods are:
The 'key features' approach - in this method the precise way in which the
information should be given would not be specified, and the commission could
be disclosed either in the document or in a separate letter.
The key features document would be shorter and more basic than the
prospectus. It would cover questions such as what the potential investor
might pay, and what the company would pay if the policy was maintained until
the end.
The prospectus approach - the prospectus would give a broader range of
information, including a general table of illustrations of commission,
investment return and cash-in values for every year until the end of the
life of the product. It would also include a warning against cashing in the
policy early on, and an indication of how much charges and expenses would
cost the investor.
Calculating commission
The draft rules go into some detail about how to calculate the cash figures
that should be disclosed as commission, in order to give the potential
investor a clear and fair picture of the arrangements through a range of
different distribution channels.
They say that the amount disclosed to the prospective buyer should include
not only payments and personal benefits, but the full commercial cost of
assistance and services provided to company representatives which
independent advisers would have to pay for themselves, such as
administrative support, computer systems and accommodation.
Where the amount of commission is not known at the time of the transaction,
as would be the case if it depended on a particular volume of sales over a
certain period - perhaps for someone selling through a bank or building
society - then the amount disclosed as commission should not be less than
the average figure that someone in that position would receive.
On other issues covered in the remit from the Treasury, the board proposes:
To amend its rules to allow product providers to reflect in the price of a
product the distribution costs through different 'tied' distribution
channels.
To press ahead with consulting the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries over
the detail of how to provide examples of life insurance products using the
provider's own charges rather than industry averages.
To use cash surrender values to meet the requirement that potential
investors be given an indication of the surrender value, although they would
be accompanied by warnings that the figures given were not guaranteed
amounts.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931116

