FT932-260

FT  29 JUN 93 / International Company News: French insurer lifts holding in
AMB to 33.5%


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


ASSURANCES Generales de France (AGF), one of France's largest insurance
groups, yesterday confirmed that it was on course for a return to profits
growth this year and that it had raised its minority stake in Aachener und
Munchener Beteiligungs (AMB) of Germany.
Mr Michel Albert, chairman, told shareholders that the figures for 1993 were
looking 'much brighter' than those for 1992, fuelled by sales growth in
France and the return to profit of its troubled UK operation.
AGF, a prime contender for privatisation, last year suffered a sharp fall in
net profits to FFr1.5bn (Dollars 261m) from FFr2.7bn in 1991, on
consolidated premium income of FFr59bn.
Nevertheless, AGF fared better than Union des Assurances de Paris (UAP) and
Groupe GAN, the two other state-controlled insurers which are also scheduled
for privatisation.
GAN last week warned it would have to resolve the problems of its damage
insurance business before flotation, but UAP said it expected a
'significant' improvement in profits this year and was prepared for
privatisation.
Mr Albert said AGF sales had risen by 5.5 per cent to FFr24.5bn in the first
five months of the year against the same period in the previous year. The
French life insurance business mustered sales growth of 12 per cent to
FFr8.7bn over the same period, with non-life business rising by 12 per cent
to FFr7.8bn. Foreign turnover rose by 9 per cent to FFr8bn.
AGF also confirmed it had increased its holding in AMB, the German insurer,
from 25.1 per cent to 33.5 per cent. The French group last year won a bitter
legal battle to exercise the full voting rights on its AMB shares.
Mr Albert said AGF had bought the additional 8.5 per cent stake in the
market in the response to the recent sale of AMB shares by La Fondiaria of
Italy to a group of German financial institutions.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930629

