FT932-13479

FT  23 APR 93 / World Trade News: Japan to hear familiar litany of
complaints


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


THE arrival in Tokyo yesterday of Mr Ron Brown, US commerce secretary, is
likely to be accompanied by familiar strong words from the US on Japan's
trade surplus and closed markets, followed by polite rebuffs from Japan of
US solutions for the problems.
Mr Brown is in Tokyo to take part in a ministerial conference on assistance
to Russia. But his arrival two days before the conference opens will give
him time to remind the Japanese that the US is serious about rectifying the
countries' trade imbalance.
Japan needs little reminding so soon after the bilateral meeting in
Washington last week, which left no doubt where the priorities of the US
under President Bill Clinton lie. Even Japanese trade officials who have
been through the same show often in the last 10 years fear this time they
may be in for a tougher confrontation.
Both the structural and sectoral issues which the current US trade team says
it wants to address have been discussed in the past. But this time the US
administration's emphasis is on economic issues as a strategic priority and
on achieving quantifiable results, says an official from Japan's Ministry of
International Trade and Industry.
At the same time the Clinton team is not as ideologically committed to free
trade as previous Republican administrations.
Mr Brown is likely to reiterate Washington's unhappiness with Japan's
Dollars 46bn (Pounds 30.4bn) trade surplus and the need to obtain concrete
results in tackling the issue.
The new framework for bilateral consultations on trade agreed last week
between Mr Mr Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa is expected to take
firm shape in the months ahead.
In addition to its currency stance, which has allowed the yen to rise
sharply against the dollar, the new bilateral trade framework will form a
key pillar of Washington's strategy on correcting the trade imbalance.
The US also appears reluctant to abandon the idea of using temporary
quantitative indicators to measure improvements in access to Japanese
markets, despite numerous protests from Japan.
For its part, Tokyo is adamant it will not give in to US calls for such
quantitative measures, which it has repeatedly said leads to managed trade.
The Japanese offer is for more long-term steps to deal with the trade
imbalance, such as industry co-operation and business initiatives.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930423

