FT932-226

FT  30 JUN 93 / Iraq's N-arms now destroyed US claims


   By JUREK MARTIN and REUTER


   PARIS


THE US believes that Iraq's nuclear weapons programme has now been
'essentially destroyed', although President Saddam Hussein retains the
longer term ambition of rebuilding it with indigenous and foreign resources.
In testimony before Congress, Mr Robert Gallucci, the assistant secretary of
state for polito-military affairs, also conceded that US and other
intelligence agencies had significantly under-estimated the extent of the
Iraqi attempt to acquire offensive nuclear capability.
'It is clear in retrospect,' Mr Gallucci said, 'that they got it wrong and
that there were large elements of the Iraqi nuclear programme unknown to the
intelligence communities.'
He was confident the nuclear ambition was now 'out of business' as a result
of the efforts led by the International Atomic Energy Agency under UN
auspices. But he concurred with the recent judgment of Ambassador Rolf
Ekeus, the UN special commissioner on Iraq, that Baghdad's weapons
programmes would 'grow like mushrooms after rain' if UN sanctions against
Iraq were lifted.
Mr Gallucci said the US, as well as the IAEA, was aware of the identities of
foreign concerns that had supplied Iraq.
In southern Iraq yesterday, a US Air Force jet fired a missile at an Iraqi
anti-aircraft radar in the first such incident in the no-fly zones since
mid-April.
It was fired after the radar locked on to one of the two US jets in the
area, the US Defence Department said in Washington. A Pentagon spokesman
said there was no immediate information on whether the Harm missile had
destroyed the radar.
Iraq claimed the anti-aircraft battery near Basra was not activated and said
a soldier was wounded.
The attack followed Sunday's raid by US cruise missiles on intelligence
headquarters in Baghdad in retaliation for what Washington said was an
attempt by Iraq to kill former President George Bush.
US and other warplanes have been policing no-fly zones over northern and
southern Iraq to protect dissident Kurds in the north and Shia Moslems in
the south. French state radio said yesterday that a French engineer had been
jailed for eight years and a Moroccan colleague was missing after they
crossed into Iraq from Kuwait, Reuter reports from Paris.
According to relatives, the 25-year-old engineer, Mr Jean-Luc Barriere, and
his 29-year-old Moroccan colleague strayed into Iraq while driving in the
desert 10 days ago.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930630

