FT934-11668

FT  30 OCT 93 / S Africa talks close to accord


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   JOHANNESBURG


OFFICIALS of the South African government and the African National Congress
said yesterday they expected to reach agreement within days on a
post-apartheid constitution, but the government appeared to have made little
progress in persuading the right-wing Freedom Alliance to accept that
constitution.
Working under a self-imposed deadline of 5 November to complete a new
constitution, negotiators from the African National Congress and National
Party met yesterday to try to resolve remaining obstacles. They said they
would meet again on Tuesday and possibly Wednesday to finalise joint
constitutional proposals. Government negotiators including President FW de
Klerk later met a delegation from the Freedom Alliance, led by Chief
Mangosuthu Buthelezi of the Inkatha Freedom Party, but appeared to have made
little progress.
Joint proposals from the ANC and the government on how power should be
shared within a multi-racial government of national unity are not yet
complete, but they appear to give the National Party a much weaker position
than originally envisaged.
The National Party would have no constitutionally-entrenched power to block
the decisions of the majority in a post-apartheid government. In an earlier
constitutional draft, the National Party had been guaranteed what amounts to
a veto in the areas of budget, finance and security.
The party now appears to be moving closer to a form of voluntary rather than
enforced power sharing, with Mr de Klerk appearing to rely on assurances
from Mr Nelson Mandela, ANC leader, that fundamental decisions will not be
taken without his approval.
According to proposals made on Thursday, the cabinet would be composed of
all parties winning more than 5 per cent of the vote, with each party
holding cabinet seats in proportion to their voting share. The president
would come from the majority party, likely to be the ANC, and there would be
two deputy presidents: one from the ANC and one from the next largest party,
likely to be the National Party.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931030

