FT932-27

FT  30 JUN 93 / London Stock Exchange: Blue chips weaker as support fades


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


THE LONDON stock market lost its US buyer of stock index futures yesterday
and interest rate optimism alone proved not enough to sustain share prices.
The struggle to hold the Footsie 2,900 level, regained in early trading, was
again lost towards the close when Wall Street came in lower following
disappointing data on the US economy.
Selling pressure was light, however, and some enthusiasm was stimulated by
corporate activity, especially among the domestic television industry
stocks. Analysts at the leading securities firms continued to recommend a
range of switching moves towards stocks regarded as underperformers. The
FT-SE Mid 250 Index gained 5.2 to close at another all-time high of 3,229.1.
UK equities opened higher as Wall Street's 39 point gain overnight took some
of the pressure off the drug sector and also raised hopes that US buyers of
the London stock index future contract would continue to push the UK market
forward. Indications, as soon as stock index futures opened, that the US
buyer was not active, were ignored at first and the stock market advanced by
8 points to 2,905.
But the market went abruptly into reverse when some futures traders believed
that a US house had turned seller of the September future, and the slide in
share prices accelerated in the face of a significant sell programme from a
UK house.
The selling hit the Footsie 100 list hard and the market gave ground
steadily to show, at the day's worst, a loss of nearly 14 points. A modest
rally brought a final reading on the FT-SE Index of 2,886, a net loss of 11
points since the previous close.
The Footsie Index has returned to its previous testing area, having made no
convincing progress over the past week. Mr Robin Aspinall at Panmure Gordon
commented that the Footsie Index looked 'precarious' on the index charts.
The absence yesterday of the basket trading between index futures and blue
chip stocks which has provided sustenance for equities for several session
left the Footsie-listed issues looking vulnerable.
Interest rate optimism also went into a decline, in spite of the renewed
climb in sterling yesterday afternoon. Although some strategists continued
to insist that the Bundesbank is likely to make a move at its policy meeting
on Thursday, analysts of the UK scene were less certain that rates will be
cut in the UK before Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor, introduces his
autumn budget. The stock market also fears that any benefits arising from a
cut in base rates could be offset by rises in domestic taxation.
However, the fixed income team at Nikko believe that; 'lower (UK) interest
rates later in the year are inevitable, given the poor outlook for growth.'
In addition to its many other reasons for caution, the equity market is now
restrained by the prospects for today's auction of Pounds 3.25bn of
long-dated government bonds. Institutional activity has been at a low ebb
this week as fund managers have raised cash for the gilt-edged auction.
Rights issues have also reappeared this week, and yesterday's Pounds 190m
rights call from United Newspapers revived market rumours that further cash
calls are in the pipeline.

The Financial Times


London Page 50

930630

