FT934-8718

FT  13 NOV 93 / How To Spend It: Wake up to witty waistcoats - A look at
this season's essential fashion accessory


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


IF YOU DO not yet know that waistcoats are this season's must-have accessory
then you have clearly not been paying attention. Whether you be male or
female you need only to take yourself off to the nearest emporium for a
waistcoat to suit your mood and you can feel that you have done your bit
towards fashionability for the season.
From BhS and Marks and Spencer to the chic designer labels there are
waistcoats of every sort - pale, ascetic and almost minimalist in mood;
exotic and embroidered for when in peacock mode; tweedy for the country;
woolly for warmth; richly patterned for the show-off set; and specially
embroidered for those used to bespoke.
At Favourbrook, 19-21 Piccadilly Arcade, Jermyn Street, London SW1Y 6LX,
waistcoats are the shop's speciality. It does sell other things, most
notably some gorgeously rich and romantic evening jackets, but waistcoats is
what it is primarily known for.
The latest collection is for women as well as men and the emphasis is on
rich and original versions for evening wear. There are silk and cotton
brocades, plain and patterned velvets, wools and cashmeres. All can be
either single or double-breasted and Favourbrook has also developed a new
high-cut Edwardian style which it believes lends a more elegant look - and
who among us would not wish to look more elegant?
There is a wide range of waistcoats already in stock but there are also some
2,500 different fabrics to choose from and the shop will make to measure at
no extra cost.
Favourbrook's waistcoats never come cheap, but the fabrics really are
exceptional. For ready-to-wear or made-to-measure the prices range from
Pounds 70 to Pounds 170, depending on the fabric.
Evening jackets and coats, for those who are interested in a rich romantic
look for the evening, include brocaded hacking jackets and silk evening ones
as well as smoking versions in velvet, often with frogging and satin
linings. These range in price between Pounds 300 and Pounds 400.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

931113

