FT932-3231

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Company News: UBS faces legal challenge from
largest shareholder


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


BK VISION, the Swiss financial securities investment company, has launched a
legal challenge against new by-laws of Union Bank of Switzerland that would
enable the bank to raise capital without offering prior rights to
shareholders.
BK, which was set up in October 1991 by Mr Martin Ebner's BZ Bank group, is
already the largest single shareholder in UBS with a 15 per cent stake.
BK's policy is to take an active interest in the strategic policies of the
financial comp-anies in which it holds stakes and to protect the interests
of shareholders if the need arises.
It jostled recently with UBS over its decision to sack Mr Christoph Blocher,
a BZ group ally, from its board, but chose not to make a stand on that
matter.
Mr Ebner, who is BK's chairman, said yesterday that the argument over the
by-laws was less likely than the Blocher case to become emotional. Moreover,
if BK did not take it up, then it would forfeit its credibility as a
responsible shareholder.
UBS enacted resolutions at its AGM in April, taking advantage of provisions
in last year's revised Swiss companies law enabling companies to create
authorised capital that could be used for 'important purposes' at any time
for up to two years.
The new law also enabled companies to create conditional capital for use
indefinitely in convertible or warrant issues.
In both cases, there was the possibility of issuing the shares without
offering shareholders their normal priority subscription rights.
BK is claiming that the law requires such resolutions to cite a purpose for
which the authorised shares are to be used, such as a specific acquisition.
UBS made no specification, but its by-laws already say that such shares
could only be used for takeovers or financing takeovers.
BK also claims that the decision on whether or not to waive shareholder
rights cannot be delegated from the general meeting to the board of
directors.
UBS acknowledged that the new companies law 'left several points of law
open' and welcomed the opportunity for early clarification by the courts.
It argued that 'a narrow interpretation of the new legislation would do
insufficient justice to the practical needs of today's companies and the
specific situation of the capital market'.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930615

