FT932-3430

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (6): Mapping out an EC future - Mark
Nicholson discusses trade relations with Europe


   By MARK NICHOLSON


WHATEVER the map suggests, there is little doubt to which regional bloc
Tunisia belongs economically. Last year Tunisia bought 71 per cent of its
imports from the EC, to which it sold 77 per cent of its exports. The
respective figures for trade with its Maghreb neighbours were 3.6 and 7.9
per cent. And much of that was with Libya.
For these commercial reasons alone, Tunisia's forthcoming negotiations with
the European Community on a fresh co-operation accord are likely to
overshadow whatever diligent efforts the government may make - and recently
has certainly been making - to create something meaningful out of the
four-year-old Arab Maghreb Union (which embraces Mauritania, Morocco,
Algeria, Tunisia and Libya).
But Europe is Tunisia's touchstone near-neighbour for cultural reasons, too.
For all its religious distinction, Tunisia is a deeply Mediterranean country
and the aspirations of its swelling and sophisticated middle classes are
little different from those of its neighbours on northern shores. 'It is
very important for Tunisia, and particularly for the government here, to
feel itself a south European rather than simply a north African country,'
says one diplomat.
For these reasons, therefore, Tunisia and the EC look set to tie their knot
more tightly by negotiating onwards from the financial protocols which have
guided relations between the two since 1977 to a fuller accord. 'We want to
enlarge our relations to a complete and total collaboration,' says one
foreign ministry official. 'Because we are condemned to live together, we
want to make sure we do so as happily as possible.'
By the end of the fourth and latest Tunisia-EC protocol in 1996, the
community will have provided direct aid in the form of grants and credits
worth around Ecu743m (Dollars 899m). A clutch of additional agreements have
also been reached, covering co-operation in science and technology, the
environment, telecommunications, energy and many other areas.
But most important for Tunisia will be the negotiations on trade.
Eventually, both sides want to see the creation of a free trade zone between
the EC and Tunisia, but in Tunisian eyes this is a long way off and much
needs urgently to be negotiated well before then. Under the most optimistic
assessments of some officials, the country will be in a sufficiently sturdy
economic state to offer fully free trade with the EC only by about 2010.
Under the format for the negotiations, four rounds of 'exploratory
conversations' have now been concluded to establish the basic technical
issues covering an eventual accord. Pending a mandate from the council of
ministers, negotiations are likely to begin at the start of next year on a
text which, with luck, could be ratified by the Twelve and in place by 1996.
The EC is following a parallel course already in talks with Morocco and
hopes to add Algeria to the process as soon as its political stability will
allow. A bloc-to-bloc approach from the EC to the Arab Maghreb Union has
been a non-starter for several reasons, not least among which is Libya's
continued diplomatic isolation over the Lockerbie affair.
But although both EC officials and their Tunisian counterparts consider
overall relations to be excellent, mutual understanding high and the will to
reach an accord clear, there are some very tough talks ahead. To begin with,
say Tunis officials, the EC will have to stump up considerably more aid if
it is to help put Tunisia on a steady enough economic footing to consider
opening its economy further to EC goods. 'There's a heavy price to pay and
an effort to make,' says one official. 'We'll make the effort, but the
community must help us to pay.'
The thorniest issue, however, will be trade, particularly in agricultural
products, and most particularly on the issue of olive oil - Tunisia's most
important agricultural export. At present, Tunisia is permitted a quota of
46,000 tonnes of olive oil under an agreement which expires at the end of
this year. A fresh transitional agreement covering 1994-1995 is under
discussion now, and Tunisia is insisting on a quota of at least 80,000
tonnes.
By Tunisian standards that is a modest request. In a bad year the present EC
quota would account for less than half Tunisia's olive oil crop. In good
years, like 1991-92, the country produces 270,000 tonnes. Furthermore,
agriculture is one of Tunisia's most important employers - accounting for
perhaps 40 per cent of the workforce - and environmentally vital crops.
Olive trees are among the country's best defences against desertification.
But olive oil is also a key crop for almost all southern EC states,
particularly Italy, Portugal, Spain and Greece. As a result, the present
quota looks likely to stay more or less in place, pending agreement on the
wider accord. 'The Tunisians are saying to Europe, open up your olive oil
market, and the Europeans are saying open up all the rest of your markets
first. Neither can happen immediately,' says one diplomat.
However tough these interim talks prove, though, Tunisian officials are
quietly confident of the eventual outcome. The 'pragmatic march of Europe',
in the view of one senior official, will soon extend it across the present
Efta countries and many in eastern Europe. 'Eventually,' he says,
'membership of Europe will be a question of purely economic rather than
geographical criteria. At that point we will inevitably be part of a broader
Europe.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930614

