FT932-13316

FT  23 APR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Optimism remains high on Yemeni
oil - Explorers are confident of further discoveries


   By ERIC WATKINS


TOP US, Canadian and French oil executives remain optimistic over Yemen's
potential for development despite problems stemming from the country's
political uncertainty.
'With 60 to 70 per cent of Yemen yet to be explored, it would be premature
to estimate the country's ultimate potential,' says Mr Ray Irani, chairman
of both the US and Canadian Occidental Petroleum Corporation. 'Top notch
companies are now combing the land and there are bound to be more
discoveries.'
Oil in commercial quantities was first discovered in Yemen by the
Dallas-based Hunt Oil Company in 1984 and exports began in 1987. Hunt's
production had been as high as 210,000 barrels a day of, but depletion of
the 1bn-barrel of reserve has brought the figure down to 180,000 b/d.
Yemen's production is expected to rise to 300,000 b/d in September when
CanOxy's new fields in Al-Maseela come on stream. 'We expected to pump
120,000 barrels a day by the end of September,' says Mr James B. Taylor,
executive vice-president and chief operating officer of the Calgary-based
company, which has been operating in Yemen since 1987 and has drilled 37
exploratory wells, 28 of them successfully.
'That is a 76 per cent success ratio, a phenomenal success, almost unheard
of elsewhere,' Mr Taylor says.
CanOxy's reserves are now estimated at 1.5bn barrels, of which some 460m are
potentially recoverable.
Other companies are also begining to report significant discoveries - Total
of France recently announced a 12,000 b/d find in its Shabwa concession,
which is adjacent to CanOxy's field in Al-Maseela. But problems are also
being discovered. Two weeks ago hostile Yemeni tribesmen kidnapped six Total
employees at gunpoint and released them only after the company agreed to
provide 85 jobs for the tribe.
Last July other armed tribesmen kidnapped Hunt's general manager along with
six other employees to use as bargaining chips in a dispute with the
government. All seven were later released unharmed.
Hunt, Total, Royal/Dutch Shell, Arco and other companies operating in the
country have meanwhile been faced with continued hostility as tribesmen
threaten employees and hijack company vehicles in broad daylight.
Most observers attribute such difficulties to the country's economic and
political problems. Already one of the world's poorest countries, Yemen
suffered particular hardship when Saudi Arabia expelled some 1m Yemeni
workers and their families during the Gulf war. Since then it has suffered
inflation at nearly 200 per cent and a 36 per cent unemployment rate.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930423

