FT933-10100

FT  05 AUG 93 / New ministers to spearhead Cuban reforms


   By REUTER


   HAVANA


CUBA'S government replaced four ministers yesterday in a shake-up of key
economic posts that signalled its determination to confront the island's
economic crisis with reforms, Reuter reports from Havana.
The ruling council of state, headed by President Fidel Castro, named Mr
Alfredo Jordan Morales, Mr Nelson Torres Perez, General Silvano Colas
Sanchez and Mr Jose Luis Rodriguez Garca as the new ministers for
agriculture, sugar, communications and finance respectively.
It was the most important shake-up of economic posts on the Caribbean island
for several years.
Foreign diplomats said the changes confirmed President Castro's intention to
tackle the island's economic problems, aggravated this year by flagging food
production and a disastrous sugar harvest.
Mr Rodriguez, a leading economist, was previously deputy director of the
Centre for Research in the World Economy in Havana. Last week he told
foreign reporters he foresaw the introduction of monetary, tax and exchange
rate policies and limited market mechanisms to overhaul the economy.
The state media have indicated the government intends to depart from its
adherence to the former Soviet-style economic policies in force when Cuba
was a member of the Soviet trading bloc Comecon.
Mr Torres, who is to head the strategic sugar ministry, has earned a
reputation for efficiency in his previous post as Communist party chief in
the south-central province of Cienfuegos. He replaced Mr Juan Herrera
Machado, another veteran who had served seven years as sugar minister.
During Cuba's disastrous 1992-93 sugar harvest, output slumped to 4.2m
tonnes, one of the lowest levels ever. Reasons cited for the failure, which
cost Cuba Dollars 500m in lost sugar revenue, were unseasonably bad weather
as well as acute shortages of fuel, spare parts and fertilisers.
In the agriculture ministry, Mr Jordan also faces the challenge of reviving
flagging food production, a sensitive area for Cuba's nearly 11m people who
are suffering serious food shortages.
Mr Jordan was a provincial party chief in eastern Las Tunas province.
The new ministers will serve under Mr Carlos Lage, vice-president of the
council of state and recognised by most observers as Cuba's leading economic
strategist.
The appointment of Gen Colas as communications minister follows an existing
policy of putting military figures in infrastructure posts, such as
transport.

The Financial Times


International Page 4

930805

