FT934-11557

FT  30 OCT 93 / Markets: Unexpected recruits to penny shares - London


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


THOUSANDS more people joined the ranks of investors in penny shares this
week - but only one of them was a volunteer. The enthusiastic convert was
Lord Weinstock, whose GEC group was revealed as a potential purchaser of
Ferranti at a price of 1p a share. The unwilling penny-share investors were
Ferranti's existing shareholders, who had thought until now that their
company as worth more like 10p a share.
Indeed, in 1987 they believed Ferranti to be worth 140p a share. That was
before Ferranti bought the US company International Signal and Control, and
discovered it to be constructed around an elaborate fraud, blowing a whole
in the parent company's balance sheet from which it was never able to
recover.
Eugene Anderson, the company doctor brought in to rescue Ferranti from its
ISC problems, said this week that the company had also suffered from the
decline in the defence business, and from poor management in the past. 'But
I'm not blaming anybody. I've been here for three and a half years and we
should have turned it around.'
In retrospect, it is possible to draw two lessons from the Ferranti story.
The first is that all deals made amid the heady atmosphere of 1987 and 1988
must be viewed with scepticism, because so many of them have since come
unstuck.
Second, the inability of Ferranti's core businesses to survive the financial
damage inflicted by the ISC acquisition shows that the decision to diversify
was based on a correct assessment of the company's vulnerability. But as
shareholders will be all too painfully aware, getting your strategic
analysis right is not much use if the steps taken to implement it are
flawed.
There was one other relic of 1987 around this week, illustrated in the
bottom chart. Figures published on Tuesday revealed that in the first nine
months of this year, more money flowed into unit trusts than in the whole of
1987, the previous record year. Yet the long-term trend of individuals'
ownership of the stock market, shown in the top chart, has been steadily
downwards over the past decade. Rising unit trust sales do not contradict
that trend, which partly reflects an increasing preference for collective
rather than individual ownership. But the conjunction of the two charts does
raise the question of whether the growing appetite for equities will in time
lead to a revival of interest in individual ownership.
That partly depends on how long the current rally lasts. And on that
subject, after the gloomy tone of some recent columns readers might
appreciate a bit of no-holds-barred bullishness. It comes by courtesy of
James Capel, the stockbroker, whose analysts spent Wednesday telling clients
their optimistic views on the future for UK equities.
The specifics of this forecast are obviously those of the broker concerned.
The broad argument, though, is one shared by a wider selection of investors
and analysts.
Capel is expecting steady growth for the UK economy, continued low
inflation, falling short-term interest rates, and satisfactory inroads into
the government deficit. A sharp rise in corporate earnings would allow
continued progress in share prices, taking the FT-SE 100 index possibly as
high as 4,000 - although Capel was keen to point out that this was not an
official forecast.
For Paul Walton, the broker's UK strategist, much of bullish phase of the
equity cycle still lies ahead. There is still another 1 1/2 points to come
off base rates, taking them down to 4 1/2 per cent in the first part of
1994. Longer-term interest rates will stabilise around 6 1/2 per cent, a
level not seen on a sustained basis since the 1960s.
The economic recovery is healthy, says Capel, with 3 per cent gdp growth
forecast for next year. Companies will take a rising share of the economic
pie. Earnings per share are set to rebound sharply, as companies start
outperforming analysts' estimates for the first time since the recession
started. Annual dividend growth returns to 6-7 per cent.
Such encouraging fundamentals mean that the market is not over-valued at
current levels, says Walton. He estimates that the market as a whole is
selling at 14 times 1994 earnings, compared with a target range of 16-18. It
is selling at a 1994 dividend yield of 4.2 per cent, compared with Walton's
target of 3.5 per cent. That gives scope for share prices to move up by
another 25-30 per cent.
What are the risks in such a scenario? Apart from the dangers that Capel
itself mentions - political uncertainty or a slide in sterling - they can
best be summed up as how to get there from here.
If there is one thing the British economy has been famously bad at doing, it
is settling into sustained non-inflationary growth. If, this time, that's
what we get, the equity market will be entitled to rejoice on the scale
these forecasts suggest. But there are an awful lot of potential pitfalls on
the way, starting with the Budget at the end of November. And - if the CBI
survey published on Tuesday is any guide - company bosses are not yet ready
to be as optimistic as stockbrokers. Business confidence rose for the fourth
quarter in a row, but the increase was slight. Only one per cent of
companies were more optimistic about the general business situation than
three months before.
No such pessimism was in evidence among the enthusiasts for emerging stock
markets. Any worries that the fad might be going too far were dispelled by
an announcement from the First Philippine Investment Trust: Norman Lamont is
to join its board. So that's all right, then.

The Financial Times


London Page II

931030

