FT934-11293

FT  02 NOV 93 / Japanese new car sales show steep decline


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


THE SEVERITY of the downturn in Japan's car market was underlined yesterday
by registration figures for October which showed that sales of new cars were
down 11.3 per cent on October last year.
The figures, from the Japan Automobile Dealers Association, represent the
seventh consecutive monthly decline in new car sales, and a 15.5 per cent
fall from September. Vehicle sales in October amounted to 374,227 units,
while car sales were nearly 10 per cent down to 253,516 units.
The gloomy figures, which came despite the opening of the biennial Tokyo
Motor Show last month and the recent launch of several new models by
Japanese manufacturers, reinforced growing concerns in the country's motor
industry about the timing of a possible upturn.
Nissan Motor, which on Friday announced a pre-tax loss of Y28.9bn (Pounds
180.6m), over double its loss in the previous first half, said it was
becoming extremely difficult to keep to its goal of breaking even this
fiscal year and returning to profit in fiscal 1994.
While the company was still pinning its hopes on stronger demand during the
winter bonus season, the growing possibility that Japanese employees would
receive lower bonuses this year casts a cloud over that scenario. 'The
recovery may not come until next year,' Nissan conceded.
Honda, which saw its sales in October, excluding imports from the US, drop
28.4 per cent, said it was becoming very difficult to read the market.
Other Japanese carmakers are expected to confirm the difficult trading
environment when they announce figures for the six months to September in
the weeks ahead.
Meanwhile the rise of the yen is leading one Japanese carmaker after another
to raise prices in the US market, a trend which many of them fear could
result in a loss of market share.
Mazda became the latest company to announce a price rise, of 2 per cent,
yesterday, following a 4 per cent increase in September.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931102

