FT934-10065

FT  08 NOV 93 / Investment in China set to top Dollars 100bn


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


CHINA EXPECTS contracted foreign investment to exceed Dollars 100bn (Pounds
66bn) this year for the first time. This would represent an increase in
planned investment nearly double that of last year.
An official of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Co-operation
(Moftec) said that in the first nine months of this year Dollars 15bn of
foreign investment had been utilised.
Funds invested since China opened for business to the outside world in 1979
now exceeded Dollars 50bn. Total contracted investment in the past 14 years
was nearing Dollars 200bn. More than 150,000 individual projects had been
approved, but many of these were tiny enterprises like restaurants and small
processing units.
However, the Moftec official said, 'more larger-sized projects with advanced
technology' were being initiated and more investment was being directed
towards infrastructure.
Other new developments included a tendency for more foreign businesses to
put their funds in inland areas. The growth of investment in China's
hinterland from a low base was now much higher than in coastal regions.
China was also opening new fields on a 'trial basis' to foreign investors,
including finance, insurance, retail businesses and construction.
The official said that about 50,000 enterprises with foreign involvement
were now operating, employing 5m Chinese. Most of these were 'well-run and
make a profit'.
Chinese economists are predicting that inflation in China will moderate to
about 10 per cent next year compared with 14 per cent in the first three
quarters of this year.
They are also forecasting that the country's growth will slow in 1994 to 10
per cent from the 13.3 per cent recorded in the nine months to September.
This would still be higher than the targeted 8-9 per cent.
The report, prepared by the Academy of Social Sciences and the State
Statistical Bureau, was optimistic about prospects in the coming year.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

931108

