FT934-10272

FT  06 NOV 93 / Economists cheer US jobs outlook


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


ECONOMISTS yesterday hailed an improvement in the US jobs market during
October, in spite of a slight upturn in the unemployment rate.
Although Labour Department statistics published yesterday showed the
unemployment rate rising to 6.8 per cent, from 6.7 per cent in September,
most economists agreed the figures indicated more people were looking for
work again, and reflected a more encouraging outlook for the economy.
Job creation in October was much more robust than most forecasters had
predicted, but the number of people either working or looking for work
increased even more sharply. Most economists said this probably reflected
people who had previously given up the hunt for jobs returning to the labour
market as the economy strengthened.
By two different measures, based on separate surveys of businesses and
households, the Labour Department's statistics showed an increase in jobs.
The survey of businesses showed a net increase of 177,000 in the number of
jobs in the non-farm sector - and an increase of nearly 1.9m over the last
12 months. 'October job advances were fairly widespread, with increases in
services, construction, wholesale trade and finance,' said Ms Katharine
Abraham, commissioner of the government's Bureau of Labour Statistics,
saying the number of manufacturing jobs stabilised after nine months of
decline.
The survey of households, which can capture not only sectors such as
agriculture but also consultants and self-employed contractors who may not
be counted in the business survey, showed a net increase of 471,000 in the
number of jobs, but also a rise in the number of unemployed as a net 739,000
people entered or re-entered the labour force.
Ms Abraham said 6.8 per cent unemployment was 'in line with the rates in the
July through September period'.
'Unemployment remains a bit below the average of 7 per cent for the first
half of this year and is substantially below the 7.7 per cent reached in
June 1992,' she said.
Ms Abraham said the data also provided signals that employers remained
cautious about hiring new workers: the average factory working week has
continued to rise to 41.6 hours in October, equalling the post-second world
war record set in 1966, and much of the increase in jobs continues to come
in the sector of temporary employment services.
'The rapid growth in personnel supply services, coupled with the increasing
use of overtime by manufacturers, suggests that at least some employers have
been reluctant to meet increase demand for their products by adding new
employees to their payrolls,' she said.
Data from the biggest states showed unemployment increasing markedly in
California, Florida, New York and Texas, but declining or stabilising in the
Midwest.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931106

