FT933-5178

FT  04 SEP 93 / The Long View: Strength of the bull


   By BARRY RILEY


IN JUST short of three years the London stock market has risen by 60 per
cent, which amounts to a major bull market by any reckoning. One leg
reflected the lifting of the Gulf War threat, the next was triggered by the
UK's ERM exit. In between came a sharp setback, afterwards a period of
stagnation.
Now the market has entered its third and most dangerous leg as it seeks to
adjust to lower interest rates and the tantalising prospect of economic
recovery. The economic news is indeed promising, but share prices are no
longer fundamentally cheap as they were three years ago, when the yield on
the All-Share Index touched 5.85 per cent and the price-earnings ratio on
industrials was 9.7. They are relatively expensive, on a yield of 3.6 per
cent and a p/e of over 20 (possibly 17 1/2 on prospective 1993 earnings).
They might, nevertheless, become still more expensive in the coming months.
These normal fundamentals, however, do not count for a great deal at
present. True, company profits are recovering, and the half-year results
season now getting under way will give a hard indication of whether the
expectations of earnings growth of 15 per cent or so are realistic (so far
the picture has been rather patchy). But dividends remain in the doldrums,
having tumbled by 5 1/2 per cent over the past twelve months in aggregate
and, historically, the descent of the yield below 4 per cent has represented
a reliable sell signal, at least on a one-year view.
The reason why these numbers do not matter much, at least for the time
being, is that the stock market has been riding piggy-back on an even bigger
bull market in bonds. The total return on the All-Share Index after eight
months of the year has been some 15 per cent, but long gilts have done much
better, returning upwards of 20 per cent in combined capital gains and
income as the yield has tumbled by 1 1/2 percentage points to about 7 1/4
per cent.
This bonds bonanza is a global phenomenon, led by the US Treasury long bond
on which the yield has fallen from 7.3 to 6.1 per cent since January 1.
Strangely, US equities have benefited comparatively little from this
adjustment. Although the Dow Jones Average of market leaders has climbed by
10 per cent this year, on a broader basis (as measured, for instance, by the
US index in the FT-Actuaries World Index series) Wall Street share prices
have risen only by about 5 per cent. Instead of pushing up their domestic
stocks US investors have been seeking cheaper opportunities overseas, buying
Dollars 8.4bn worth of foreign equities in the first quarter, for instance.
Such statistics take a long time to emerge but the flood of dollars into
European equities has certainly persisted in recent months, serving to drive
UK share valuations close to those on Wall Street and generating a freak
surge in share prices in declining continental economies.
When international money sloshes about like this the dangers of valuation
errors can become acute. On the one hand, there is a tremendous opportunity
for companies to raise new equity capital even though their circumstances
may be inauspicious, as we saw with Rolls-Royce this week. On the other, the
prospects for attractive future returns to shareholders are correspondingly
poor.
Although valuation measures such as dividend yields and price-earnings
ratios are looking stretched in the London market, investors have been able
to draw comfort from the ratio of long gilt to equity yields, which at about
2.0 remains comfortably close to the middle of the normal range for the past
20 years.
Falling gilt yields have neatly offset the drop in dividends and the effect
of higher share prices. The alarm bells of 1987, when pre-crash the ratio
briefly topped 3, are not ringing in the same way.
But the yield ratio is an unreliable indicator at times of economic upheaval
because it depends upon particular circumstances of inflation, economic
growth and payout ratios. It is at quite different levels in other
countries: in Germany it has been more like 3 and in Japan usually between 5
and 10. It has also been very different in the UK in past time periods.
In the 1930s, for instance, the yield ratio was typically about 0.7, because
in non-inflationary conditions, when growth expectations were low, risky
equities were required to yield more than safe gilts. During the early to
mid 1960s, when there was more optimism about growth, but complacency about
inflation, the ratio was about 1.2.
Then, in the late 1960s, the gilt yield rose above 7 1/2 per cent and the
yield ratio climbed to just over 2. That was the period of the 'cult of the
equity' which led to an overvaluation of equities lasting several years, in
due course corrected by the disastrous mid-1970s bear market.
Now, a quarter of a century later, the gilt yield has fallen back below 7
1/2 per cent but the yield ratio shows no sign of retreating to 1.2. Once
again it seems that the capital market is finding it hard to handle a major
shift in inflationary expectations: global bond investors are seeing it
differently from global equity investors, and one group or the other will
surely be eventually be forced into a sharp adjustment.
Debt deflation would normally be expected to be associated with subdued
economic activity and with downwards pressure on prices (and profits).
Recent capital market trends appear, however, to assume an improbably benign
combination of low inflation and reasonably rapid economic growth. But I do
not want to be too gloomy.
The positive way of looking at all this is to say that conditions are now
favouring an unsustainably high valuation of equities, which could be
further exaggerated when European short-term interest rates follow long
rates down.
Investors should enjoy the party while it lasts. But finance directors may
enjoy it even more.

The Financial Times


London Page I

930904

