FT934-10140

FT  06 NOV 93 / Fashion: Name games - it's no go for logos


   By JANE MULVAGH


LOGO-ITIS, the defacing epidemic that ran amok during the 1980s, has not
been cured. I went to Harrods' sportswear department in London the other day
to buy a plain, navy-blue track-suit. These fall into two categories:
clinging, micro-fibre suits for the brave and baggy, cotton fleece 'sweats'
for the modest.
The sales assistants, scanning their impressive domain filled with
multi-coloured two-pieces, would have you believe that you are spoilt for
choice. You are not. All I wanted was a plain track-suit without a logo; no
'go faster' stripes or tributes to an Olympic medallist - and certainly no
free marketing for the brand. I discovered there was not a single plain
track-suit in stock.
Bearing in mind that a sandwich board man marching up and down Oxford Street
is paid, on average, Pounds 50 a day for his advertising efforts, I see no
reason why Nike, Adidas, Fred Perry or any other brand, should deface my
track-suit with its logo and expect me to pay for its advertising as well.
I put this to the sales manager. Did he not have, amid the plethora of
options, a single plain suit? No, he apologised. And why not? I persisted.
Does Harrods not come across customers who refuse to be used as an
advertising hoarding?
Certainly, he admitted. Many. So, what was the problem? Simply, that no
big-brand sportswear manufacturer was prepared to sell track-suits without
distinguishing logos. 'They're very difficult to get. The manufacturers
don't like making them,' he explained.
Thankfully, the epidemic of logo-itis that hit high fashion over the past
decade has, largely, been contained. When Dawn Mello took over Gucci in
1988, its cachet was in freefall. Her first, brave move was to rid the
products of the devalued green and red double-G logo. It was not long before
Gucci's reputation as leather-maker to the discerning was restored.
Mello says: 'It no longer makes sense in today's more sophisticated market
to have initials on every product. People just don't want it - or, at least,
not the customer we're trying to attract.'
Similarly, Louis Vuitton - once dubbed the 'Luncheon Voucher brand' because
it became the status symbol among young clerks and secretaries - Dunhill,
Hermes and others are now more discreet about their logos while Tanner
Krolle, the leather craftsman, is so coy about its name that this is
virtually anonymous, making for truly elegant luggage. Managing director
Philip Davis reasons, quite emphatically, that 'our customers respect
discretion.' '
Meanwhile, Chanel, the brashest marketeer of all, is now so over-exposed and
sits so uneasily with the times that it has become a social handicap to hang
any of its pinchbeck geegaws from one's person.
For those who want to do their sit-ups in anonymous cotton fleece, I found -
after much searching - two publicity-shy brands. Hanes, established in 1904
in America, makes three basic styles in three weights, each piece retailing
for under Pounds 10. Its excellent and extensive range can be found at 237
High Street, Acton, west London.
John Liggins, the manager, recalls: 'Twenty years ago, we launched Hanes
tracksuits in Britain, thinking that the timing was right since everyone in
Clint Eastwood's film Magnum Force was wearing them. But we burnt our
fingers and couldn't shift them because no one knew what they were for. Now,
though, we're the biggest manufacturer in the world: we make 1m T-shirts a
day.'
Hanes also makes gear for many sports brands such as Champion and department
stores such as Harrods, which puts its own labels on the products.
Alternatively, there is a new range of clothing by Doctor Martens (of boot
fame) which includes navy-blue or black schoolboy cotton track-suits which
are baggy, fastened with an un-logoed zip, and grip the ankles and wrists
with a band of elastic. The tops retail at Pounds 50 and the bottoms Pounds
40.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

931106

