FT932-284

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (10): One tread ahead of the competition - The
single market poses new problems for some, but not all / Profile, Technic
Group


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


MOST businesses tackle export markets after establishing a firm base in
their home country. But Technic Group, a Burton-on-Trent manufacturer of
retreaded tyres, was set up to break into the European market.
Six years on, 80 per cent of its sales - Pounds 13.3m in 1992 rising to a
projected Pounds 16-17m this year - are made in continental Europe. 'We set
up to sell overseas, expecting that probably 50 per cent of our sales would
be made outside the UK, but it has been between 70 and 80 per cent from day
one,' says Mr Chris Talbot, company secretary and finance director.
Technic is one of the five winners of this year's Export Award for Smaller
Businesses. The company's exports are handled alongside UK sales by the
12-strong head office staff.
Established in 1987, co-founders Mr Phil Blood, already experienced in the
UK and continental Europe tyre industry, and Mr Tony Farmer, experienced in
the tyre industry, power station maintenance and property development, are
equal shareholders and joint managing directors.
The company, whose sales and exports have grown rapidly, is building a
second retreading plant in Burton. This will expand current capacity of
35,000 tyres a week by between 35 and 40 per cent.
Growth has been achieved by focusing on a niche market, for car and light
van retreads, and by concentrating on manufacturing, says Mr Talbot. The
company does not, for example, handle its own transport and distribution.
Retreads have long had a down-market image but new technology has led to
improvements in quality and safety. Technic strips the used tyres down to
the carcass and then applies a new layer of tread and sidewall rubber. Tyres
can be made which are safe up to 150 mph, says Mr Talbot.
The traditional advantage of retreads has been their cheapness but awareness
is now growing of their environmental quality - there is no longer any need
for used tyres to take up large amounts of space in landfill sites.
Technic has developed its overseas business by signing exclusive
distribution agreements for its two brands, Technic and Eurospeed, in each
country. Distributors are then able to build their own national markets
avoiding direct competition.
Technic says an important advantage over rivals is its small but manageable
number of customers.
Distributors are visited at least three times a year by the joint managing
directors and technical, production and administration staff visit when
possible. Customers are also invited to Burton to view the factory.
The frequent contact allows the company to keep up with new developments in
tread patterns and tyre sizes and to assess levels of demand for existing
tyre types.
The company avoids foreign exchange exposure in sales by invoicing overseas
customers in sterling. Sterling's departure from the exchange rate mechanism
and its decline against other European currencies has given the company a
competitive advantage.
Technic runs a small foreign exchange risk on its purchasing side for used
tyres from continental suppliers. Most of its used tyres are purchased in
the UK, although some sizes come from the Continent. 'We don't take out
forward cover on these because we make prompt payments,' says Mr Talbot.
Safety and quality standards are essential in the tyres field. Technic says
its tyres conform to BSAU144B as well as to ECE regulation 30, a test soon
to be incorporated into a revised BS, allowing tyres to be rated for maximum
speeds.
Technic has also qualified for the 'P mark' award from the Swedish National
Testing and Research Institute. The institute audits qualifying companies
annually.
Formal approval from the German test authority, TUV, has been harder to
obtain though Technic says its plant has been visited and commended by TUV
inspectors. Technic adds that pressure from German manufacturers has
prevented TUV from endorsing a UK manufacturer. This, however, has not
prevented Technic from selling into Germany.
The company has not applied for BS5750, the British quality assurance
standard increasingly demanded by UK purchasers. This is because ISO 9000,
the international equivalent to BS5750, has not been adopted to the same
extent outside the UK, and there has been no pressure from customers, says
Mr Talbot. The formal launch of the Single European Market on January 1 had
little impact on Technic due to its already extensive European business. New
VAT regulations, which have caused difficulties for many companies, have not
been a problem, says Mr Talbot. Technic has also received Customs & Excise
help in adjusting its data collection systems and its procedures to the new
regime.
The company's early concentration on the European market has given it a head
start on other, more UK-focused rivals. But other retreaders have now
started to expand their overseas activities, so competition looks set to
increase.

The Financial Times


London Page X

930629

