FT933-12565

FT  23 JUL 93 / Technology: Designs on the future - Intergraph is weathering
a painful transformation


   By ANDREW BAXTER


For a senior executive in an industry notorious for hype, Manfred Wittler is
refreshingly frank about trading conditions in Europe for Intergraph, the US
company that sells computer graphics systems.
In Italy, where the corruption scandal has brought corporate decision-making
to a halt, and in post-Olympics, recession-hit Spain, Intergraph's markets
are 'devastated', Wittler says. 'There are workstations sitting idle and
that's about as bad as you can get.'
Germany is 'terrible' - big customers have taken board-level decisions to
halt investments. Customers in the Mittelstand, the medium-sized independent
German manufacturers, have seen their orders fall by as much as 50 per cent
and are slashing spending.
After strong growth last year, Intergraph's sales in Europe are likely to
fall about Dollars 50m (Pounds 33.3m) to Dollars 400m this year. And some
European countries will make their first loss this year, Wittler warns.
Wittler is Intergraph's top man in Europe and also executive vice-president
for sales and support. The company makes everything from Cadcam systems used
to design and manufacture cars to mapping systems that help water companies
manage their sewage networks, so few people get a better view of sentiment
among industrial, utility and government users of computer graphics.
Fortunately for Intergraph, the view from Wittler's office, down the road
from Amsterdam's Schipol airport, is not one of unrelieved recession. In the
UK, too, the recession has cut leading clients' spending plans, but, Wittler
says, 'we don't see that any more'.
Intergraph has also been helped by the diversity of its customer base. With
about 40 per cent of its European business coming from government, utilities
and transportation, another 30 per cent from building and process industries
and the rest from manufacturing, the company has fared better than suppliers
who are more dependent on the mechanical Cad market alone.
But the company has also benefited from a series of changes introduced by
Wittler since he joined the company in 1989. By building up a true indirect
sales channel for the company's products, Intergraph is better able to take
advantage of continued computer graphics purchases by small companies or
divisions of larger organisations.
Another important move was the reorganisation of the sales force into
industry segments. In the past, Wittler says, Intergraph had not fully
exploited its biggest strength - its ability to provide a complete range of
products for all the technical needs of a particular industry.
An example is the transportation sector, which Wittler sees as one of
Intergraph's biggest growth opportunities. It has started a drive into the
railway industry, which is now undergoing a renaissance in continental
Europe.
The recession in Europe has coincided with what Wittler calls a 'painful
transformation' of Intergraph's technology. Because its applications
software was tied to its mid-range Clipper workstations, it could not be
sold easily through indirect channels.
Intergraph is now converting its 350 software packages so that they can run
on Microsoft's new Windows NT operating system. This is an important move -
Wittler believes it will open up a mass market for Intergraph's software via
indirect resellers.
But the company is also working on 'porting' - making compatible - Windows
NT to its Clipper Risc processor, which powers its existing Unix
workstation.
At the same time, Intergraph is developing a high-end workstation based on
Sun Microsystems' Sparc processor and earlier this month was chosen by Sun
both to co-develop the next Sparc processor generation and to port Windows
NT to the Sparc architecture.
All this activity emphasises the importance for Intergraph of tying its
future to that of Windows NT, which Wittler believes will be 'the big
winner' as an operating system - without totally supplanting Unix. As long
as software can run on Windows NT, the hardware will not matter.
Wittler's hope is that the European market will recover from recession in
the second half of next year, coinciding more or less with the completion of
Intergraph's technology changes.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930723

