FT933-9977

FT  06 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Faster roads


THE MEASURES announced yesterday to speed up Britain's tortuous
road-building process are welcome. Even those who oppose new roads should
benefit from steps to reduce the duration of the blight that afflicts their
property. Reducing the delays in the planning process will not mean a
significant acceleration in road-building: less red tape and fewer delays
could save on costs, but there is no new money to fund a substantial
increase in the roads programme.
The creation of a Highways Agency is a sensible move. Across Whitehall,
agencies have brought improvements in public services through a clearer
focus on the job to be done. Putting distance between ministers and the
managers of the roads programme should free the latter from day-to-day
political interference.
Similarly, separating the Department of Transport from the road-building
programme should improve transport policymaking. The close identification of
the department's mandarins with the road-building programme has led to
accusations of bias against alternative forms of transport such a rail.
Hiving off roads into a separate agency will make it easier to shake off the
image of 'Department for Roads'.
Streamlining the planning process and speeding up public inquiries are also
to be welcomed. It is absurd in the computer age that inquiries should be
required to read out all written objections. Inquiries that drag on are at
the mercy of those with the time and inclination to take advantage of the
opportunities for delay. The losers include the often greater numbers of
people who live in towns and villages in need of bypasses. Motorists suffer,
too, through delay and congestion, as do industry and businesses that rely
on road transport.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, expects tens of millions of
pounds to be saved by greater efficiency in road-building. He may be right,
though this would be small beer in comparison with the Pounds 1.4bn spent
annually on new roads. So those who see speeding up road-building as
producing more roads are likely to be disappointed. The new measures could
mean that priority roads are completed more quickly, but that will be at the
expense of those further down the list.
However, shortening the time taken to build new roads improves the chances
of raising private finance for road-building. The delays and uncertainties
in the current planning process are disincentives to investors. The more the
government can do to reduce the risk associated with project planning, the
greater the chances that the private sector will invest in new roads.
What is also needed is to generate a stream of income from new trunk roads
to repay the investors. Whether that is politically saleable will depend on
the response to Mr MacGregor's green paper on tolling trunk roads, published
earlier in the summer.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930806

