FT934-11367

FT  01 NOV 93 / British Gas made plans to break up


   By BERNARD GRAY


BRITISH Gas prepared plans to break the company up in the months before its
reference to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission last year.
With financial pressures mounting as a result of tightening regulation,
senior executives at the company commissioned studies into a range of
options including the sale of some businesses and the complete break-up of
the company.
The plans were dropped after several directors opposed them, including Lord
Walker, a non-executive director, who as Mr Peter Walker was the Secretary
of State for Energy responsible for privatising British Gas in 1986. As a
result, formal plans were never put to the board, although they circulated
among executives at the top of the company.
That the radical plans were drawn up is a sign of how far the company
believed it might have to go to respond to the pressure upon it from
consumers and Ofgas, the industry watchdog. They will strengthen the hand of
British Gas critics who argue it should be broken up to reduce its monopoly
power in the industry.
Disclosure of the plans comes at the end of the consultation period for the
MMC inquiry into the company. The Department of Trade and Industry is
expected to make a decision on the commission's proposals before the end of
the year.
In the course of the MMC investigation British Gas repeatedly insisted that
splitting the company into separate gas transportation and marketing
companies was unnecessary. It argued that an integrated company would be in
the best position to meet customers needs.
British Gas drew up the plans at a time when its financial position had
become increasingly stretched after Ofgas had tightened its price cap from
the retail prices index minus 2 per cent to RPI-5. The Office of Fair
Trading had insisted that the company give up half of its share of the
contract gas market and the DTI lowered the threshold at which competitors
could bid for customers.
By early 1992 it was clear these measures would have a severe impact on
Gas's profits and so the company started to consider radical measures to
ease its burdens, including breaking the company up.
Lex, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931101

