FT932-7210

FT  25 MAY 93 / BT hopes fund managers will buy before sale


   By ROLAND RUDD and VLADIMIR MATEJOVSKY


INSTITUTIONAL shareholders which increase their holdings in BT, the telecom
group, in the run-up to the sale of the government's 21.9 per cent stake
will be given greater allocation.
The move, announced yesterday at the launch of the BT marketing campaign, is
designed to prevent institutions from trying to depress the company's share
price over the next few months.
Big shareholders which increase their stake in BT between May 21 and the
close of the offer period in July will be given favourable allocation if, as
expected, the offer is oversubscribed. The sale is worth more than Pounds
5bn.
SG Warburg, the government's global co-ordinator, is anxious to avoid the
row which flared up with institutions in the last sale of BT shares in 1991.
Lord Cairns, Warburg chief executive, said that he favoured offering a
'carrot' by rewarding big shareholders which increased their BT holdings
instead of using a 'stick' by penalising institutions trying to depress the
share price.
In practice, any institution which 'aggressively shorts the stock', in an
attempt to push the BT price down, is still likely to be penalised.
Mr Tim Hirst, telecommunication analyst at Kleinwort Benson, which decided
not to take part in the sale when it was not chosen as a global manager,
said: 'It looks like blatant rigging of the market.'
One UK fund manager said: 'The government is trying to support BT's share
price in advance of the sale of its shares which one would normally call
rigging.'
However, most UK institutions yesterday welcomed what several described as
'Warburg's more constructive approach to the sale'. As in previous sales,
the new BT shares will be offered in three instalments expected to be spread
over 12 to 18 months.
The first instalment for retail investors will be announced in the middle of
June and set at a lower price than the first instalment for institutions
which will be set on June 29 when the prospectus is published.
The second and third instalment will be the same for both investors; the
last will be priced at the end of the offer period depending on the BT share
price at the time.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930525

