FT934-8766

FT  13 NOV 93 / World Stock Markets: Reform proves an uphill struggle for
Milan - A look at the effects of political and economic change on the
Italian market


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


For one Milan analyst, the business outlook for Italy is like the ascent of
Mont Blanc, Europe's highest mountain on the Franco-Italian border.
For years, delays in tackling chronic economic problems such as the budget
deficit and monopolistic state industries meant the summit was so far out of
reach as to be invisible.
Then in 1992, the government of prime minister Giuliano Amato instigated a
stream of reforms, axing state spending and sweeping away restrictive
practices so energetically as to part the clouds and make the peak almost
attainable.
The ascent has accelerated under the new government of prime minister Carlo
Azeglio Ciampi. Privatisation has been pushed forward, wage indexation
abolished and inflation reduced. 'Suddenly, the summit, still some way off,
looked as if it could be conquered,' says the analyst.
But as many mountaineers know, Mont Blanc is infamous for its deep
crevasses. Out of nowhere, huge chasms, sometimes camouflaged by a thin
layer of ice, can suddenly appear.
The crevasses have emerged with a vengance this month as Italian share
prices have plummeted in the light of unexpected political difficulties in
Rome.
Though the gloom lifted slightly by mid-week, the end result left the Comit
index down 1.6 per cent on the week at 546.32. The biggest bombshells have
come over the 1994 budget, which is an essential part of the government's
budget cutting plans.
After having made reasonable progress, helped by an unprecedentedly early
start, parliamentary debate on the budget has run into trouble.
Mr Ciampi is now racing against time. Although previous governments have
missed the formal year-end deadline for parliamentary approval of the next
year's budget, some fear that he may treat failure as a point of principle,
and consider resigning.
As a former governor of the Bank of Italy, Mr Ciampi regularly fulminated
against governments which failed to meet the December 31 target.
The budget has become hostage to a broader debate about the timing of new
elections. In the past month, members of parliament fearing the loss of
their seats - or perhaps worse if involved in the corruption scandal - have
used the budgetary process to hold up broader political change.
Matters have been worsened by this month's stream of leaks about alleged
payments by Italy's security services to senior politicians, including Mr
Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, now head of state.
The allegations, made by top members of the security services under
investigation for alleged embezzlement, have been dismissed by many as
deliberate disinformation. However, some of the mud has stuck, and the
impact has given a jolt to the political establishment.
The renewed political uncertainty has blocked the government's path in the
tackling of Italy's economic problems, and has even been perceived as an
obstacle to the broader process of change, which is expected to culminate in
a general election in early 1994.
Continuing difficulties on the business front have exacerbated the bearish
sentiment on the bourse. Hopes of an early end to the recession are fading;
this week, Mr Giovanni Agnelli, the Fiat chairman, suggested that the upturn
in the motor sector would come later than expected.
Separately, the warning signals from the US that the downward trend in world
interest rates might be reversed have subsided, but sentiment remains wary.
The bears have also taken note of the heavy cash calls overhanging the
bourse. On Monday, Fiat shareholders will decide at a special meeting to
approve the mammoth L3,235bn (Dollars 1.95bn) rights issue announced in
September. Other deals pending include Mediobanca's L1,000bn capital
increase and the L492bn rights issue by Ifil.
Privatisation will soon swell the demands for cash. Next month sees the
launch of Italy's first big flotation of a state-controlled company with the
sale of the government's stake in the Credito Italiano banking group. Other
disposals are due to follow thick and fast.
An initial tranche of shares in Istituto Mobiliare Italiano, the Rome-based
financial services group, is scheduled for early February. Two months later,
investors are expected to be asked to stump up for shares in Banca
Commerciale Italiana, another big state-controlled bank.
This week's bout of nerves on the stock market may be forgotten quickly if
the structural shift of retail savings from government bonds into equities,
seen during the summer, is repeated. Mr Nils Peter Gyllenbaga, an analyst at
CS First Boston in Milan, says the weight of money from private savings
could trigger renewed share price rises before long.
Before that however, the political picture will have to clarify. Though Mr
Ciampi's government may emerge from the present impasse of political
manoeuvrings over the budget and disinformation about political corruption
to return to the ascent, the upward path for Italian shares is strewn with
hazards.
The most ominous among them is the election, assuming it takes place in the
early months of next year. Observers widely forecast heavy support for the
autonomist Northern Leagues, the Democratic Party of the Left (the former
Communists) and a weakened Christian Democrat party, ever more dependent on
voters in the south.
How such a threesome could form a government is the biggest imponderable in
Italian politics at present. Although Mr Ciampi and his immediate
predecessor can be satisfied by the distance they have climbed, the rest of
the way is littered with perils.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931113

