FT933-12800

FT  22 JUL 93 / Investors win case over home income schemes


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


INVESTORS who were given bad financial advice when trying to free the
capital in their homes won a decisive victory in the High Court yesterday.
The judgment, in favour of increased compensation rights, could result in
more than 150 compensation claims for a possible total of Pounds 2m, based
on average payouts to date by the Investors Compensation Scheme.
The compensation scheme is managed by the Securities and Investments Board,
the regulatory body for the financial services industry, for claims made
against authorised investment firms in default.
The High Court ruled against the scheme by deciding that investors who took
out a home income plan before August 28 1988 - the day the scheme came into
existence - would be entitled to compensation in some cases. The ICS had
argued that claims could only be made by investors who took out a plan on or
after that date.
Lord Justice Glidewell and Mr Justice Cresswell also ruled that the ICS was
not right to halve the amount of compensation to a surviving spouse.
Mr Richard Barnett, of solicitors Barnett Sampson, which represents 450 home
income plan claimants, said that the decision showed 'good common sense' and
that the ICS had unfairly interpreted the rules for payouts.
The SIB welcomed 'the clarity given to difficult technical issues' but said
it was studying the judgment to see how it would apply before making a
decision on whether to appeal.
The ICS has paid compensation of Pounds 16.3m to 1,300 home income plan
investors to date, an average of just over Pounds 12,500 per claim. The
maximum compensation given by the ICS is Pounds 48,000 per claim.
Investment-linked home income schemes were marketed in the 1980s as a way
for investors - most of them elderly - to unlock capital in their homes by
taking out mortgages and investing the proceeds in investment bonds, which
were meant to cover the repayments and provide extra income.
Returns were affected by poor stock market performance, which left many
investors in financial difficulties. Where the schemes were sold as 'safe'
investments, investors have a case for compensation against their advisers
for negligent advice.
In the case brought before the court, Aylesbury Associates was the firm of
advisers which had given bad advice to an investor to take out a home income
plan. The High Court said the investor was eligible for compensation for
losses made as a result of further bad advice relating to the plan given
after August 28 1988.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930722

