FT931-4197

FT  12 MAR 93 / Arrest of chairmen may speed flotation at Eni


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


THE ARREST of the chairmen of the three most important subsidiaries at
Italy's Eni energy and chemicals group, on charges of illegal funding of
political parties and falsifying company accounts, continues the progressive
managerial decapitation of the group.
The detentions follow the arrest on Monday night of Mr Gabriele Cagliari,
Eni's chairman, and Mr Franco Chiatti, chairman of its Nuovo Pignone
turbines subsidiary, and highlight the attention being paid to Eni by
Milanese magistrates leading the country's political corruption
investigations.
The arrests of Mr Raffaele Santoro, Mr Pio Pigorini and Mr Giovanni
dell'Orto, chairmen of Eni's Agip petroleum, Snam gas distribution and
Saipem exploration subsidiaries, were accompanied by raids by magistrates
and the Guardia di Finanza fiscal police on the group's offices on the
outskirts of Milan. Offices in the Agip, Snam and Saipem buildings were
sealed by police on Wednesday night.
The arrests mark the second big blow this week to the government's
privatisation programme following the incarceration on Monday of Mr Chiatti,
whose company is one of the most prominent candidates for disposal. Both
Agip and Snam had been hoping to float part of their capital under a
long-heralded scheme to bring in private shareholders.
Yesterday, some executives claimed the arrests could accelerate, rather than
obstruct, privatisation. Once the current investigations are completed, Eni
may need a clean sweep to restore its international standing.
The departure of top executives from its most powerful subsidiaries could
also reduce internal bickering and tilt the balance in favour of floating
group rather than individual operations.
Arguments over the form of flotation have been one of the biggest obstacles
to speedy privatisation.
Agip, which had net profits of L1,101bn (Pounds 502m) on sales of L10,957bn
in 1991, is Eni's main operation in upstream oil and gas.
Snam is responsible for gas supply and distribution, as well as providing a
variety of group services such as property management and communications. In
1991, it reported net earnings of L635.7bn on sales of L11,479bn. The
smaller Saipem, which made a 1991 loss of L129bn on sales of L1,624bn, is
involved in energy-related drilling and construction.
Eni's other subsidiaries include its big, loss-making EniChem operation,
which is already under scrutiny. Italgas, the retail gas distribution arm,
and the Snamprogetti engineering business have so far remained outside the
magistrates' net.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930312

