FT932-3271

FT  15 JUN 93 / Leading Article: Disunited nations


BOSNIA, CAMBODIA, Angola, now Somalia. At no time in its 48-year history
have the demands on the United Nations to resolve regional conflicts,
contain civil wars and save lives been so high. Nor has there ever been
greater readiness to blame the UN when peace-keeping or peace-making
operations go wrong.
It is not, however, the UN that should be blamed for failure to bring peace
to the Balkans, or even for the tragedy of errors now unfolding in the Horn
of Africa. Its leading member states - and in particular the five permanent
members of the Security Council - would do better to examine their own
responsibility for what has happened in Bosnia-Hercegovina and in Somalia,
and to ask what lessons can be learned to ensure that future international
humanitarian and peace-making efforts do not go so badly awry.
The record is far from all bad. In Cambodia, for example, the UN has in
recent weeks overseen a remarkably successful multi-party election. While
that, too, appears to have run into difficulties, with the ruling party
rejecting the results, the UN transitional authority has done as well as
could have been expected in facilitating the process. The UN should now
focus upon helping to secure a constitution and legitimate government, if
necessary deploying the powerful sanction of withholding recognition. But it
will in the end be for Cambodians to make democracy work.
Uncharted waters
Somalia, like Bosnia, presents a much more uncomfortable case, taking the UN
into uncharted waters. For what started as a well-intentioned if belated
military intervention with the aim of feeding a starving populace has become
a bloody melee in which UN forces risk ending up at war with the people they
are trying to help. The US, which led the 'humanitarian invasion' last
December, is now expending its energies in bombing the facilities of a rebel
warlord, Pakistani peace-keepers in fire-fights on the streets of Mogadishu.
The chances of restoring order or effective government are more remote than
ever.
In helping to bring Somalia to this pass, the UN powers made a number of
fundamental errors. First, Washington failed to think clearly about the
purpose or implications of its military role at the outset. George Bush's
decision to send a large force to feed Somalia was one of the last acts of a
defeated president. His administration did not co-ordinate its actions
properly with the UN. Its purpose was always to feed the maximum number of
Somalis in the shortest possible time, then allow Mr Bush's successor to
hand the country over to a broader-based peace-keeping force. American
troops were not ordered to disarm Somalia's lawless militias. Washington
also paid insufficient attention to the root cause of the country's
problems: the collapse of any form of administrative authority. Without a
serious effort at political reconciliation, encompassing a broad swathe of
Somali society, intervention could never be more than a palliative.
Urgent action
The UN's current difficulties stem directly from these blunders. Its own
efforts to foster negotiations among Somalia's warring factions were
hopelessly ineffectual. They attributed undue importance to the warlords and
did not include a wide enough cross-section of what is left of Somali civil
society. When they came to nothing, UN forces were left with no clear
mission beyond continuing to fill empty stomachs, and with decreasing
authority to carry it out. Confrontation with a warlord ambitious to fill
the vacuum was only a matter of time.
Urgent action is now required from the UN Security Council to prevent the
situation from deteriorating further. As in Bosnia, member states face a
stark choice: either re-engage with the country on a new, more carefully
considered basis, or pull out. In Somalia the former course means nothing
short of taking the country under temporary UN trusteeship, with all the
political responsibilities that entails - combining concerted diplomatic
action to restart reconciliation among Somalis and a stiffened military
presence with the aim of disarming the militias. It is a tall order, but it
is more palatable than the international humiliation and Somali suffering
which would follow withdrawal. In Bosnia, where negotiated three-way
partition seems the least terrible outcome, the stakes are higher. For the
UN, however, the underlying lesson is the same.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930615

