FT934-11537

FT  30 OCT 93 / Travel: Not many people know about El Salvador . . .


   By MARK HODSON


TWO HUNDRED years ago, a hole appeared in the ground somewhere in western El
Salvador and a huge fountain of lava and ash spewed out to form a perfect
volcanic cone 4,000ft high. Over the years it remained almost permanently
active and, late in the 1950s, the government decided to build a lavish
hotel on an adjoining peak with spectacular views into the crater.
Just as the Hotel Montana was about to open its doors in October 1966,
Izalco volcano let out one last rumble and, to this day, has remained
perfectly, stubbornly dormant. Such is the luck that has dogged the history
of El Salvador's tourist industry.
In recent years, events have taken several turns for the worse, with a
terrible civil war and a frail peace accord in 1992 doing little to promote
the country as a holiday destination.
The capital, San Salvador, once was an elegant colonial city but has twice
been destroyed by earthquakes and is now dominated by a monstrous,
unfinished concrete cathedral. Building started in the 1950s but, during the
war, the liberal archbishop, Oscar Romero, ordered church funds to be spent
instead on the poor. Despite his murder by a death squad 13 years ago, the
cathedral shows no signs of being completed.
In the 1980s, other Central American countries seized on developments in
international tourism, with Guatemala cashing in on its colourful indigenous
population and Costa Rica catering to the fast-growing demands of
eco-tourism. But El Salvador seems to have missed the boat again. Its own
indians apparently have decided to adopt western culture, trading in their
traditional garb for T-shirts and jeans. Even the country's principal
pre-Colombian ruin, a 10th century pyramid at Tazumal, has been restored
crudely in concrete. The countryside is beautiful but farmed intensely:
eco-tourists want to see jungle, not banana groves and coffee plantations.
At the tourist office in San Salvador, the staff refuse to be disheartened.
A bubbly young lady assured me there were muchos, muchos other tourists in
the country, although her excitement at my arrival suggested otherwise. She
gave me a handful of photo-copied bus timetables, a list of government
tourist centres - and suggested I visit a Texaco garage to find a road map.
I took a bus to the 'charming indian village' of Panchimalco, which
allegedly has a 'beautiful church full of colonial treasures.' Everyone
there spoke Spanish, wore Levis and seemed to be listening to heavy rock
music. The church was boarded up, apparently after a Colombian tourist had
run off with some of the colonial treasures.
Things improved at Ilopongo, just half-an-hour from the scream and stench of
San Salvador, where I found a clear blue lake five miles wide in the crater
of an extinct volcano. The water was warm, fed by hot springs, and an old
man steered me around the little craggy islands in his leaky boat. On the
shore, the government has built one of its tourist centres, a surprisingly
tasteful collection of wooden picnic tables under a cluster of palm trees.
The indians used to drown four virgins in the lake every year because they
believed it was inhabited by gods - and, with all those other tourists
mysteriously absent, it was easy to see why. The place was eerie.
On weekdays, all the tourist centres were similarly deserted but, on
Sundays, rattling buses would descend on them, packed with thousands of city
folk. Few would sunbathe or even swim, preferring instead to sit around
drinking horrifying quantities of Tic-tak, a clear rum that scientists might
like to consider as a way to power space missions. For most Salvadoreans, a
perfect Sunday seems to consist of going to church, downing two bottles of
rocket fuel at the beach and then driving home, stopping on the way for a
brief gunfight with a fellow motorist.
The second city, Santa Ana, has a small-town feel; when I got off the bus I
was approached by various people who wanted to help me find a hotel, have a
chat or just shake hands. None asked for money. It was one of the most
friendly places I have known. There were few sights; but inside the huge
neo-Gothic cathedral, under a shrine to Our Lady of Santa Ana, was an
interesting plaque which read simply: Gracias por el pick-up.
Two hours away, at Sonsonate, a week-long fiesta was getting under way in
honour of La Virgen de la Candelaria. Each evening, the streets were blocked
off with enormous loudspeakers and the salsa and merengue blasted out until
3am. At 4am, an army brass band drove around town on the back of a truck,
playing a screeching fanfare.
In the east of the country, where the war had been fought most intensely,
the fiestas were more subdued. In the small town of San Vicente, in a valley
surrounded by fields of sugar cane, people were still getting used to the
lifting of the curfew and some would not yet venture out after dark.
On the main square, the church was overshadowed by a huge military barracks,
painted lurid green and surrounded by sandbags and gun turrets. On Sunday
evening, about 30 uniformed soldiers marched out on to the leafy park, took
up positions on the bandstand and, armed with three bass drums, six tubas
and a woodwind section big enough to fill a stadium, bashed out possibly the
worst-ever public rendition of the Beatles' Yesterday.
Not a soul watched; but, across the square, a small stage had been set up
outside a chemist shop where two young men with acoustic guitars played
songs of love and freedom. A crowd of hundreds appeared from nowhere.
Eventually, the army retreated, leaving the guitarists in peace. Twenty
minutes later, a power cut threw the square into darkness and the crowd
drifted back into the shadows without complaint.
El Salvador's best chance of attracting tourists might lie in its beaches.
The long stretches of stark black sand and crashing white surf are dramatic
and deserted. Word had it that some of California's most adventurous surfers
were about to descend on a spot called Zunzal, but I swam there in complete
solitude until a military training jet roared over the horizon and buzzed me
from 20ft, almost bringing on a heart attack.
As I recovered my composure over a beer and a plate of crayfish at a wooden
beach-side restaurant, a thick-set, middle-aged man in dark glasses walked
in, looked carefully around - and then sat down to embrace a young female
companion. Outside stood his black Jeep with tinted windows and five
nervous-looking bodyguards, each with matching moustache and machine-gun.
I developed a habit as I travelled around the country of asking hotel and
restaurant staff if there really were many other tourists in El Salvador.
The answer was almost always the same. 'Oh, lots. Not right now, but we have
many, many tourists here.'
Back at the Hotel Montana, all was quiet. In the observation lounge, bored
waiters in grey tuxedos shuffled from one foot to the other, waiting for
customers. The furniture was period hi-tech, as if from an early James Bond
movie. The high-backed chairs were not worn out but faded in the sun.
I sat with a cocktail reading the paper. A banner headline read: Gran Futuro
Por Turismo Salvadoreno. More question, perhaps, than boast. I looked out of
the plate-glass window across to the volcano, half expecting an answer, but
the reply remained the same: unequivocal silence.

The Financial Times


London Page X

931030

