FT934-8659

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (5):
The FT guide to the world's top ski resorts - Arnie Wilson picks a personal
selection of the most perfect pistes


   By ARNIE WILSON


ALPE D'HUEZ
Alpe d'Huez epitomises French skiing at its best: it has modern, spacious,
fast-moving gondolas and a large, sunny, arena of enormously varied skiing
with half a dozen different areas containing everything from dramatic
off-piste, long steep black runs, swooping motorway skiing and gentle
nursery slopes. The focal point is the Pic Blanc from which gloriously long
off-piste itineraries right down to the village can be attempted. There are
also off-piste runs of unusual quality down to villages like Oz en Oisans
and Vaujany.
The Pic Blanc is the starting point for some of the longest black runs in
the Alps, including the Sarenne, which is 10 miles long. La Combe du Loup is
another tough, long black run with an even tougher variant, the Chateau
Noir. Skiers chasing derring-do slopes should hire a guide and try the Col
de la Pyramide. The Signal area - linked with Villard-Reculas - is
magnificent terrain for intermediates who want fast cruising in wide open
spaces.
Heights: Resort 6,068 ft. Skiing 4,428 - 10,889 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 35 per cent; Intermediate 52 per cent; Advanced
13 per cent.
Transfer: 2+ hours from Lyon or Geneva, 1+ hours from Grenoble. 572 miles
from Calais.
LES DEUX ALPES/LA GRAVE
There can be few more contrasting resorts than these neighbouring ski areas
either side of the mighty Meije (13,065 ft) in France. Les Deux Alpes is
conveyor belt skiing: lifts whirr and hum like a busy factory and the Jandry
express 20-person gondola and the Dome Express funicular carry thousands of
skiers, a substantial number of them British, to the bleak but widely spread
slopes on the Glacier du Mont de Lans. La Grave is a pretty climbing village
perched on the Col de Lautaret, an extraordinarily beautiful steep-sided
mountain pass which links Grenoble with Serre Chevalier and Briancon.
Les Deux Alps is full of good but rather soulless skiing. Some of the easier
slopes are high on the glacier. This makes the resort exiting for novices,
who can ski on the roof of their world until the last run of the day when
they must either face steep and narrower lower slopes above the village or
descend by mechanical means. It's a long way down] The vertical drop of over
7,500 ft is one of the highest in the Alps.
The scenery is rugged but it becomes even more dramatic if you make the 10
minute walk to the inter-connecting lifts with the La Grave slopes on the
other side of the glacier. This vast, ungroomed expanse of glacial
wilderness is served by five linked gondolas which seem, when viewed from
the road, to be journeying to the very heavens. Over the years La Grave has
attracted skiers enthralled by its breathtaking scenery, savage and remote
beauty and huge vertical drop. The terrain is much steeper than the glacier
runs on the Deux Alpes side, and should only be attempted with a guide.
There are several routes down, all spectacular and all gruelling, though not
really extreme. Unmissable for the serious off-piste skier.
Heights: 2 Alpes 5,445 ft. La Grave 4,756 ft. Skiing 11,775 ft
Difficulty of runs: 2 Alpes: Beginner 30 per cent; Intermediate 61 per cent;
Advanced 9 per cent. La Grave: No grooming below 10,500 ft, where terrain is
100 per cent Higher Intermediate/Advanced.
Transfer: 3 hours from Lyon or Geneva, 1+ hours from Grenoble 580 miles from
Calais.
ANDERMATT
Whatever happened to Andermatt? Or rather what happened to the British who
used to ski there? Once the archetypal Swiss resort - pretty village,
delightful tea-rooms, rushing river, terrific mountain (Gemsstock) and good
nursery slopes at Natschen/Stockli and Hospental - it was a popular
destination with the British in the 1960s and '70s. It's still the same -
except British tour operators don't go there any more. Nowadays the only
British skiers you are likely to find there are those who fell in love with
the place years ago and still make their own way there, and the small band
of skiers who will know it as a magnificent ski-touring centre.
Fashions change. But the stay-away British didn't cause the resort much
alarm because it has one major guaranteed customer: the Swiss army. They do
much of their mountain training there, and Andermatt - in a sunny valley
just north of the St Gotthard Pass - has never really needed to up-grade its
skiing facilities to compete with big tourist centres like Verbier or
Zermatt. The Gemsstock (almost 10,000 ft) is a challenging mountain with
some wonderful scenery and long off-piste runs back down to Andermatt (5,000
vertical ft). Take a guide]
Heights: Resort 4,738 ft. Skiing 9,842 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 29 per cent; Intermediate 30 per cent; Advanced
41 per cent.
Transfer: 3 hours 20 minutes from Zurich. Rail station in resort. 504 miles
from Calais.
ST ANTON
An outstanding resort for skiing and scenery, St Anton in Austria has four
ski areas and is also on the same lift pass as Lech and Zurs, a short bus
ride away. The most challenging area is the Valuga, networked with wonderful
red runs and testing blacks. And for those with nerves of steel there is a
little-known route down to Zurs via the North Face, accessed by a small
yellow cablecar in which you can only travel if accompanied by a
high-mountain guide. The initial descent is quite severe, but afterwards the
run continues in more relaxing style with off-piste terrain of the highest
quality in powder.
Some of the lifts in St Anton, such as the Schindlerspitze, seem to have
been constructed in mind-bogglingly difficult but awe-inspiringly beautiful
terrain. This lift takes you soaring over jagged ridges and steep, seemingly
unskiable couloirs (they are occasionally skied by ski-extreme specialists)
with what seems to be the whole of the Vorarlberg alps spread out in a
breathtaking panorama. Although St Anton is a happy hunting-ground for
strong intermediates and experts there is plenty for the more cautious
skier. The town meanders alongside the main line from Switzerland to Italy
(you can travel home from the slopes on the Venice-Simplon Orient Express)
and although far from charmless, is too towny to be picture-postcard.
Heights: Resort 4,210 ft. Skiing 9,222 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 30 per cent; Intermediate 52 per cent; Advanced
18 per cent.
Transfer: 3-plus hours from Zurich, station in St Anton. 606 miles from
Calais.
ARGENTIERE/CHAMONIX
Argentiere in France is the ultimate off-piste paradise: many keen skiers
regard the Grands Montets as the best ski mountain in Europe, particularly
in powder. If you ski the top section you are on the glacier and there is a
danger from crevasses. If you plan to ski it properly, a guide will
considerably enhance your chances of skiing safely and pleasurably. If you
are worried about crevasses, but do not want to hire a guide, make sure you
keep to the marked trails - or only ski the lower half of the mountain below
the ice line.
One of the highlights is the possibility of venturing - at your guide's
discretion - into the edge of the Argentiere Glacier. There are places near
the Point de Vue where you can ski a little way through the surreal,
dreamlike ice-scape of seracs - a sort of petrified forest of ice-blocs. The
challenging Pas de Chevre (Goat's Hop) is one of Europe's classics, leading
down to the Mer de Glace, a dramatic glacier that forms a border between the
skiing at Argentiere and the Vallee Blanche, Chamonix's best known run.
This is a spectacular and quite gruelling off-piste descent although the
skiing itself is not difficult. (There are much more testing variants). It
enables intermediates to enjoy one of the longest (13 miles) and most scenic
off-piste adventures without having to worry too much about technique. But a
guide is important because of crevasse danger.
For less intrepid skiers, any one of the many other ski areas dotted around
the spectacular Chamonix Valley - such as Brevent, Flegere and Les Houches -
offer good all-round slopes.
Heights: Argentiere: Resort 4067 ft. Skiing 10,824 ft. Chamonix: Resort 3280
ft. Skiing 12,431 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Argentiere: On piste, Beginner 10 per cent; Intermediate
70 per cent; Advanced 20 per cent. Off Piste 100 per cent Intermediate and
advanced. Chamonix: Beginner: 40 per cent; Intermediate 48 per cent;
Advanced 12 per cent.
Transfer: 1-plus hours from Geneva. Train station in Chamonix. 562 miles
from Calais.
THE ASPENS
The big news about Aspen this year is the acquisition of the resort's
nearest neighbour, Aspen Highlands. Absorbing its rival gives Aspen four ski
mountains and greatly enhances its claim to be America's Number One ski
resort - a far cry from its tatty beginnings when the early miners shivered
in the camp that was once called Ute City.
This year sees the 100th anniversary of the legislation that ruined Aspen
and other silver-mining towns: the US government dropped the silver standard
and Aspen went bust.
Today Aspen is described as Hollywood on Ice. Even its location - in Roaring
Fork Valley - sounds more like a TV soap opera than real life. But the
skiing is great, especially with the addition of Highlands, a run-down
resort with antiquated lifts but superb skiing. Aspen itself has 75
picturesque trails squeezed into a fairly steep forested mountain served by
a fast, modern gondola, the Silver Queen. Many are fast cruising runs like
Copper Bowl, Spar Gulch and the exhilarating Ruthie's: others are short,
steep double-diamond (extra-difficult) mogul chutes, such as Zaugg Dump and
Lost Dollar, some of which were made by miners shovelling debris down the
slopes as they tunnelled into the mountain.
Bell Mountain - almost a mountain within a mountain - is mainly mogulfields
and skiing in the trees. There is good snowcat skiing on the back of Aspen
mountain. Highlands has the highest skiing - some would say the best - and
with its view of the stunning Maroon Bells range, the best scenery.
The chutes, moguls and tree skiing on both sides of the ridge around
Steeplechase and Olympic Bowl are outstanding, and one steep trail,
Deception, is so called because it starts steep and gets even steeper.
Tiehack-Buttermilk is ideal for beginners, but it has secret powder caches
where you might find a few wise skiers who have drifted across from Aspen.
Snowmass, although a lot less fashionable than Aspen, has more ski visitors
than the other three resorts put together. A vast intermediate playground,
Snowmass is famous for its Big Burn area, which comprises several runs which
virtually merge to form one huge trail as much as a mile across in places.
It also has some severe chutes off The Cirque and steep tree skiing in the
Hanging Valley Glades. Unlike Aspen, Snowmass also has some excellent
nursery slopes.
But there is only one Aspen: the atmosphere is fun, the town is pretty and
the natives are actually quite friendly. Aspen has had to own up to a little
'fat cat' arrogance in the past that alienated some of its clients. It
realised, none too soon, that skiers did not owe the town a living, and so
to ensure their continued custom, Aspen has spent more on updating its lift
systems and ski infrastructure.
The main skiing is on Ajax mountain, and the place to be afterwards is
Schlomo's, at the back of the Little Nell hotel. The sundeck at the bottom
of Ajax is a favourite place for skiers relaxing with apres-ski drinks to
the sound of reverberating heavy metal music. The Little Nell's big rival,
the Ritz Carlton, opened last year in a blaze of publicity, leaving the
Jerome to cater for clients who prefer the quaint and the historic to the
last word in luxury.
Heights: Resort: 7,945 ft. Skiing: 11,212 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 0 per cent; Intermediate 35 per cent; Advanced
65 per cent.
Aspen Highlands: Resort: 8,000 ft. Skiing: 11,800 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 23 per cent; Intermediate 48 per cent; Advanced
29 per cent.
Snowmass: Resort: 8,220 ft. Skiing: 11,835 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 9 per cent; Intermediate 51 per cent; Advanced
40 per cent.
Tiehack-Buttermilk: Resort: 7,870 ft. Skiing 9,900 ft.
Difficulty of runs: All beginner/Intermediate.
Transfer: Aspen 204 miles from Denver local airport.
AVORIAZ
Of all the purpose-built French purpose-built resorts, Avoriaz, with its
space-age architecture, is arguably the most exiting. It is a little
reminiscent of the pulsating, futuristic city in the classic film
Metropolis. In sunshine it has a colourful Riviera flavour, but during one
of its rather surreal white-outs, the mist-shrouded tower blocks of
apartments pierce the heavens like some Martian film set, giving it a
sinister and surrealistic quality. This can be chillingly appropriate when
they stage the annual festival of 'Films Fantastiques]'
Avoriaz is the jewel in the crown of the vast Portes Du Soleil region, a
circuit which takes in more than a dozen resorts along the French-Swiss
border. It is also the location for one of the classic decents - the
Chavanette, or Swiss Wall - down into Les Crosets. The wall has a fairly
fearful reputation. It is in fact a very unforgiving long and steep mogul
field, where it is easy to fall, but not normally terribly dangerous except
for the problem of falling skiers crashing into others. It is usually closed
when conditions are seriously unpleasant. In fresh snow, there are
alternative routes to the left which are more enjoyable and less dangerous.
Avoriaz and the rest of the Portes du Soleil provide endless terrain for
average-to-good skiers and the opportunity to enjoy the satisfaction of
skiing from one resort to another. Conversely, off piste enthusiasts who
prefer quality to quantity will have a treat if they can find the secret
powder fields off the Ripaille above Champery's Grand Paradis area. Rather
than perpetually skiing to the next horizon, they will want to stay and ski
the powder out.
Heights: Resort 5,904 ft. Skiing 7,743 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 18 per cent; Intermediate 66 per cent; Advanced
18 per cent.
Transfer: 2+ hours from Geneva. 555 miles from Calais.
BARILOCHE
Half way down the vast length of the magnificent Andes, close to Lake Nahuel
Huapi, the Argentine city of San Carlos de Bariloche has a decidedly
cosmopolitan feel about it. Bariloche's ski area at Gran Catedral is South
America's biggest and oldest mechanised ski resort. The city of Bariloche is
12 miles from the slopes (there is a regular bus service) but there are
lodging facilities at the resort base.
Since the city's beginnings almost a century ago, when German settlers
started trading here, other travellers from all over Europe have followed,
and European-style chalets are common. Although the season normally runs
from early June until early October, Bariloche's snow record is not
outstanding, either for quantity or quality. With a maximum elevation of
6,725 ft and a fairly warm winter climate, the slopes tend to experience
snow that is heavy and soft. But with 32 lifts and 50 runs, it is a
significant resort. Most of the runs are intermediate, but advanced skiers
will be able to enjoy high-speed cruising on the upper slopes. Bariloche,
with eight FIS approved runs, is Argentina's principal racing centre.
Heights: Resort 3,378 ft. Skiing 6,725 ft.
Transfer: 12 miles from Bariloche. 1048 miles from Buenos Aires.
BIG SKY
Montana is rarely mentioned in skiing circles outside the Rockies, but it
has 13 small but often spectacular resorts including Big Sky. The resort has
some dramatic terrain - steep bowls and chutes - and is often used by ski
extreme enthusiasts for derring-do videos. Its annual snow record - 400 in -
is also well above average. Now that the resort is starting to be
'discovered' by outsiders, it is busily adding lifts at the rate of almost
one a year. One of the latest, a high-speed quad called Ram Charger which
speeds you from bottom to top of Andesite Mountain in under five minutes,
gives you a fairly unequivocal flavour of the kind of ambiance the resort
exudes] And Challenger Lift, on Lone Mountain, is for experts only.
The nearby resort of Bridger Bowl is also building up a reputation as a cult
resort for powder fanatics. But beginners should not despair: in spite of
Big Sky's machismo image, they should be able to manage 20 per cent of the
trails. If they can't, there's not a lot else to do, but they could take a
trip to Yellowstone nearby.
Heights: Resort 6,970 ft. Skiing 10,900 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 20 per cent; Intermediate 50 per cent; Advanced
30 per cent.
Transfer: 45 miles from Bozeman.
BLUE RIVER
Blue River - half way between Kamloops and Jasper - is a small railway town
in the middle of British Columbia's mountain wilderness where the Canadian
National trains howl all night and heli-skiers whoop all day on runs like
Yukon Jack, Smokey Ridge, Sparkey's, Cobra and even Two Titties. It is the
headquarters of Mike Wiegele Heliskiing, Canadian Mountain Holidays' only
serious rival in the Canadian Rockies. Wiegele operates along a 4,000 square
mile area of the Monashees (rugged, glaciated, treeless) and Cariboos (tree
skiing) on the shores of Lake Eleanor, 370 miles from Vancouver. You can do
the entire journey by train, but there are only two a week.
Like CMH's rival operation in Revelstoke, basing heli-skiing in a town
enables skiers to come and go for the odd couple of days or so rather than
be committed to an entire week in a lodge. The skiing is excellent even when
snow conditions are not perfect: Wiegele's guides (there are usually two
with every group of 10 skiers) have a knack of teasing out good runs, come
what may. A word of warning though. Says Wiegele: 'No refunds are given if
you are unable to keep up or it is too difficult.' In practice this hardly
ever happens.
Heights: Resort ft. Skiing 10,500 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Heliskiing off-piste. All Intermediate/Advanced.
Transfer: 370 miles from Vancouver. (There is a special Wiegele Greyhound
service from Kamloops, 140 miles).
COURMAYEUR
On a superficial level, Courmayeur in Italy is a smallish resort above an
attractive, medium sized town with a big cable car - somewhat lacking in
breadth and vertical drop, though there is quite a testing 12 kilometre run
down to Dolonne. There are one or two reasonably challenging runs at
Checrouit/Cresta d'Arp - and some inspiring scenery. It's the scenery that
gives a clue to one big gun the resort has up its sleeve: Mont Blanc. Thanks
to a staggering feat of engineering, this great hulk of a mountain
overlooking Courmayeur's slopes brings all kinds of interesting
possibilities into play.
The Italian version of the famous 18-kilometre Vallee Blanche off-piste
excursion is achieved by taking three cable cars from Entreves. Elsewhere,
there is some goodish helicopter skiing to be had around Courmayeur and at
nearby Valgrisensche. Epicurians will be fascinated with a different sort of
Entreves challenge - how to consume a 36-course meal at the Maison de
Filippo. The trick is not to hog the early courses and pace yourself - a
difficult achievement if you come off the slopes ravenous after a good day's
skiing. Courmayeur is good-food country, with excellent restaurants both on
and off the slopes. One major snag - you can't ski back to town. Unless you
want to bother to be picked up by car on the village outskirts, there is
only one way down: back in the big cable-car.
Heights: Resort 4,015 ft. Skiing 9,843 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 44 per cent; Intermediate 44 per cent; Advanced 12
per cent.
Transfer: 2 hours from Geneva or Turin. 575 miles from Calais.
CORTINA
Italy's Cortina has stunning scenery (used extensively as pretend-Colorado
in Sylvester Stallone's movie Cliffhanger) and self-indulgent visitors. It
also has so many fur coats that
Aspen, its real Colorado equivalent, seems like a bastion of Greenpeace by
comparison. The possibilities of apres ski at this former Olympic resort
come so early - around noon - that some people go straight to the apres
without bothering with the ski. Many visitors have not the slightest
intention of skiing anyway, and the number of people on the slopes often
seems to bear this out.
By early afternoon, long before the sun dips behind the Dolomites, enhancing
their naturally pink hue, the main pedestrian precinct, the Corso Italia, is
crowded with people wearing the inevitable jewellery and furs. But
surprisingly few visitors seem to find their way to the slopes the following
morning. Having spent the later part of the evening in discos and
nightclubs, they may feel that actually skiing is asking too much.
The slopes are largely intermediate and widely spread out in beautiful
surroundings. Faloria, which links with Cristallo/Staunies, an exhilarating,
quite steep but wide gully, is easily accessible from the town, and
therefore one of the most popular. Tofana, Pocol and Socrepes are also
linked. Some of the more testing skiing is at Cinque Tori and Lagazuoi and
the upper section of Cristallo. Cortina is also part of the vast Dolomiti
Super Ski area which can be skied with one lift pass, which also enables you
to ski in some Austrian resorts.
Heights: Resort 4,078 ft. Skiing 10,543 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner/Early Intermediate 64 per cent; Intermediate 20
per cent; Advanced 16 per cent.
Transfer: 2+ hours from Treviso. 834 miles from Calais.
CRANS MONTANA
Crans Montana is a sun-drenched, wide-open picturesque and rather expensive
Swiss ski resort perched above the Rhone Valley - roughly mid-way between
the Matterhorn and Mont Blanc - where you can ski fast and furiously with
great gusto in a giant, largely treeless arena which contains a hundred
miles of pistes. Like Bormio in 1985, Crans Montana took advantage of the
world championships in 1987 to modernise its lift systems, tripling the
number of skiers the resort can transport to its three main ski areas: Les
Violettes-Plaine Morte, Cry d'Err-Bella Lui and Aminona-Petit Bonvin. But
apart from a handful of black runs, it has rather a lack of seriously
testing slopes.
One of the most spectacular is the Faverge off-piste run from the very top
of the ski area at Plaine Morte (the 9,840 ft glacier from where Arnold Lunn
launched the nine-mile long precursor of the Kandahar race) all the way down
to the neighbouring resort of Aminona - a vertical drop of almost 5,000 ft.
Crans, the posher of the two, with most of the smart boutiques, and Montana,
the older and more rustic, have merged and now form what is claimed to be
the largest ski resort in Switzerland. The resort is reputed to have more
five-star hotels than Gstaad.
Heights: Resort 4,920 ft. Skiing 9,840 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner: 34 per cent; Intermediate 62 per cent;
Advanced 4 per cent.
Transfer: 3 hours from Geneva. (Other airport: Sion). 632 miles from Calais.
CRESTED BUTTE
For a former ma-and-pa ski hill, this Colorado resort has a lot of bright
ideas as well as some of the best beginner-intermediate trails and most
testing back-country slopes in the Rockies. It has already made a big name
for itself by offering free skiing for the first four weeks of the season
for the last three years. Now the former mining town is offering new skiers
their money back this winter if they haven't learned to ski from the top of
the Keystone lift to the bottom after a special two-day learn-to-ski
package.
Crested Butte is something of a Jekyll and Hyde resort, although the Hyde
section - dramatic terrain called the Extreme Limits - lurks out of harm's
way above the normal ski area. Families and intermediates gliding around on
much less daunting slopes below need never be aware of the thrills and
terrors of the terrain around the North Face and recently opened Headwall.
Like Steamboat, Crested Butte (a butte is a solitary mountain) has an
attractive old wild-west town - scarcely more than a village - a mile from
the ski resort. It is colourful and rustic, with quaint old bars hotels and
shops all snuggling up together and a delightful frontier town atmosphere in
a remote corner of Colorado. Winters used to be hard for miners gouging
anthracite, silver and gold out of the ground. Now they are good for skiers.
Heights: Resort 9,100 ft. Skiing 11,400 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 29 per cent; Intermediate 53 per cent; Advanced
18 per cent.
Transfer: 230 miles from Denver.
THE CAUCASUS
'As much salmon, caviar, vodka and Russian specialities as you can eat and
drink' - and then there's the helicopter skiing. As much as you can afford?
This is heliskiing in the Caucasus mountains close to the Black Sea as
offered by Yak and Yeti, the specialist high mountain guide company in
Chamonix which has a programme at Krasnaya Poliana near Sotchi. Skiing in
the Caucasus used to be - and in some resorts probably still is - a fairly
primitive affair with ancient lift equipment that frequently broke down and
spilt drops of oil on your ski-suit. It was another Caucasus resort,
Guadauri, which changed all that. The Austrians built a new hotel complex
there and installed state-of-the-art Doppelmayer lifts. The Georgians added
a couple of rather ponderous, unwieldy and ancient ex-military Mia
helicopters and the scene was set for an exciting new ski resort.
Then the problems started. Two helicopters were involved in separate
incidents, killing one young Austrian guide and seriously injuring a flight
technician and two Austrian tourists. Better helicopters have been
introduced, but because of the unsettled regime in Tbilisi the situation is
unpredictable. However, when the dust settles Guadauri should be the
showpiece of the Caucasus.
Heights: Resort 6,600 ft. Skiing 10,913 ft (up to 13,200 ft with
helicopter).
Difficulty of runs: Easy 46 per cent; Intermediate 38 per cent; Advanced 16
per cent. Heli-skiing: 100 per cent Intermediate/Advanced
Transfer: 2+ hours from Tblisi.
DAVOS/KLOSTERS
The British have been coming to Davos since the 19th century - originally to
enjoy the climate: hence the resort's claim to be the 'cradle of skiing'. It
is also the highest ski town in Europe and Switzerland's largest ski resort.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who brought his wife here to convalesce, made a
historic ski-tour with local guides across the mountains to Arosa. Sprawling
pleasantly along a picturesque valley in eastern Switzerland there is little
of the cowbell-and-yodelling flavour associated with a traditional Swiss
resort.
The five skiing areas are considerably spread out. Only the famous Parsenn
area and Schatzalp-Strelapass are linked, and it is well to have a car,
although there are trains and buses. The Parsenn is a huge network of runs
almost the size of Manhattan including one excursion all the way from the
Weissfluhjoch to Kublis, 14 kilometres away. The Jakobshorn provides good
skiing and there are testing off-piste runs on the back of Rinerhorn.
It is difficult to escape the influence of the Prince of Wales in Klosters,
a pretty but now slightly sprawling Swiss resort. He was almost killed in an
avalanche here, and the cable car to the Gotschnagrat slopes close to where
it happened is named after him. The Gotschnawang is not quite the terror it
is made out to be. What makes it dangerous is not the difficulty but its
proneness to avalanche. The Gotschnagrat is effectively a major flank of the
adjoining Davos skiing area. There are several routes down to Klosters from
the Parsenn area. Skiers of most grades can make the descent using one route
or another but the most challenging is Drostobel. On the other side are the
sunny, wide open slopes of Madrisa.
Heights: Davos 3,706 ft; Klosters 5,116 ft. Skiing: 9,328 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 29 per cent; Intermediate 41 per cent; Advanced
30 per cent.
Transfer: 3 hours from Zurich. Other airport Basle. Rail station in Davos.
626 miles from Calais.
FLAINE
Traditionally Flaine has always borne the brunt of criticism over
purpose-built French resorts, with claims that it is 'even uglier' than
Tignes, Les Menuires or the worst excesses of La Plagne. But much as La
Plagne started doing some years ago, Flaine is now building any fresh
accommodation in a much gentler, 'sympa' style. Hence the new Le Hameau
development just two kilometres away from the original, rather charmless,
concrete village centre at Flaine Foret. The new timber chalets are
delightful. They have balconies, sloping roofs and look far more like the
kind of buildings one would prefer to find in the mountains.
Ugly or not, Flaine is a great favourite with British skiers, and the resort
is celebrated for its children's facilities. Only 90 minutes or so from
Geneva, the Grand Massif area has a lot of honest-to-goodness skiing with
some unusually good off-piste (guide de rigeur because some of the off-piste
areas are honeycombed with pot-holes and there one or two dangerous cliffs
around too.) Though most of Flaine's skiing is above the tree-line, there
are some delightful runs through the trees down to the more traditional
villages of Samoens and Les Carroz.
Heights: Resort 5,250 ft. Skiing 8,150 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 7 per cent; Intermediate 77 per cent; Advanced
16 per cent.
Transfer: 2 hours from Geneva. (Other airport: Lyon) 548 miles from Calais.
THE GASTEIN VALLEY
This is one of those major Austrian ski areas like Ischgl that still does
not seem to have entered the consciousness of many British skiers, which is
something of a mystery. There are so many Gasteins in this beautiful
Salzburger land valley - from the pretty village of Dorfgastein at 2,755 ft
to the chillier slopes of Sportgastein with skiing up to 8,800 ft on the
Kreuzkogel - that it is less confusing just to call it the Gastein Valley.
The skiing is spread out across wide-open and sunny slopes with a lot of
quite easy off-piste terrain. The toughest runs are off the Stubnerkogel and
Kreuzkogel at Sportgastein - the highest and most snow-sure of the Gasteins
 -and on the wooded slopes of the Graugogel on the other side of the valley
above Badgastein.
The Schlossalm, a large bowl above the tree line, provides most of Bad
Hofgastein's skiing. Bad Hofgastein is is between Dorf, with its friendly,
tree-clad slopes on the valley floor, and Sportgastein. The most interesting
of all is Badgastein, famous as a spa resort for 600 years, which clings to
a steep hillside, through which the River Ache bubbles and cascades. Over
the years kings, emperors, heads of state and all kinds of celebrities have
come here to ease their aches and pains and try and fend off advancing age
and even impotence - but not to ski. Badgastein's public swimming pool - one
of the largest in Austria - is heated naturally by thermal waters which also
provides hot water for some of the local hotels.
Heights: Bad Hofgastein 2,853 ft; Badgastein 3,608 ft. Skiing: 8,812 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 24 per cent; Intermediate 66 per cent; Advanced 10
per cent.
Transfer: 1 1/2 hours from Salzburg, 2 hours from Linz or Munich. 763 miles
from Calais.
GSTAAD
The good news is that Gstaad is back in the Which? Good Skiing Guide, the
skier's Bible. It was churlishly axed for one edition but the new editors
have done the decent thing and rescued it from the ashes. There is however,
a problem: although it may be true that in Gstaad 'every guest is a king;
but kings are only guests', it does not apply on the the slopes. Skiers here
are not kings. Occasionally they are even paupers. In spite of being one of
the great 'in-places' to ski, Gstaad has an indifferent snow record and
rather unexciting skiing, rescued only by being part of the much bigger
Gstaad Superski region. There are some quite decent runs on the Wasserngrat,
close to the resort's famous Eagle Club - perhaps the most expensive and
exclusive luncheon club in the world - and parts of the Wispile are testing.
Fortunately Gstaad can share the glory of a whole network of satellite
resorts such as Saanenmoser and Videmanette, above Rougemont. Because of its
reputation as a trendy place in which to be seen, this is a very fortunate
arrangement that spares its blushes as a ski resort. At around 3,500 ft,
Gstaad is quite low, but it is fortunate to have the Diablerets Glacier
reasonably close to hand. Here, at 10,000 ft, there is excellent skiing. And
when the snow is limited in Gstaad, the glacier can be a godsend, although
it is prone to be shut in bad weather.
Heights: Resort 3,308 ft. Skiing 6,461 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 42 per cent; Intermediate 45 per cent; Advanced 13
per cent.
Transfer: 2 1/2 hours from Geneva. Station in resort. 533 miles from Calais.
GULMARG
Of the handful of ski resorts in the wild and relatively unknown Himalayas,
seven thousand miles from the UK, such as Shimla, Narkandar and Auli, only
Gulmarg in Kashmir is known to British skiers and even that at present has
severe drawbacks. There is very little for intermediates. Either you pootle
around on the beginner slopes or you go to the other extreme and take a leap
into the unknown and try helicopter skiing. There is nothing much in
between.
The long-awaited and much-discussed cable car up to the nearest mountain,
Aparwat, is now half finished, but sporadic fighting in Srinagar has made
the resort dangerous to get to. But once the cable-car is up and running the
skiing in Gulmarg - an old British Army hill station - should be
transformed. Although this is India, you will find a hot-water bottle in
your bed, a charcoal-burning stove being lit by your 'room-boy' and the note
in your fact sheet saying: 'During the winter the temperature is almost
identical to that of the Alps.' Since the skiing ranges from 8,700 ft to
more than 12,000 ft, this is hardly surprising. The heli-skiing is run by
the Swiss-born ski extreme specialist Sylvain Saudan, who claims there are
perhaps 2,000 runs within reach of Srinagar.
Heights: Resort 8,954 ft. Skiing 12,000 ft.
Difficult of runs: Gulmarg 100 per cent Beginner/Early Intermediate.
Heliskiing 100 per cent Off-piste: Intermediate/Advanced.
Transfer: Unpredictable because of unstable political situation. Normally
one hour by air from Delhi to Srinagar. Gulmarg is 35 miles by road from
Srinagar. Helicopter link normally available.
HAPPO ONE
While Norway puts the finishing touches to preparations for next February's
Winter Olympics at Lillehammer, plans are well under way for the next winter
games in Japan - in spite of last winter's farcical Alpine Championships.
This charming and impressive ski resort in the Japan Alps has been chosen to
host the 1998 Winter Olympics with Shiga Kogen. Happo One - pronounced
'Hap-pony' - is one of the few resorts in Japan capable of staging a decent
Men's Downhill. It is the best of a string of resorts in the spectacular
Hakuba Valley, where the mountains are real mountains, unlike some of the
rounded hilltops that pass for mountains in some parts of Japan. Although
individually they are nothing to shout about, if you are going to the Hakuba
Valley to ski Happo One, it is well worth spending a few hours at the
neighbouring areas of Sunalpina Sanosaka, Goryu Toomi, Hakuba 47, Iwataka
and Hakuba Minekata. The village of Happo One - a maze of attractive narrow
streets with colourful quasi-European shops and bars - is most attractive,
although skiers on foot and two-way traffic causes severe congestion after
the lifts have closed. Every resort in the valley has a fire festival - each
on a different date - when instructors carrying fiery torches give a
breathtaking display of synchronised skiing under floodlights. Some of them
leap through blazing hoops, while at the bottom of the mountain, enthralled
crowds munch on squids-on-a-stick to the accompaniment of hypnotic tribal
drumming.
Heights: Resort 3,053 ft. Skiing 6,005 ft.
Difficulty of run: Easy 30 per cent; Intermediate 50 per cent; Advanced 20
per cent.
Transfer: 4 hours from Tokyo by train.
INNSBRUCK
The beautiful Tyrolean capital of Innsbruck itself is not really a ski
resort as such (although some Americans think it is) but it is surrounded by
dramatic mountains and a lot of good skiing - five satellite resorts with 65
miles of runs altogether, served by 35 lifts. All are linked by bus, but a
car is a better bet. Innsbruck staged the Winter Olympics in 1964 and in
1976, when Franz Klammer stormed to glory in the downhill at Igls. You can
ski the 2.4 mile course from the Patscherkofel and compare notes]
The most testing local skiing is at Hungerburg where the challenging
Hafelkar slopes are the big attraction. From the Hungerburg plateau there is
an exceptional view across the city and a very severe descent back to the
outskirts of Innsbruck which should be attempted only by experts. Five miles
from Innsbruck is Axams, where the Olympic slalom events and the women's
downhill were staged at Axamer-Lizum, which itself has 20 miles of skiing.
There are some quite challenging runs at Igls-Patscherkofel. Tulfes, almost
eight miles from Innsbruck, has some good off-piste terrain: Mutters is more
suitable for intermediates. Neustift, with summer skiing on the Stubai
Glacier, is also within easy striking distance of Innsbruck.
Heights: Resort 1,886 ft. Skiing 7670 ft. Axamer-Lizum 10,499 ft; Stubai
Glacier, Tulfes: 8783 ft.
Difficulty of runs: (Stubai Glacier) Easy 55 per cent; Intermediate 31 per
cent; Advanced 14 per cent.
Transfer: Flights and ski train direct to Innsbruck.
ISCHGL
Relatively few British tour operators send clients here, which is odd:
Ischgl in Austria has been described as coming close to having the perfect
ingredients for a ski resort, combining the best aspects of French, Austrian
and Italian skiing: plenty of long, fast and comparatively undemanding
skiing, the kind of snow reliability you normally hope for in Val
d'Isere/Tignes, the village charm of Alpbach, and the apres-ski vitality of
St Anton, all combined with the drinks prices of Livigno.
And what of the Swiss? They haven't been missed out, because part of this
wonderful, swooping, wide-open ski area (it is sunny but like most exposed,
mainly above-the-tree-line areas, sometimes chilly too) actually crosses the
wooded Swiss border into Samnaun, where duty-free prices really do rival
Livigno's. (Skiing visitors are recommended to bring rucksacks]) Ischgl has
an exhilarating 4,000 ft vertical drop. As for charm, the smaller resort of
neighbouring Galtur - once a haunt of Ernest Hemingway - has more of the
Alpbach flavour, although even Galtur's ski terrain has doubled in size in
recent years, and is probably better than Ischgl for nursery slopes and a
lack of queueing.
Heights: Resort 4,620 ft. Skiing 9,480 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 19 per cent; Intermediate 72 per cent; Advanced
9 per cent.
Transfer: 100 minutes from Innsbruck. 3+ hours from Munich.
JACKSON HOLE
Jackson is arguably the pick of the crop of American skiing, and it is in
fact my favourite ski resort of all. Under new management it is set to
become even better, with new lifts and trails gradually filling in some of
the gaps. But the beauty of Jackson cannot be told in terms of lifts, which
are merely the icing on a rich cake. It is Jackson's cocktail of rugged,
awe-inspiring scenery, effervescent skiing and haunting desolation that
grabs at your senses.
As you fly in you are spellbound by a scene that has stunned generations of
trappers and then tourists: the vast, wide-open 600-square-mile valley floor
is punctured by the magnificent Teton mountains which rise like a tidal wave
of granite. It is these giant, snow-clad shark's teeth, glinting in the
Wyoming sun, that lure skiers to Teton Village, 12 miles from the Wild West
town of Jackson with its cowboy bars and wooden sidewalks.
Rendezvous, a graceful brute of a mountain full of gullies, chutes and
couloirs, exhilarating cruising runs and steep untracked powder-fields is an
extension of the range, and all but obscures the Teton peaks. Jackson's most
famous couloir is Corbet's, which mesmerises strong skiers as they glimpse
it from the red Tram on their way to the top of Rendezvous. Many ski to the
edge, and stare into the abyss, feeling that mixture of fear and excitement
luring them nearer the point of no return. Many don't know until the last
moment whether they will end up performing or simply spectating. Skiers must
jump at least 15 ft to enter Corbet's. There is no disgrace in turning back:
there is plenty of excitement here without hurling yourself into Corbet's.
And for less ambitious skiers, neighbouring Rendezvous Mountain has a good
mixture of nursery slopes and fairly easy cruising runs.
Heights: Resort 6,311 ft. Skiing 10,450 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 10 per cent; Intermediate 40 per cent; Advanced
50 per cent.
Transfer: 24 miles from Jackson Hole airport. 250 miles from Salt Lake City.
JUNGFRAU REGION
The combined skiing of Wengen, Grindelwald and Murren is considerably
greater than the sum of its individual parts, and the scenery is out of this
world. The impact of Europe's most famous North Face - the Eiger - is
dramatic because it is so close to Grindelwald and is also flanked by two
more giants - the Jungfrau and Munch (Monk). The skiing on Grindelwald's
local slopes at First is fun but a little limited. Fortunately Grindelwald
shares much of its back yard with neighbouring Wengen, so overall there is
quite a lot of good, robust but not terribly challenging skiing. There are,
however two good off-piste runs  - the exquisite White Hare which starts at
the bottom of the Eiger, and Oh God] The best of the blacks is Black Rock.
To all but the keenest skiers, however, the comparative lack of really
testing terrain seems to be a minor consideration when you offset it with
such breathtaking scenery, the fascinating history of the conquest of the
mountains by both climbers and railway engineers and the quintessential
Swiss-ness. Europe's highest rack railway, the Jungfraubahn, curls up to the
Jungfraujoch, Europe's highest railway station in most dramatic fashion -
through the very heart of the Eiger. En route it halts at two stations where
passengers are allowed to peer out of the windows on to the mind-numbingly
steep North Face. Above and below are huge, jagged rocks topped with wild
cornices.
When the Swiss built the railway soon after the turn of the century there
were no such things as chairlifts, and the train represented a wonderful new
alternative to slogging up the mountain with sealskins on the bottom of your
skis. The triumphant British were able to leap aboard the Jungfraubahn and
ski downhill only. This was the birth of The Down Hill Only Club (DHO).
The club's great rival, the Kandahar, is based just across the valley in
Murren, spiritual home to Sir Arnold Lunn, who set the first modern slalom
course on the local slopes. Perched on a steep high ledge, you realise just
how fragile Murren's grip on the cliff-side seems when you fly over it in a
helicopter. The quaint, car-free resort has one famous and testing mountain,
the Schilthorn, topped by one of the highest revolving restaurants in Europe
at Piz Gloria. The Schilthorn, which featured in the James Bond movie On Her
Majesty's Secret Service, is also the mightily mogulled and un-nerving start
of the famous Inferno, the longest amateur skiing race in the world - over 8
miles - all the way down (when snow conditions permit) to Lauterbrunnen.
Apart from some noteworthy exceptions like Kanonenrohr, Murren's other
slopes tend not to be terribly eventful, but if you know where to look, or
better still hire a guide, it has some excellent off-piste opportunities.
Heights: Grindelwald: Resort 3,393 ft. Skiing 8,157 ft. Wengen: Resort 4,165
ft. Skiing 9,744 ft. Murren: Resort 5,739 ft. Skiing 9,741 ft.
Difficulty of runs in Jungfrau Region: Easy 33 per cent; Intermediate 47 per
cent; Advanced 20 per cent.
Transfer: 3+ hours from Zurich (other airports: Berne, Geneva). 521 miles
from Calais.
KILLINGTON
Killington is a snow factory. The Vermont resort starts making it as soon as
possible - as early as October - and keeps churning it out in such
proportions that each of its six mountains has its own stockpile of snow
that turn some of the trails on which it is stored into gigantic, marauding
glaciers of snow. The most extraordinary example is Outer Limits, which
drops down from the top of Bear Mountain for more than half a mile. The run
would be difficult enough to ski normally, but when piled high with
artificial snow it becomes the toughest mogul run in the East.
However, of Killington's 77 miles of trails, more than half are classified
as easy - although when the weather turns seriously cold, as it does in
Vermont, even the easiest slopes can bear more resemblance to skating rinks
than ski runs. One of Killington's problems is that it has individual
establishments with considerable charm, but the resort itself has no real
heart.
Among the more intriguing restaurants is Charity's, with its exquisite
cherrywood bar and Italian marble pillars, imported from France more than a
century ago. In those days the wooden floor had to be replaced as often as
six times a year because of the hobnailed boots worn by lumberjacks. The
Wobbly Barn is an infamous nightspot worth at least one visit.
Heights: Resort 1,045 ft. Skiing 4,220 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 45 per cent; Intermediate 20 per cent; Advanced
35 per cent.
Transfer: 150 miles from Boston. 80 Miles from Burlington Airport.
KITZBUHEL
You will never nod off during the apres ski in Kitzbuhel, but the skiing
itself is a touch predictable. Kitzbuhel's boisterous and colourful ambience
makes it permanently Christmassy - but it tends to be very much a case of
Ding-dong Merrily on Low rather than the Silent Night breed. Without the
invasion of foreign skiers the walled, medieval town, with archways, cobbled
streets, gabled houses and colour-washed facades would be immensely
charming. It has some quintessentially Austrian tea-rooms and coffee shops
offering the most deliciously gooey cakes, of which Praxmair's is the most
famous.
Kitzbuhel also tends to be noisy, and its altitude (slightly less than 2,500
ft) means that it sometimes struggles for snow - although most of the time
it does better that you might expect. The resort also has some serious
queueing problems. There are four main skiing areas which means that with
transport (free bus service or own car) one can enter the ski circuit at the
Fleckalm, Jochberg or Pass Thurn lifts, thus sometimes avoiding the worst
queues and getting better snow conditions. Unfortunately a lot of other
people often have the same idea. Gung-ho skiers might want to try the feared
Streif run on the Hahnenkamm, but most of the skiing is
friendly-intermediate. The Kitzbuhelerhorn provides a delightful alternative
to the local skiing.
Heights: Resort 2,624 ft. Skiing 6,471.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 36 per cent. Intermediate 47 per cent. Advanced 17
per cent.
Transfer: 1 1/2 hours from Salzburg, 2 hours from Munich. Rail station in
resort. 706 miles from Calais.
LA PLAGNE
La Plagne in France is a genuine intermediate and lower-intermediate
paradise, with the vast majority of its 100 or so runs either red or good
blues. It is a vast snowy wilderness dotted with 10 or more villages that
between them cover the entire spectrum of traditional and purpose-built
French architecture, from genuine farming settlements like Montchavin to
brave but not beautiful new world, of which the most dramatic and
controversial is Aime-la-Plagne. The highest of all the villages, Aime
resembles a huge ocean-going liner that has gone aground. This is now
generally recognised to be something of a carbuncle, and some of the more
recently added satellites have been designed in much more traditional style.
The skiing is almost as varied as the architecture: apart from the quite
steep piste and off-piste skiing on the Bellecote Glacier, which offers
10-mile-long runs through a vertical drop of 6,500 ft, there is a lot of
good motorway skiing and powder runs in the trees. The sprinkling of
villages means you can enjoy skiing from one to another without the need to
leave the resort.
Heights: Resort 6,232 ft. Skiing 10,660 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 67 per cent; Intermediate 29 per cent; Advanced 4
per cent. Plus off-piste on Bellecote Glacier.
Transfer: 4 hours from Lyon. 4 hours from Geneva. 583 miles from Calais.
LAS LENAS
The Vall de las Lenas in Argentina's Mendoza Province, at the southern end
of the Alto Cordillera close to the Chilean border, was built only a year
after the end of the Falklands conflict between Britain and Argentina. It is
probably the biggest ski area served by lifts in South America. Although Las
Lenas means 'firewood' the wood it refers to are in bush form rather than
trees, and the terrain is wide-open and bleak, with some superb off-piste
bowl skiing.
Many of the runs are tough, and the weather frequently is too. Winds can be
extreme and accompanied by fierce blizzards which bring avalanche danger.
Some areas are often closed, so that it is quite rare to be able to ski the
entire area even if you had the stamina. The feeling of space is enhanced by
the names of the lifts, many of which are named after the planets: among
them are Mars, Neptuno, Venus, Urano and Mercurio. The Mars chair accesses a
huge amount of steep and challenging off-piste, and only the strongest
skiers can begin to explore it all.
Heights: Resort 7,349 ft. Skiing 11,253 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 25 per cent; Intermediate 40 per cent; Advanced
35 per cent.
Transfer: 1+ hours flight from Buenos Aires.
LES ARCS
Les Arcs, one of the finest resorts in the French Alps, is the acceptable
face of purpose-building. The architecture is not displeasing, the slopes
are under-rated and the scenery is inspiring. It is probably France's most
innovative resort, known mainly for its Kilometre Lancee Olympic course,
which recreational skiers can attempt from the half-way stage, and - at the
other end of the scale - the ski-evolutif short-ski learning programme,
which the resort pioneered. Les Arcs also has a wonderfully diverse
selection of specialist ski schools which between them cover just about
every possibility of la glisse.
Les Arcs has dozens of good long cruising runs and virtually limitless
off-piste opportunities. The long run down to Villaroger is one of the
classic off-piste descents, and its focal mountain, the Aiguille Rouge, has
superb off-piste runs off both shoulders - preferably skied with a guide.
Experts will also find some real challenges behind the Aiguille Grive and
Aiguille Rousse.
Heights: Resort 5904 ft. Skiing 10,580 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 17 per cent; Intermediate 49 per cent; Advanced 34
per cent.
Transfer: 4+ hours from Geneva or Lyon. 585 miles from Calais.
LECH/ZURS
These two Arlberg villages, five kilometres apart, share some interesting -
though largely intermediate - skiing across three mountains, some excellent
off-piste (particularly from the Rufikopf). They attract Austria's
glitterati and quite a few film stars, aristocrats and royals from elsewhere
in Europe, including Britain. The shared (clockwise only) circuit is about
20 kilometres long. The Zurs skiing is all above the tree line. Although
Lech has some higher skiing in its satellite, Oberlech, many of its own
slopes are below the tree line, which in bad weather - when the Zurs skiing
can become distinctly unpleasant - are a godsend. In Lech some of the more
challenging slopes are off the Zuger Hochlicht. In Zurs, more advanced
skiers would enjoy the runs down from the Trittkopf cable car. Zurs is tiny,
remote, bleak and trendy. What there is of it is packed with expensive
hotels. Lech is bigger, considerably older, more real - and also expensive.
Lech and Zurs are as famous as their neighbour St Anton though slightly more
precious, genteel, swanky and expensive, with a wealth of intermediate
skiing and up-market hotels and shops. St Anton is not linked, but is only a
short bus journey away.
Heights: Lech 4,756 ft. Zurs 5,641 ft. Skiing: 8,036 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 40 per cent; Intermediate 42 per cent; Advanced 18
per cent.
Transfer: 3 1/2 hours from Zurich. (Other airport Munich.) 606 miles from
Calais.
LAKE LOUISE/BANFF
With more than 100 trails spread over four mountain faces and some of the
most magnificent scenery in the Canadian Rockies, Lake Louise is the most
important of three separate resorts that make up the Banff/Lake Louise
region in Alberta. Some 30 miles from Banff, Lake Louise also has high
calibre bowl skiing in Boomerang, Whitehorn, Paradise and East Bowls. Purple
Bowl, which traditionally takes skiers an hour to hike up to, is having a
lift installed - a mixed blessing for aficionados who wanted to keep out the
riff-raff]
Unlike some resorts in North America, every lift in Lake Louise has an easy
way down and can be ridden by novices. This is not the case at Mount
Norquay, Banff's local ski 'hill' - also reputedly Canada's oldest resort.
This is known principally for its short steep trails such as The Face, and
Lone Pine, although more temperate slopes have recently been opened up.
There is night skiing three nights a week on some runs.
Fifteen miles away down the Trans-Canadian Highway is one of Canada's
highest and bleakest (in spite of its name) resorts, Sunshine, part of which
actually spills over the border into British Columbia. This is fairly
intermediate open bowl skiing with so much natural snow that they don't need
to make their own. Skiers should not miss a visit to the region's great
railway hotels - the Banff Springs and the Chateau Lake Louise.
Heights: Resort 5,400 ft. Skiing 8,650 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 20 per cent; Intermediate 45 per cent; Advanced
35 per cent.
Transfer: 115 miles from Calgary. 24 miles from Sunshine, 34 miles from
Banff.
Sunshine Village Heights: Resort 5,440 ft. Skiing 8,954 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 25 per cent; Intermediate 40 per cent; Advanced
35 per cent.
Transfer: 90 miles from Calgary. 10 miles from Banff. 24 miles from Lake
Louise.
MAMMOTH
There is something strangely primeval about Mammoth Mountain, an extinct
volcano 11,000 ft up in California's High Sierras. The resort is exciting
enough to attract thousands of skiers every weekend from Los Angeles, 300
miles away - even though they have skiing in their own back yard in the San
Barnardino area. (The only other way to reach the slopes from Los Angeles is
a 70-minute trip in a light aircraft). During the week the slopes are
wonderfully uncrowded. Spread across the six miles that separate its
boundaries are 150 trails of all descriptions and difficulties although the
emphasis is on the more testing. There are some good nursery slopes, but
beginners may prefer neighbouring June Mountain, 30 miles away. Good
off-piste skiers in search of a challenge will relish Mammoth's Avalanche
Chutes (the Avies). Those with stamina can attempt a different challenge:
skiing off every major lift in a single day. This is complicated because the
numbers are not consecutive. The lifts were numbered as they were being
built, so consequently lift 1 is next to lift 26, and lift 25 is on a
separate mountain. The scenery is spectacular, with views of the Minarettes
on one side and Utah peaks on the other. Mammoth is one of the few US
resorts that opens during the summer.
Heights: Resort 7,953 ft. Skiing 11,053 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 30 per cent; Intermediate 40 per cent; Advanced
30 per cent.
Transfer: 4 miles from Mammoth Lakes Airport, 300 miles from Los Angeles.
THE MILKY WAY
High on a mountain pass on the French border with Italy, with a good snow
record, Montgenevre has a large, mainly intermediate ski area of its own,
but it is also the starting point for a very scenic, though easy, tour deep
into Italy - the Milky Way. This makes it possible to visit - out of
curiosity - but perhaps not to stay, in the much maligned 'Benidorm-on-Ice'
resort of Sauze d'Oulx. En route one skis through Claviere (said to be
Italy's oldest ski resort), Cesana, Sinsicario and Sestriere (said to be the
first purpose-built resort, once rather unkindly described as being
hand-built by fascist robots in Mussolini's day). The section between
Montgenevre and Claviere is the most stunning visually, with dramatic
mountain views. But the skiing, for the most part, is bland and reasonable
intermediates will manage to get all the way to Sauze and back in a day. For
a strong beginner, the excitement of skiing to other resorts - especially in
a different country - is considerable, even if they only manage the first
resort or two. Montgenevre attracts visitors from both sides of the border,
particularly Briancon and Turin.
Heights: Montgenevre 6,068 ft. Skiing: 8,528 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 24 per cent; Intermediate 64 per cent; Advanced 12
per cent.
Transfer: 2 1/2 hours from Turin, 3 hours from Grenoble, 4 hours from Lyon.
611 miles from Calais.
REVELSTOKE
This is prime helicopter-skiing country. Most off-piste skiers believe that
helicopter skiing in British Columbia is one of the best ski experiences on
earth. But most of the serious heliskiing is carried out from high mountain
lodges such as those at the celebrated Bugaboos, Cariboos and Monashee
lodges. Revelstoke is one of the few towns - the only one used by the market
leaders, Canadian Mountain Holidays - from which you can heliski without the
need to be incarcerated (however cosily) in a remote mountain lodge. It
serves the mainly wooded terrain in both the Monashee and Selkirk Mountains,
which between them have 200 off-piste trails with names like Fat Freddy's
Cat, Sunrise and Stump Farm. Bad weather in heli-ski lodges can mean a total
shut-down of skiing for a day or even days if the helicopter cannot fly. But
in Revelstoke there is a good local ski resort - Mount McKenzie- which can
be skied happily even if bad weather is halting flights.
Heights: Resort 1,509 ft. Skiing 8,856 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Heliskiing off-piste. All Intermediate/Advanced.
Transfer: 258 miles from Calgary.
SELLA RONDA
The mountainous border became the the scene of bitter fighting after Italy
entered the war against Austria in 1915. This gave the region a split
personality that lingers to this day. Part of the area was once in the
Austrian sud-Tyrol, and many of the place names still have German
equivalents: Selva, for example, is also known as Wolkenstein. The skiing is
typical Dolomite terrain: fairly gentle lower slopes and some steepish runs
through the trees overshadowed by towering, near-vertical cliffs of the
celebrated Dolomite granite, its pinkish hue often enhanced by glorious
sunsets.
With an impressive man-made snow system Selva/Val Gardena is a pre-Christmas
venue on the World Cup circuit and part of the scenic four-valley circuit
round the Gruppo Sella mountain, a huge monolith surrounded by ancient pass
routes linking dozens of old villages. Selva is also part of the Dolomiti
Superski region which covers 38 resorts served by 464 lifts, all of which
can be skied on one lift pass.
Arabba, at the base of the spectacular Sella Massif, is linked with the
Passo Pordoi (with good off-piste opportunities on the Gruppo Sella) and
Alta Badia. The resort's north-facing mountain provides a number of long and
quite breathtaking runs. Many are so steep that you feel like an astronaut
on a space walk. You constantly need to check your speed. There is some
outstanding scenery from the top of the cable car, which includes a
marvellous view of the Marmolada, which at just under 11,000 ft is the
highest peak in the Dolomites. Marmolada has its own superb long cruising
run, but the mountain is not covered by the Dolomiti Superski lift pass.
Heights: Selva 5,084 ft; Arabba 5,254 ft. Skiing 9,676 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Selva: Easy 35 per cent; Intermediate 58 per cent;
Advanced 7 per cent. Arabba: Easy 41 per cent; Intermediate 45 per cent;
Advanced 14 per cent.
Transfer: Approx 4 hours from Verona, 6 hours from Milan, Munich or Treviso.
766 miles from Calais.
SNOWBIRD/ALTA
When the snow - sometimes as dry as talc after crossing the West Coast
deserts - falls deep at Alta and Snowbird they can justifiably claim that
Utah has 'the greatest snow on Earth' - the 'champagne powder' the Americans
are always on about. Last winter so much snow piled up in Little Cottonwood
Canyon that it almost buried the neighbouring resorts. The road to Salt Lake
City was blocked and at one stage it was even illegal to leave your hotel
because of the avalanche danger. Until it was destroyed by fire and
avalanches, old Alta was a bustling, lawless mining town with countless
brawls and shootouts at bars like the Bucket of Blood Saloon. It had one of
the worst murder rates in the West.
Today its reputation is whiter than white. Both resorts are criss-crossed
with chutes and bowls but there is plenty for beginners and intermediates.
Alta has one of the cheapest lift passes in the Rockies and strong skiers
will enjoy the Greeley Bowls and the Chutes at Spiny Ridge. At Snowbird, Gad
Valley and Peruvian Gulch have steep-sided bowls with stunted,
blizzard-lashed pine trees to give you a little perspective. Snowbird's Tram
whisks 125 skiers to the top of Hidden Peak (11,000 ft) in eight minutes. It
also has what is probably the widest green run in the Rockies - Big Emma. At
Alta's Shallow Shaft (a euphemism for a poor day's work by a workshy miner)
you can eat swinging on old mining chairs. In contrast, Snowbird is probably
the closest to a modern purpose-built French resort in the Rockies.
Heights: Alta: 8,500 ft. Snowbird: 7,900 ft. Skiing: 11,000 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 25 per cent; Intermediate 35 per cent; Advanced
42 per cent.
Transfer: 32 miles to Salt Lake City.
SQUAW VALLEY
With no fewer than six mountains, almost shoulder-to-shoulder in a huge arc,
Squaw Valley - which hosted the 1960 Winter Olympics - is the most
challenging of 15 ski resorts that encircle Lake Tahoe, a beautiful
cobalt-blue stretch of water on the California/Nevada border. Unusually,
there are no marked trails as such. Instead the resort offers 4,000 acres of
open-bowl terrain spread around its rich variety of peaks: Emigrant, Granite
Chief, Squaw Peak, Snow King, Broken Arrow and the most spectacular of all,
KT22, whose front face mogul field is a serious test of most skiers' nerve.
However, even that pales into insignificance compared with The Palisades
chutes off the shoulder of Squaw Peak. But in spite of some tough terrain,
beginners do rather well at Squaw because unlike so many ski resorts, the
nursery slopes are up among the higher slopes on Emigrant Peak, rather than
at the bottom of the mountain.
Heights: Resort 6,200 ft. Skiing 9,050 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 25 per cent; Intermediate 45 per cent; Advanced
30 per cent.
Transfer: 45 miles from Reno, Nevada.
SKI THE SUMMIT
Summit County, Colorado is one of the few places in the US which promotes
the European concept of skiing in a number of resorts on the same lift pass.
Breckenridge, just purchased by Keystone and Arapahoe Basin, plus Copper
Mountain, now the odd one out, are within a 30 mile radius of each other and
linked by shuttle bus. More British skiers have their first encounter with
the American skiing experience here than anywhere else. There are many more
Britons here than there were native Americans during the post gold-rush days
when the population of Breckenridge was reduced to just seven and it became
a ghost town. Today its charmingly renovated mainstreet has 350 original
buildings dating back to the Victorian mining days. The British have been
buying condominiums here faster than any other non-US nations.
Breckenridge's four mountains (Peak 7 is due to open soon) have well over
100 trails between them. The original, Peak 8, offers a good mix of terrain,
plus the highest resort skiing in America - at a couple of ft below 13,000
ft - in the newly opened Imperial Bowl. (Arapahoe actually steals it at
13,050 ft, but that is 'back-country' skiing.) Peak 9 tends to be easier and
10, with some good tree-skiing in The Burn, more difficult. Strong skiers
can attempt Devil's Crotch and Mineshaft on Peak 9, Goodbye Girl and
Psychopath on Peak 8 and Blackhawk and Mustang on Peak 10.
Copper Mountain - once a copper mining centre - is a less attractive but
friendly purpose-built village of somewhat drab brown brick buildings. But
there's some attractive skiing, neatly 'arranged' strategically so that the
more difficult of Copper's 76 trails, like Formidable, are on the left, easy
slopes like Loverly are on the right and intermediate trails are in the
middle. Reasonable skiers can try trails like Copperopolis or Oh No] in the
middle area.
For many years Keystone had a reputation for being a slightly tame but fun
resort for families and beginners. But it always had a few difficult runs on
North Peak and those who wanted to ski steeper terrain could always head a
little way up the road to Arapahoe, a small but funky satellite with such
high skiing that it doesn't close until May or June. Now the recently opened
Outback area offers still more interesting terrain for strong skiers, and
the resort is seeking permission from the National Forest Service to open up
another big new bowl.
Keystone has the biggest night skiing area in North America and probably the
world, with more than 300 high-pressure sodium lights illuminating 13 trails
like giant glow-worms down an impressive 2,340 ft vertical drop.
Heights: Breckenridge: Resort 9,603 ft. Skiing just under 13,000 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 21 per cent; Intermediate 32 per cent; Advanced
47 per cent. Transfer: 85 miles from Denver.
Copper Mountain: Resort 9,600 ft. Skiing 12,360 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 25 per cent; Intermediate 40 per cent; Advanced
35 per cent. Transfer: 75 miles from Denver.
Keystone: Resort 10,780 ft. Skiing 12,450 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 10 per cent; Intermediate 50 per cent; Advanced
40 per cent.
Transfer: 74 miles from Denver.
ST MORITZ/PONTRESINA
This is where the British invented winter holidays in the Swiss Alps. Like
Aspen, Switzerland's most famous ski resort is not as snooty as you might
expect. Dammit, they are even opening a 'half-pipe' track for snowboarders
at Corviglia] You can arrive in the most infra dig fashion - by mini-bus
from Livigno - and still feel welcome. Although there are cheaper ski
packages available during the low season, St Moritz tends to be expensive,
but friendly: you don't have to stay at The Palace, but a visit is
recommended even if it's only for a drink or better still, dinner.
St Moritz's ski areas are scattered on both sides of the valley. The local
slopes are at Corviglia which has warm, fairly undemanding runs within easy
reach of the centre of town. Corvatsch is further out of town and has more
interesting terrain, but there are often serious queues at the bottom of the
cable car. A car is useful to get you round to the various areas, although
trains and buses will do the job. The short train journey to Pontresina is
gorgeous. If anything Pontresina's architecture, with turreted facades and
colourful murals creeping into view as the train negotiates a great sweeping
curve, is even more attractive than downtown St Moritz. The skiing in
Pontresina is amongst the best in the whole region, particularly on the
visually stunning Diavolezza Glacier and Lagalb, where you will find a long,
tough but hugely enjoyable black run and some quality off-piste.
Heights: Resort 5,904 ft. Skiing 10,824 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 22 per cent; Intermediate 57 per cent; Advanced 21
per cent.
Transfer: 4 hours from Zurich. (Or local airport). Rail station in resort.
654 miles from Calais.
SUN VALLEY
Sun Valley was invented just before the last war when Averell Harriman,
chairman of the United Pacific Railroad, asked an Austrian count to search
the Rockies for a site for a ski resort which would attract rail passengers
during the lean winter months. After a prolonged quest, Idaho's remote
Sawtooth Mountains were chosen for the creation of Hollywood's concept of
what a Tyrolean resort transferred to the American west should look like -
reindeer and all]
It was great success. Celebrities arrived in their hordes and the film Sun
Valley Serenade helped make the resort famous. The framed photographs which
line the walls of the Sun Valley Lodge give it the appearance of a mausoleum
built to commemorate post-war Hollywood. Although the train, usurped by the
aircraft, no longer calls, Sun Valley - currently involved in a big
redevelopment programme - still has some of the best skiing in the Rockies,
mainly on Baldy Mountain, where seven or eight bowls allow skiers to drop
off into some excellent terrain with constant pitch all the way to the
bottom. There is a second mountain, Dollar, where the skiing is easier.
Heights: Resort 5,750 ft. Skiing 9,140 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 38 per cent; Intermediate 45 per cent; Advanced
17 per cent.
Transfer: 81 miles from Twin Falls, 150 miles from Boise or Idaho Falls, 300
miles from Salt Lake City.
TAOS
New Mexico's most prestigious ski area was built by a German-born Swiss,
Ernie Blake, and he made it a cult resort, with some magnificent steep runs
such as Sir Arnold Lunn, Inferno, Powderhorn and Walkyries Chute. Al's run,
named after Dr Al Rosen, who used to ski with an oxygen tank after suffering
a heart attack, is legendary but not as steep as it looks when you first
glimpse it - with some trepidation - on your arrival. The resort is about 20
miles from the adobe town of Taos, the haunt of DH Lawrence in the 20s. It
also has a fascinating Pueblo Indian reservation. Some of Taos's best runs -
a series of chutes off the Highline Ridge like Thunderbird Trees - can only
be reached on foot. Some are named after German generals who plotted
Hitler's death (Blake, nee Bloch, worked for Allied intelligence in the last
war.).
The most exiting and gruelling is the long trek to Kachina Peak, which is
rarely open but a glorious red-letter day when it is. Blake always refused
to turn Kachina into a common-or-garden extension to the ski area and
refused to build a lift there. The rewards of skiing it are therefore that
much greater. There are now rumours that following his death his wishes may
be ignored, and a lift may be built. Walk up while you have the chance and
it is still extra special.
Heights: Resort 9,207 ft. Skiing 11,819 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 24 per cent; Intermediate 13 per cent; Advanced
63 per cent.
Transfer: 147 miles from Albuquerque. 288 miles from Denver. 20 miles from
local airport in Taos.
TELLURIDE
Telluride in Colorado is still much as it was a century ago when its remote
position coupled with its boom-or-bust philosophy made it a town of
contrasting fortunes. Life was cheap in the silver and gold mines and gaming
saloons, and on the mountains where miners were frequently killed in
avalanches - if the mines didn't get them first.
Described by the locals as 'the most beautiful place you'll ever ski' it is
indeed stirringly atmospheric. The ski area - steep though it turns out to
be in places - is actually to the right of the main range. The skiing has
many exhilarating blue runs like See Forever and testing bump runs through
the forest such as Staircase and The Plunge. However, the resort has a
civilised policy of grooming one side of many of its mogulfields, giving the
average intermediate a chance to enjoy the same runs as the more expert.
Built at the end of a spectacular box-canyon once held sacred by the
Indians, Telluride today is an interesting mixture of devil-may-care
earthiness, gung-ho boisterousness and unexpected conservatism. The old town
has many traditional Victorian buildings that have not been spoilt by too
much prettying up, unlike some old mining towns in the Rockies. Development
of the new ski village up on the mountain is still a sore point among local
residents.
Heights: Resort 8,725 ft. Skiing 11,890 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 28 per cent; Intermediate 54 per cent; Advanced
18 per cent.
Transfer: 65 miles from Montrose plus local airport.
LES TROIS VALLEES
Courchevel, Meribel, Les Menuires, Val Thorens
Almost too big to be true, this is the largest concentration of pistes in
the world (the Portes du Soleil on the Swiss border is more strung out but
more thinly spread). The Three Valleys are a paradise for any grade of
skier, although there is no point in beginners buying a Three Valleys lift
pass when they will never get round to all the skiing in any one of the main
components. Intermediates can ski for ever and there is everything from
testing to extreme terrain for advanced skiers. The Petit and Grand Couloirs
above Saulire are not that difficult in good snow: likewise the Col du
Fruit. A guide is recommended for off-piste skiers, both for safety and to
help seek out some of the classic itineraries. Many of these - such as the
beautiful descent of the remote Les Avals valley via the Roc Merlet at
almost 9,000 ft and the stunning descent of the Gebroulax Glacier - involve
hiking up for anything up to an hour from the highest lifts, carrying your
skis or skinning up on touring skis.
Although the ski area is huge it does not mean that there are no picturesque
or rustic nooks and crannies tucked away in its vast terrain. Admittedly Val
Thorens and Les Menuires are no oil paintings, although a French friend
insists that even Les Menuires doesn't seem ugly when you get used to it.
There are some delightful spots in Courchevel, particularly lower down at
1650 and 1350. St Martin de Belleville is a truly charming old town and
Meribel Mottaret, although modern, has been put together with considerable
charm.
As for the skiing, there is every possible permutation from the manicured
motorways of Courchevel to the manic mogulfields of Menuires. Courchevel,
with its network of colourful but ageing bubble cars, has 86 runs alone, and
the region as a whole has more than 300 miles of groomed pisteds served by
almost 200 lifts. You can head for the sophistication and variety of
Courchevel or in the other direction for the rather more stark lunar
landscape of Val Thorens, Europe's highest ski resort, where a giant cable
car takes you up to the Cime de Caron at almost 10,500 ft. The skiing here
is bleak and fairly unforgiving but exciting if you have the legs for it.
Nearby Les Menuires has some powerful and quite testing skiing on La Masse.
Meribel's skiing is also a good mix. Those interested in clocking up
ski-miles can sample all three valleys in one day.
Heights: Courchevel 1850: 6,013 ft - 8,825 ft. Meribel: 4,756 ft - 8,856 ft.
Les Menuires: 6,068 ft - 9,512 ft. Val Thorens: 7,544 ft - 10,496 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 15 per cent; Intermediate 65 per cent; Advanced
20 per cent.
Transfer: 2 1/2 hours from Geneva or Lyon. 500 miles from Calais.
VAIL/BEAVER CREEK
Vail maintains that it is America's largest single-mountain resort and has
around 100 beautifully groomed trails (none of which is seriously
difficult.) What sets it apart from all other US resorts are its fabulous
back-bowls. It has seven: Game Creek, Sun Up, Sun Down, Tea Cup and the more
recently developed China, Siberia and Mongolia Bowls. These bowls are left
ungroomed in all weathers. When they are bad they're tough but when they are
good they are superb. Vail and Beaver Creek both devote part of their
mountain to special ski runs and features for children.
Even newer and more up-market than its sister resort, Beaver Creek is like a
scaled-down version of its neighbour - nine miles away - without the bowls.
It is a fairly straightforward, slightly sanitised resort, with
uncomplicated fast skiing on superbly-groomed slopes. The toughest runs are
the so-called Birds Of Prey, with trail names like Golden Eagle, Peregrine
and Goshawk. Recently the resort added 100 acres of intermediate/advanced
skiing on Grouse Mountain, served by a new high-speed quad chair. Further
expansion is in the pipeline.
Other highlights include Beano's Cabin, a restaurant which is reached after
dark by snowcat-driven sleighs, and Trapper's - a small, luxurious and
expensive cabin where you can dine on such delicacies as buffalo and
rattlesnake meat, soak yourself in a hot whirlpool under the stars and spend
the night in splendid isolation without any 20th century distractions.
Heights: Resorts 8,150 ft. Skiing 11,450 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Vail: Beginner 32 per cent; Intermediate 36 per cent;
Advanced 32 per cent. Beaver Creek: Beginner 23 per cent; Intermediate 43
per cent; Advanced 34 per cent.
Transfer: Beaver Creek: 110 miles from Denver. Avon Stolport 1 mile. Vail:
103 miles from Denver. Eagle airport 30 miles.
VAL D'ISERE/TIGNES
Val d'Isere, a bustling and lively ski town with plenty of good restaurants
and a pulsating night life, is one of the most British-influenced ski
resorts in the French Alps. Its mayor recently wrote a controversial letter
to British tour operators - signed by several colleagues in other resorts -
asking them to weed out the 'hooligan element' among their clients. Together
with Tignes the region, dubbed 'L'Espace Killy', forms what is arguably the
greatest ski resort in the world. Unfortunately, Tignes is also one of the
ugliest. But at least its lift queues will not be so grim this winter. The
'caterpiller' funicular - supposed to be open in time for last year's Winter
Olympics but bedevilled by geological problems - is up and running and will
hopefully cut queues to the Grand Motte to a minimum.
The joint ski terrain named after Jean-Claude Killy, France's greatest
skier, is a vast network of long and inspiring pistes where many of the red
runs would be black elsewhere and many of the blacks are at the extreme end
of the anxiety spectrum. Val, as it is so often abbreviated to, is
traditionally the location for the Criterium De La Premiere Neige, the first
major world cup race of the season. The resort has two world-class downhill
courses: the dramatic Face on Bellevarde, which was redesigned for the
Olympic games, and the old OK run where you can take part in a race-training
programme with Top Ski, one of the Espace Killy specialist ski schools.
The resorts also have a selection of couloirs that are as tough as you will
find anywhere, plus an enormous number of off-piste opportunities and tours
which would take most skiers an entire winter of non-stop exploring to ski
in its entirety.
Heights: Val d'Isere 6,068 ft. Tignes: 6,560 ft. Skiing 11,280 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easier 21 per cent; Intermediate 69 per cent;
Advanced/Expert 10 per cent.
Transfer: 4 1/2 hours from Geneva. (Other airport Lyon). 600 miles from
Calais.
VERBIER
With 200 miles of skiing spread around 10 local Swiss villages, and almost
90 lifts (including the 'jumbo' cable-car which whisks 150 skiers up to the
Mont-Fort glacier at almost 11,000 ft) Verbier's skiing is quite exceptional
in terms of size alone. But this sprawling collection of modern chalets
(there are few hotels) built on a sunny shelf beneath some of the most
dramatic slopes in Europe is celebrated chiefly for two things: fabulous
off-piste and a somewhat antiquated lift-system.
Mont-Fort and Mont Gele are the two big mountains that give Verbier its
cachet with serious skiers. The back side of Mont-Fort is one of the finest
off-piste descents in Switzerland but should only be attempted with a guide.
Mont Gele too has an extreme side and an easier face which is excellent in
fresh powder, but even that should be skied with care. Tortin is another
magnet for adventurous skiers, and Stairway to Heaven - which involves a
steep climb over a saddle, skis on shoulder - is well worth the effort
providing the snow is good.
Many people find neighbouring Haute Nendaz a quieter alternative to the
veritable cat's cradle of lifts around Attelas, Ruinettes and Lac des Vaux
where intermediates tend to buzz around like stray Exocets, and places such
as La Tzoumaz provide some delightful and quite gentle runs through the
trees when snowstorms are battering the major local peaks.
Heights: Resort 4,920 ft. Skiing 10,915 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easier 39 per cent; Intermediate 42 per cent; Advanced
19 per cent.
Transfer: 2+ hours from Geneva. 623 miles from Calais.
WANAKA AND QUEENSTOWN
Between the beautiful alpine lakes of Wanaka and Wakatipu on South Island is
some of New Zealand's most spectacular helicopter skiing terrain, dominated
by the Central Harris Mountains, which can be skied from both bases. From
the attractive and cosy mountain town of Queenstown, on the shores of
Wakatipu, skiers have access to the South Harris Mountains, with a mixture
of easy, open bowls for intermediates and 'radical' chutes for experts. From
Wanaka, skiers can descend the North Harris Mountains - bigger peaks with
more dramatic terrain, and longer runs.
The Tyndall Glaciers, with an awe-inspiring network of crevasses and
wonderful views of Mountain Aspiring, offer vertical drops of as much as
4,000 vertical ft. Because of the proximity to the Tasman Sea, skiers often
find themselves accompanied by seagulls who follow them down the mountain as
they might a cross-channel ferry. Altogether Harris Mountains Heliski visits
more than 100 peaks with as many as 200 named runs. Be it August powder or
September corn, this is some of the finest helicopter skiing you will find
in either hemisphere.
Heights: Resort 5,116 ft. Skiing 9,328 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Helicopter skiing. 100 per cent strong
intermediate/advanced.
WHISTLER/BLACKCOMB
These two mountains standing shoulder to shoulder near the western seaboard
of British Columbia provide the finest resort skiing in Canada, with superb
bowl skiing in one and first-class glacier skiing in the other. Whistler and
Blackcomb also have the highest vertical drop in North America - more than
5,000 ft. Both have a richly varied selection of runs but on the higher
slopes each mountain specialises in different terrain.
Whistler has six bowls which rival those of Vail, Colorado. Blackcomb's big
feature is its glaciers. Both the Horstman and the Blackcomb Glacier provide
top-class powder skiing when conditions are good. There is also a selection
of excellent couloirs such as Cougar, Soudan and Pakalako. The only snag
about these resorts is that because of their maritime nature the snow can
sometimes be quite wet and heavy. Whistler Village is low - even lower than
Kitzbuhel - and if often rains. You need faith and determination to set out
for a day's skiing in the rain, confident that by the time you get to the
main skiing area the rain will be falling as snow. Last winter I donned a
plastic mac in a cloudburst and ended up having one of the best day's skiing
of the winter.
Because of their northern location it gets dark quite early so some of the
the runs close at 3.30pm. This means that long lunches are a luxury. Often
you find that if you have that final drink the lift network is closing
around you.
Even though the two resorts are run by the same company they are marketed
separately and competitively. The resorts are locked in combat: thus as fast
as one resort makes a big improvement, the other tries to outgun it with
something even more spectacular. This conflict can only be to the skier's
gain.
Heights: Resort: 2,200 ft. Skiing: 7,494 ft (Blackcomb), 7,140 ft
(Whistler).
Difficulty of runs: Beginner 25 per cent; Intermediate 55 per cent; Advanced
20 per cent.
Transfer: 70 miles from Vancouver. Journey can be made by helicopter.
ZERMATT
In the beginning was the Matterhorn. Tourists flocked here just to gaze upon
its rugged beauty. Climbers, inspired by the tragic first ascent by Edward
Whymper, in which four people were killed on the way down, could not keep
away either. The bewitching mountain is Zermatt's crowning glory. Almost
everywhere you go the Matterhorn is there watching over you.
Zermatt has three main ski areas. Schwarzsee and the Theodul Glacier bring
you closest to this thrilling slab of granite. The other areas are
Sunnegga/Rothorn/Gornergrat. Gornergrat provides some of the most stunning
views in the Alps - across the chain of mountains to the left of the
Matterhorn, the Klein Matterhorn Lyskamm, Breithorn, Castor, Pollux, and the
mighty Monte Rosa. This winter the train service to Gornergrat has been
speeded up and observation cars have been introduced.
The cable car to the Klein Matterhorn - the highest in Europe - gives access
to Cervinia, on the Italian side, which can also be reached via the
Theodulpass. Sunnegga, Rothorn and Gornergrat provide the best of Zermatt's
friendlier, sunnier slopes plus some of its best black runs like National
and the superb Triftji run. The Theodul Glacier - which doubles as Zermatt's
summer skiing area - offers rather dull motorway skiing, and the Schwarzsee
at the very foot of the Matterhorn offers a good selection of runs for all
grades.
There are two excellent blacks - Tiefbach and Aroleid, plus an exciting and
scenic descent, the Weisse Perle, which takes you swooping past the pretty
villages of Stafelalp and Zmutt, where you will be tempted to call in at
cosy piste-side bars and restaurants. You might as well surrender: by common
consensus Zermatt has the best selection of mountain restaurants in Europe.
Heights: Resort 5,346 ft. Skiing: 12,610 ft.
Difficulty of runs: Easy 27 per cent; Intermediate 42 per cent; Advanced 31
per cent.
Transfer: 4+ hours from Geneva. Station in resort. 672 miles from Calais.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

931113

