FT932-13284

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (10): Irish banks
are top performers as Europe's revival continues - Equities


   By WILLIAM COCHRANE


'EUROPEAN markets have reminded us forcefully in the past six months that
the relationship between interest rates and equities is far from
mechanical,' said Robert Fleming Securities, in a recent strategy report.
Illustrating this view, the first quarter of 1993 extended the re-awakening
in Continental bourses, which had begun late last October as they awaited a
Bundesbank interest rate cut.
In the three months to end-March, Europe, excluding the UK, gained 9.53 per
cent in sterling terms, as measured by the FT-A World Indices, against a
9.33 per cent rise in the final quarter of 1992.
This year, however, has given Euro-investors an object lesson in choice.
Individual countries have been moved by fiscal and political considerations;
currencies have reflected the argument between the high-interest-rate and
devaluation camps.
Once those choices had been made, industrial sectors were still divided
between defensive and cyclical plays; and individual companies moved both
with and against their sector trends.
The two biggest continental markets produced above-average gains in sterling
terms. France registered a 12.8 per cent appreciation on the quarter.
Germany balanced its increasingly painful recession against the slow easing
of Bundesbank fiscal policy, to show a rise of 11.03 per cent, but was
fairly subdued in March as the Russian political crisis developed.
Elsewhere, it would have been nice to have domestic currency available.
Ireland and Finland, in local currency terms, were the top European
performers in the World Index series in the quarter, with gains of 27 and 26
per cent respectively.
The Irish punt was devalued on February 1, but this represented a limited
cut in value. Even in sterling terms, Ireland leads the pack with a 19 per
cent gain.
Interest rate cuts have been the key. Ireland's short-term facility rate,
cut by 0.75 of a percentage point on April 2, had by then been reduced eight
times since February 1.
There were big rewards at corporate level. The country's two big banks,
Allied Irish Banks and Bank of Ireland, combined domestic interest rate
sensitivity with strong recovery prospects in the US. These two stocks,
individually, were the best performers in Europe, outside the UK, as
measured by the FT-SE Eurotrack 100 index, with rises of 49 and 48 per cent.
Finland's recovery, an extension of its gains in the final quarter of 1992,
combined the linked effects of devaluation, interest rate cuts and a feeling
that the bottom of the recession had been reached. However, devaluation had
the opposite effect on the value of existing holdings in foreign currency
terms - the Helsinki market lost half of its gains on that score, rising
only 12.97 per cent in terms of sterling.
Its Nordic neighbour, Sweden, offered a stark contrast, with a first-quarter
fall in equities of nearly 4 per cent in sterling terms. The country had a
couple of exciting weeks in February after Ericsson, the telecommunications
giant, issued better than expected 1992 results; indeed, Ericsson ran high
in the individual lists last quarter, with its B shares up 44.6 per cent.
Since then, however, a crisis of confidence in the economy has led to
heightened political risk, and this has kept major houses out of the market
for the time being.
Italy, with its scandal-ridden politics putting ever increasing pressure on
the lira, saw its equity market rise only 1.45 per cent in sterling terms in
the quarter. This is one country, too, where sector selection, linked with
interest rate and general economic
G258
cycles, did not make the usual amount of sense.
Two of Italy's big banks, Credito Italiano and BCI, ranked bottom and third
bottom among Eurotrack 100 constituents over the quarter, with falls of
20.09, and 10.34 respectively. The time to have bought these stocks was in
the second half of last year, when privatisation fever inflamed the Milan
stock market. Within six months there were gains of 91.53, and 56.31 per
cent respectively.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

930423

