FT933-5119

FT  04 SEP 93 / Arts: The sun shines on Edinburgh - Edinburgh Festival / Off
the Wall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


EVERY festival has its crisis points but perhaps the worst for Brian
MacMaster, supremo at the Edinburgh Festival, was last Tuesday; the sun
shone remorselessly for the first time in months. Looking down on the vast
booking hall at the Festival HQ, where just one punter was buying tickets,
you saw his problem.
Fortunately it would take a heat wave of Saharan proportions to scupper the
financial success of this year's Festival, which ends tonight. The box
office has already taken over Pounds 1.5m, and although its target is Pounds
220,000 higher than last year, it seems certain MacMaster will bring this,
his second Festival as director, safely home within budget.
This is a great achievement. On the international stage Edinburgh is only
matched by Salzburg. It mounts the same number of productions, 170 this
year, and must sell the same number of tickets, 200,000: but Edinburgh lasts
just three weeks, rather than Salzburg's five, and operates on a much
smaller budget of Pounds 4.5m.
Apart from the sudden sunshine the Festival has not been without its other
problems. The mysterious fire which allegedly damaged the back stage at the
Playhouse Theatre undoubtedly hurt the ticket sales of the Canadian Opera,
the only big visitors not to achieve their box office target: which was
ironic since their double bill of Bluebeard's Castle and Erwartung, directed
by Robert Lepage, was perhaps the greatest artistic success of the Festival.
There was also the little matter of three conductors and a leading soprano
crying off at the last moment, and the stranding of the 250 strong cast of
Julius Ceasar in a foreign airport overnight. Then there were the critics,
but MacMaster thinks that productions such as Peter Sellar's The Persians,
which split critics and audiences down the middle, achieved exactly what was
needed by causing controversy. There was less dispute that the Festival's
opening concert, and James MacMillan's new opera Tourist Variations, were
dead in the water, but the dance troupes scored with the audiences.
MacMaster, who gives the impression that if he worries about anything, he
worries internally, has already shifted much of his attention to the 1994
Festival. The only certainties are that Mark Morris will be bringing his
dance company back again to present his ambitiously huge work L'Allegro;
that, after the appearance of Peter Stein's Salzburg Festival production of
Julius Ceasar this year, there will be another joint venture with Salzburg;
and that Scottish Opera will continue to feature in the Festival's plans.
Much still awaits selection. MacMaster was forced to pull a planned opera
from the 1993 lineup just before the programme went to press because its
opening night in Paris was an artistic disaster (which accounts for the
shortage of opera), and in an era when foreign governments can no longer
afford to subsidise visits by their artistic elites a festival director
operates on a much shorter time scale and devotes more time to joint
productions and local talent.
MacMaster faces a daunting new challenge in devising the 1994 Festival. The
completion, at last, of Edinburgh's 'opera house', the Festival Theatre,
next spring, brings problems, along with the largest stage in the UK. It
adds another 1,800 seats to fill nightly, boosting the size of the Festival
by almost 20 per cent. With the Festival's major paymasters, the local and
regional councils, the Scottish Arts Council, and sponsors, unlikely to have
more cash available next year, the hunt is on for new sources of revenue and
ways of boosting ticket sales.
The solution, long mooted, is a co-ordinated international marketing push,
pointing out that for anyone with artistic pretentions, Edinburgh in August
is the only place to be. The Festival, the Fringe, the Television, Film,
Jazz and Book Festivals will all co-operate and help to finance the drive.
MacMaster is also seeking a corporate sponsor to provide cash for the
campaign. Sixty per cent of tickets are sold to outsiders, who bring more
than Pounds 80m into the city.
For too long the mass of artistic events which make the city so exciting for
at least three weeks in the year have worked together in a haphazard way. By
next year such perennial fantasies as one, co-ordinated, marketing
headquarters, even a joint ticket office, or maybe a Festivals Club (the
Palladian building abandoned by the Royal Bank of Scotland in George Street
would be perfect) might have become a reality.
And Edinburgh may gain one more festival. MacMaster denies that he is
antipathetic to the visual arts, but he has resolutely repelled attempts by
Timothy Clifford, director of the National Galleries of Scotland, to get his
marvellous exhibitions, (which this year were devoted to Holbein and Russian
art), attached to the Festival programme. He wants Clifford to organise with
the other visual arts venues to create an autonomous festival to join the
throng. Something needs to be done. The visual arts were particularly strong
this year in Edinburgh. Their contribution should be integrated more
handsomely into this feast of festivals.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

930904

