FT931-4184

FT  12 MAR 93 / Pakistan expects Dollars 1.45bn package


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


PAKISTAN expects to obtain a financing package totalling Dollars 1.45bn
(Pounds 1.02bn) following discussions with the International Monetary Fund,
Mr Sartaj Aziz, finance minister, said in London yesterday.
He predicted agreement by June on a Dollars 1bn IMF facility, which would be
accompanied by a Dollars 250m World Bank loan to support public sector
reform, and Dollars 200m of co-financing from Japan.
A central element would be Pakistan's plans to tackle the budget deficit,
its most pressing economic problem. Mr Aziz has insisted that the deficit
cannot be reduced quickly as this would curb economic growth unacceptably.
He expects the IMF to agree to a target of 5 1/2 per cent of GDP for the
fiscal year beginning July 1993. The outcome for this financial year is
likely to be 7 per cent compared with a previous target of 5 per cent.
Pakistan faces large structural problems in reducing the deficit, with some
60 per cent of spending taken by defence and debt service, and more than 50
per cent of revenues coming from import tariffs.
Mr Aziz plans further gradual reductions in tariff rates as part of his
programme to reform and open up the economy. Revenue will be made up by
broader application of consumption taxes and more effective collection of
direct taxes.
He admitted it was taking time for liberalisation to attract foreign
investment in export-oriented industries. But there was encouraging
expansion by well-established foreign companies and investment in
small-scale industry by expatriate Pakistanis.
Attempts to Islamicise the financial system, which have contributed to
foreigners' hesitancy, should be resolved this year by the supreme court, Mr
Aziz said. The government is seeking exceptions to a ban on interest
payments so that inflation can be taken into account and to facilitate
government borrowing and transactions with foreigners.
The IMF loan would be a three-year enhanced structural adjustment facility,
Pakistan's first new IMF funding since 1988. The World Bank loan would
support reform and a cut in the size of the public sector, already being
reduced through rapid privatisation.
Inflation this year is expected to be around 10 per cent compared with an 8
per cent target, Mr Aziz said.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930312

