FT933-10189

FT  05 AUG 93 / LDP's desks are cleared as Japan faces new political era


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


HOLED UP in a Tokyo hotel, Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's prime
minister-designate, granted audiences to passing politicians and furiously
worked the telephone in an attempt to put names to places in the cabinet
expected to take power today.
In government buildings not far away, officials of the ruling Liberal
Democratic party, resigned to at least a few months in opposition, were
clearing desks and moving potted plants in preparation for a role alien to a
party which thought it had a permanent lease on power.
Unless the incoming seven-party coalition crumbles unexpectedly, the LDP
will be formally removed from office today at a special parliamentary
sitting, which will select a new prime minister and prove to a still
disbelieving populace that Japanese politics has entered a new era.
If the choice of cabinet members is an indication of politicking to come,
coalition government will provide some surprises. It was rumoured for much
of yesterday that Mr Akio Morita, chairman of Sony, the consumer electronics
company, would be foreign minister, though the odds were lengthening early
today.
'Mr Morita has not been formally asked if he wants the job and his feeling
is that he does not want it,' Sony said, although Japanese politicians
sometimes signal their enthusiasm by denying that they have an interest.
Leaders of most coalition parties were expected to take cabinet posts,
including Mr Tsutomu Hata, leader of the Japan Renewal party, who is likely
to provide a sense of continuity by becoming finance minister, a post he
also held when he was a member of the LDP.
Mr Sadao Yamahana, leader of the Social Democratic party, was apparently
torn between resigning to take responsibility for his party's poor election
performance and accepting a senior cabinet position. He was suggested for a
range of posts, including international trade and industry minister.
Meanwhile, recently elected MPs from Mr Hosokawa's Japan New party were
lectured on life in the parliamentary precincts, including the need to
satisfy the tourist groups who pass through each day on guided tours of the
Japanese political culture.
Back in LDP headquarters, Mr Yohei Kono, the party's new president, was
displaying a confident smile that seemed to suggest that its stint in
opposition would be brief.
The smiles among officials of the coalition parties were of a different
kind. For those who are not ex-LDP members, power has always been far beyond
their reach, but by voting together today, they will sit for the first time
in the government benches.
Monument to Hosokawa, Page 3
Tokyo tries to close chapter on 'comfort women', Page 3
Editorial Comment, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930805

