FT934-10238

FT  06 NOV 93 / Leading Article: A bout of nervousness


STOCK MARKET turning points are, more often than not, marked by a change in
the thrust of economic policy. After the sell-off in the US bond market this
week, which was followed by sharp falls in the world's leading equity
markets including the UK, it is beginning to look as though investors
suspect that the change is about to come. The markets' worry, which dates
back to mid-October, reflects stronger than expected US growth in the third
quarter and a growing suspicion that the fourth quarter will be buoyant.
Against that background the risk may be growing that the US Federal Reserve
will perceive a renewed inflationary threat and feel obliged to put
short-term interest rates up instead of down.
Yet the argument is scarcely cut and dried. The present strength of consumer
spending in the US, as in the UK, owes much to a fall in the savings ratio
which looks unsustainable; in both economies consumers face significant tax
increases next year. Nor did yesterday's US job figures point to a rate of
job creation that would justify a panic in the bond market. And as far as
the global environment is concerned, the problems are still chiefly about
deficient demand rather than inflation.
As CS First Boston has pointed out this week, there are two novel and
enormously powerful forces at work in the world economy that are holding
back prices. One is that weak demand has prompted importers in Britain and
other devaluing countries to switch to new lower cost sources of supply in
Asia and elsewhere, where liberalisation is dramatically transforming former
command economies. For the UK, import volumes from the European Union are
down 10 per cent since September 1992, while the share of the new regions in
the UK's imports from outside the European Union has risen by nearly 5 per
cent since the start of the recession. The decline in imports from Europe is
all the more striking in that competition from the new regions has forced
exporters in non-devaluing countries such as France and Germany into price
cuts.
Harsh conditions
Another powerful influence is that workers are responding in
uncharacteristic fashion to harsh conditions in labour markets. Instead of
making unrealistic demands for higher wages, they have gone on a buyers'
strike in their capacity as consumers and are withholding their purchasing
power unless discounts are on offer. This week's decision by J. Sainsbury to
start a price war in food retailing is, in part, an attempt to forestall the
effects of such pressure.
Here lies part of the explanation for the lack of the widely expected surge
in prices after sterling's devaluation last year. And the nature of the
analysis raises a question about the call by the governor of the Bank of
England for companies to restrain their profit margins in the interests of
preventing a renewal of inflation.
So far in the 1990s there has been less downward pressure on profit margins
than in the recession of the early 1980s, when competitiveness was badly
impaired by an overvalued exchanged rate; and certainly the recent increase
in manufacturing output prices owes much to higher margins. Yet exporters'
initial response to the devaluation of sterling  - to boost prices to
increase margins - seems likely to be reversed in a depressed European
economy in which the world's exporters are battling increasingly fiercely
for market share. The surprising thing is that they have not been forced to
trim their sails more rapidly to this biting wind. Asian competition will
probably have a more potent influence on margins than the governor's
exhortations.
Huge outflow
These forces are, of course, much more powerful in Europe than the US, where
the tradeable goods sector is a smaller part of the economy. The US is also
out of sync with continental Europe and Japan. Why, then, should the global
markets slump to the tune of the US Treasury market, when the leading
economies are moving in different directions?
One answer might be that the valuation of non-US bonds and equities has been
sustained in part by a huge outflow of US capital. A significant amount of
the Dollars 180bn that has flowed into US mutual funds so far this year has
spilled over into foreign markets in pursuit of higher returns. If the US
bond market starts to offer more attractive yields, then funds may be
repatriated, with devastating effects on foreign markets.
Or perhaps not quite as devastating as it might appear at first sight. For
part of the exodus of funds from the US reflects a structural shift in
pension fund portfolios, as fund managers have been pursuing more active
diversification strategies. While mutual funds' investment in overseas
markets may be the equity equivalent of hot money, the pension funds are
likely to be less footloose, if they are working to specific asset
allocation targets. This is, then, a mixed picture. The markets have been in
dangerous territory for some time. But their behaviour this week could prove
to be a temporary correction rather than a U-turn. It all depends on the
Fed.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931106

