FT933-10241

FT  05 AUG 93 / Accountancy Column: Litigation battle spreads to more than
one front in US - Richard Lapper explains why accountants are increasingly
concerned about 'illogical' legal burdens


   By RICHARD LAPPER


'THERE IS really only one issue affecting accountants worth writing about:
the litigation crisis', the US journalist Thomas La Freniere was told during
a routine interview with a leading US accountant.
La Freniere, the former editor of International Accounting Bulletin and
himself a former accountant, took the advice. The result - 18 months on - is
The Litigation Nightmare, published this week by Dublin-based Lafferty
Publications, and one of the most complete accounts of the mounting legal
threat to accountants.
In a 300-page report, La Freniere details the extent of a burden described
by Mr Richard Murray, the chairman and chief executive of Minet Global
Professional Services, the insurance broker, 'as the most illogical faced by
any business'.
'The threat of litigation has taken on new dimensions,' says La Freniere in
his introduction to the report. Legal trends in the United States mean that
accountants are 'held responsible for much more than obvious malpractice. A
disturbing trend has arisen which would make them guarantors of good
management judgment,' says La Freniere.
In the US, where most legal actions have concentrated, the big six
accountancy firms have faced a steady rise in legal costs, as creditors and
investors in troubled and insolvent companies seek to recover losses.
The costs incurred in fighting and defending legal actions rose by at least
25 per cent to an amount equivalent to 12 per cent of total accounting and
auditing revenues in the 1992 financial year. This followed an 18 per cent
increase in 1991 to Dollars 404m, an amount equivalent to 9 per cent of
total revenues.
The figures show that 10 of the 12 settlements involve pay-outs of Dollars
20m or more. Four of the cases related to a Dollars 400m settlement by Ernst
& Young when it was sued by three US government bodies over the the failure
of US savings and loans institutions for which it had worked.
Other big settlements included a pay-out of nearly Dollars 150m against
Coopers & Lybrand to the bondholders and bankruptcy trustees of Miniscribe,
a disk drive manufacturer, and a pay-out of Dollars 77.5m against KPMG Peat
Marwick, Deloitte Touche and 27 others to investors in Wedtech, a defence
contractor. Since many settlements are negotiated out of court and given
little publicity, the real cost and number of claims is much higher. La
Freniere says 1992 will 'likely go down as the worst year ever for
litigation against accountants'.
Worse still, the tide of litigation shows no signs of letting up.
Accountants face at least five claims worldwide where investors and
creditors or troubled or insolvent companies are seeking to recover more
than Dollars 1bn, three of them outside the US.
These include a claim for Dollars 8bn in damages by the liquidators of Bank
of Credit and Commerce International against Price Waterhouse and Ernst &
Young and a claim for ADollars 1.1bn against KPMG Peat Marwick by the state
of Victoria in Australia.
Claims in the pipeline in the US include one for Dollars 158m against Peat
Marwick (Ballingary Mines and Flair Resources) - and a whole string of
Dollars 100m-plus claims stemming from the failures of the Savings and Loans
Associations. Internationally, claims are mounting in scope. La Freniere
says that accountancy firms in at least 50 countries have experienced one or
more claims. Firms in at least 20 further countries may have claims pending.
Outside the US, Australian accountants seem to be most heavily exposed.
'With more than ADollars 3bn in known claims there are about ADollars
160,000 worth of claims for each professional employed by the top 16 firms
in the country,' says La Freniere.
Although the level of liability in continental European countries is low,
the trend there is rising faster than in any other part of the world. Last
year, for example, French accountancy firms faced about 150 cases, twice as
many as in 1991. German accountants' liabilities are currently limited to
DM500,000, but as firms prepare financial statements for use abroad a
growing proportion of their work will fall outside the scope of this limit.
The report says that if all proposed legislation and regulation in the
European Community is adopted, accountants practising in member states will
be subjected to the harshest rules anywhere that govern claims and
liability. Commenting on the incidence of a claim in South Korea, La
Freniere says: 'The problems seem to be spreading from the Anglo-influenced
countries to places where one would think the likelihood for litigation
would be small.'
The Litigation Nightmare - a threat to public accounting firms worldwide.
Lafferty Publications, IDA Tower, Pearse Street, Dublin 2. Pounds 549.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930805

