FT932-292

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (8): A struggle for dominance
 -The prospects for the main operating systems strategies


   By PHIL MANCHESTER


BY THE end of the decade, most personal computers will be attached to a
network of one sort or another. Many will be attached to local area
networks, so they can share resources, support 'group working' applications
and connect personal computers to large corporate databases.
Like any other, networks of personal computers need a controller - a sort of
telephone exchange - to make sure that messages get to the right
destination, cope with hardware breakdowns and maintain security.
Personal computer networks are controlled by software in the form of a
network operating system. In the same way that an operating system such as
Microsoft's MS/DOS looks after the complexities of operating a personal
computer, network operating systems control the flow of traffic through a
network.
It follows that the developers of what becomes the dominant network
operating system will be assured of a lucrative market well into the next
century.
In pole position is the Utah-based software developer Novell with its
NetWare package. Over the past 10 years Novell has successfully seen off
sustained attacks from its biggest rivals - IBM and Microsoft - and driven
at least one potential competitor - 3Com - out of the networking software
market.
More recently, it bought out Digital Research - Microsoft's one-time rival
in the PC operating system market - and formed Univel, a joint venture with
Unix Systems Laboratories (USL), to market Unix software. Novell is now on
the verge of completing a takeover of USL, which will give it effective
control of the Unix operating system.
Apart from its abortive merger with Lotus Development in 1990, Novell has
made all the right moves. It is well-placed not only to continue to dominate
the network software market, but also to challenge Microsoft's dominance of
the broader PC systems software market.
Not surprisingly, Microsoft is keen to extend its sphere of influence beyond
the confines of single, stand-alone personal computers. It wants a slice of
the network operating system market and has struggled - so far in vain - to
oust Novell. Microsoft's Lan Manager software, which is also the original
basis of IBM's OS/2 Lan Manager, has failed to appeal to PC network builders
 -partly because of technical problems and delivery delays.
The recent launch of the Windows NT operating system, which puts Microsoft
in a better technical position to compete with Novell, has raised the heat
of the battle.
Windows NT is a gamble for Microsoft. It is much more than a replacement for
its top-selling Windows 3.1 PC software. It is also designed for use on the
high-speed reduced instruction set computers (Risc) being developed by IBM
and DEC. This is traditionally the territory occupied by Unix.
More important, it comes with a new networking product called Windows NT
Advanced Server. Although Microsoft has not given a definite delivery date
for the Advanced Server, it has priced it very competitively and aimed it
directly at Novell's NetWare.
Novell's interest in Unix through USL - in addition to the products it
inherited in the Digital Research takeover - give it the weapons to break
into Microsoft's market.
However, Mr Lalit Nathwani, NetWare product manager at Novell UK,
acknowledges Microsoft's strong position. 'Microsoft will dominate the
desktop - but not the network server,' he says.
'The market is looking for stability and proven, reliable networking. And
customers do not want to be locked into a specific product like Windows -
it's proprietary. We can take a more independent view. Unlike Microsoft, we
have no involvement in applications software and we are hardware
independent.'
He adds that users are looking for integration across networks and that
Novell's new involvement in Unix development will make this easier.
The key to Novell's strategy is the bringing together of Unix and Novell's
NetWare - a combination which could give Microsoft's Windows NT a run for
its money. The proven track record of both Unix and NetWare in their
respective markets gives them a clear advantage.
But Unix has suffered from a lack of standardisation and confusion over the
'front-end' interfaces for applications programs and user interfaces. Novell
could put this right. It has succeeded in making Netware a standard for PC
networks and given application builders a fixed target to aim at.
It could do the same with Unix - although whether this will be enough to
triumph over Microsoft remains to be seen.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930629

