FT934-11373

FT  01 NOV 93 / De Benedetti lawyers attack magistrates' arrest order


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


LAWYERS for Mr Carlo De Bene-detti, the head of Olivetti, were seeking to
make arrangements yesterday for him to hand himself over to Rome magistrates
to answer corruption charges.
Mr De Benedetti was outside Italy when an arrest warrant was issued in Rome
on Saturday. His lawyers, who expressed 'amazement' at the warrant, said Mr
De Benedetti would 'simply follow his usual approach and present himself to
the judges to answer their questions'.
Lawyers were seeking to determine whether Mr De Benedetti would be obliged
to spend time in jail before being questioned. With a public holiday today,
they initially suggested that Mr De Benedetti should hand himself over on
Tuesday.
The arrest warrant for Mr De Benedetti has provoked consternation in Italy
among lawyers and businessmen as well in the media - not least in the daily
La Repubblica, which Mr De Benedetti also owns.
At Ivrea, the headquarters of Olivetti, the unions voiced concern over the
future of the telecommunications and office equipment group, which made
first-half losses of L168bn (Pounds 69.79m).
The magistrates' move against one of the most prominent figures in Italian
business also comes at a moment of increasing confusion as Italy's
discredited political parties disintegrate.
The charges against Mr De Benedetti relate to payments of L10bn made to
secure Ministry of Posts contracts for teleprinters between 1988-91. They
have already been investigated by Milan magistrates.
However, the investigations into the postal ministry have since become the
responsibility of Rome magistrates. They have hinted that they have acquired
new information suggesting payments to secure contracts went back to 1983.
More seriously for Mr De Benedetti, the Rome magistrates have altered the
nature of the charges. They are alleging that Mr De Benedetti was a willing
party to the payments and actively connived in them.
The essence of Mr De Benedetti's defence has been that he was forced to make
payments to ministry officials and their political masters. To demonstrate
that, he said that in 1987, when he refused to comply with demands for
money, Olivetti did only L23bn worth of business with the ministry. A year
later, when commissions had been arranged, orders jumped to L204bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

931101

