FT932-3395

FT  15 JUN 93 / EC replay for some golden oldies


   By ANDREW HILL


   LUXEMBOURG


DEAD POETS and ageing rock stars could receive an unexpected boost in
royalty payments from mid-1995, under harmonised European Community
copyright rules agreed yesterday.
EC internal market ministers agreed that books and films should enjoy
copyright protection for 70 years after the author's death, while musical
recordings will earn royalties for 50 years from the date the record was
first published or the performance broadcast.
The deal - agreed by a majority in spite of opposition from the Irish,
Luxembourg, Dutch and Portuguese delegations - aims to end problems which
could be caused by varying protection across the EC.
Without such a measure, certain governments were worried publishers would
escape paying royalties in high-protection member states by importing
records or books from countries where protection was low or non-existent,
taking advantage of the single market.
But one side-effect of the new measure could be a temporary bonanza for
performers and the heirs of authors for whom copyright protection has
already expired in some parts of the Community.
For example, early Beatles recordings no longer earn royalties in Germany,
which protects recordings for just 25 years. From July 1, 1997, however, the
Beatles will again earn royalties on recordings and broadcasts of their
early songs, until the new 50-year period expires.
The same rules will apply for books in Britain, which will have to extend
copyright protection from 50 to 70 years after the author's death. That
could mean a royalties boom for heirs of James Joyce and Virginia Woolf, for
example.
However, the directive should protect publishers and recording companies
which rushed out special editions to coincide with the end of copyright
protection. A special clause says states should take action to protect the
'acquired rights and legitimate expectations' of those who took advantage of
the old, unharmonised copyright system.
The EC yesterday came a step closer to agreeing common rules on the freedom
and cross-border management of pension funds.
In their first detailed discussion of the measure, internal market ministers
reached broad agreement on how to liberalise a sector still bound by
traditional national restrictions on where and how funds can be invested.
But officials said several problems needed resolving at a future ministerial
meeting - possibly in the autumn.
They would have to agree on the extent to which pension fund assets should
be kept in the fund's home country; and to what extent pension funds should
invest in currencies other than those in which pensioners were paid.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930615

