FT934-11445

FT  01 NOV 93 / Military aim to tighten grip in Haiti


   By CANUTE JAMES


   KINGSTON


HAITI'S military leaders, who successfully defied international efforts to
have exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide reinstalled on Saturday, plan
to consolidate their rule by making Mr Aristide constitutionally redundant.
Parliamentarians and businessmen who supported the military which overthrew
Mr Aristide two years ago, say that by failing to return the president has
defaulted on a United Nations-brokered agreement which he signed in July.
Mr Aristide's opponents plan to replace him with a provisional president,
and then to call a presidential election. In Port-au-Prince, Haiti's
capital, armed men in plain clothes, widely held to be an unofficial arm of
the police, fired guns in the air on Saturday, celebrating the president's
failure to appear.
Mr Aristide's return has been frustrated by the military leaders' refusal to
step down in keeping with the July agreement. They also refused to provide
protection for parliamentarians supporting the president, thwarting attempts
to pass amnesty legislation which the military demanded.
The military's new ploy is likely to force the UN to take stronger action
than the embargo on oil and arms shipments implemented a fortnight ago to
force the military leaders to step aside. Mr Aristide, who says the UN
agreement is still valid, asked the UN last week to tighten the embargo.
The UN Security Council said on Saturday it was insisting on complete
compliance of the agreement for Mr Aristide's return to office, and
threatened to tighten sanctions. The Security Council condemned General
Raoul Cedras, Haiti's military leader, for violating the agreement.
Mr Robert Malval, the prime minister appointed by Mr Aristide, has backed
away from a declaration that he would resign if the president did not return
by Saturday. He now says he will stay in office to fight for Mr Aristide's
reinstatement.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931101

