FT932-13519

FT  23 APR 93 / Bundesbank cuts rates to stem slowdown


   By DAVID WALLER, QUENTIN PEEL and JAMES BLITZ


   FRANKFURT, BONN, LONDON


THE Bundesbank yesterday cut both its main interest rates in a move seen as
the clearest indication yet that it is concerned about the slowdown in the
German economy and the prospect of renewed pressures inside the European
exchange rate mechanism.
The central bank's policymaking council decided at its scheduled meeting to
cut the discount rate, the floor for money market rates, by 0.25 points to
7.25 points. It also cut the Lombard rate, which provides an emergency
ceiling for bank borrowing, by half a point to 8.5 per cent.
The timing of the rate cuts surprised financial markets. On Wednesday, a
further easing in monetary policy seemed unlikely for some weeks when the
Bundesbank released figures showing that broad money supply, traditionally
the central bank's key indicator in its fight against inflation, grew at an
annualised and seasonally adjusted rate of 3.2 per cent - twice what
economists had hoped for.
The cuts in interest rates also came even though the inflation rate in
Germany is 4.2 per cent, more than twice the Bundesbank's long-term target
of 2 per cent.
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, Bundesbank president, said he stayed fully committed
to cutting inflation. He presented the cuts as part of the central bank's
cautious approach to the easing of monetary policy which had led to stable
conditions on capital and money markets.
Mr Schlesinger also said, despite the worse than expected data, the
Bundesbank's money supply was growing at a level consistent with its
medium-term inflation objective of 2 per cent.
In March, the M3 measure of money supply growth rose at an annualised,
seasonally adjusted rate of 3.2 per cent. This was below the Bundesbank's
target range which, for this year, has been set at 4.5 to 6.5 per cent.
Mr Schlesinger said the cuts would bring some relief for other countries,
raising speculation that the Bundesbank may have been concerned by new
currency pressures inside the European exchange rate mechanism.
Before the announcement, the French franc and Spanish peseta had been under
pressure inside the ERM, with the Spanish authorities raising their daily
intervention rate by 65 basis points to 14 per cent to staunch selling of
their currency.
The Bundesbank cut helped the French franc recover in afternoon trading to
close almost unchanged on the day at FFr3.374 against the D-Mark. However,
the peseta was still much weaker by the London close, finishing at Pta72.54
from a previous Pta72.37.
In New York, the peseta closed at Pta72.765 against the D-Mark with the
French currency finishing slightly higher than in London at FFr3.3764.
Bundesbank's surprise, Page 2
Spain defends peseta, Page 2
Currencies, Page 27

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930423

