FT932-7040

FT  26 MAY 93 / Top industrialists meet Heseltine


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Correspondent


SENIOR EXECUTIVES from 18 large organisations yesterday met Mr Michael
Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, to discuss the economy and
long-term issues such as industrial competitiveness.
Mr Heseltine said the three-and-a-half-hour meeting had been 'very
constructive' and 'an interesting unscripted dialogue'. Mr David Sainsbury,
chairman of supermarket chain J. Sainsbury, said it had been 'useful and
productive'.
The meeting is expected to be the first in a series of gatherings as part of
Mr Heseltine's effort to produce a better framework for industrial growth.
The companies have agreed to send Mr Heseltine confidential sales data every
few months to help him monitor the expected economic recovery.
Imperial Chemical Industries, which had indicated it would not be part of
the 'round table', sent a representative in the shape of Mr Tony Rodgers, a
director of its Zeneca bioscience subsidiary due to be floated as a separate
company next month. Courtaulds Textiles sent Mr Colin Dyer, a director,
after earlier saying no one would be available.
Other people attending were: Food industry: Christopher Haskins, chairman,
Northern Foods; Ross Buckland, chairman, Unigate. Banking/mail: Lord
Alexander, chairman, National Westminster Bank; Chris Lendrum, deputy
managing director, Barclays Bank; John Platt, regional director, 3i; Michael
Heron, chairman, Post Office. Engineering: Tony Pedder, commercial director,
British Steel; Chris Kinsella, finance director, Meggitt; John Towers,
managing director, Rover; Sir Christopher Lewinton, chairman, TI; Alistair
Fleming, director, Weir Group. Retailing: Sir Richard Greenbury, chairman,
Marks and Spencer. Electronics/telecoms: Max Kaye, finance director, Racal
Electronics; Keith Todd, finance director, International Computers; Mike
Harris, chief executive, Mercury Communications. Department of Trade and
Industry: Tim Sainsbury, industry minister; Walter Eltis, economic adviser
to Mr Heseltine; David Coates, DTI chief economic adviser. Treasury: Robin
Mountfield, head, industry division.
Grand Metropolitan and Shell Chemicals were invited but did not send anyone.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930526

