FT931-4143

FT  12 MAR 93 / The Taurus Collapse: Harsh post-mortem reveals flaws


   By RICHARD WATERS


   TOO ambitious, too complicated and badly managed


these are the conclusions yesterday from the first post-mortems carried out
on the body of Taurus.
The Stock Exchange and financial institutions around the City put the blame
squarely on the compromise hammered out between registrars and other City
interests in 1989. This had resulted in a complicated decentralised system
designed around a series of databases maintained by a range of financial
institutions.
It was to be tied together by a communication system with a level of
security which the exchange boasted would be the most secure in use anywhere
in the world outside the defence establishment. It proved impossible to
build.
An emergency review conducted for the exchange last autumn by Andersen
Consulting said that such a complicated system was 'inoperable', Sir Andrew
Hugh Smith, exchange chairman, said. It would take at least 15 months to
rebuild the system, and up to three years to bring it into operation.
The lesson was not lost on the exchange and the Bank of England yesterday.
'If there are going to be industry-wide services, they've got to aim at the
optimal result, not the acceptable result,' Sir Andrew said.
The second significant flaw was the exchange's own failure to manage the
development effectively. From the beginning, financial institutions had
warned of the difficulties.
Until August 1989 there was no project director with overall responsibility
for Taurus, only a technical team working on the project. The exchange
brought in Mr John Watson, a consultant from Deloitte Haskins & Sells, which
merged later with Coopers & Lybrand.
Yesterday his team was by implication blamed for failing to realise earlier
that the project could not be completed at an acceptable cost. Sir Andrew
did not name him but said: 'We were testing parts of the system while others
had not been designed or built. It was only at the heart of the project that
this was known.'
Sir Andrew said 'there may have been an element of self-delusion' among the
Taurus project staff which had prevented them from seeing the enormity of
the problems at an earlier stage. Senior exchange executives outside the
project had no idea of the fundamental flaws in the system.
Mr Watson was a former deputy chief executive of the exchange who had lost
out in the race for the chief executive's job to Mr Jeffery Knight, Mr
Rawlins' predecessor. A dogged, hard-working man, he was seen as giving the
project the best chance it had. There have been few if any calls for his
resignation over the years.
Doubts began to gather at the exchange last autumn. At the start of 1992,
the exchange had reviewed the system and decided to proceed, though with a
strengthened management team under Mr Watson.
Last October Ms Jane Barker, the exchange's finance director - and yesterday
appointed its chief operating officer - was given overall responsibility for
the project.
It was after her appointment that the severity of the problems started to
become clear, Sir Andrew said. When Andersen Consulting was called in to
examine the project its advice, which came as a shock, was that the project
was inoperable and should be scrapped.
Early this year the technical side of the project was given to Mr Stewart
Senior, a consultant with Coopers & Lybrand, and an urgent review began. Ten
days ago, the exchange realised, there was no option but to end the project.
'If you're building a house, you see the foundations going in and the roof
being put on. It's not like that with a technology project. It's an
invisible palace, rather than a brick house,' Sir Andrew said.
Yesterday, the invisible palace turned out to be a mirage.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930312

