FT934-10268

FT  06 NOV 93 / Gore-Perot joust seen as gamble for Clinton


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton has taken a political gamble in sending Vice
President Al Gore into televised battle with Ross Perot, the Texas populist,
on the merits of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The confrontation was last night fixed for Tuesday evening in Tampa,
Florida, with Larry King, the talk show host, as moderator. There may be
other TV debates before the House of Representatives votes on Nafta on
November 17. Mr Clinton is giving a hour-long interview on one of tomorrow's
regular Sunday morning current affairs programmes. Nafta is certain to
consume a fair part of this.
Yesterday, Mr Warren Christopher, secretary of state, warned Congress of the
dire consequences of rejecting Nafta. Drawing together the treaty, the
Uruguay Round trade negotiations and the APEC summit in Seattle later this
month, he said, 'these are 40 days that can shake the economic world and
shape America's future position in it'.
Last Tuesday's round of off-year elections, which saw the Democrats lose
three big races in New York, New Jersey and Virginia, might have stiffened
resistance to Nafta among the 50 plus Democrats still reckoned to be
undecided.
Nafta was not an issue in any of the contests but the results have been
freely interpreted as demonstrating that Mr Clinton's political coattails
are very short and that congressmen may be inclined to pay more attention to
local opinion against the agreement.
The White House also thinks Mr Perot's credibility is diminishing, a
conclusion borne out by public opinion polls. But last year's three
televised presidential debates showed how effective he could be with his
homespun arguments.
It was considered inappropriate for Mr Clinton himself to take Mr Perot on,
while fielding Mr Lee Iacocca, pugnacious former head of Chrysler and a
prominent pro-Nafta campaigner, might have resulted in verbal fireworks, but
too much on Mr Perot's terms.
Mr Gore, his many years in the Senate notwithstanding, is not a natural
television debater. His confrontation last year with then vice president Dan
Quayle showed him to be a bit stiff. But it is thought his dignity and
ability to marshal arguments and facts will stand up well against Mr Perot's
tendency to shoot wildly, if divertingly, from the hip.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931106

