FT932-7116

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (7): Exchanges resist a full
merger - Stock market euphoria has faded


   By JOSE GALANG


AS ONE of the best performers in recent years among the world's emerging
markets, the Philippine stock market has been receiving increasing attention
from global investors.
In 1992, the Manila Stock Exchange (MSE) composite index closed the year 9.1
per cent higher, a growth which was, however, substantially slower than the
77 per cent recorded the year before.
The euphoria in the weeks that followed the election of President Fidel
Ramos, in May last year, which pushed the index to a historical high of
1,580 points, has given way to a cautious optimism, especially since it
became clear in October that existing electric power generating capacity may
not be sufficient to support economic growth targets.
This year, most analysts expect the market to approximate last year's
performance, with much of the growth in the second half.
In April, after the signing by Mr Ramos of an 'emergency powers' bill that
enables him to attack the power problem more decisively, the index level
broke the record established in mid-1992.
However, foreign investors are by no means tripping over each other in their
efforts to put money into the country's two operating stock exchanges, the
66-year-old MSE and the Makati Stock Exchange (MKSE), which was established
in 1963 by a splinter group disenchanted at the time by the domination of
Chinese-Filipino interests in the older bourse. The Philippine market,
despite its strong performance since 1990, has also been viewed as a
volatile one. Furthermore, certain fundamental reforms are felt necessary to
ensure investors of a level playing-field.
The two exchanges trade the same set of stocks, often at different prices,
and give the impression - according to the watchdog Securites and Exchange
Commission (SEC) - of price manipulation, especially since arbitrage is
allowed.
The SEC has vigorously pushed for a merger of the two exchanges, but leaders
of each detest the idea of being absorbed by the other. The proposal has
been amended to a 'functional unification', which member-brokers of the two
approved overwhelmingly at a historic meeting last March. However, a key
issue at the same meeting, the selection of the head office for the unified
exchange, had remained unresolved owing to a fierce contest between two
property firms, both regarded as giants in the local real estate market.
The MSE is currently housed in Tektite Towers, owned by Philippine Realty
and Holdings, which is located in the rapidly developing Ortigas Centre,
where the Asian Development Bank has put up its new headquarters.
ON the other hand, the MKSE has its own building on Ayala Avenue, in
Makati's financial district. It was established by Ayala Corporation, the
oldest business conglomerate in the Philippines, which is controlled by the
Zobel family.
The debate has simmered down a bit since mid-April, with a move to declare
both present locations as head offices, which will be linked up by a
computerised system starting this July if no further delays are encountered.
Amid this acrimony, the two exchanges accounted for combined turnover of
154.5bn pesos (Dollars 5.8bn) in 1992, almost double the level in 1991.
Analysts forecast that turnover will expand by a third this year.
While the composite index reflects price movements of a dozen stocks from
the market's three sections, six stocks already account for over 60 per cent
of the market capitalisation of 390bn pesos.
It is scarcely surprising that trading is often concentrated on these six
firms: Philippine Long Distance Telephone, San Miguel Corporation, Ayala
Corporation, Ayala Land, Philippine National Bank, and Manila Electric
Company.
The Philippine stock market is also more sensitive to movements in interest
rates and the peso-dollar exchange rate than to other macroeconomic figures.
For instance, with the expected further decline in domestic interest rates,
mirroring the downtrend in Treasury bill yields, investor interest in stocks
should grow over the next few months.
During the two-tiered exchange-rate era of the mid-1980s, which was
characterised by volatile peso-dollar rates on the black market, speculative
money was siphoned away from the stock exchanges, resulting in lean
turnovers.
These days, with the exchange rate showing fundamental stability, funds are
more partial to stocks.
The market at the end of 1992 was trading at a price/earnings multiple of
about 15, from which level there has been not much change. This rating is
considered competitive among the region's stock markets.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930525

