FT932-3164

FT  15 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Heywood Williams expands in US - Dollars
65m spent on building products and automotive components group


   By PAUL TAYLOR


HEYWOOD WILLIAMS, the building materials group which sold a large part of
its UK glass business to Pilkington earlier this year for Pounds 95m, plans
to use some of the proceeds to acquire a specialist building products group
in the US.
The Huddersfield-based group is paying Dollars 53.25m (Pounds 35m) in cash
to acquire LaSalle, a US-based distributor of building products and
furnishings to the manufactured housing and recreational vehicle markets.
Heywood will also repay up to Dollars 11.75m of LaSalle's borrowings on
completion.
Mr Ralph Hinchliffe, Heywood's chairman, said the acquisition, which is
subject to shareholders' approval at an extraordinary meeting on June 30,
represents 'an exciting development for the group'.
He added: 'The company has an impressive management team, is performing
extremely well and operates in markets which should show strong long-term
growth.'
Last year LaSalle reported operating profits of Dollars 6.4m, almost double
the Dollars 3.3m recorded the previous year, on turnover ahead to Dollars
117.7m (Dollars 98.4m).
Three quarters of its business comes from supplying the fast-growing US
market for factory-built housing.
Manufactured housing sales represented about 15 per cent of the overall US
housing market last year when 210,000 units worth Dollars 5.7bn were sold, a
20 per cent increase over the previous year.
The US recreational vehicle industry also grew by more than 20 per cent in
volume terms and was worth an estimated Dollars 4.4bn last year.
The planned acquisition will substantially strengthen Heywood's presence in
the US providing its existing Creation Windows subsidiary with a nationwide
distribution network.
Creation Windows and LaSalle will have a combined annual turnover of more
than Dollars 200m across a broad range of building and automotive markets.
The acquisition was foreshadowed in March when Heywood sold its UK and Irish
glass processing and distribution business to Pilkington.
At the time Mr Hinchliffe said that after paying off debts, the net cash of
about Pounds 65m would be used to fund acquisitions and expand its remaining
businesses.
The deal will leave Heywood with about Pounds 25m in cash. Mr Hinchliffe
said he expected it would be spent on another acquisition, probably in the
UK, by the end of the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930615

