FT932-6968

FT  26 MAY 93 / The debt burden of property high-flier: Why the banks
decided the time had come to shoot down a crippled Speyhawk


   By VANESSA HOULDER


A YEAR ago, Mr Trevor Osborne, chairman of Speyhawk and one of the best
known figures in the UK property industry, made a light-hearted reply to a
speech by Sir John Quinton, then chairman of Barclays, about the banks'
attitude to troubled property companies. 'Sir John,' he quipped, 'we owe you
more than we can ever repay.'
The joke has now acquired a hollow ring. Barclays, which is Speyhawk's main
lender, yesterday put the company into receivership. The company's 46
domestic and international banks are owed more than Pounds 350m, which is
secured on assets worth an estimated Pounds 200m.
At a fraught meeting on Monday the banks unanimously rejected a last-ditch
plea from Mr Osborne to give the company more time. Mr Osborne said
yesterday that he was 'gutted' by their decision. 'It came as a devastating
blow to me,' he says.
The blow was all the more severe because Speyhawk has been in restructuring
talks for nearly two years and Mr Osborne has long believed that a deal was
within reach. A restructuring agreement in which the banks agreed to
subordinate part of Speyhawk's debt, has been in the hands of lawyers since
Christmas Eve.
But the banks say that the restructuring package was never as secure as Mr
Osborne thought, 'It was a question of developers' optimism versus bankers'
realism,' one said.
The difficulty partly arose from conflicts of interest between the banks,
the loans of which were secured on different assets.
But the banks say their decision mainly stemmed from a growing unease about
the deterioration in Speyhawk's position. Asset values have been under
increasing pressure, particularly in the City. 'It (supporting Speyhawk) was
not really sustainable any more' says Barclays.
This is the first high-profile property receivership this year, but it
follows a well-established pattern. Development companies like Mountleigh
and Rosehaugh, which collapsed last year, shared Speyhawk's fundamental
predicament. They lacked a cushion of rental income, making them reliant on
sales to cover interest costs. The property downturn has hit unlet buildings
and development properties particularly badly, resulting in huge falls in
asset values.
Speyhawk was never one of the largest development companies, but it was
always one of the best known. It was set up by Mr Osborne, a former
chartered surveyor with Middlesex County Council, in 1980 with the intention
of developing buildings to sell to institutions. In 1981 it became the first
of this new breed of merchant developers to join the stock market.
The company built a number of high quality developments including the Thames
Valley Park near Reading, Cannon Bridge (a building over the City station
partly let to the LIFFE market), and Exchequer Court, a City office building
that was badly damaged by the 1992 bomb in St Mary Axe.
Its value peaked in 1987 at Pounds 140m, after which the combination of the
stock market crash and increasing nervousness about property companies
eroded its value. But in mid-1990, it looked as though a takeover would come
to the rescue of the company's shareholders.
Nordstjernan, a Swedish property and construction group trying to increase
its exposure to UK property, entered bid discussions. But the Swedish group
withdrew in August 1990 after the invasion of Kuwait.
After that, there was no escape from the pressures of rising interest
charges and falling trading profits. Its high gearing, its concentration on
London and the south-east and the large proportion of development sites and
unlet properties magnified the impact of the market's decline.
Speyhawk's banks argue that the picture remains unremittingly bleak.
Although there has been an upturn in much of the property investment market,
the change of fortune does not apply to much of Speyhawk's property. There
is a two-tier property market, which has left unlet property as out of
favour as it has ever been.
The decision to put the company in receivership did not merely stem from the
bleakness of Speyhawk's position, however. 'It was a combination of the
banks thinking what is the point of going on because we will lose so much
anyway, the difficulty of reconciling how the package is put together and
concern about the costs and commitment of the management,' says one banker.
The question now taxing the property industry is whether Speyhawk's
receivership has implications for other property companies that are
supported by the banks.
Mr Osborne believes it heralds a change in attitude by the banks. 'The whole
climate has changed,' he says. 'The banks are now making profits so they can
make provisions.'
He adds that the banks are no longer prepared to shoulder the additional
workload of a workout compared with a receivership.
Many commentators believe that lenders are more prepared to dump property on
the market because the property market is showing the first sign of a
recovery, albeit a fragile and narrowly-based one.
'The banks are more likely to pull the plug as the market improves and they
look to get their money back,' says Mr Mike Riley, head of Chesterton's
financial services division. 'There will be more receiverships to come.'
But bankers deny that Speyhawk's receivership is the start of a trend in
which the banks become increasingly aggressive. 'We don't see crystallising
losses as in anyone's interests,' says Barclays. 'Receivership is the last
resort.'
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930526

