FT934-11788

FT  29 OCT 93 / Worry over Wellcome's sales growth


   By TONY JACKSON


INVESTORS marked down shares in Wellcome, the UK-based international drugs
group, by 11 per cent yesterday in response to a 46 per cent rise in pre-tax
profits, a one-third rise in the dividend and Pounds 157m rise in the cash
mountain to Pounds 567m.
Analysts expressed concern about a sharp slowing in the underlying rate of
sales growth. Wellcome's 20 per cent rise in sales was chiefly due to the
devaluation of sterling. At constant exchange rates, the rise was only 7 per
cent, made up of 11 per cent in the first half falling to 3 per cent in the
second.
Mr James Culverwell, drugs analyst at broker Hoare Govett, said 'the problem
with all drug companies is you have to keep increasing the research and
marketing expenditure, because that's the company's future. If your sales
growth slips below 10 per cent, that starts to hit profit margins.'
Mr John Robb, Wellcome's chief executive, said double-digit sales growth
remained the company's target. This would now be achieved partly by
aggressive price-cutting.
'There is disappointment in the market about our sales level, and that has
to be given our attention,' he said. 'With our cash and margins position as
strong as it is now, it's clearly right to focus on things like extracting
maximum sales from existing drugs. Our attention is going much more to the
top line and getting double-digit growth.'
There was now much more sensitivity to price in all Wellcome's main markets,
he said. 'We need to do more on price competition. There may be a neutral
effect on profitability if you get more volume. We are in a financial
position now to get our factories working at a higher level than before, and
we'll use price as one way of doing that.'
Wellcome gave as example a neuro-muscular blocking agent called Nuromax,
where in response to poor US sales it had cut its price in recent months by
more than half. As a result, it hoped to more than double sales volume.
Mr Robb said 'historically, pharmaceutical companies would discover and
develop a drug, then go in with the highest price and hope that by the time
the patent had expired, you would have come up with something else. That
game is over.'
He said some of Wellcome's cash mountain might be spent on collaborative
deals with other companies, the aim being to extend the range of Wellcome's
products across more therapeutic classes.
Lex, Page 18
Details, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931029

