FT932-6726

FT  27 MAY 93 / Political Notebook: Rearranging the deckchairs


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


ON one level Mr John Major cannot win. If he does reshuffle his cabinet
within the next few days his enemies will declare him weak - unable to
resist demands in the media to rearrange the deckchairs. If he does not then
he will be declared, well yes, weak. This time the charge will be that he is
not in command of his own cabinet, more specifically that he is afraid to
sack his chancellor.
Mr Major understands the predicament well. It explains his irritation when
he is pressed on the subject, as he was this week in his interview with the
FT. It explains why the starting point for his non-committal answers is
always that he will decide in his own time, that he will not be pushed.
There are two other factors behind the hesitation. Mr Major is loyal to his
colleagues. It may seem strange in a government in which that particular
trait is at a premium but it is true nonetheless. The prime minister is far
from convinced that Mr Lamont's stewardship of the Treasury has been
perfect. There are background recriminations about the run-up to sterling's
departure from the European exchange rate mechanism. But scapegoats are not
Mr Major's style.
The second strand is grounded in realpolitik. The chancellor still provides
a shield for Mr Major. He absorbs day by day much of the flak that might
otherwise directed at his Downing Street neighbour. He could be a dangerous
enemy on the backbenches.
But senior party managers are now more convinced than ever that Mr Major
cannot afford to let presentation, loyalty or fear of Mr Lamont's reaction
get in the way of a decision.
They put it this way: Mr Major has a single judgement to make: will his
government - and hence his own position as prime minister - be stronger with
a new chancellor? The answer they give is an unequivocal Yes.
Above all else the government must regain the confidence of the electorate
in its competence to manage the economy. Mr Lamont is not the man to do it.
It would be more dangerous politically to keep him than to sack him.
The chancellor will not go quietly. Colleagues say he is ready to fight to
the last ditch for a job he has always wanted. The betting is that he would
not accept another cabinet post. We might expect another of those famously
destructive resignation speeches from the back benches.
That, say the advocates of an early reshuffle, is an argument for sooner
rather than later. The longer the uncertainty continues the more it will
drain Mr Major's authority. The danger point is the autumn - when the
anti-Maastricht fanatics might seek to wound him in a leadership challenge.
A shake-up now would give Mr Major time to regain his balance before the
October party conference. It might - just might  - allow the Conservatives
to hold on to their 23,000-seat majority in the Christchurch by-election.
It is not though quite as simple as that. For Mr Major the choice of a
successor is as important as any decision to remove Mr Lamont.
At first sight Mr Kenneth Clarke is the only choice. Mr Douglas Hurd apart,
he is the strongest member of the cabinet. He has confidence, common sense
and political guts, and whoever delivers the November Budget will need them.
He wins more votes than anyone else among his cabinet colleagues. He is a
pugnacious performer in the Commons.
But his weaknesses are as obvious as his strengths. Charge of the Treasury
would confirm his status as heir apparent. He has eschewed for the moment
any desire to take sterling back into the ERM but he remains the subject of
deep suspicion on the Euro-sceptic right.
That puts Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary into the frame. His
strengths are obvious. He is careful, clear, and calculating. During the
past year he began to punch his weight in the cabinet. He is the choice of
the recalcitrant right. But then the drawbacks: Mr Howard's instincts on
Europe, on public spending, on industrial policy are closer to those of Mr
Lamont than to those of Mr Major. He is not a man with whom the prime
minister shares a late night whisky.
So on to the 'safe' choices: Mr Malcolm Rifkind and Mr MacGregor. Both have
their admirers, the former for his sharp intellect, the latter for a
well-earned reputation as a skilful political operator. Neither would
threaten Mr Major. The prime minister might yet surprise us all and stick
with Mr Lamont.
But if he did it would be against the advice of his closest advisers and
political friends. As one cabinet minister put it last night: nothing could
be more dangerous than the status quo.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930527

