FT932-269

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (25): Fragile - handle with care - How the
Edinburgh Crystal Glass Company rationalised and speeded up the distribution
and delivery of its delicate, lightweight and high value products to
worldwide markets / Transport


   By PHILLIP HASTINGS


UNTIL recently, deliveries by the Edinburgh Crystal Glass Company were 'a
real mish-mash', according to Mr Douglas Arbuckle, the company's export
manager. Some customers asked for products to be sent by mail, some used
their own air freight consolidation services and others used surface mail.
The big change in distribution - in particular to the US - came when United
Parcel Service, the US-based international parcels delivery giant,
approached Edinburgh Crystal's Penicuik site near Edinburgh, Scotland, where
it has been making crystal glasses and giftware for over 125 years.
'We can pack something like Pounds 1,200-worth of crystal into a box which
UPS can deliver for us in the US within three or four days for about Pounds
30,' says Mr Arbuckle.
With an annual turnover of more than Pounds 20m, Edinburgh Crystal exports
all over the world to markets such as Japan, Hong Kong, Australia and the
Middle East. The US currently accounts for 20 per cent of total exports and
has been targeted for growth, particularly among corporate customers.
'That speed of delivery allows us to hold our stocks here in Penicuik and
ship out products in response to customer requirements,' Mr Arbuckle says.
'We do not need to incur the costs of having a warehouse in the US.
Likewise, our customers there do not need to hold large inventories.'
An air express service might typically account for 5-12 per cent of the cost
of the package, compared with 2 per cent for sea freight. 'If the package is
worth Pounds 1,200, then it will stand the cost of going by air. But if the
value is only, say Pounds 200, then it is not so viable.'
Air freighters come into their own as the need for speed increases, as the
bulk of the cargo rises and when the freight cost falls as a proportion of
the total cost of the consignment.
Crystal glasses fall into the lightweight, high value category, making air
freighting attractive. Other suitable sectors are electronics,
pharmaceuticals, specialised instruments, and spares for machinery.
Time advantages offered by air express become less obvious the nearer the
destination. Throughout the European Community a parcel can be transported
to to the customer within five days.
Sometimes local practices militate against air freight. In the Middle East,
importers tend to prefer to buy in bulk, making sea freight more suitable.
Some importers may be consolidating orders from various suppliers into one
cargo - in which case Edinburgh Crystal may have no option but to deliver
its supplies to a central point in the UK where the buyer's freight
forwarder will load them with goods from other suppliers.
Some large loads, for example volumes sufficient to fill a 40-foot
container, will continue to go by sea.
'We would never consider sending a full container load with an air
freighter. The consignments we send by air would typically be 20 parcels or
less,' Mr Arbuckle says.
The pattern of sending by sea is more pronounced in markets such as Japan,
Hong Kong and Australia where customers tend to import larger volumes by sea
and then store products locally. But in the long term, Mr Arbuckle suspects
that even these markets will begin to make more use of international air
express delivery services.
So it is to customers in the US, where UPS has a particularly extensive
delivery network, that air freight has much to commend it. Over the last
couple of years, most of Edinburgh Crystal's US customers have switched from
their previous modes of distribution to use the UPS delivery services
favoured by Edinburgh Crystal. That in turn has simplified the Scottish
company's administration activities.
Another important advantage of using a delivery company such as UPS, says Mr
Arbuckle, is that deliveries can be made direct to end-customers. Products
generally suffer fewer breakages while in transit, he says - partly because
the shipments remain in the hands of the same company all the way.
'The high value nature of our products means that on a unit cost basis, the
freight rate is not such a big factor in percentage terms. But if we use an
importer or distributor, our prices escalate and that would make us less
competitive in what is a very competitive market,' he explains.
The use of a door-to-door through delivery service to end-buyers in the US
also means Edinburgh Crystal can offer delivered prices in dollars, a
particular attraction for corporate customers used to dealing in that
currency in their other areas of business.
At the same time, US customs duties can be paid from the UK end. That means
US customers who may not be particularly conversant with import procedures
do not have to worry about activities such as customs brokerage.
'We can really make the whole thing more like a domestic transaction for
them,' adds Mr Arbuckle.
Why did Edinburgh Crystal pick UPS, rather than DHL, Federal Express, or
even registered speed post? UPS was the first to walk through the door. DHL
and Fedex offer similar services, at a similar cost: 'We used UPS on a trial
basis and were happy with both the service levels, and prices,' said Mr
Arbuckle.
'We have sinced looked at competing services, but have not so far had any
reason to consider seriously a change. Mr Arbuckle concedes there have been
some problems with UPS. 'We have had occasions when they have failed to meet
their delivery deadline but generally that has been due to freak conditions.
By and large, though, UPS have helped us immeasurably in terms of time and
cost.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

930629

