FT933-5228

FT  04 SEP 93 / Earth Mother Exec seeks New Man: Feminism and
thirtysomethings


   By RACHEL JOHNSON


You've come a long way, baby, boasted the Virginia Slims cigarette
advertisements in the 1970s, as author Shirley Conran, aka Superwoman,
revealed that life was too short to stuff a mushroom.
But the myth that today's woman can have it all after 100 years of feminism
and 20 of the equal opportunities industry was exploded this week.
A national survey of 11,000 men and women of all backgrounds born in 1958
suggests feminism has failed Britain's female thirtysomethings. The survey,
funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, found most women were
caring for the children, many as lone parents; moreover, they were doing the
bulk of the housework and earning less than men.
Women's average full-time hourly pay, at Pounds 4.40, was 85 per cent of
their male counterparts'; women working part-time earned just Pounds 3 an
hour on average; and affordable childcare facilities and company creches
were 'virtually non-existent'.
Do these findings strike a chord with professional women in their 30s?
Rosa Monckton, managing director of Tiffany, the jeweller, has an
eight-month-old daughter, mortgage and busy husband. She is typical of women
who have found the combination of work and motherhood more demanding than
anticipated.
'We want too much and expect too much,' she says, even though she has been
able to juggle her hours to see more of her daughter, Savannah. 'You can
combine motherhood with a job, but it's bloody. I feel particularly sorry
for single mothers who have to work.' She has rearranged her day so that she
leaves the office at 4.30pm to be home in time to give the baby supper.
Nina Harris, 36, set up her own estate agency, which she runs from her home
in Notting Hill, London, two and a half years ago. This has made her recent
return to work after her son's birth less traumatic.
'I've tailored my life down now, taking over from the nanny at 4pm on the
dot. If I had to do menial tasks I'd be sent over the edge. But I am
responsible for laundry and shopping,' she says, echoing the ESRC survey's
finding that only one in five men shared household chores.
For a woman working in more male-dominated environments, the careful
management of time to combine career and motherhood is more difficult.
Jill Shankleman works for the consultancy Environmental Resources
Management's Oxford office, and supports two teenagers. She believes that,
in order to cope with the pressures on them, women have had to 'grow up',
whereas 'men haven't'. Women, she says, 'work it all out, develop
compromises and present solutions'.
In common with women working in the City, she detests the 'unnecessarily
macho' 1980s attitude to work which means getting in very early and staying
very late as proof of commitment.
'We should follow the Germans who regard it a sign of inefficiency to stay
late,' she suggests.
For married gilder and artist Clare Mosley, today is the fourth day that she
has been back at home in Camberwell with her toddler, Augustus, her first
child, since packing up her studio in Battersea.
'I'm climbing the walls but he's loving it,' she says. 'It's mind-numbing
but I thought I would try to do one thing at a time.'
Different generations of women have, she believes, have different attitudes.
'My mother was brought up to have a husband; her expectations were very low.
Ours are so high. We have to have the husband, the job, the children and the
right colour kitchen.'
She worries that, having temporarily stopped working, she will be confined
to the social ghetto sometimes inhabited by mothers who do not work. 'Men
lean across you at dinner parties to talk to each other,' she remarks.
Praise for feminism is more likely from professional women without children.
Brigid Larmour, 33, artistic director of Contact Theatre in Manchester,
believes 'every politically conscious feminist is making things easier for
the next generation'.
Even so, she believes that having it all - high-powered job, children, home
and professionally satisfied husband - is not possible. 'The state is no
help whatsoever, employers expect unreasonable hours, and the extended
family's not there.'
It seems, ultimately, that Executive Earth Mother cannot exist without
domesticated New Man, and he has failed to materialise.
But men pay a price too. 'They have no flexibility at all,' says Alison
Coburn of Common Purpose, an educational charity.
Feminism may not have solved the problems of today's female
thirtysomethings. But it has not liberated men from their bondage either.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930904

