FT934-10137

FT  06 NOV 93 / A grave issue to tackle: Minister for a Day


   By LUCINDA LAMBTON


AS Heritage Minister for the day I would slice sabres through the stifling
bureaucracy that has laid cultural architectural and artistic waste to
almost all churchyards and cemeteries throughout the British Isles.
Whereas in the past these plots of land were paradise - Elysian fields of
monumental sculpture and design, that reflected the tastes, dreams and
ideals of the age - today they are being swept squeaky clean of all their
spirit.
In the 1950s the church laid down rules and regulations as to the dimensions
and design of memorials. This was done with the best of intentions - to stem
the ever encroaching tide of plastic and green chippings - but it has led to
grimly uniform results, with blightingly bland blocks lying roughshod over
the remains of Britons.
Whereas architecture has forged forward with evermore innovative forms, this
miniature branch of structural design has stomped on, seemingly regardless
of its vital role to reflect the very culture of the country. Walking
through a new graveyard or cemetery is like walking through the most
horrifying of 1960s developments, with one gloomy difference: that it is
still being built, holy hand over fervent fist today. Democracy in life has
become a dictatorship in death, with even the most aesthetically minded of
us forced to end our days beneath blocks of Ceausescu-like regimentation.
At long last though there are rays of hope on this bleak horizon; with a new
generation of stonecarvers, artists and letter cutters, who are primed to
restore dignity, artistry and individuality to the tombstone. After barren
years, with Eric Gill and his disciples flying lone flags of excellence,
craftsmanship is returning again to the churchyard.
Arm yourself with this stirring knowledge, however, and you are in trouble.
Decide to order a plain block and it will go ahead like clockwork; decide to
commission a memorial of lasting beauty and you will be battling through the
brambles of church democracy. Crosses are often no longer allowed, nor are
statues and other images such as books and hearts. A gravestone, say church
authorities, should be: 'No more than 4 ft high . . . no less than 2 ft 6 in
high (you dream of Sir Richard Burton's life-size Islamic stone tent in St
Mary's churchyard at Mortlake); 'No more than 3 ft wide . . . no less than 1
ft 8in wide' (how you yearn for the great crawl-underable castellated
railway tunnel at Otley in Yorkshire, commemorating the 18 men killed while
building it); 'No more than 6in thick . . . no less than 3in thick'; (you
long for Nancy Mitford's substantial stone at Swinbrook, in Oxfordshire, or
for the life-size armchair, at Kensal Green, commemorating Henry Russell,
composer of My Old Armchair.)
Most stifling of all, are the rules governing inscriptions; with the Diocese
of Birmingham chillingly declaring that they 'be neither presumptious nor
laudatory'. All Diocesan advisory committees decree that wording on the
tombstone should be 'simple, short and appropriate' (How one craves the
stone of railway engineer, Joseph Rutherford, killed by a boiler explosion
at Bromsgrove, Worcs, in 1840: Under a steaming engine are 18 lines of
evocative verse: 'My Engine now is cold and still/No water does my boiler
fill/My coke affords its flames no more/my days of usefulness are o'er'.
Every square inch of this stone reveals the individual that it commemorates,
bringing him stirringly to life for each succeeding generation . . .
A churchyard was, and should still be, a chronicler of the community, a
celebration of its very diversity, with hearty huzzahs to the individual.
John Buchan lies beneath a circular stone, emblazoned with a Greek Cross, in
Elsfield's tiny churchyard outside Oxford. Sir Benjamin Baker, who designed
The Forth Bridge, lies beneath a giant amalgam of arches, in a Cotswold
churchyard.
The Dioceses of Chelmsford and of Oxford are beginning to realise that such
individuality should and could, be celebrated again. The Churchyards
Handbook too, calling the churchyard a work of art, has the encouraging
words that: 'Applications for specially designed and appropriate memorials
will be sympathetically considered'.
On the crest of this promising wave, there is one Liberty-like figure, who
with beacon aloft, shines freedom into the churchyard: Harriet Frazer.
With her organisation Memorials by Artists, at Snape Priory, Saxmundham,
Suffolk, Frazer has established a nationwide service to put people in touch
with designers, carvers and letterers who will make individual memorials of
beauty.
Her success has been spectacular. The tide of taste has unquestionably
turned. Diocesan committees should take stock of the situation.
An issue of grave and fundamental importance is in their hands; one that
affects us all. As Heritage Minister I would wrench off the bland blanket
that is ordained to lie over our remains.
Information: A Memorials by Artists booklet is available, priced Pounds 5,
from Harriet Frazer, Snape Priory, Saxmundham, Suffolk, IP17 1SA. Tel:
0728-688934.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

931106

