FT932-212

FT  30 JUN 93 / World Trade News: Tokyo learns art of diplomatic defiance


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


JAPAN is learning to say No to the US, in a new mood of assertiveness which
saw trade talks in Tokyo end in stalemate late on Monday.
The question is whether Tokyo can say more than that, and come up with its
own proposals to create a framework for further detailed trade talks with
the US.
This week's talks foundered on Japan's vehement opposition to targets for
cutting its current account surplus, which will be worth about Dollars 150bn
(Pounds 100bn) this year, and opening its markets to imports.
The US wants the surplus cut from about 3.5 per cent of gross national
product to between 1 and 2 per cent. It also wants Japan to increase by a
third its imports of manufactured goods and has proposed targets in five
areas, including government procurement, supercomputers and auto parts. In
return the US has pledged it will reduce its federal budget deficit and
block protectionist measures to exclude Japanese goods from the US.
In reply the Japanese said in private what they have been saying in public
for weeks: they will not agree to numerical targets on the grounds that this
would amount to managed trade.
Japan's opposition is unlikely to weaken, with one senior Japanese official
acknowledging a growing psychological need to resist US pressure.
Older bureaucrats and business leaders want to test the credibility of the
young Clinton administration, believing its resolve to pressure Japan will
flag. Younger officials believe it is their task to establish a more equal
relationship with the US, in which Japan stands up for itself.
The bureaucrats' approach is echoed in the business community. One top
executive with a leading Japanese publishing group sums up the mood: 'We
should say No because Mr Clinton simply does not know very much about
economics.' Yet when asked what Japan should do after resisting, he replied:
'That is up to the government.'
The problem is that Japan's new willingness to say No has not been matched
by a capacity to propose alternative approaches. This has been exacerbated
by the political turmoil created by the government's defeat in a
no-confidence motion two weeks ago.
Getting the Tokyo's hard-nosed bureaucrats to budge will become increasingly
difficult in the next few months, until a political leadership emerges after
the July 18 general election strong enough to deliver concessions.
At the very least the US administration will have to adjust its expectations
of how quickly it will be able to reach a deal, and its hopes of concluding
an agreement in time for next week's summit between President Bill Clinton
and Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister, have been dashed.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930630

