FT932-7075

FT  26 MAY 93 / Italian ex-PM at centre of probe on earthquake funds


   By ROBERT GRAHAM and REUTER


   ROME


MR Ciriaco De Mita, a former prime minister and ex-leader of the Christian
Democrat party, was yesterday advised he was under investigation for alleged
extortion in connection with the huge state funds available in the wake of
the 1980 Irpinia earthquake, near Naples.
Naples magistrates said that they also wanted to question Mr Elveno
Pastorelli, head of civil protection at the Interior Ministry, who was
temporarily in charge of distributing the earthquake reconstruction funds.
At the same time, arrest warrants were issued for 15 local government
officials and bank employees alleged to be involved in various frauds and
over-invoicing scams to the tune of nearly L30bn (Pounds 13.2m). In a
separate investigation, also connected with the earthquake reconstruction,
an arrest warrant was issued for Mr Corrado Ferliano, the colourful
construction magnate who runs Naples football club, on corruption charges.
Mr De Mita and Mr Pastorelli are alleged to have threatened owners of three
companies with losing their disaster relief funds if they did not take on
employees recommended by them. Mr De Mita's two brothers have already been
arrested and charged with separate offences relating to the abuse of the
funds.
The leadership of Italy's Socialist party, moving quickly to find a third
leader in three months, yesterday endorsed the candidacy of a top union
leader, Reuter reports from Rome. Mr Ottavio Del Turco, leader of CGIL,
Italy's largest union grouping, is expected to be elected at a scheduled
congress on Friday.
The party is seeking to regroup quickly after the resignation as leader last
week of Mr Giorgio Benvenuto, who complained that his efforts for reform
were blocked by an entrenched old guard.
Mr Benvenuto had been elected in February to replace former prime minister
Bettino Craxi, who was forced to resign by a corruption scandal after nearly
17 years as party secretary.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930526

