FT932-37

FT  30 JUN 93 / Money Markets: Muted speculation


   By PETER MARSH


TALK of possible cuts in German interest rates tomorrow was the dominant
feature on European money markets as traders weighed up the implications of
the slight rise in the D-Mark against other important currencies, writes
Peter Marsh.
The consensus view was that members of the Bundesbank council may be pushed
into a small cut in German official interest rates by the weight of pressure
from industrialists and politicians both inside and outside Germany.
In support of such notions was the conciliatory tone sounded at the weekend
to the idea of an easing in monetary policy by Mr Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank
vice president.
Even so, there is a strong body of opinion on financial markets that the
German central bank's worries about inflation and the recent weakness in the
D-Mark may hold it back from any such action.
The fall by almost 1 pfennig in the dollar against the German currency to
DM1.692 at the close of European trading last night slightly pushed the
balance of possibilities in the direction of a cut in interest rates.
That seemed to be the reaction of investors trading Euromark futures, where
the September contract closed slightly up at 93.21 from 93.19 the evening
before. There was a similar upward movement in the December contract, which
ended at 94.30 from 94.27.
The three month French franc contract changed in a similar direction,
closing 3 basis points up at 93.70 from 93.67.
The sterling money markets saw little action as traders took the view that
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the new chancellor, would almost certainly not cut
interest rates in the next month or so until he has taken a broader view
about the strength of any UK recovery.
Comments yesterday by the chancellor that the rise in the pound recently
reflected 'some confidence' in the UK's economic recovery had little impact
on the market.
The September sterling futures contract closed unchanged at 94.15, as did
the December contract, which was last night quoted at 94.33.
In its technical operations, the Bank of England injected Pounds 257m of
late assistance into the banking system bringing the total cash handed out
during the day to Pounds 1.4bn. compared to a forecast shortage of Pounds
1.75bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 41

930630

