FT934-10203

FT  06 NOV 93 / International Company News: Home Shopping calls off plan to
merge with QVC


   By MARTIN DICKSON


   NEW YORK


TELEVISION shopping groups QVC Network and Home Shopping Network yesterday
called off a four-month-old merger plan because of QVC's separate Dollars
9.5bn bid for entertainment group Paramount Communications.
The move came amid signs that BellSouth, the Baby Bell telephone group which
has been considering involvement in the Paramount battle for weeks, might be
about to invest more than Dollars 1.5bn in QVC.
QVC, which is headed by Mr Barry Diller, a leading Hollywood film industry
figure, is making a hostile bid for Paramount in competition with a
similarly valued but friendly takeover proposal from Viacom, the cable
television group.
QVC and Home Shopping Network, its chief rival, announced plans to merge
last July - a deal which would have created a strong power in the growing
television shopping field, with sales of around Dollars 2bn a year.
However, the deal had seemed in doubt ever since September, when QVC's
energies became absorbed in its bid for Paramount. Home Shopping said last
month the talks had been put on the back burner.
Yesterday, the two companies said they had mutually and amicably agreed to
terminate discussions because of 'timing and other uncertainties created by
the QVC bid for Paramount'.
Separately, BellSouth, the largest of the Baby Bell regional telephone
companies, declined to confirm or deny reports that it is negotiating to buy
the 22 per cent stake held in QVC by Liberty Media and inject further funds
into the group which would allow it to increase its Paramount offer.
Liberty is in the process of merging with its associate Tele-Communications
Inc, America's largest cable service company, which in turn has agreed to be
acquired by Bell Atlantic, another Baby Bell company.
The severing of Liberty's links with QVC could help Mr Diller ameliorate
federal anti-trust concerns which could slow up his bid.
It would also remove Bell Atlantic from entanglement in the bid, thus
overcoming qualms BellSouth might feel at investing in a company partly
owned by another telephone group.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931106

