FT933-5118

FT  04 SEP 93 / Arts: Big Star live - Pop Music


   By PETER BERLIN


ONCE ROCK and roll was the medium through which teenagers shocked their
strait-laced parents. But a wasted youth cannot compete in the image market
with the two wasted decades that are part of the legend of Alex Chilton, who
turned up alive on stage in Clapham last week.
Chilton's one brush with popular success came when his band the Box Tops had
a hit with 'The Letter'. Chilton left the Box Tops in the middle of a show.
Back in his home town, Memphis, he joined Big Star.
Big Star are the blueprint cult band: split by internal disputes, alleged
victims of record-company incompetence. Chris Bell, the founder, left after
the first album No 1 Record but may have contributed uncredited to the
second Radio City. Bell's death in a car crash only strengthened the legend.
After the ragged Third, recorded in 1974, released in 1978, Chilton more or
less disappeared. The simplest version of the legend is that he spend two
decades drinking. A talent so hugely squandered, runs rock logic, must be a
huge talent.
The reformed Big Star consists of Chilton, Jody Stephens, the original
drummer, and Jon Auer and Ken Stringfellow, members of Seattle band the
Posies, on bass and guitar.
The two Posies looked more like early-70s escapees than Chilton. While he
stood chain-smoking at the side of the stage, they bounced enthusiastically,
tossing their long hair back, a powerful advertisement for regular washing
and conditioning. Chilton readily shared the murky blue and red spotlights.
The two youngsters sung the songs Bell sang. The band displayed all the
virtues of a good American bar band: the playing was tight, enthusiastic and
proficient. Chilton's warm guitar solos were few and brief.
At the root of the Chilton legend is the idea that he is a songwriting
genius. Here were all the fans' favourites. Pop songs with the maddeningly
familiar sound of the hits they never were: 'The Ballad of El Goodo',
'Thirteen' and 'September Gurls' (covered by the Bangles). At its best, the
band played the strongest tunes with muscular conviction, at its worst it
descended into chugging boogie.
The cover versions were revealing (no doubt self-consciously). 'You're
Strange', one of the more obscure works in the T Rex canon, 'Slut' from Todd
Rundgren, master of pop artifice, and a clunking cover of 'Kansas City' from
the rich ersatz rhythm and blues songbook of Lieber and Stoller.
Lou Reed and Iggy Pop can fight over the titles 'godfather of punk' and
'grandfather of grunge', but Chilton, emerging as if from a time warp,
champions a tradition that has largely withered: the clean-cut pop rock of
the Beatles imitators. At times Chilton, the pop singer with a rock and roll
lifestyle, adds a darker shading, a touch of chaos and dissolution colours
his best songs. There were moments in Clapham when the material did justice
to the myth.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

930904

