FT932-13482

FT  23 APR 93 / Hopes recede for early Nigerian debt agreement


   By PAUL ADAMS and MICHAEL HOLMAN


   LAGOS, LONDON


NIGERIA'S prospects for early rescheduling of its Dollars 29bn (Pounds
19.2bn) external debt have receded after the visit of a joint International
Monetary Fund and World Bank mission.
Although the mission backed the military government's latest reform efforts,
it is understood to have made clear that a formal IMF agreement would depend
on the performance of the civilian administration which is scheduled to take
office in August. An IMF deal is a precondition to rescheduling the debt, of
which Dollars 16.5bn is owed to the Paris Club of official creditors. Paris
Club arrears exceed Dollars 3bn.
Nigeria's transitional council, the country's interim administration, is
drawing up a shadow IMF programme that would conform to the terms of an
extended structural adjustment facility (Esaf).
The new government would be expected to adopt the programme.
The council hopes to present its medium-term economic strategy for 1993-96
to a meeting of the Paris Club co-ordinated by the World Bank. Nigerians
have suggested this could take place in July.
But Fund officials are pressing for action on two key issues before such a
meeting is convened. They want to see deregulation of the foreign exchange
market, and a narrowing of the gap between the official rate of exchange
(N21 to the dollar) and the parallel market rate (N37 to the dollar).
They also expect the government to reduce the domestic fuel subsidy. The
team from Washington was assured that the recent decision to postpone petrol
price increases was necessary to ensure orderly presidential elections on
June 12. The government has yet to give a date for the promised action.
There are also continuing concerns about management of state resources.
Since taking office at the end of December the council has tried to account
for all export earnings, but the exercise is not complete. World Bank
officials in Washington and western government analysts estimate that the
proceeds from 200,000 barrels of oil a day are inadequately accounted for.
Total production is around 1.8m b/d.
It is thought these receipts go directly into so-called 'dedicated accounts'
earmarked for specific purposes or projects, but details remain difficult to
obtain.
Western government and IMF officials have said that they want to monitor the
new government's handling of the economy for at least three months after its
installation in August before a formal agreement can be reached.
This timetable makes it unlikely that debt relief could be obtained before
the end of this year.
If Nigeria can secure an Esaf agreement with the IMF, it could qualify for
debt relief from the Paris Club under the Trinidad terms, involving a
write-off of 60 per cent of the loans and longer payment periods for the
rest.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930423

