FT934-11280

FT  02 NOV 93 / World Trade News: Texan to invest DM550m in new Berlin
complex


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BERLIN


A PROMINENT Texan property developer will invest more than DM550m (Pounds
223m) in building a new office, hotel and residential complex in the heart
of Berlin's cultural centre despite the federal government's repeated delays
in moving the entire administration to the capital.
Hines Interests Limited Partnership, which has been responsible for
complexes ranging from Postal Square, Washington, to the 30th Street
Station, Philadelphia, will develop the area around the Gendarmenmark. Now
east Berlin's cultural centre, it was the city's banking quarter before the
second world war.
This is the first time Hines has moved into the European property
development market. Mr Gerald Hines, its chairman, said Berlin provided 'a
unique opportunity. This is an untapped sector. It is also a crucial axis
between eastern and western Europe. There is no other city which offers so
much potential.'
In addition to developing over 50,000 sq metres of property on 8,400 sq
metres of land, the company has been chosen by Sony to design the interior
of its new European headquarters on Potsdamer Platz, which straddled the
eastern side of the Berlin wall.
Unlike other property developers who arrived in Berlin after the wall was
pulled down four years ago this month, Mr Hines has not encountered big
difficulties over outstanding property claims. Instead of dealing with each
individual case, the company bought the entire property from the Senate, or
government of Berlin, which in turn will compensate any claimants.
Since 1990, property developers have already invested DM11bn in this part of
the Mitte, or centre of old Berlin. The other prominent developers include
Tischman Spier, which is building a Galeries Lafayette shopping and office
complex, and the American Business Centre backed by Mr Ronald Lauder, heir
to the US cosmetics magnate.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931102

