FT932-135

FT  30 JUN 93 / No breath of fresh air


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


Increasing rates of asthma among British children could be one of the next
environmental issues to provoke widespread public concern, environmentalists
and government officials believe, writes Bronwen Maddox.
But, while many doctors believe that traffic pollution triggers asthma
attacks in people who are already sufferers, medical opinion is divided
about whether it can be blamed for the increase in the number of cases. The
difficulty of proving which chemicals are responsible has not helped
environmentalists to boost public awareness, some campaigners feel.
There are no national statistics of the number of asthma cases, and doctors
warn that not all sufferers are diagnosed accurately. However, the National
Asthma Campaign quotes research on small groups which suggests that about 10
per cent of schoolchildren have wheezing of some kind, and about 3 to 5 per
cent of schoolchildren are diagnosed asthmatic. Other studies suggest about
2 to 5 per cent of adults are asthmatic, it adds.
Medical research in the past three years has also pointed to annual
increases of 5 per cent between 1973 and 1986.
The puzzle of the rise in the number of asthma cases and in their severity
is that it has occurred in the past few decades, when much industrial and
domestic air pollution in Britain has been dropping because of tighter
environmental rules. The Department of Health, which acknowledges that
'asthma is an important problem', says only that the link with 'air
pollution is particularly complex and remains incompletely understood'.
However, traffic pollution has been rising, and doctors are suggesting this
may be the culprit. Professor Robert Davies of St Bartholomew's Hospital,
London, a leading specialist in respiratory medicine, said last month that
traffic fumes were under 'very great suspicion' of triggering attacks.
The chemicals thought to be implicated are nitrogen oxide and dioxide, ozone
and sulphur dioxide, and particles from diesel exhausts.
Friends of the Earth, the pressure group, and the National Asthma Campaign
have urged better monitoring of roadside air pollution.
The DoH is now mounting further studies. Its committee on the medical
effects of air pollutants is investigating the link between asthma and air
pollution, under the chairmanship of Professor Ross Anderson, of St George's
Hospital Medical School, and it expects to produce a report next year. The
DoH is also funding a study on the health effects of the severe air
pollution in London in December 1991, the worst episode of nitrogen dioxide
ever recorded in the UK.
In the meantime, practising doctors have few qualms in telling patients at
risk to stay away from busy London streets. Dr Stephen Durham, consultant
physician specialising in allergies at the Royal Brompton Hospital, says
'the balance of probability is in favour of pollution' as the cause 'of both
the increase in the number and worsening symptoms of asthma cases'.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930630

