FT933-10058

FT  06 AUG 93 / Testing time for Pakistan's caretaker PM: Qureshi's dash to
tackle chronic economic woes


   By FARHAN BOKHARI and ALEXANDER NICOLL


MR Moeen Qureshi, Pakistan's caretaker prime minister, has only a short time
to tackle the country's chronic economic problems. But he has begun a
campaign to enforce tighter control on spending and to increase revenue
which may, business and economists believe, have long-term impact.
Mr Qureshi, appointed in July to lead a government which is due to hold
office until elections on October 6, said this week: 'The problems (of the
economy) have to do with the establishment of discipline and integrity, not
only in all parts of the public sector but also the private sector. There
has to be a sense of civic commitment to meeting your obligations and I am
afraid that is frequently lacking in Pakistan.'
The former World Bank official is perhaps uniquely qualified to deal with
the problems left behind by Mr Nawaz Sharif, the former prime minister who
resigned in July after a bitter political struggle which also resulted in
the premature departure of President Ghulam Ishaq Khan.
Mr Qureshi, who is 63, worked for Washington financial institutions for 33
years and is therefore untainted by ties to Pakistani political parties.
Deputy chief of the government's planning board while in his 20s, he left
Pakistan in 1958 to join the International Monetary Fund.
He gathered huge experience in the problems of developing countries first as
an African expert at the IMF, and later as a senior official in the
International Finance Corporation. From 1981 until his retirement in 1991,
Mr Qureshi was a senior vice president of the World Bank.
He has inherited an economic situation which worries Pakistan's financial
community, although there have been no official intimations of an immediate
crisis.
Foreign exchange reserves are very low, though bankers believe they have
risen since Mr Qureshi's appointment. Pakistan's trade deficit in the
financial year ended June 30 was Dollars 3.2bn (Pounds 2.14bn), with exports
of Dollars 6.8bn falling short of the targetted Dollars 8bn. Economic growth
slowed and inflation rose in the financial year, and the Asian Development
Bank estimates that foreign debt rose from Dollars 25.4bn to Dollars 28bn.
The latest devaluation was intended to counter Indian and Chinese exports of
textiles, Pakistan's chief export earner. Falling textile sales have led to
widespread losses, with almost 15 per cent of approximately 6m spinning
units shutting down during the past year.
Mr Sharif was an enthusiastic reformer of the economy. He oversaw a
substantial privatisation programme, removed restrictions on industry, and
actively sought to boost exports foreign investment. However, he failed to
curb the budget deficit. Though exports grew, they fell below official
projections. Foreign investment remained small because of economic and
political uncertainties.
Mr Babar Ali, an industrialist who has been appointed finance minister,
says: 'We feel that perhaps there was some hesitation on the part of the
politicians, because there could have been bitter pills that they didn't
want to take, but we have no such hang-ups.'
The interim government's first measure was a 9 per cent devaluation of the
rupee to boost exports. Measures under consideration include reduced
spending on infrastructure, such as motorway construction projects which
began under Mr Sharif, senior officials say.
Mr Qureshi said the steps considered were aimed at reducing the budget
deficit, strengthening the financial position of utility companies such as
the Water And Power Development Authority - Pakistan's largest public sector
supplier of power - and further deregulation of the economy.
He did not make clear whether an increase in the tariff for electricity or
other utilities would be on the agenda. It was also not clear how the
government would deal with the chronic problem of widespread tax evasion.
'People do need to pay taxes. If people don't pay taxes, you cannot have
resources from which to run government,' said Mr Qureshi.
The government has begun an official inquiry intended to compile a list of
bank clients who took large loans, defaulted on repayments and then used
connections to influential politicians to stop the banks from liquidating
their assets. The inquiry began after reports that defaulters could be
barred from contesting the elections.
Some officials see this initiative as an important test of the government's
determination to introduce tough, politically sensitive measures. They hope
Mr Qureshi will leave behind a new medium-term economic plan, which would
help to reduce the overall budgetary deficit down to 5.5 per cent of GDP -
the target recommended by international financial institutions, which has
been missed for several years.
There must be doubts about how lasting measures can be if taken by a
neutral, caretaker government, given that its successor which is elected in
October will again face familiar political constraints.
The best hope, however, is that the incoming government will feel bound by
economic necessity to abide by the terms of the agreement which Mr Qureshi
hopes to reach with the IMF, particularly as it will partially escape the
unpopularity which naturally goes with agreeing to IMF strictures.
Moreover, Mr Qureshi has the backing of the army, which brokered the
resignation deal which brought him into office. Though the army has proved
that it is no longer interested in wielding power directly, it remains a
powerful force in the background.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930806

