FT932-3108

FT  16 JUN 93 / World Trade News: Fokker launches regionaljet with orders
won


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent and BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


FOKKER, the Dutch aircraft manufacturer 51 per cent owned by Deutsche
Aerospace, yesterday launched the production programme for its new Fokker 70
regional jet, having won Dollars 400m (Pounds 262m) of orders from Indonesia
for the new 79-seat airliner.
The launch orders from the Indonesian carriers Sempati Air and Pelita Air
Services, involving up to 20 aircraft, will also provide Pounds 70m of
business for Rolls-Royce, the UK aero-engine group whose Tay 620 engines
power the new Fokker twin-jet airliner.
The Fokker 70, which made its maiden flight in April, is a smaller
derivative of the Fokker 100, also powered by Rolls-Royce Tays. The fuselage
and tail section of the aircraft are produced by Deutsche Aerospace, the
wings by Short Brothers of Belfast.
The new Fokker aircraft will intensify competition in the regional jet
market, which has been badly hit by the financial troubles of smaller
airlines but is now expected to recover strongly by 1998-2000.
It will compete directly against Avro International, the recently
established regional jet joint-venture company of British Aerospace and
Taiwan Aerospace.
The BAe-Taiwan venture, also unveiled at the Paris Air Show, plans to
develop a lighter version of its RJ70 regional jet, to make it more
competitive with the new Fokker 70.
Rolls-Royce, whose engines have traditionally powered Fokker jets, is now
also trying to break into the Avro RJ market by negotiating with Taiwan
Aerospace its participation in the BR700 regional jet engine programme with
its German partner BMW.
In the large end of the commercial engine market, Rolls-Royce has also
expanded at the air show its risk-sharing partners on the Pounds 400m
development programme of its high-thrust Trent engine. Lucas, UK aerospace
and car components group, is taking a 3.5 per cent share in the Trent
programme.
Bernard Simon reports from Toronto: Air Canada and McDonnell Douglas are to
study the feasibility of modernising the Canadian carrier's ageing fleet of
DC-9 jets as an alternative to replacing them with new aircraft.
Air Canada operates 35 DC-9s, and predicts that the modernisation would add
15 years to their life. The work would include new engines and avionics, and
extensive re-wiring. McDonnell Douglas would provide new warranties for the
aircraft.
The two companies said yesterday that they might open the programme to other
airlines wanting to extend the lives of their DC-9s.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930616

