FT932-3429

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (7): Bright hopes for energy / Examining
the future of the oil and gas sector


   By FRANCIS GHILES


TUNISIA is, by Middle Eastern standards, a very small producer of oil and
gas - 5.19m tonnes of oil last year and 231,000 tonnes of oil-equivalent in
gas.
However, the royalties, in the form of gas, Tunisia receives from the
trans-Mediterranean pipeline that carries Algerian gas to Italy, gives it
access to three times as much gas as it produces.
The share of natural gas in meeting the country's growing requirements is
steadily increasing.
Two factors will ensure that the share of gas in meeting Tunisian energy
requirements continues to grow. First is the doubling, over the next five
years, of the volume of Algerian gas Italy has contracted to buy, which
spells a doubling of royalties to Tunisia; second is the development, by
British Gas, of the Tunisian offshore Miskar gas field, the production of
which will meet domestic requirements.
The last four years have also witnessed a surge of oil exploration and
development as more international oil companies are attracted by the
favourable environment Tunisia offers, including tax incentives, stable
government and pleasant living conditions.
Conoco's senior director of exploration, Mr Alfred J Boulos, said recently:
'Tunisians are intelligent and worldly wise, listen to reason and logic and
take positive steps whenever justifiable.' Such words well describe senior
oil gas officials, be it in the state companies or in the ministry of
economic affairs.
In the middle 1980s, such people were faced with having to meet rising
domestic energy consumption when production from the country's two leading
oilfields, El Borma and Ashtart, was declining. Consumption looked as if it
might overtake production. New legislation was introduced in 1987. In
particular, faster cost-recovery in royalties starting as low as 2 per cent
were aimed at promoting the development of low- and medium-sized fields that
had been discovered but not exploited in the decade or so before.
After five years of decline, production picked up in 1989 and has grown
modestly but steadily ever since. The past two years have been marked by
three important developments. The annual number of new wells drilled on and
offshore has increased threefold to 22, the figure of investment by foreign
oil companies doubled over the same period from Dollars 70m to Dollars 140m.
The aim is to keep drilling activity around 20 annually to the end of the
decade. Despite the rising consumption of energy, the increased exploration
activity has just about maintained a reserve to production, at current
levels ratio, of about 12 years.
The second important development was the agreement in December 1991 between
British Gas and Enterprise Tunisienne d'Activites Petrolieres (ETAP),
whereby the UK company decided it would spend Dollars 580m developing the
offshore Miskar gas field. This field was discovered 15 years ago by the
French company Elf and inherited by British Gas when it bought the US
company Teneco in 1988. Among the reasons that made a gas field interesting
in 1991 - when ti was unattractive to develop in the mid 1970s - were the
fast development of Tunisia's domestic gas requirements. Gas today accounts
for between 17 and 33 per cent of the country's energy requirements,
depending on how competitive its price is with heavy fuel oil to fire power
stations. The construction of combined cycle power stations, which produce
electricity from gas, is increasing the need for gas.
The Tunisians did much to lure British Gas. As production from Miskar will
be too modest for export purposes, British Gas has been guaranteed the sale
of all the gas it produces to the Tunisian domestic market. The gas will be
paid for in hard currency and British Gas will be allowed to transfer
profits out of the country. Further advantages include royalties which,
since the law was changed in 1985-7, are now calculated on a flexible basis.
They can be as low as 2 per cent or as high as 15 per cent depending on the
profitability of the operation. Tunisian flexibility has proved worthy of
the country's Carthaginian forebears.
Meanwhile, the 10th anniversary of the trans-Mediterranean gas pipeline was
celebrated last month. The throughput capacity of the pipeline is being
doubled to 24bn cubic metres and the work will be completed this summer.
The passage of this pipeline has become a central feature of the energy
policy. Tunisia's reputation, and for that matter Algeria's, has been
enhanced by the complete absence of disruption to the gas flow since
operations started in 1983. There have been no disputes on tariffs or
prices. No political dispute between Tunisia and Algeria has marred the
operation. The seller has succeeded on more than one occasion in altering
the price formula, but the flow of gas has not been interrupted.
The doubling of the Trans-Mediterranean is a vindication of the security of
supply. It has proved a key factor in helping to launch the western
trans-Mediterranean line, which will carry Algerian gas to Spain across
Morocco and under the Straits of Gibraltar.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930614

