FT933-5123

FT  04 SEP 93 / Collecting: In the Cotswolds, the buying is easy - An area
of rare charm where antique hunters can find almost anything


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


A QUICK foray recently into this most bucolic of regions to test the
temperature of the antique trade produced a fairly consistent response. Most
dealers are happier with business than they were a year ago, when trade was
negligible, but there is no consistency to the revival.
A few excellent weeks can be followed by a dead period. One day, that almost
extinct species, the American dealer, turns up and walks out with Pounds
10,000 worth of goods; then, for the rest of the week, the only visitors are
coach parties of OAPs sheltering from the rain. One dealer reports that
turnover is up by 50 per cent in the first half of the year while another
struggles on, taking Pounds 100 a week on a shop that costs Pounds 1,000 a
week to keep open.
At least most of the serious dealers have survived. Few have thrown in the
towel in the past year and most agree that, while sales are increasing only
slowly, there has been a considerable rise in enquiries. Experience suggests
that many of those potential buyers, ruminating over a photograph of a
Georgian dresser or a Victorian desk, will eventually take the purchasing
plunge.
The Cotswolds offers the biggest concentration of antique dealers outside
London. Within a few pleasant miles, well over 100 present antiques which
often approach the best of the capital in quality - and, equally, often seem
to carry lower price tags.
This could be because Cotswold dealers operate on lower overheads and have
not such a commercial approach to the game. They enjoy living in the area,
and trading in antiques offers a wonderful excuse for an attractive life
style.
Not that they are unprofessional. Traditionally, the Cotswolds was the great
clearing house of the British antiques world, the place where runners -
those sharp-nosed individuals who grab a living buying antiques cheaply at
obscure auctions or from small dealers, and then pass them up through the
trade - called in regularly to sell, while the London, American and
continental dealers made frequent visits to acquire stock.
Today, the Cotswold dealers sell much less to the trade, which is suffering
badly from recession - and the restraints of bank managers - and is not in a
buying mood. Instead, private collectors have become the main customers.
They are also becoming more demanding. To make a sale these days, dealers
must ensure that their goods are repaired and polished to perfect condition.
They must also be prepared to let the customer try out the item in their
home; offer payments by instalment; consider taking antiques in part
exchange; provide free delivery; and often guarantee to take the object back
any time in the future at the sale price.
All these services - added to the fact that prices have, at best, held
steady over the past year and, for lower quality antiques, have actually
fallen - mean it is an excellent time to buy. Some dealers are becoming more
like interior decorators, working for a group of regular clients with a home
to furnish, or a hotel to refurbish, seeking out a specific type of antique
to fit a specific slot.
One dealer gets by with half a dozen loyal private customers; another works
mainly with American interior decorators. A great deal of business is now
done through sending photographs of choice items to buyers who might be
interested. This saves both time and money.
It is one of the ironies of the Cotswold life that while August sees the
small, picturesque towns like Stow, Cirencester, Broadway and Burford awash
with tourists, it is the quietest selling month of the year. Very
occasionally, a tourist, usually from the Continent, makes a big purchase,
but most of the passing trade is looking, at most, for a holiday memento
costing Pounds 100 or less.
With business at base relatively quiet, the Cotswold dealers are more likely
to be found at fairs. One leading dealer, Duncan Baggott of Stow, tried his
first-ever fair, the BADA at the Duke of York's, in May and, like many
fair-goers, found the main benefit was in later enquiries back at the shop.
John Noot of Broadway is the epitome of the modern dealer in concentrating
on fairs and giving up his prime retail site. He reckons he can take space
in 10 good fairs for the annual cost of his former high street outlet's
overheads, and do more business. He has kept a small space in the town but
his main stock of decorative paintings is on show at his new home, a manor
house on the outskirts of Broadway.
Like all dealers, Noot says the main problem at the moment is a scarcity of
good objects to buy. Only in extremis are owners disposing of worth-while
antiques at this time of low prices: they are waiting for an upturn. Even
the cash flow problems of Lloyd's Names have failed to unleash many fine
objects; and although some Cotswold dealers have lost the custom of
beleagured Names, Lloyd's has not yet proved a major obstacle to recovery.
If the house market, and the opportunities for refurbishing, continue to
improve; if the rising stock exchange index increases disposable incomes;
if, above all, the antique buying classes feel more confident about the
economic future - then, the tentative recovery of the past six months will
turn into a firmly based revival.
No one should be shy of entering the shop of a Cotswold dealer; in a
concentrated area, there is a wealth of choice. Most carry some low priced
items and most will be prepared to consider an offer below the labelled
price (although some consider this boorish behaviour on the part of a
customer at a time when profit margins can be as low as 20 per cent). In the
Cotswolds, you can choose between dozens of 18th century tables; Regency
bookcases; Gothic chests; country dressers; and decorative clocks, pots, and
pewter. Yet, there is individuality within the variety.
Take Stow, which has more than 30 dealers of varying importance. Baggott has
one of the largest stocks in the region, with more than 5,000 items for
sale, the great majority priced below Pounds 20,000. He used to concentrate
on supplying the trade but now the public is his best customer. They want
useful objects, like chairs and chests, preferably costing less than Pounds
10,000.
Baggott stocks everything in his two Stow retail outlets, from Chippendale
bookcases, to a Gillow desk of 1884, to a board showing the rules for the
servants' hall at Woburn in 1793, to glass walking sticks.
Next door on one side is Huntington Antiques, which has one of the best
stocks of early - up to Queen Anne - furniture in the UK. This is the place
for an early-16th century Flemish pulpit, once in the Cloisters Museum in
New York; or a 13th century Limoges enamel book cover priced at Pounds
75,000; or a Charles II tester bed.
On the other side is John Davies, one of the few specialist picture dealers
trading in the Cotswolds. They have been hit hardest by the recession
(wrongly or rightly, buyers feel they can live without more pictures while
still needing tables and chairs), but Davies has responded by moving into
the 20th century, and modern, period.
Across the way, Antony Preston tried trading from the King's Road in London
recently but he prefers Stow for his distinctive Regency and First Empire
furniture and decorative objects. And around the corner is Christopher
Clarke, who always carries eclectic rarities like 18th century fire screens,
Venetian busts, and 19th century American door-stops in the shape of a boot.
The great rival to Stow in terms of shops is Burford. Once again, the
variety is astonishing. Manfred Schotten is one of the few Cotswolds
specialists, being a leading dealer in sporting antiques. Here, you can buy
an early 20th century golf club for Pounds 20 or an acclaimed Tom Morris
club of the mid-19th century for Pounds 3,000; an old croquet set for Pounds
400; and an Eton boater of the 1890s for Pounds 220. Anyone bored with 18th
century brown furniture will be refreshed by the Schotten stock.
Actually, one of the attractions of the Cotswolds is that it is not
over-burdened with sedate, refined, Georgian pieces. Swan Antiques deals in
early country furniture, and proprietor Dominic Pratt seems positively to
enjoy bargaining over his modestly priced stock.
Here, you might buy a William and Mary Bible Box for Pounds 700; a 1790s'
bidet with its original, decorated receptacle, for Pounds 500; a Queen Anne
dresser for around Pounds 4,500; and a 10 ft-long late-Georgian table for
just over Pounds 4,000. Pratt likes to turn over his stock quickly, and
still gets calls from the families of Irish tinkers who roam the land
smelling out antiques of variable quality.
Down the way from Swan, David Pickup sells an unusual range of items, from
late-19th century arts and crafts furniture, preferably by named makers, to
early-19th century items like an 1822 table, one of the first to be created
in the Elizabethan revival style (Pounds 16,000).
Across Burford High Street is Robin Shield. Among the many off-beat items in
his stock is a large refractory glass on a bronze stand, dating from around
1730. It is the largest of its kind to surface and probably was used for
scientific experiments. Now, it will delight interior decorators.
On the edge of Burford is Gateway Antiques, a great barn of a place with a
bewildering stock of modestly priced antiques. The owners, Paul Brown and
Michael Ford, spend much of their time on the road acquiring hundreds of
pieces which they aim to turn over quickly at a modest profit. Prices rarely
exceed Pounds 5,000. The choice is vast, and it is not just Victorian repro
chests or Georgian commmodes. Gateway culls 15 auctions a week for
interesting stock.
A few miles away, Witney Antiques is a complete contast. In the upstairs
gallery at Gateway, you can buy 1950s' tables for Pounds 200 or less. At
Witney, you get classic Georgian furniture of Bond Street quality. The
prices bring you down to earth, but every piece is presented meticulously
and shouts class.
In stock at present is an ivory-veneered bureau bookcase with silver mounts
made in India late in the 18th century for the likes of Robert Clive; a
cabinet completed in China and priced at Pounds 10,000; and any number of
gleaming Georgian bureaux and chairs. Witney Antiques has long considered
moving to London but it has prospered for almost 30 years at the entrance to
the Cotswolds and is a regular first stop for overseas dealers and serious
collectors.
Twenty miles away, on the northern edge of the Cotswolds, is Broadway. Here,
perhaps the longest established dealer operates from a row of Tudor mansions
in the High Street.
In its day, HW Keil was a regular port of call for the rich Americans who
disembarked from their transatlantic liner at Southampton in the 1930s and
arrived in London via the Cotswolds. The Queen Mother, when Duchess of York,
was a Keil customer.
Some of the items in the vast stock carry a silver star, which means they
are not for sale because they could no longer be replaced. They include a
15th century food cabinet, although you can buy a sedan chair. Keil is a
step back into the past, with antiques ranging from Georgian to the oldest
and rarest.
A bonus from antique hunting in the Cotswolds is that you get to visit some
attractive towns and villages. Cirencester might not get the coach parties
that throng Broadway and Stow, but it has a composed charm. It also has some
good antique shops, notably William Stokes, yet another dealer trading in
early furniture who is adept at stocking a 16th century farm house or a 17th
century manor house with period furniture.
Along the way, too, is Rankin Taylor, which specialises in rarities as well
as antiques that strike the fancy of its proprietor, Leslie Taylor. At
present, these include some late-17th century sculpted heads, created in the
fledgling New England, to some 19th century port bottles which convert into
excellent decanters.
Some of the Cotswold towns, notably Stow and Burford, seem to be given over
entirely to antique shops. But there are also important stopping places in
smaller villages like Winchcombe, Taddington, Tetbury and Fairford, where
Richard and Scilla Chester-Master go in for His and Her shops, His features
traditional Georgian mahogany; Hers has French country furniture and
faience. Alongside each other, they sum up the range and charm of what the
Cotswolds can offer.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

930904

