FT934-11346

FT  01 NOV 93 / Danish Bonds: Further rate reductions in Nordic region
promise large capital gains


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


WITH yields in many core European bond markets approaching historic lows,
more investors are lured by the yield pick-ups that Nordic bonds offer.
Moreover, further rate cuts in coming months are expected to result in hefty
capital gains.
Denmark remains one of the region's favourites and is widely expected to
outperform several core markets in coming months.
The Danish central bank has taken advantage of the widening of the ERM's
fluctuation bands on August 2 to cut its interest rates independently of the
Bundesbank, and with inflation a mere 1.2 per cent and unemployment at 12.4
per cent, that trend is set likely to continue.
In the last 2 1/2 months, it cut its important 14-day certificate of deposit
rate six times from 11 per cent to 8 per cent.
The Danish krone has held up well in the process, a factor that is expected
to facilitate further rate cuts in the near future.
Mr Peter von Maydell, senior economist at IDEA, the market analysis group,
expects the central bank's 14-day CD to fall another 100 basis points by
year-end and said the next reduction could come towards the end of this
week. He said a  1/4 -point cut - rather than the recent 1/2 -point
reductions - was most likely.
'They will probably scale down the easing pace as we approach interest rate
levels of the time before the ERM break-up,' he said.
This is likely to keep Danish bonds well supported.
'We remain very positive for Denmark,' said Mr Rainer Back, bond market
analyst at DB Research, Deutsche Bank's research arm.
Mr Back expects the Danish 10-year yield spread over German government bonds
 -currently at 51 basis points - to narrow to around 20 basis points in the
next six months.
However, five- to seven-year bonds probably offered the best capital-gains
potential on continued interest rate cuts, Mr Back said. The Danish
five-year yield spread over Bunds currently stands at some 70 basis points.
Apart from its large Treasury market, Denmark has a liquid market for
mortgage bonds, which have longer maturities than government bonds and offer
a substantial yield pick-up.
The 6 per cent mortgage bond due 2026 yielded some 110 basis points over the
8 per cent government bond due 2003 on Friday.
Swedish 10-year bonds offer a larger yield pick-up over Germany - 163 basis
points on Friday - and the allure of capital gains on further easing.
However, analysts warn the long end remains vulnerable to bad news on the
public-sector deficit front and political uncertainty ahead of next year's
elections.
'With elections coming up, the government isn't going to show much fiscal
austerity,' said Mr von Maydell.
The public-sector deficit is expected to account for some 14 per cent of
gross domestic product this year and only slightly less next year.
However, investors may be able to realise large gains on the currency, which
depreciated sharply in recent months but has begun a slow recovery which is
expected to be supported by the country's improving export performance.
After hitting a SKr5.04 high against the D-Mark in late September, it traded
on Friday at SKr4.80.
'Even if this is just a dead cat bounce, the krona could well rise by about
10 per cent from its low to around 4.55,' Mr Back said.
Even higher-yielding bonds in Finland and Norway are expected to benefit
from the easing scenario, although the relative lack of liquidity in those
markets tends to deter heavy foreign investment.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931101

