FT934-8810

FT  13 NOV 93 / The prince's hectic progress: An exclusive look behind the
scenes


   By MICHAEL CASSELL


The Prince of Wales chuckles as his VC 10 aircraft, seconds from touchdown
at Riyadh military base, climbs steeply back up into the night sky. Crown
Prince Abdulla bin Abdul Aziz is not quite ready to greet his guest.
The incident offers early warning of what lies ahead; HRH Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Rothsay, Earl of Carrick, Baron Renfrew, Lord of
the Isles, Prince and Great Steward of Scotland and heir apparent to the
British throne is about to step on to a ceremonial conveyor belt. It will be
six, long, hot days before he can step off.
The unscheduled delay at least gives him precious extra minutes to do his
homework before the first of a thousand handshakes.
This week's visit to the Middle East has been intended principally to help
British companies win contracts in the region, though the prince admits, in
characteristically self-deprecating style, that it will be hard to calculate
its impact. With the lights of Riyadh below and one of his protection
officers changing trousers behind a curtain, the prince reflects: 'I just
hope I can be of some value and that the benefits filter down. The trouble
is that my hosts all think I have as much influence at home as their own
royal families.'
Even so, the trip to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Abu Dhabi, Dubai and Jordan was
designed to make every second pay; if diplomacy was the name, trade was the
game.
The meetings with kings, sheikhs, crown princes, prime ministers and
businessmen was the product of a year's preparation. While the royal party
may ultimately be hostage to the time-keeping of its hosts, it is the job of
the small household team, which last weekend set out with 'the boss' from
RAF Lyneham, to make things run as regally as possible. The spotlight
inevitably falls on Prince Charles, but the success of the show depends
largely on those who remain in the shadows. They are surprisingly young -
not a fogey among them - and show few traces of the pecking order said to
afflict the much larger Buckingham Palace household.
Heading the prince's 12-strong group in the Gulf was Stephen Lamport, the
prince's deputy private secretary, seconded six months ago from the Foreign
Office and recently forced to endure an unwelcome moment of fame as a
witness in the arms-to-Iraq Scott inquiry. During the day he regularly
speaks into the prince's ear, though even over a late-night drink with the
future monarch, his proximity never converts to familiarity.
Alongside him is Commander Robert Fraser, a grammar school-educated naval
barrister who has been equerry to the prince for nearly three years and will
shortly go back to the Navy. The boyish Mr Fraser, dressed in white and
dripping gold braid, is 'Mr Fixit', on hand for as many hours as his boss
needs him.
At home, he might be weeding out some of the 4,000 invitations a year
extended to the prince. If he ever entertained ideas of grandeur, they would
quickly have been crushed under the weight of gifts which the royal visitor
attracts, and which the equerry often has to carry.
The spoils of diplomacy include models of sailing dhows, endless bouquets
and an armoury of ceremonial daggers and swords which the prince confides
should be sufficient to equip his own bodyguard. Gifts, however, are a
two-way business. The princely progress left in its wake paintings, Wedgwood
urns, Cartier boxes and leather-framed photographs.
Neither Detective Inspector Tony Parker nor Detective Inspector Andy
Crichton carries anything but a pistol - discreetly tucked away on the right
hip under a City suit. DI Parker has been watching those watching the prince
for 10 years. DI Crichton has seen eight years' service, and although he has
been to operas and stage shows the world over he has never seen any of them.
The only worrying moment this week came when an unpublicised death threat
was made against the prince during a visit to the edge of Abu Dhabi's
desert, the 'empty quarter'. Hundreds of soldiers hid among the mountainous
sand dunes to scour for assassins.
The two men ease off only when the prince is safely in the inner sanctum,
chatting on an immense sofa under one-ton chandeliers with King Fahd of
Saudi Arabia, in a gold-embossed hall of mirrors with the Emir of Kuwait or
amid a forest of flowers with the ruler of Abu Dhabi, where they argue the
merits of a good compost.
Surgeon Commander Robin Clark is a royal physician on a two-man rota
attached to the prince. In one hand he carries a black case containing basic
medical supplies, and in the other a heavy metal box holding trauma
equipment. Never far away is the refrigerated blood bank; the unthinkable
has been thought of.
Always present is Allan Percival, recruited recently from the Northern
Ireland Office to be the prince's press secretary. His task is to 'sell' the
prince's visit in the face of other royal story distractions back home.
Formerly with the Ministry of Defence, he is an experienced press officer
and will play a big role in explaining the prince's future agenda.
Other members of the entourage have no public face but they are no less
important to the organisation and smooth-running of the trip. Mary Ann
Malleret and Elspeth Walker, the two secretaries, work late while Michael
Fawcett, the prince's young valet, works sporadically. The quintessential
picture of sartorial elegance, he sets out the prince's clothes and runs his
bath. He starts work when his employer switches off for the day.
Ron Lewis, the Welsh, white-haired travelling yeoman, first worked for the
Duke of Edinburgh until, more than 30 years ago, his son was big enough to
have his own baggage. The luggage gets heavier as the paraphernalia grows en
route.
For his added comfort, the prince takes with him Bernie Flannery, his butler
for more than three years. A chirpy young man, he helps 'the boss' start the
day and can influence his mood, especially if he gets something wrong.
Wherever he is, the prince appreciates familiar objects - like the drinks
tray - in their usual places. Bernie, who worked for eight years on HM Yacht
Britannia, has developed an eagle eye.
When the prince goes aboard Britannia - last week in Damman and later Abu
Dhabi - another support team goes into action. The atmosphere is more
formal, the hierarchy unbending.
His Royal Highness is met by Rear Admiral Bob Woodward, the ruddy-faced
ex-Buccaneer pilot who captains the 40-year-old vessel. Britannia's
glistening engine room, like something out of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang,
steamed flat out for eight days to be on time for the prince after
salmonella poisoning struck down some of the crew in Cyprus, where they were
stationed during the Commonwealth heads of government conference. The
admiral was close to being late for the first time in his career.
In the cramped, hot kitchens Carolyn Robb and Chris Barber, two chefs flown
in from St James's Palace, fought for space to help provide food for two
on-board dinners and an entourage already suffering from banquet fatigue.
On Thursday night, from the same kitchen, came a premature birthday cake for
the prince, who is 45 tomorrow and who is returning home today to be on duty
at London's Cenotaph for Remembrance Sunday. As the birthday boy blew out a
single candle, one of his team whispered: 'He's spent every year of his life
getting ready for the job. No Prince of Wales has been better prepared.'
While the informal celebrations were under way, on the other side of the
world, four members of his household were working hard in Australia. Their
mission, to get ready for January, when the prince's royal caravan gets back
on the road.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931113

