FT931-4152

FT  12 MAR 93 / Controversy over Birt grows at BBC


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


A NUMBER of BBC governors expect an 'unholy row' at next Thursday's meeting
of the board of governors over the tax arrangements of Mr John Birt,
director-general.
The controversy over Mr Birt being employed as a freelance consultant since
1987 until last week grew last night amid claims that the BBC personnel
department has regularly suggested that he should join the staff.
There was also speculation that a more formal attempt to persuade him to
join the staff was made at the highest level in the corporation last year
but Mr Birt decided to retain his freelance status.
His arrangement will be raised as a matter of urgency at the meeting by
governors who are outraged at the situation.
One governor said last night: 'John Birt has put himself in an untenable
position and it is up to him to sort it out.'
On Monday the board of management expressed support for Mr Birt, who was
appointed deputy director-general six years ago.
Mr Marmaduke Hussey, chairman, and Lord Barnett, vice-chairman, also
expressed their backing for Mr Birt on Monday. However, no mention was made
of any other governors supporting the director-general.
It is believed that a number of other governors were canvassed for their
support before the statement of support was released but that some wanted to
meet before giving their support.
It is believed that Mr Hussey and Lord Barnett handled the unusual
arrangement whereby Mr Birt was taken on as a freelance deputy
director-general while not being on the staff and negotiations for him to
remain a freelance when he became director-general.
There was a growing suspicion last night that other governors were not told
of the arrangement.
Mr Birt took over from Sir Michael Checkland as director-general at the end
of last year. A controversial decision had earlier been taken not to
advertise the post of director-general and to offer an extension of only one
year to Sir Michael's five-year contract. The decision is believed to have
been passed only by the casting vote of Mr Hussey.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930312

