FT934-8692

FT  13 NOV 93 / Sport: Jersey that built a team - Derek Wyatt visits an
ambitious club with luxurious facilities / Rugby Union


   By DEREK WYATT


LAST NIGHT, the club's four top XVs trained until late. Each team had been
designated one of the four floodlit training pitches. There was a coach and
a team manager watching each side go through its paces for Sunday's games.
Other facilities on the club's 45-acre site include a sports shop, a
restaurant and bar, full-time medical support, accommodation, beach
volleyball, tennis, a golf range, and a basketball and volleyball arena.
After training, the first XV held an impromptu karaoke evening with wine,
cheese and salami provided by club stalwarts.
This morning, the forwards will go through some line-outs at the main
ground. When the side assembles for brunch tomorrow at an exclusive tennis
club, the players will mentally rehearse their play and discuss the
opposition. They will then make their way to their ninth league game of the
season knowing that a loss will deprive them of the leadership of the first
division.
The club is A S Benetton Rugby TV. The TV stands for Treviso, a small,
elegant town near Venice. Benetton, as it is more familiarly known, would
sit easily in the first division of the Courage League in England.
Its facilities are the best in the world. When I watched Benetton earlier in
the season against Milan, the team played a fluid and intelligent game
although it struggled in the line-outs. At the start of the season, Benetton
beat Gloucester at home; last year, the club lost by three points to Bath.
Being so closely identified with Benetton poses problems. Benetton is
Treviso. It has grown from a small clothing venture into a global brand and,
along the way, the family has grown and accommodated similar business
cultures including Nordica (ski clothing and ski boots), Prince (squash and
tennis), Siseley (leisure clothing), Nitro (golf balls), andLangert and
Grafalloy (golf clubs).
The assumption is that Benetton Rugby is flush with money, that all its
players are lire millionaires, and that there is a benefactor who will pay
until success arrives. This is not the case.
Fabrisio Gaetaniello, capped 39 times by Italy and its captain from
1974-1983, is the sports director for rugby at the club: 'Our contract with
Benetton is renewed annually with Luciano, one of the three Benetton
brothers. They are not our only sponsors but they do give us somewhere in
the region of L700m (Pounds 290,000) each year, about a half of what we need
to run our club.
'But we have nine or 10 sides each week. We have a fully fledged schools
programme in the region and supply coaches and coaching to eight of them;
we're dealing with 300 juniors from the age of seven and upwards.
'Plus, we have a newish stadium to support. We have built two stands to hold
12,000 spectators and we have plans to develop further.'
Success is what Benetton TV craves and it has been prepared to go to the
market place and attract the best coaches and players. Until 1992, its coach
was Pierre Villepreux; under him, the club won the championship.
The new coach is Wayne Smith, a former All Black fly-half. He has immersed
himself in the local culture and can speak and correspond in Italian. (The
Italian Rugby Federation has just appointed a French coach to the national
side who cannot speak a word of Italian). In Smith's first season, Benetton
lost the championship final to Milan, its arch-rival, for which David
Campese used to play - he has now been replaced by Jason Little.
'In New Zealand, so much of rugby is automatically inherent. Here in Italy,
there isn't that tradition,' said Smith. 'Rugby is not 100 per cent in their
culture even though, in Treviso, it is the main sport.
'My job is to create a winning side and, at the same time, plan the supply
of future generations of local players. The locals love the game here and it
is the main topic of conversation at the bars. At the same time, although
they talk fondly about it, they might struggle to know where the hooker
plays.
'As a consequence, although we are allowed only two overseas players per
team, they always occupy the decision-making positions. We have Michael
Lynagh returning to us this week and I brought in Rob Penney, the Auckland
No 8, to bring some dynamics to the forwards.'
Talk of Lynagh invariably raises the question about how much players from
the southern hemisphere are paid to play in the north.
'Michael is not paid by Benetton Rugby club,' said Smith. 'And, when John
Kirwan played for us, he also was not paid, either. I have read that these
players are on contracts with us at so much a game. This is absolute
nonsense. JR did not play in the first Test against the Lions because he
wanted to play for us in the final against Milan.'
Kirwan, who is married to an Italian - Lynagh is about to follow suit - has
a business in Treviso; Lynagh works for the main company, Benetton, in
public relations. Is this any different from all those English and Welsh
first division players who hold nebulous positions in 'public relations'? I
am not sure how 'jobs for the boys' translates in Italian, but this is how
all the leading clubs in the world now work.
Smith's wish is that the Italian clubs become involved in the planning of a
European league.
'We need more sides from the UK and France to play us,' he said. 'After all,
it is quicker to travel to London, Cardiff or Edinburgh than it is to play
Catania in Sicily.'
This, and the need for an overhaul of the Italian league structure so that
it is more competitive, is what keeps Smith involved. When he returns home,
you can be sure the club will continue to think big. My guess is that Bob
Dwyer, Australia's coach, will top their list.
Llanelli has provoked the Welsh and English rugby unions to open discussions
for an Anglo-Welsh league. This would be the saviour of club rugby in Wales.
It would not offer the big English clubs sufficient incentives, nor enough
fixtures of merit. England must look to the continent of Europe as well. It
is a European Cup, including French and Italian clubs with the English and
Welsh, that is required.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931113

