FT933-5114

FT  04 SEP 93 / Hawks and Handsaws: Twist and squirm


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


I HAD MY final chess lesson yesterday in preparation for the world chess
championship tussle between Britain's Nigel Short and Russia's Garry
Kasparov which starts in London next week. As usual, the lesson was
conducted by Nigel himself, and once again I was accompanied by two friends:
Queen Elizabeth II, head of the House of Windsor, and John Major, prime
minister (just) of Britain.
During these lessons the Queen has emerged as a superb chess strategist who
moves with airy grace through the upper mental atmosphere inhabited by
grandmasters of Nigel's calibre.
But John Major cannot hack it. The man cannot concentrate. He is
superficially competitive, but that is not sufficient. He is easily
befuddled. His play is laborious. He attacks the wrong pieces. Just throws
the game away. We have been most disappointed. But we have endeavoured to be
kind to him because his struggles in the real world - the crises and the
cock-ups, the way people laugh at him - have wrecked his confidence and made
him look haunted.
Yesterday we discussed the finer points of Nigel's own preparation for the
match.
'One has read, Nigel, about your work-outs with your trainer, Mr Kavalek,'
said the Queen, 'and your tireless search for weaknesses in your opponent's
game. So what can we look forward to - what secret moves and stratagems will
you use to slay Kasparov the Barbarian? One is counting on you, Nigel, to
restore some credibility, plus a soupcon of glamour, to one's slightly rocky
reign. One despairs of one's children. One is putting one's faith in you.
You deserve to win, Nigel. And always remember: le fruit du travail est le
plus doux plaisir.'
'Oh, right,' said Nigel. 'Absolutely, yeah. It's really a matter of style,
you know, of trying to steer the game towards a style that suits me, or
steering it towards a style that is uncomfortable for him. Or both at once,
preferably. It's actually quite tricky. But life is treating me good right
now. I am extremely well and happy. I am resisting all distractions. And I
want to kill Kasparov. I really really hate him. He's nothing but a monkey -
those horrible dangling arms and all that revolting chest-hair. He works out
with dumbbells. He can lift his own bodyweight, 80 flipping kilos. God, how
I hate him.'
The Queen rattled with laughter. Her tiara twinkled and shone. But John
Major started to tremble. Greyness suffused his face.
He said: 'I am not sure, Nigel, if you shouldn't try to restrain yourself
and downplay any natural antipathy you might feel towards your opponent. In
my experience most people are perfectly decent sorts once you get to know
them, and there are considerable advantages to be gained from not making
enemies.'
'But he is my enemy,' said Nigel. 'Top-level chess is all about hatred. The
moves are incidental. It's about pulverising your opponent. Stamping on his
face. Making him scream in agony. Watching him twist and squirm and cry out
for mercy as you destroy all his brain cells and smash all his teeth and
chop both his arms off. I'm going to kill that monkey.'
'Nigel,' I murmured. 'You should drop this monkey business. Find some other
insults. The reason I say this is that there is a move afoot in scientific
circles to reclassify the great apes - chimpanzees, orang-utans, gorillas -
as people. People with basic rights. This is because of their extreme
biological closeness to humans and their sophisticated mental abilities.
'They can communicate, you know. Tell a trained female chimpanzee in sign
language that her baby is dead and she will cry, Nigel. Very soon jokes
about apes will be as tasteless as jokes about slavery or' - I searched for
something topical - 'Rupert Murdoch. A few years ago Murdoch looked washed
up. He was teetering on the brink. Now he's OK, though. He's being called a
visionary because of his success in satellite TV.'
The Queen pursed her lips. She abhors the Dirty Digger. John Major was
terrified. He lives in mortal fear of him. But Nigel looked thoughtful. It
is The Times, after all, one of Murdoch's rags, that has raised Pounds 1.7m
in prizemoney for his match against Kasparov.
'All right,' said Nigel grudgingly. 'I'll drop the monkey jokes. But I'm
still going to murder him, the flipping little git.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

930904

