FT932-7036

FT  26 MAY 93 / Three writs over BCCI slam Bankfor 'bad faith'


   By ANDREW JACK and DAVID OWEN


THE BANK of England is accused in three separate writs lodged in the High
Court of 'misfeasance in public office' throughout the 12 years it regulated
Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The writs are from the four UK liquidators at accountants Touche Ross, the
three Luxembourg liquidators to BCCI and from a group of depositors led by
Three Rivers District Council, Hertfordshire, in a set of co-ordinated
claims for damages and interest against the Bank of England.
A group of 72 MPs headed by Mr Keith Vaz, Labour MP for Leicester East,
tabled a Commons motion welcoming the proceedings as 'long overdue'.
In a letter, Mr Vaz urged Mr John Major, the prime minister, to 'intervene
to ensure a just and speedy settlement' rather than fight the action, which
would waste taxpayers' and creditors' money.
The writs say the Bank of England 'knowingly, deliberately contrary to the
statutory scheme in accordance with the (1979 and 1987 Banking Acts) . . .
and in bad faith' granted BCCI a full licence in 1979, which it failed to
revoke at any time between October 1987 and July 1991.
It alleges that the Bank 'deliberately, repeatedly and unlawfully' relied on
assurances by LBC and IML, the Luxembourg bank regulators, and failed to
supervise BCCI SA and BCCI Overseas.
The Bank of England yesterday reiterated its belief that it had 'a complete
defence' and refused to comment on the detailed allegations.
It is believed never before to have been sued under banking law. The 1987
act specifically introduced immunity from action in connection with
regulation except as a result of 'bad faith'.
Experts yesterday said there was a case to answer because approval to
proceed had been granted by Sir Donald Nicholls, the vice-chancellor - the
senior Chancery judge - and was supported by a legal opinion to the
liquidators from Sir Patrick Neill QC. The Bank was criticised for its role
as regulator in the US, in an inquiry chaired by Senator John Kerry, and in
the UK in a Commons Treasury committee report and the government-sponsored
inquiry chaired by Sir Thomas Bingham.
The liquidators were advised that they could not sue the Bank on behalf of
BCCI as a company but that action by individual depositors had 'a fair
prospect of success'. There were 150,000 account holders in BCCI SA who
could join the liquidators' action.
The legal action comes as the liquidators to BCCI prepare for a meeting of
creditors at Wembley in London tomorrow to elect a creditors' committee.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930526

