FT932-13295

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (1): Savings
deposits feel the draught - UK interest rates have slipped so far that
higher-rate taxpayers are not keeping up with underlying inflation / Keynote


   By BARRY RILEY


NOT FOR the first time, the stock market hare thought it a good idea in the
first three months of the year to allow the tortoise-like British economy to
catch up. Fortunately, investors found that the economy had not entirely
quit the race, and was plodding slowly forwards.
In the circumstances of emergence from recession, the UK equity market
action centred on lower grade recovery stocks, and the premium on quality
began to crumble. It became a 'buy Asda, sell Sainsbury' sort of quarter.
Entering the year on a high point, the markets looked to lower interest
rates and economic revival for sustenance, but were always fearful of a
torrent of indigestible new issues from both the public and private sectors.
There was the lurking threat of chancellor Norman Lamont, busily plotting a
package of high borrowings and rising taxation for his March Budget.
In the event, the pluses and minuses largely cancelled out. There was a
one-point cut in base rates to 6 per cent on January 26, and although the
move was clumsily handled, and upset the sterling exchange rate, share
prices went ahead.
The FT-SE Index of the 100 top shares, having ended 1992 at 2846.5, hit a
new all-time peak of 2873.8 on February 3, and after a pause for breath went
on to a further high of 2957.3 on March 8. But the Footsie failed to mount a
serious assault on the 3,000 level and relapsed over the remainder of March,
to finish within about 1 per cent of where it had begun, at 2878.7.
That was by no means a complete picture of the UK stock market, however. The
new indices of middle-sized and small capitalisation companies showed that,
while some of the leaders might have been struggling, there was ample
strength elsewhere. The FT-SE Mid 250 rose 9 per cent during the three-month
period, while the FT-SE SmallCap put on more like 13 per cent. During the
first quarter of the year it paid to think small.
Moreover it paid to think recovery. Among the 100 Footsie constituents,
battered companies like British Steel, Asda and British Petroleum led the
way. The biggest losers included Glaxo, Wellcome and, yes, Sainsbury. Over
the long term, Sainsbury shareholders have nothing at all to complain about,
but they may reflect that, had they switched to Asda at the turn of the
year, they would have been nearly 50 per cent better off by the end of
March. You don't get many better special offers than that.
Behind the ups and downs of the equity market lay similar movements in
government securities. The yield on long-term gilt-edged bonds began the
year at 8 3/4 per cent, trended strongly downwards to 8 1/4 per cent by
early March, then jumped back up to 8 1/2 per cent. The problem here was the
Budget on March 16, unveiling a borrowing requirement of Pounds 50bn for the
1993-94 financial year.
The Budget had another nasty element, this time a rather slow-burning one.
Norman Lamont introduced an obscure change in the rules on advance
corporation tax, which was cut from 25 to 20 per cent. This, he said, would
help companies. But, through a parallel reduction in the tax credit on
dividends, it also had the effect of clobbering tax-exempt investors,
ranging from giant pension funds to modest holders of personal equity plans.
Their gross income from UK dividends will fall by 6 1/4 per cent. Investors
scratched their heads over the implications, and the stock market finished
the quarter in a subdued mood.
In theory, the budget deficit is there to stimulate growth in the economy -
that is why Norman Lamont deferred his main tax increases until 1994-95 and
beyond. But if there is a miscalculation here the public sector could begin
to 'crowd out' the requirements of companies and individuals.
Could overseas stock markets offer better pickings in these conditions?
Certainly the pound sterling version of the FT-Actuaries World Index
outpaced the Footsie in the first quarter, putting on 9 per cent.
The surprise national winner with a 19 per cent gain was Japan,
unfortunately a market which British investors have largely been frightened
out of. Elsewhere Hong Kong continued to perform for those with strong
enough nerves to accept the risks of Chinese politics. But Wall Street, up 4
per cent, once again proved disappointingly sluggish.
Back home, the pressures from the budget deficit are also becoming obvious
in the savings deposit market, where interest rates on premium accounts have
slipped to around 4 per cent after standard-rate tax. In fact, at these
levels higher-rate taxpayers are no longer keeping up with underlying
inflation, which steadied at just under 3 1/2 per cent during the quarter
(although the headline rate, which is temporarily reduced by falls in
mortgage rates, dropped to a 26-year low of 1.7 per cent for January).
Building societies have been bristling over the renewed competition from
National Savings, where the chancellor unveiled a freshened-up range of
products after last month's Budget. They included the controversial First
Option Bond, which had been introduced and then withdrawn last year when it
proved uncomfortably hot for the building societies to compete against.
After a couple of dismal years, the building societies are sniffing a decent
upturn in their mortgage business. There may not be a significant
improvement in house prices - although they rose by nearly 1 per cent
between December and March, according to the Nationwide Index - but the
volume of house transactions could easily rise sharply, having collapsed
from 2.15m in 1988 to 1.14m last year.
If so, the building societies are going to need more funds, and they may
have to pay higher rates to savers to get them, perhaps negating, as far as
borrowers are concerned, any further fall in short-term money market rates.
But in the housing market, as elsewhere, the shadow of the recession is
gradually lifting. Industrial production and retail sales have begun to pick
up. Company order books are filling up again. For investors there have been
opportunities, but caution has been unrewarded, rather it has actually paid
you to be a little bit off your trolley.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930423

