FT934-11244

FT  02 NOV 93 / Tory peer keeps up pressure over rail sell-off


   By ROLAND RUDD


LORD PEYTON, the former Conservative transport minister, warned he would
continue to oppose any watering down of the government's obligations to the
railway pension fund, as the government cut short its Commons debate on rail
privatisation.
Mr Tony Newton, leader of the House, last night unexpectedly announced that
debate was not going beyond 10pm and that debates today would be
'guillotined' through a timetable measure.
Mr Tim Rathbone, a Tory backbencher and potential rail rebel, warned that
the government risked losing 'quite a considerable amount of good will' if
it did not allow sufficient time tomorrow for discussion of key changes
decided by peers.
The government plans to change the Lords amendment to the bill in order to
require BR bids to be vetoed if there are 'credible alternatives'.
Mr Nicholas Winterton, another potential rail rebel, said he would abstain
in tomorrow's vote on the Lords change to the franchise rules. He said the
government's legislation was 'misguided'.
While the government is not expected to lose the vote, its problems over
rail privatisation were exacerbated by last night's intervention by Lord
Peyton. He has already been instrumental in forcing ministers to retreat
over their initial refusal to allow BR to bid for any franchises.
Ministers hope to overturn a Lords amendment tabled by Lord Peyton,
reimposing an obligation on the government to secure the pension trustees'
written agreement before altering the government's financial commitments.
The government believes the amendment would in effect give the pension-fund
managers a veto over government expenditure. However, Lord Peyton said he
would continue to oppose the government measures. 'The whole thing has been
a messy process and is typical of the mess the government has got itself
into over its rail proposals.'
Earlier in the day the government outlined its plans to encourage BR
management buy-out teams to bid for franchises in co-operation with
private-sector companies.
Mr Roger Freeman, transport minister, said priority would be given to bids
where railway employees had a substantial interest. 'We are talking about
the management and staff of BR, either alone or in conjunction with other
private-sector companies, joining to bid for franchises.'
The government amendment ensuring priority for BR staff with a 'substantial
interest' in any franchise was backed by 321 votes to 283, a government
majority of 38.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931102

