FT934-11430

FT  01 NOV 93 / Ministers consider ending health pay review bodies


   By JAMES BLITZ


MINISTERS have begun to question whether the National Health Service's pay
review bodies have a long-term future, arguing that hospital trusts should
increasingly make direct pay settlements with doctors, consultants and other
medical staff.
For nearly 30 years, pay review bodies and the Whitley Councils have advised
the government on pay and conditions for doctors and other health service
professionals.
But as hospitals and other NHS organisations gain financial independence
under the recent reforms, ministers are privately suggesting that the pay
review bodies have no long-term future.
Government officials have been careful not to press publicly for the
withering away of the pay bodies. The British Medical Association has said
that these institutions play a key role and would view any move to abolish
them 'with grave disquiet'. But, according to a health department official,
trusts need to look to the future, and change the manner in which they make
pay settlements. 'They need to use their freedom to decide on terms and
conditions for consultants,' he said.
Treasury officials have also raised doubts about the future use of national
pay norms for the health service. 'Trusts are being given the right to
operate in their own way,' said a Treasury official. 'With further
developments in the NHS of that kind, there is a possibility that the role
of the review bodies will change.' The government's imposition of a pay
freeze for the whole of the public sector in the next financial year has
already dealt a blow to the role of the pay review bodies. This year a pay
rise of 1.5 per cent is being imposed.
Moreover, hospitals are already setting their own terms for direct pay deals
with some staff. Last month, an internal government review issued to health
authorities said that nearly a fifth of NHS trusts have introduced some form
of local pay for small groups of workers such as cleaners and healthcare
assistants.
Opposing the move, the BMA said that pay review bodies are vital in the
health service where there are bigger constraints on industrial action than
on other areas of the public sector. It also opposes the move on the grounds
of expense. 'If you were to have pay negotiations in every trust, it would
be extremely time-consuming and expensive,' it said.
But, according to a recent report published by the Social Market Foundation,
an independent pressure group, the health service reforms should squeeze out
any room for statutory pay reviews.
'With trusts having the authority to set terms, it is difficult to
understand exactly what functions Whitley and the pay review bodies
perform,' said Mr Ron Beadle, a lecturer in Human Resource Management at
Newcastle upon Tyne University. 'So long as they persist, they provide a
defence for inertia.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931101

