FT933-12678

FT  23 JUL 93 / Managua hits back at rebels who seized city


   By TIM COONE


   MANAGUA


NICARAGUAN troops, backed by helicopter gunships and armoured vehicles,
yesterday counter-attacked against rebels who seized control of a provincial
capital and barred the Pan- American highway on Wednesday.
Heavy fighting was reported to have killed 30 people and injured 70 in and
around the northern city of Estel. The fighting is the most serious
challenge to the authority of President Violeta Chamorro's government since
she took power from the left-wing Sandinistas in April 1990.
The rebel troops are left-wing veterans from the war in the 1980s when
US-backed Contras tried to overthrow the Sandinista government. They are led
by a former Sandinista major who commanded an elite counter-insurgency
battalion.
There is growing concern that if the army cannot regain control in the next
24 hours, further towns in the north will fall, and rioting might break out
in the capital and elsewhere. But, for the moment, the government has ruled
out state of emergency.
Calling themselves the Workers' and Peasants' Revolutionary Front (FROC),
the rebels are demanding finance for small farmers and craftsmen, and free
health and education and lifetime pensions for some 100,000 demobilised
troops. They also want to stop gold mines and sugar and banana plantations
being privatised.
The government has said it will not negotiate, and a spokesman for the army,
which continues under Sandinista control, described the rebels as
'delinquents' who would be pursued into the mountains and destroyed.
While condemning the rebels, the leadership of the Sandinista party (FSLN)
has called on the government to take urgent action to alleviate growing
poverty in the countryside.
Deep rifts have recently appeared within the party. The radical wing,
supported by leaders of trade unions and peasant farmers, wants to break
away from what has evolved into a coalition government of social democrats,
other centrists and FSLN moderates.
The army, under General Umberto Ortega, is firmly behind the government.
However, the government is now being attacked from both right and left as
austerity measures implemented over the past two years have cut social
services sharply and increased unemployment.
A loose alliance of right-wing and left-wing rebels in the mountains has
been skirmishing with the army for the past year. They are thought to number
around 1,500.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930723

