FT932-7032

FT  26 MAY 93 / Strengthen NHS buying power, says watchdog


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


STRUCTURAL changes to create stronger purchasing power in the National
Health Service's internal market are advocated by the Audit Commission
today.
Since the reforms took effect two years ago, most attention has been given
to the establishment of trust hospitals and other developments on the
provider side of the internal market's purchaser-provider split. The
government is trying to switch the emphasis to the purchaser side and stress
the importance of successful commissioning of services to give the
market-based reforms full effect.
The commission supports the concentration on purchasing. It says district
health authorities, freed from running hospitals, have a 'great opportunity
to alter the pattern of healthcare provision'.
District health authorities and general practitioners in fundholding
practices purchase hospital provision, while family health service
authorities are responsible for primary care services. Districts spend about
Pounds 25bn a year in England and Wales, and family authorities more than
Pounds 7bn.
District authorities and family authorities cannot combine under present
law. The commission says: 'Legislation is required to allow the formation of
single, comprehensive commissioning authorities.'
The reforms are forcing purchasing authorities to make more explicit
decisions about spending priorities, opening up a debate about the way in
which health service resources are rationed.
Authorities must, says the commission, be able to explain how spending
priorities are reached. 'Positive decisions about what to commission should
be openly set alongside any decisions about what is unaffordable.'
GP fundholders have independent purchasing power on behalf of their
patients. The commission says that, while they had made rapid innovative
progress and exercised considerable influence on hospitals, there was no
guarantee that their activities would be consistent with local district and
FHSA policies and it was 'not clear that they are being held sufficiently to
account'.
Their Health, Your Business. Practice Makes Perfect: the Role of the Family
Health Services Authority. Audit Commission. HMSO, Pounds 9 each.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930526

