FT932-6740

FT  27 MAY 93 / Policy framework meets mixed reaction


   By DANIEL GREEN, DAVID OWEN and JOHN AUTHERS


INDUSTRY broadly welcomed the science and technology white paper yesterday
as providing a clear policy framework for the next five to 10 years, while
academic bodies and opposition parties found room to both praise and condemn
it.
Especially popular among industrialists were measures intended to improve
the flow of knowledge to smaller companies, the establishment of a
technology foresight programme and the promise of help for projects that are
close to commercial exploitation.
Mr Ken Gray, chief executive of Thorn EMI's central research laboratories,
said: 'For the first time we are going to have science, technology and
engineering organised for one purpose: wealth creation.'
Mr Richard Freeman, chief economist at ICI, said: 'This is a major
opportunity to change the ethos and behaviour within and between
science-based industry and government.'
The Confederation of British Industry welcomed government recognition that
government-supported science and technology should be linked more closely to
industry. 'The country cannot afford elegant science and technology entirely
for its own sake.'
However, Mr Andrew Boswell, technical director of computer company ICL,
warned against trying to direct basic research to industrial ends. He added
that better co-ordination between government, industry and academia must not
mean more paperwork.
The Labour party condemned the white paper as 'a complete failure' and a
'bitter disappointment' to scientists, while welcoming some of its specific
proposals.
Mr Lewis Moonie, the party's science spokesman, said it failed to meet
expectations 'on almost every key issue facing British science and
engineering today'.
He complained that no extra money was to be made available to meet even the
document's 'limited' aspirations.
Mr Moonie said 80 per cent of government research and development spending
was still left outside the Department of Trade and Industry's control.
Mr Don Foster, the Liberal Democrat science spokesman, said the paper
promised much but delivered very little. He said Britain was the only
country in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, with
the exception of Turkey, where research and development funding as a
proportion of gross domestic product had declined.
Professional bodies were divided. The Institute of Professionals, Managers
and Specialists said it 'threatens every government laboratory with
privatisation'.
But the Engineering Council and the four engineering institutions (chemical,
civil, electrical and mechanical) welcomed the arrival of science and
technology 'at the top of the political agenda'.
Reaction from the academic community was mixed. Dr David Harrison, chairman
of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, welcomed the pledge to
continue dual funding for research. He said: 'We also support the philosophy
that much of government-funded scientific research should underpin wealth
creation. Competitiveness and economic recovery depend on investment in
innovation.'
However, he attacked the failure to set up a humanities funding council,
which he said would have protected funds 'against other claims on university
finances'.
Students and lecturers voiced concern about the proposal that research
councils should make 'fewer awards' for three-year doctorates.
Several industrialists, however, felt the increased emphasis on masters'
degrees would improve science graduates training for industry work.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930527

