FT932-7026

FT  26 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Warning on Swan Hunter


   By CHRIS TIGHE


MR TIM SAINSBURY, the industry minister, was warned yesterday that there is
growing concern at the uncertainty hanging over Swan Hunter, the Tyneside
shipbuilder which went into receivership nearly a fortnight ago.
Mr Alastair Balls, chief executive of Tyne and Wear Development Corporation,
told Mr Sainsbury at a meeting in London that a rapid response from the
Ministry of Defence on whether work could continue beyond Friday on
outfitting three frigates was vital to maintain cashflow.
Continuing work on the frigates offers Swans a chance of winning new orders
and finding a buyer as a going concern.
Negotiations between Price Waterhouse, the receiver, and the MoD are
continuing. 'Time is perilously short,' Mr Balls said after his meeting with
Mr Sainsbury - who visits Tyneside today.
The development corporation is backing calls for Swans to survive as a
shipbuilder. Mr Balls said that Mr Sainsbury had said demands for the
company, currently designated a warship yard, to be given access to
Intervention Funding so it could pursue merchant vessel orders were being
'closely examined'.
According to research released yesterday, Swans owes almost Pounds 1m to
direct suppliers in North Tyneside alone. A survey by North Tyneside
council's economic development service of 40 of the company's 44 direct
suppliers in the borough says they employ 1,542 people; businesses
representing 70 per cent of these employees said they face a significant
impact if Swans closes.
The research, the first attempt to quantify the knock-on effect of Swans'
possible demise, reveals that it owes Pounds 904,000 to 31 of the companies;
some of the other nine, who declined to disclose financial details, are also
believed to be owed substantial sums. Of the 40 surveyed, 82.5 per cent said
they were owed money.
Most said it was too soon to quantify job losses if Swans closed. But one
business, a supplier to since 1937, planned to cut 10 jobs immediately.
The report, Cutting the Supply Line, says job losses are likely in
high-technology supply companies in sectors such as hydraulic equipment,
cabling and marine engineering. In total, it says, Swans has 140 direct
suppliers in Tyne and Wear and many local companies supply them.
It remains unclear when an announcement will be made about the frigates.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930526

