FT934-11357

FT  01 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Tough task for a master of low profile -
The new chairman of GPA who is not averse to taking risks


   By ROLAND RUDD


MR DENNIS Stevenson, the new chairman of GPA, is not about to move into the
group's sumptuous London offices in Pall Mall. As a non-executive he does
not believe he should have an office at all.
Nor will he be jetting across the Atlantic or be photographed at charity
galas. His stark and somewhat puritanical view of management is in marked
contrast to his predecessor Mr Tony Ryan, and his glittering array of
non-executive directors, who included Lord Lawson and Sir John Harvey-Jones.
Whereas many of the old management were rarely out of the public gaze,
albeit not always of their own choosing, Mr Stevenson is the master of the
low profile.
'Our objective is to have a 'PC Plod style of management' getting on with
the business out of the limelight,' he said.
Friends of Mr Stevenson have been asking him why he decided to take on the
chairmanship of GPA, wondering whether it could become a recovery stock. As
far as Mr Stevenson is concerned it is far too early to start talking about
the potential long-term value of its as yet unlisted shares.
He was attracted to GPA because he sees it is a novel piece of financial
reconstruction of 'vital importants' to stabilise the company. Furthermore,
a restructured GPA could also help protect the airline industry and would be
able to pay back some of the loans made by the 139 banks which financed the
company through its massive expansion at the turn of the decade.
If that sounds a daunting task for a company with debts of Dollars 5.8bn
(Pounds 3.84bn) Mr Stevenson replies that people have GPA out of proportion.
'The only big thing is the noughts,' he says.
All he will be doing is managing a financial asset - it is sub-contracting
the leasing to the GE Capital subsidiary, GE Capital Aviation Services under
the terms of GPA's rescue deal with GE Electric of the US.
However, Mr Stevenson is the first to admit that up until a few months ago
he knew nothing about aircraft leasing, prompting some to wonder why GE
asked him to chair the new company in the first place.
The initial approach was made by Mr Ryan, who first got to know Mr Stevenson
while he was advising the Bank of Ireland, where Mr Ryan used to be a
non-executive. Six months ago Mr Ryan made an informal approach to Mr
Stevenson to parachute in as a trouble shooter in the role of chief
executive.
He declined. He had no problem in juggling several part-time jobs at once,
but he has always been very selective about what boards he chose to join.
Aparting from chairing his own consultancy group SRU, and the Tate Gallery,
Mr Stevenson currently has non-executive directorships with Pearson, which
owns the Financial Times, and J Rothschild and Assurance and Manpower
(formerly Blue Arrow). He also sits on the Takeover Panel.
According to GE it was this 'solid, impressive curriculum vitae' that made
Mr Stevenson so appealing as a prospective GPA chairman. Furthermore, Mr
Stevenson is not averse to taking risks. He took on Mr Tony Berry at Blue
Arrow in a highly personalised battle and won control of the board and
chaired the Intermediate Technology Development Group, a Third World charity
which by eschewing big development projects was never assured of success.
So last month, at 6am in the morning, Mr Gary Wendt, chief executive of GE
Capital, met Mr Stevenson and Mr Ryan in the United Airlines VIP lounge at
Heathrow Airport. It was at that meeting that Mr Stevenson was finally
persuaded to take on the chairmanship of GPA and to try and bring the
stability seen as essential to the long-term growth of the airline industry.
Mr Stevenson will be paid for one day's work every week and will have the
extra incentive of a success fee. While not disclosing his salary, he says
he will he charging considerably less than he charges at SRU, where he is
reputed to be one of the highest paid consultants.
He does not believe the downside is too onerous. If he makes a big mistake,
such as diversifying into shipping leasing, for example, and thereby
compounding GPA's problems Mr Stevenson feels he would deserve a loss of
reputation.
But since he was not responsible for the past mistakes, he is not fearful
for his reputation if GPA is eventually unable to meet its demanding debt
repayments.
Mr Stevenson would not have attempted the challenge without Mr Patrick
Blaney, the 39-year-old chief executive, who he believes was untainted by
GPA's past mistakes. He also made it a condition of him accepting the
chairmanship that Mr Michael Davies, a non-executive director, from British
Airways, also joined GPA's board. Mr Davies is an old Stevenson ally at Blue
Arrow where they combined to oust Mr Berry.
The company still faces a tough time if it is to cut borrowings to a
manageable level. Although it is deferring Dollars 750m of debt, this will
largely fall due in September 1996. In the year to March 1997 GPA must repay
or refinance debt of Dollars 2.36bn.
It will be no small achievement, irrespective of any upturn in the airline
market, if Mr Stevenson can steer GPA through the next four years.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

931101

