FT934-8915

FT  12 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Minister to lobby EU over
Spanish abattoirs


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


MR NICHOLAS Soames, UK agriculture minister, said he would protest strongly
to the European Commission about conditions in Spanish abattoirs after the
RSPCA released undercover videos of the grisly ways used to butcher
livestock.
Mr Soames said he was 'appalled' by the film of lambs being paralysed by
having their spinal chords severed with a screwdriver. 'It is completely
unacceptable. It is in flagrant abuse of the European rules and
regulations,' he said.
New European rules on abattoirs came into effect at the beginning of the
year stating that all animals must be stunned before slaughter.
Mr Alastair Mews, assistant chief veterinary officer at the RSPCA, said the
films showed that, although paralysed, many animals killed in Spanish
abattoirs were fully conscious when their throats were cut. 'I'm a hardened
vet, I've seen some ghastly things, but this is the worst ever,' Mr Mews
said. 'It's nothing short of organised barbarity.'
The RSPCA has visited six abattoirs in Spain with the same methods in use at
all of them. 'There are pigs which have not been stunned properly, they are
coming round while their throats are being cut and screaming,' said Mr Mews.
The organisation plans to put its findings to the Commission in the hope it
will tighten up enforcement of animal welfare rules in abattoirs across the
European Union.
Mr Mews said he believed Britain should withhold the export of live animals
to Spain in protest at conditions in the abattoir industry. Around 2m live
sheep are expected to be exported this year to Spain and France - about 20
per cent of the UK's total sheep-meat exports.
The RSPCA is urging farm ministers to introduce restrictions on the
transport of live animals because of the appalling conditions in which they
are kept. The organisation is pressing for journey times to be kept to eight
hours.
Mr Mews said that animals bound for slaughter on the continent often
travelled for up to 40 hours in inhumane conditions without food or water.
He said Germany, Holland, Luxembourg and the Scandinavian countries had
joined in enforcing maximum journey times and he wants the UK government to
follow.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

931112

