FT934-8444

FT  16 NOV 93 / Top China meeting 'falls a bit flat'


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


CHINA'S just-ended Central Committee meeting was billed the most important
since the 1978 party plenum which launched the country's reform drive, but a
bland communique issued after four days' talks provided little substance.
The tone of the communique, which contented itself with repeating
well-established positions, has fuelled speculation about divisions in the
leadership over the pace and scope of economic reform.
Delays in releasing a promised 50-article manifesto of reform suggest
further discussion is required, hence the lack of detail in the statement
and the conspicuous absence of supporting documents.
A Western official in Beijing said the much-heralded third plenary session
of the 14th Central Committee appeared to have 'fallen a bit flat.' There
appears to be 'quite a lot more sorting out to do,' the official added.
Among contentious issues debated in closed session by the 182-member
committee were those dealing with a new federal-style tax regime to divide
revenues between the centre and the provinces, and a re-definition of the
limits on reform of faltering state enterprises to facilitate a process of
corporatisation and privatisation.
Both these issues are certain to have produced some sharp exchanges among
China's rulers. Provincial leaders are wary about allowing Beijing to
strengthen its grip on the purse strings through far-reaching reforms of the
tax system.
A state enterprise lobby is nervous about proposed reforms of the public
sector, fearing that additional pressures on faltering industries will drive
many into bankruptcy and cause widespread unemployment and social unrest.
Many officials also owe their party status to their association with
industries which are having difficulty adapting to the demands of a market
economy. These officials are fighting to preserve their fiefdoms.
Western officials say it is premature to judge the importance of this latest
party plenum until supporting documents have been released, but they add the
delays show there are significant pockets of resistance to the reformers
such as Mr Zhu Rongji, senior vice-premier in charge of the economy.
Editorial Comment, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931116

