FT933-12572

FT  23 JUL 93 / The Property Market: Ratner's new jewel - The entrepreneur's
latest venture


   By VANESSA HOULDER


Gerald Ratner, the jeweller who once famously described one of his products
as 'crap', does not appear to have lost his taste for controversy.
Nine months after leaving Ratners (now called Signet), Mr Ratner is again
raising eyebrows with his choice of passage back into the retail industry.
He is attempting to convert Tobacco Dock, the failed shopping centre in
London's Wapping, into a US-style 'factory outlet mall'.
Factory outlet shopping - where manufacturers sell surplus stock directly to
the public at discounts of between 40 per cent and 60 per cent - is fiercely
resisted by many retailers. Unlike the US, where factory outlet malls are
typically at least an hour's drive away from a city, in the UK towns are so
close to each other that such outlets would inevitably compete with town
centres, say retailers.
Mr Ratner's task is to persuade manufacturers, which are inevitably
reluctant to offend retailers, that Tobacco Dock will not threaten their
markets. He is sending brochures to 1,000 manufacturers and admits that he
has to 'break down some barriers' to win over prospective tenants.
Mr Ratner is confident he will win the argument over Tobacco Dock's
perceived threat to existing London shopping centres. 'Docklands is not a
successful place for shopping. It will not cannibalise other markets,' he
said.
That much cannot be disputed. Tobacco Dock was in receivership from November
1990 until last October when it was bought for Pounds 12m by Bisley
Properties, a private group which took on Mr Ratner as an adviser. Tobacco
Dock's failure was blamed on its inaccessibility and poor transport links.
Tobacco Dock's location could remain a problem: the solution depends on
persuading well-known brand-name manufacturers to participate in Mr Ratner's
factory mall in a bid to attract shoppers from as wide an area as possible.
Mr Ratner is convinced that there will be no difficulty in attracting
shoppers. 'People will be coming down from Scotland,' he says rather
implausibly.
Mr Ratner's move into factory outlet shopping follows a recent visit to the
US. He became convinced that the success of factory outlets in the US could
be replicated in the UK (where such outlets exist, but on a relatively small
scale). He joined Bisley Properties on his return to the UK.
The logic that persuaded Mr Ratner that the UK is ready for factory outlet
centres has also impressed a handful of developers from the US and the UK
which are working on such schemes in Britain.
But Mr Ratner thinks that Tobacco Dock, which could have its first
manufacturers in place in two months, will be Britain's first US-style mall.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930723

