FT934-8617

FT  15 NOV 93 / Clarke to boost initiative on private finance: Call to
continue tax allowances


   By KEVIN BROWN and JOHN WILLMAN


THE TREASURY will try to breathe new life today into its faltering private
finance initiative, launched a year ago by Mr Norman Lamont, then
chancellor.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the present chancellor, is expected to stress the
government's firm commitment to the initiative to involve private capital in
public projects in a speech to the CBI conference.
Mr Clarke will also publish guidelines for joint venture projects, and
announce the membership of a working group to investigate problems
identified by the private sector.
The working group, which will include ministers and representatives from
government departments, will be chaired by a senior businessman.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, the financial secretary to the Treasury, will give
further details of the government's evolving approach to private finance in
a speech to an infrastructure conference in London.
Mr Dorrell is expected to say that the government increasingly views itself
as a facilitator of projects rather than a provider of services.
He will signal that the government wants to achieve a substantial expansion
of the private finance initiative by involving the private sector in
virtually all new infrastructure projects.
Only a handful of public-sector projects involving private finance have
started, prompting criticism from business leaders, including Mr Howard
Davies, CBI director-general. The lack of progress will be criticised in a
pamphlet to be published this week by the Tory Reform Group, which is on the
left of the party.
Mr Charles Williams, a financial consultant who wrote the pamphlet says:
'For the initiative to remain credible, early commitment to joint funding of
a high-profile project with a firm timetable is needed.'
Rail projects offer the most promising opportunities for mixed funding, Mr
Williams says, but investors are currently deterred by long-term revenue
risks and the costs of competitive bidding. The Treasury must be prepared to
bear some of the revenue risk where traffic declines.
Private Finance, Public Service. Tory Reform Group, Sheraton House, Castle
Park, Cambridge CB3 0AX. Pounds 5.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931115

