FT934-8387

FT  16 NOV 93 / Technology: A catalogue of developments - Computer moves in
the British Library


   By GRAHAM CLAYTON


Computers can prise out nuggets of information from databases at speeds that
narrow information searches down to seconds. This was just what the British
Library wanted to achieve by computerising its catalogues, a process which
has just been completed.
But the volume of information to be handled was vast. The size of the
catalogues from the library's various sites - such as the reading room at
the British Museum, the science library in central London and the newspaper
library in north London - was one of the biggest problems to be overcome. It
claims to have 150m items in its collections, ranging from papyrus to
CD-Rom, in every written language.
Most local libraries have a computer system to keep track of items loaned
out, but in many cases the only way users can see what is in the catalogue
is by searching card indexes or microfiches. This is because putting an
existing catalogue on to a computer system is time-consuming and expensive.
Another problem is that the British Library must also cater for
inexperienced users. The solution is its recently unveiled Online Public
Access Catalogue (OPAC) which uses equipment provided by Digital Equipment
as part of a Pounds 1m sponsorship
deal.
This enables the user to search catalogues by responding to questions on a
computer. Using software developed in-house, the system asks for details
such as subject, author, title or publisher and finds the relevant material.
The user looks at this and asks the system to note items of interest.
This throws up a further problem. Since much of the material is of foreign
origin, searches must be possible in the appropriate language. If a document
was published in Russian, the system can display a Cyrillic 'keyboard' on
the terminal screen and this can be used to type in a request. The user's
first language may not be English, so the system will be able to talk to
users in one of six languages, currently English, four other western
European languages and Russian.
OPAC covers 6m items from the catalogues of recent material in the science
and humanities collections - 80 per cent of the printed books held in
London. The system, which has just gone live, also includes earlier
humanities material and the recent printed music catalogue.
OPAC will really come into its own when the British Library moves to its new
site at St Pancras, due to be completed after lengthy delays in 1996.
Equipped with 150 terminals, it will be linked to a book-ordering and a
mechanical handling system. The aim will be to have 90 per cent of all
requested material delivered to the users within half an hour.
The system will also be linked to reader admission software so that it can
build up an awareness of the level of skill of each individual user. By this
means, it will be able to offer much more help to novices, while allowing
advanced users to build up complex searches with the minimum of prompting.
One further development means some users will not have to visit the library
at all. A trial has just begun which uses the Joint Academic Network (Janet)
to make OPAC available to other libraries, initially at University College
London and Brunel University, near London.
At first, librarians will act as gatekeepers to handle the system at these
sites, but there is no reason why the facility should not be made available
later on networks outside these libraries. The system will be formally
launched on Janet at the beginning of next year with about 20 UK
institutions taking part. There are also plans to offer similar access over
public networks such as Internet.
Most users will welcome the advantages the new technology will bring, but
some will miss the studious atmosphere of the old reading rooms. Maybe they
can compensate by using a home computer to browse through the catalogues
surrounded by their own books.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

931116

