FT934-10135

FT  06 NOV 93 / Food & Drink: The '83 clarets - excellent drinking / Wine


   By EDMUND PENNING-ROWSELL


THE BORDEAUX 1983 claret vintage followed a torrid summer that caused severe
rot, but was saved by a fine, completely dry harvest in September: not much
less than the then record 3.5m hectolitres in 1982.
But after that year's great success there was comparatively little demand
for the similarly priced '83s, which since have always been overshadowed by
their predecessor. En primeur buyers who expected to make a profit have been
sadly disappointed. The duty-paid, delivered first-growth prices ranged from
about Pounds 360 to Pounds 415 a dozen, but can now be bought at auction for
Pounds 300 plus 10 per cent buyer's premium, although Cheval-Blanc and
Mouton-Rothschild are around Pounds 375, and Ch Margaux that has a special
reputation sells for more than Pounds 400. Petrus of course, was hors
concours.
However, that does not reflect the quality of the wines, which, lighter than
the '82s, are much more developed and mostly make excellent drinking today:
no small recommendation for fine-vintage claret. This was demonstrated in
the annual tasting dinner of the ten-year-old first growths, attended by six
people, including two Masters of Wine.
The bottles were opened at least one hour in advance, and the right-bank
wines about two hours. The usual sequence was followed, from Haut-Brion to
Petrus. But, as often, there was a problem over the Haut-Brion for, at
10-years-old, it frequently has not developed its potential, and seems a
little severe compared with the more ample Medocs. Yet, when a few years ago
the same group tasted the 1945s and the 1961s, Haut-Brion was narrowly
second to Lafite on both occasions.
Here, then, are my notes, made at the table, followed by representative
comments from the other five. As the colours were all full, with Margaux and
Petrus exceptionally deep, but Ausone less so, comments on these have been
omitted.
Haut-Brion. Closed Grave nose, good fruit, flavour not yet complete, but
perhaps near best - nose sweet, soft, nice weight of flavour, touch of
iodine; clear, crisp nose, less intense than in some vintages, delicious
now, not sure about future; good tannin, good length, very enjoyable
tonight; lovely sweet nose, delicious but lacks backbone; soft and gentle.
Margaux. Fragrant, rich nose, full taste, plenty behind it, but will still
develop - crisp, fruity nose, lovely scent, flavour tannic, full-bodied,
good length; glorious aroma, supple yet powerful flavour, masses of fruit,
almost youthful; lots of tannin in mouth, but luscious fruit; wonderful
nose, unyielding palate, drink end of century; somewhat undistinguished
taste now.
Lafite. Distinguished Medoc nose, elegant, typical taste, at best but will
continue - bricky, harmonious nose, good fruit, excellent weight, with
length, tannic; dryer on nose than Margaux, like most could be drunk
already, satiny finish scented; plenty of fruit, good dry finish, delicious
wine; less intense than Margaux but elegant nose, dry on palate, but good
finish, delicious wine; attractive, drinkable.
Mouton-Rothschild. Nose not very developed, but velvety flavour, very
drinkable, but lacks concentration - dusty nose at first but spicy, but good
fruit, fragrant finish; good colour, slightly odd nose, reminiscent of soy
sauce, acidity pronounced, but very long, perfume grew in glass; lots of
fruit on palate, but less intense than Lafite, falls away in mouth; clarety
nose, not very open, nice sweet palate, easy drinking; rich, sweet
attractive.
Latour. Closed but rich nose, big wine, the most tannic of all, but will
develop, and the one with the most potential - classic nose, slightly
chocolaty sweet, good texture; lovely fruit; the most powerful of the lot,
sweet, full and rich, flatteringly fruity for Latour, very long; sweet and
powerful on the nose, huge, tannin and extract on palate, but drinkable and
a pleasure to drink; blackcurrants, big tannin with dried-fruits flavour;
very young nose and taste, fruity and rich.
Ausone. Sweet and rich, agreeable but not very distinguished - autumn leaves
nose, nice, open-knit texture; more acidity needed, attractive but slightly
sludgy; sweet on nose and tasted rather glyceriney; nose almost gamey,
tasting like a cough mixture; very sweet, not much body.
Cheval-Blanc. Rich, fruity engaging nose, sweet, round and fruity, but lacks
finish - good but restrained nose, sweet, good texture and length; rather
simple though, well-balanced, thick, velvety, somewhat 82-like in build,
with acidity that Ausone lacked, but less depth than Cheval-Blanc usually
has at this stage; charming nose, deep Merlot fruit, silky taste, very
well-balanced deep warm, round flavour, good but hard finish, tastes brought
together in synthesis, but perhaps a little dull.
Petrus. Very rich, but unconcentrated nose. Pomerol-style taste and fruity
but lacks intensity - Bricky, cheesy nose, full flavour but lean for Petrus,
very tannic; Earl-Grey tea flavour, but quite unresolved, slightly
locked-in; not porty but most beguiling, quite floral nose, very firm and
generous in the mouth, lovely length; closed nose, medicinal flavour;
interesting but fades on the palate, slight weakness at centre.
After all glasses had been refreshed, the order of preference was taken:
from one to eight, with the lowest number top. Although all agreed that
there was no bad wine among them, the difference in ratings were more marked
that usual.
One taster marked three wines equal first, and Petrus particularly
disappointed two tasters. This is how they finished: 1 Latour, 2
Mouton-Rothschild, 3 Margaux and Cheval-Blanc equal, 5 Lafite, 6 Haut-Brion,
7 Petrus, 8 Ausone. My own number one was Margaux, followed by Latour.
Ten-year-old wines may vary from bottle to bottle, and only one bottle of
each wine was opened.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

931106

