FT932-13282

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (13): Three new ways
for serious investors to slice up the market - Measurement of UK equities'
performance has become increasingly complex. But the ordinary saver should
try to keep life simple / Equities, The UK Indices


   By BARRY RILEY


YOU STRUGGLE along with the old stock market indices for years, and then
suddenly three new ones come along almost together.
That must be how it appears to the average private investor, who has seen
the FT-SE SmallCap index appear from the beginning of this year to join the
FT-SE Mid 250 and the FT-SE 350 which first appeared last October.
The result is that there is now a formidable range of indices published each
day in the FT, covering just the UK equity market, let alone the markets
overseas.
Apart from the three new ones, there are the venerable FT 30-Share (or
Ordinary Share) Index, the FT-Actuaries All-Share Index and also the UK
Index published as part of the FT-Actuaries World Index series.
If that is not enough, the All-Share is divided into more than 40 different
sector indices, and the FT-SE 350 is split into 35 separate industry baskets
(although only four of these are regularly published in the Financial
Times).
Stock market indices go back a long way. Charles Dow began publishing an
average of New York-traded railroad stocks back in 1884, and 12 years later
he devised his Dow Jones Industrial Average which is still the most popular
measure of the ups and downs of Wall Street.
In the UK, the London and Cambridge Economic Service also started an
industrial index at the end of the 19th century, though only monthly; and
the actuarial profession got into the index business in 1928 with a monthly
Actuaries Index. But it was 1935 before the Financial Times began publishing
a daily index.
It was found that a stock market index was a potent marketing tool, drawing
attention to the market and enabling investors to grasp a single number
rather than cope with a confusing jumble of share prices all moving in
different ways.
However, for decades there were serious technological limitations. Charles
Dow used a crude average of stock prices because it was easy to calculate,
but this was a bit like averaging apples and oranges. The British actuaries
had a better structure, but could only calculate the numbers once a month.
The FT-30 used a more sophisticated geometrical model, in which adjusted
share prices were multiplied together, which could be done fairly quickly
using log tables. This proved perfectly adequate for day-to-day movements in
normal circumstances. Eventually it was being calculated hourly by hand.
However, the 30-Share Index had one or two quirks. If a constituent went
bust, the whole index would collapse to zero; so weak companies had to be
whisked out of the index before too much damage was done.
Moreover, the construction of the index made it inevitable that over the
long term it would rise more slowly than the total value of shares on the
stock exchange (that is, the aggregate market capitalisation). It was a good
tool for measuring short-term movements, but not the long-term performance
of actual portfolios.
By the early 1960s, advances in technology made it possible to attempt
something much more ambitious. The actuaries and the FT joined to launch the
FT-Actuaries series. This highly sophisticated set of indices, in which the
constituents are weighted according to their market capitalisation, and
which therefore behaves like a real portfolio, has set the pattern for
almost all subsequent indices, both in the UK and internationally.
More recently information technology has developed at an accelerating pace.
Share prices no longer have to be individually collected (at one time they
were chalked on a board by a man touring the jobbers' pitches on the floor
of the Stock Exchange), but are continually fed into a computer network. So
the 'real time', or minute-by-minute, index has become practicable. The FT
30-Share Index is now calculated this way.
Stock market indices have therefore now moved into a third stage of
development. Whereas the first was to publicise overall market movements and
the second was to provide benchmarks for portfolio performance, the third is
to provide the raw material for so-called derivative products such as
futures and options, and for the quantitative (or computer-based) techniques
used by modern professional investment managers.
The first of these indices, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 Index,
was launched in 1984 and was the UK's pioneering real-time index. Based on
the 100 biggest stocks in terms of market valuation (updated each quarter),
it was designed to be the basis for futures and options contracts.
The very latest indices reflect the desire of sophisticated investors to
slice up the stock market in different ways, according to the sizes of the
companies. It has long been accepted that the chemicals sector, say, might
move differently from the life insurance sector. Now, investors keep track
of big companies, as opposed to small companies or even mid-sized companies.
But it would be ambitious of private investors to attempt to keep up with
all this. The amateur investor will be much happier with a single index that
he knows and understands. He or she should be cautious about the complex
matrix of sector and size indices that provide great scope for the
computer-based boffin, but may provide no clear message about whether the
market is going up or down or is just churning in what the buffs call a
'sector rotation'.
Probably Charles Dow would have found it all rather hard going, too.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

930423

