FT932-7126

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (3): Weakest will go to
the wall - The boilermaking industry is changing, but at its own speed


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Along with other parts of the power generating equipment industry, boiler
makers are having to adapt to changing product and technology trends -
environmental pressures, the growth in popularity of combined cycle power
generation - and are also reorganising themselves to become more
competitive.
But, in comparison with newer sectors such as gas turbines, the boiler
industry has travelled less far down the road towards global concentration.
As one of the oldest, and - until recently, at least - less sophisticated
sectors of power engineering, national buying preferences have prevailed
longer than elsewhere.
Worldwide, there are about 50 companies capable of producing boilers for
power plants - the boilers are traditionally used for raising steam in
coal-fired generation but are also used in combined cycle: the waste heat
steam generators that link the gas turbine to the steam turbine are
basically boilers.
In Europe alone there are 20-30 producers and manufacturing overcapacity has
been a serious problem. A study for the European Commission in 1988 found
that capacity utilisation by Europe's boiler manufacturers averaged just 20
per cent, compared with 60 per cent for the turbine generator sector.
In Europe and worldwide, the situation has improved since then, due partly
to mergers worldwide, to improved world market conditions and also to
restructuring within individual companies in Europe and North America.
Among the various deals that have more closely tailored boiler manufacturing
capacity to worldwide demand or, at the very least, rationalised the
industry's structure, were:
Asea Brown Boveri's takeover of Combustion Engineering of the US and its
recent acquisition in Prvni brnenska strojirna in the Czech Republic;
The integration of France's Stein Industrie and EVT of Germany - each of
which had themselves developed through mergers - under one roof as the main
elements of GEC Alsthom's boilers and environmental systems business;
Last year's joint venture in boilers between Deutsche Babcock and Lentjes, a
subsidiary of Metallgesellschaft; Deutsche Babcock had acquired Riley Stoker
of the US in 1990.
The acquisition by Finland's Ahlstrom Pyropower of Outokumpu's boiler
business and of Fakop, a leading Polish boiler manufacturer.
Last year's acquisition by Germany's Steinmuller of a 40 per cent stake in
Tampella's boiler-making business. Tampella, based in Finland, had
previously bought Keeler in the US.
There has also been thoroughgoing slimming and refocusing at many of the
larger companies. The workforce at Babcock Energy's main boiler plant at
Renfrew in Scotland, for example, has been reduced by 800 in the past five
years to just under 1,200 and the factory is a true low-cost producer, says
Mr John Prosser, executive director of Babcock Energy's power engineering
division.
The workforce at Combustion Engineering has been cut by about 15 per cent to
under 5,000, although the entity no longer exists as such within ABB. The
business, says Mr Kevin Pilon, vice-president for strategic development at
ABB's boiler business, is 'down to the core, and perhaps now in a small
build-up phase' for employment.
Outsourcing of less critical components has been stepped up, and the
business has been reorganised on a profit centre basis, and given new
management at profit centre levels.
Worldwide, the major boiler producers are Combustion Engineering, Foster
Wheeler and Babcock & Wilcox, all of the US; Ahlstrom, Babcock Energy, and
Deutsche Babcock from Europe and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries of Japan. The
Babcock companies are unconnected, albeit linked in the past.
Then come dozens of national producers, some of which are active in
international markets.
Most observers believe there both could and should be further
rationalisation in the boiler industry, with weaker players going to the
wall and companies with niche technologies either remaining independent or
finding financial security within larger groups.
But the pace at which some of the national producers will be squeezed will
depend critically on how quickly some of the more protectionist markets will
be opened up. Countries such as France and Italy, for example, have never
been easy for foreign suppliers.
Meanwhile, overcapacity remains and the strong competition for orders means
that prices for power plant boilers have been stable or declining in real
terms, according to Mr Pilon.
He points out, though, that there are ways for boiler makers to
differentiate themselves. One measure of competitiveness is an effective
cycle time strategy - the ability to deliver quicker. Differing product
strategies add another twist to the competition.
Companies such as ABB make a virtue of offering a turnkey package of
virtually everything needed to build a power station. Siemens and
Westinghouse, in contrast, buy in their boilers.
Then there are companies which concentrate almost exclusively on boilers, at
least as regards their power equipment business.
Mr Prosser points out that Babcock Energy has supplied boilers with ABB, and
in one of the biggest recent power plant contracts, the Dollars 1.25bn Black
Point combined cycle project in Hong Kong won by GEC Alsthom and General
Electric, Babcock won an Pounds 80m contract to supply the heat-recovery
steam generators because of the customer's strong preference for its
equipment.
Inevitably, the outlook for the boiler industry over the next few years
mirrors that of the power generating equipment market generally. Overall,
says Mr Prosser, the next two years will be tough but there are big market
opportunities in Asia and the Pacific Rim.
Naturally, therefore, the western boiler makers are stepping up local
manufacturing to help win orders and because it makes economic sense to
build at least some of the components close to the market place.
ABB, for example, has a boiler fabrication joint venture in Indonesia, and
Babcock Energy, says Mr Prosser, is looking for partners in China and
Malaysia to supply plant such as flues and ductwork.
Babcock is currently bidding jointly with Wuhan Boiler Works in central
China for the Ezhou anthracite-fired power station. Again Wuhan will be
manufacturing some of the less critical parts if the consortium wins the
contract.
As for technological developments, there is still considerable debate as to
how environmental pressures will affect the boiler industry. The boiler
producers have already made important contributions to clean coal burning,
whether through the development of low-Nox burners or through flue gas
desulphurisation equipment which removes sulphur dioxide. The big companies
are trying to keep their options open, as it is not clear what the relative
long-term importance will be in the market place for such clean coal
technologies as integrated gas combined cycle, circulating fluidised bed
boilers, traditional pulverised coal boilers with scrubbers, or such
combinations as pressurised fluidised bed boilers linked to IGCC.
GEC Alsthom's Stein Industrie recently won an order in France for a 250MW
CFB boiler, which it claims is the world's largest. Mr Eric Oakes, Ahlstrom
Pyropower's president, says the company has orders for two 230MW boilers in
Poland, and says 300MW boilers are attainable.
'If a CFB boiler can match the price of a pulverised coal boiler with a
scrubber, it can be the boiler of choice as the emissions are lower,' says
Mr Oakes. He suggests that the future could see IGCC repowering existing gas
turbine plants as the price of gas rises, while CFBs could be used to
re-equip existing coal-fired plants or fitted to new ones. 'There is room
for both in the future,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930525

