FT932-216

FT  30 JUN 93 / Gloomy US figures send shares down


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


A SERIES of gloomy economic statistics raised further questions yesterday
about the momentum of the US recovery and prompted a decline in share
prices, with the Dow Jones closing 11.35 points down at 3,518.85.
The biggest surprise was a 21 per cent drop in new home sales between April
and May, the largest monthly decline in more than a decade. Sales fell in
all regions except the west.
A slowdown was expected after an erratic 21.5 per cent rise between March
and April, but analysts had not expected the previous gain to be wiped out.
Sales in the first five months of this year are barely ahead of the same
period last year. Most forecasters had expected a big gain following falls
in mortgage rates to the lowest level in 20 years.
Separate figures for the consumer confidence index showed a three-point
decline this month to 58.9, the lowest since last October and sharply down
from a recent high of 76.7 in January.
In a strong recovery, the index would be expected to rise above 100.
The Conference Board, the New York-based business analysis group that
compiles the index, predicted the economy would remain weak. Its latest
survey of 5,000 households indicated consumers were less positive both about
prevailing economic conditions and in their expectations for the next six
months. Buying plans had been scaled down.
Some analysts believe the weakness of confidence is a reflection of
uncertainty caused by the bickering in Washington over President Bill
Clinton's deficit-cutting economic plan.
Sales of many items, such as cars, have held up better than consumer
confidence figures might suggest.
In a third sign of weakness, the Commerce Department yesterday reported a
0.3 per cent decline in the official index of leading economic indicators in
May, the third decline in five months.
The leading index is intended to predict economic conditions six to nine
months ahead but most analysts see it as a measure of the current economic
state.
Yesterday's reports, which follow news last week of the third consecutive
monthly decline in new orders for durable goods, are certain to raise fresh
doubts about the economic outlook.
Merrill Lynch, the New York broker, yesterday revised down its forecast for
second-quarter growth in GDP to an annual rate of 1.5-2 per cent.
The economy grew at an annual rate of only 0.7 per cent in the first
quarter.
The consensus view on Wall Street is that the economy will regain strength
in the second half and growth is forecast at an annual rate of close to 3
per cent.
This assumes that low US interest rates will gradually encourage higher
spending by both consumers and companies, and that enactment of the Clinton
economic plan next month will end a damaging period of uncertainty about tax
policy.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930630

