FT934-10123

FT  06 NOV 93 / Sport: The distinct tastes of the Japanese - Skiing


   By ARNIE WILSON


THE Norwegian Olympics are history as far as Japan is concerned. In Nagano
City, the Lillehammer of the Japan Alps, the mountains of Shiga Kogen and
Hakuba are where the action is until 1998.
The Japanese are relishing the role of organising the last Winter Olympics
of the 20th century. Huge neon signs proclaiming their triumph over their
rival, Utah, have been up and humming for two years. 'Welcome 1998 Winter
Olympics' flashes triumphantly opposite the Crescent Sky Bar on the 10th
floor of the Nagano Royal Hotel.
Any lingering echoes of the last Japanese Olympics on the island of
Hokkaido, in Sapporo, 22 years ago are half-forgotten. Indeed, many of
today's organisers were still in short trousers then.
Shiga Kogen is an extraordinary patchwork of 22 resortlets linked by more
than 80 lifts into one sprawling ski safari. They can all be skied
comfortably in a couple of days. I skied the western extremities of the
system at Okushigakogen, worked my way back via Yakebitai, Yamanokami,
Diamond and then attacked Nishitateyama, Tagamagahara, Higashitateyma and
Terakoya. This left 12 more areas to ski the following day, including
Sunvalley.
But the skiing in Japan, by and large, is fun but a trifle bland, with few
genuine black runs. Real Japanese skiing devotees get their kicks in Europe,
and one British tour operator, Powder Byrne has discovered something of a
niche market by organising their trips to Europe.
To British skiers, Powder Byrne are Swiss specialists. But the company's
alter ego sells France to the Japanese. Typical British Powder Byrne clients
would probably sniff at the idea of skiing in Val d'Isere - 'it is not our
sort of destination as far as the British market is concerned,' says the
company's managing director, Rory Byrne. 'But it is becoming a favourite
with the Japanese in spite of their long love affair with Switzerland. It's
extremely important to us, accounting for around 50 per cent of our total
turnover. In Britain we cater mainly for people aged between 35 and 55 who
want quality holidays in Switzerland' says Byrne.
'But the fastest-growing part of our business is taking young Japanese
skiers in their 20s and early 30s to Val d'Isere, Courchevel and Meribel in
France, as well as to the Swiss resorts the Japanese once traditionally went
to exclusively: Grindelwald, Zermatt and St Moritz.' The Japanese, wearing
the latest designer ski suits regardless of their ability, take their skiing
seriously. Their attitude to holidays tends to be different from ours.
Relaxation over lunch and apres-ski are anathema to them. They like to be
busy doing things - the more organised the better. Back home they pack half
a week's skiing into a weekend of intense activity, often skiing by floodlit
both before dawn and after dark.
According to Byrne, there are certain items the Japanese must have on a
skiing holiday in Europe: a proper bath and single beds. 'Unlike British
skiers who often complain if they are not given a double bed, The Japanese
insist on NOT having double beds' he says. 'We sell an enormous amount of
holidays to honeymoon couples, but for some reason even they insist on
single beds]'
At something like Pounds 1,200 for five days skiing (plus the inevitable day
for shopping) or as much as Pounds 4,000 for an eight day tour the Japanese
market provides lucrative business. Powder Byrne carry some 600 Japanese
skiers in winter and as many as 1,000 in Summer, including 'million yen'
tours to Britain.
Says Byrne: 'The Japanese are ski crazy, especially with the Olympics coming
up in Nagano. They have more skiers than any other nation - about 12.5m.
That's more than America. They are uniquely placed to be able enjoy skiing
all the year round with flights to New Zealand in the summer. But although
Japan has hundreds of resorts, they are nearly all on the small side. They
just don't have enough major areas to meet the growing demand. There's
certainly nothing remotely like Val d'Isere. So we bring them to Europe.
Byrne is casting his eye in the direction of Japan's neighbour, Korea.
In Japan, skiers seem to come in two groups: those who ski prettily and
daintily, and those who fall over a lot. Although the Japanese who come all
the way to France tend to be strong skiers, this is not always true among
heli-skiers. When they arrive in Switzerland they are almost inevitably
either among the best in the group, or - more often - by far the least
skilful. They are rarely average. This is partly explained by the fact that
back in Japan, skiers hardly ever ski off-piste and have virtually no
experience of powder. The good ones have usually learned in Canada, New
Zealand or Europe.
Because the Japanese are so keen to give helicopter skiing a whirl but are
so inexperienced, guides often carry with them a list of important Japanese
words to keep them out of trouble. These include such useful phrases as 'ki
o tsukete' (be careful) and 'o soku ite kudasai' (slow down, you are skiing
too fast])
When they are not skiing, the ubiquitous designer ski wear tends to make all
Japanese skiers - experts and beginners - look alike. One New Zealander who
skis regularly in Val d'Isere in ski-bum garb said scornfully: 'A few of
them spend a fortune on all this fancy equipment, snow plough for a few
turns and then fall over]'
Many male Japanese skiers seem terrified of losing face. They would sooner
ski slowly, with their bindings set low and look good than ski aggressively
fall, and risk looking foolish. They also like taking their heavily made-up
girlfriends - often quite timid, fair-weather skiers - on to the slopes with
them to provide an appreciative audience. Many even keep in touch with their
female companions by walkie-talkie. This allows a Japanese skier who has
reached the sanctuary of a mid-mountain restaurant to ask his wife or
girlfriend - possibly still struggling in a blizzard outside - what she
would care to order for lunch]

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

931106

