FT932-6887

FT  26 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Market unimpressed by bid to
firm coffee prices


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


COFFEE PRODUCERS have started to work hard to put a floor under world
prices. But the markets remain unimpressed, preferring to focus their
attention on the high level of world stocks.
Brazil and Colombia, the world's two biggest producers, overnight on Monday
agreed after a series of high level meetings to freeze stocks and limit
exports to 17m bags and 13m bags (60 kgs each).
At the same time, the Central American producers agreed to withhold 15 per
cent of their coffee production in the 1993-94 coffee year.
Colombia 12 days ago acted independently to set an effective floor of 60
cents a lb below which it will not sell coffee. African producers have also
indicated a desire for some sort of action to shift prices further away from
the 20-year low of 51.65 cents seen in New York last September.
On Monday night, however, the July arabica contract in New York shed nearly
4 cents to 61.45 cents a lb on news that stocks certified against the New
York contract had risen by more than 80,000 bags in a week to 5.7m bags.
Last night the New York July contract was at 63.20 cents a lb in late
trading. London's July robusta contract closed at Dollars 918 a tonne, down
Dollars 15 on the day.
The latest producer moves follow the collapse at the end of March of
negotiations on renewing the international coffee agreement.
Colombia appears to have tacitly admitted that it has been using domestic
stocks to boost its market share as the latest deal sharply curtails its
exports, leaving Brazil with a ceiling of 17m bags - the amount it exported
in the year to the end of March.
In the same time Colombia exported 16.8m bags from a crop of 17m bags, while
the four Central American countries - Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador and
Guatemala - exported 10.5m bags.
The countries taking action represent about 60 per cent of world coffee
production. But stocks held by consumers are estimated at between 17m and
20m bags, and as one analyst said yesterday: 'Stocks like that in Antwerp
and Hamburg have a far bigger depressive effect on the market than they
would in producers' warehouses.'
Mr Lawrence Eagles, analyst with GNI, the London broker, said the move would
do very little to tighten the market as Colombia has completed its sales for
last year and will not return to the market until December.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930526

