FT934-8538

FT  15 NOV 93 / Chinese back wide reforms to speed economic transition


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


CHINA'S ruling Communist party yesterday launched the country's most
far-reaching economic reforms, aimed at speeding its transition to a
socialist market economy.
In the second phase of a modernisation drive begun by Deng Xiaoping, China's
senior leader, 15 years ago, the party's central committee agreed a
50-article manifesto, covering banking, taxation, trade and the reform of
state-owned enterprises.
The plan was approved by the 182-member committee after four days of secret
talks. A communique emphasised that public ownership should continue to be
the 'mainstay' of the economy, but called for the establishment of a 'modern
enterprise system which suits the requirements of a market economy'.
It demanded the separation of 'government administration from enterprise
management' as part of an accelerated process of transforming state
industries.
Reforms of banking and taxation will include strengthening the powers of the
People's Bank, China's Central Bank, and also the introduction of a new
federal-style tax system to improve revenue-sharing between the centre and
the provinces.
The committee said the accelerated market reforms were needed to build on
the 'positive results' of an austerity programme launched in mid year, which
was designed to re-establish control over a runaway economy. Economic growth
this year is expected to reach 13 per cent.
The emphasis given to enterprise reform suggests that China's rulers are
anxious to speed the 'corporatisation' of the state sector, including a
pilot process of privatisation.
Chinese economists have been debating the merits of turning state
enterprises into limited- liability companies, and in some cases joint stock
companies.
The process would be aimed at making enterprises more accountable for their
profits and losses, and reducing the responsibility of the state for
faltering industries which are proving a huge financial burden.
Chinese policymakers have been obliged to advance carefully in that area
because of concerns of a backlash from the state enterprise lobby, and from
party conservatives who would claim that the 'socialist system' was under
threat. As a result, efforts to reform the debt-ridden state sector have
been disappointing.
The communique made frequent reference to Mr Deng's guiding hand, leaving no
doubt that China's dominant political figure was continuing to exert a
powerful influence.
China's trade deficit, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 20

931115

