FT934-11720

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Bonds: Bold pricing of EIB's Pounds 400m deal
surprises traders


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


THE European Investment Bank (EIB) stunned many participants in the
international bond market yesterday with the bold pricing of its Pounds 400m
issue of five-year Eurobonds.
The pricing of the bonds had been expected to be very tight, due to the
increased competition among banks for mandates and the EIB's ability to
command aggressive terms.
Indeed, some banks had declined to participate in the bidding because they
felt there would be little room to make a profit on the deal.
Nevertheless, the yield spread on the EIB's bonds of just one basis point
over the new five-year UK government bond still came as a surprise.
The joint lead managers of the EIB's issue, IBJ and SG Warburg, did not form
a group of banks to sell the bonds because they had already identified
sufficient demand from eastern Asia and continental Europe to enable them to
place the bonds by themselves.
However, there was a view in the market that their reluctance to form a
group had more to do with defending the price of the bonds more effectively.
The bonds, which were priced at launch at 98.261, closed yesterday at 98
3/16 bid, giving a spread over the underlying gilt of two basis points.
SG Warburg said many investors had bought them as a substitute to the UK
government's auction on Wednesday of Pounds 3.5bn 6 per cent gilts due 1999.
In addition, the payment date on the EIB's bonds of December 2 offered
investors a play on UK interest rates, which are widely expected to be cut
as part of the UK budget on November 30.
An official at the EIB said the issue was designed to to establish a new
five-year benchmark for the EIB in the Eurosterling sector. He also
expressed confidence that the bonds would eventually yield less than the
underlying gilts.
The EIB did not expect to tap the Eurosterling sector for another three
months, but syndicate managers said it was likely the offering would be
re-opened in the new year.
By comparison to the EIB's issue, the coupon of 15 basis points over
six-month London interbank offered rate (Libor) on Ford Credit's Pounds 200m
issue of three-year floating-rate notes (FRNs) looked positively generous.
Lead manager Goldman Sachs said the notes, which marked the first offering
by Ford's amalgamated European credit operations, carried a 20 per cent
capital risk weighting. The notes were kept in syndicate overnight and are
expected to be freed to trade today.
The bidding environment is likely to remain acute for the near future.
Commerzbank, the German bank whose long-term credit rating was downgraded by
Moody's on Wednesday, is expected to raise Dollars 750m today through an
issue of five-year FRNs. The notes, via Merrill Lynch, are expected to yield
one basis point over Libor.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

931029

