FT933-12620

FT  23 JUL 93 / Press and lottery bills are delayed


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


THE National Heritage Department has failed to complete work on two of its
main policy initiatives - regulation of the press and the completion of the
National Lottery Bill - before the summer parliamentary recess.
Mr Peter Brooke, National Heritage secretary, yesterday told Mr Gerald
Kaufman - chairman of the heritage select committee which looked into the
press and privacy - that the planned white paper on the press would not be
published before parliament rises for the summer, as had been expected. Work
on the complex issues involved is not complete and the white paper will be
published during the recess.
The document is expected to advocate the creation of an ombudsman for the
press in addition to the Press Complaints Commission, the body set up by the
newspaper industry to adjudicate on complaints.
Mr Brooke also wants the newspaper industry to agree voluntarily that the
ombudsman should have the right to fine newspapers for misbehaviour. This
proposal is likely to be vigorously opposed by the newspaper industry.
Hopes that the National Lottery Bill would receive royal assent before the
Commons rises have been abandoned largely because of the pressure on
parliamentary time caused by debate on the Maastricht treaty.
The lottery bill will complete its passage through the House of Lords, but
its final Commons stages will not take place until October. The delay will
disappoint the consortia interested in applying for the licence to run the
lottery, which could have revenues of between Pounds 3bn and Pounds 5bn a
year.
The National Heritage Department believes that the first Pounds 1m prize
draw could still take place on schedule in late 1994 or early 1995.
Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, is to meet chief police officers to
discuss the radical proposals on pay and conditions in the Sheehy report.
Sheehy proposes fixed-term appointments, performance-related pay and changes
in pension rights, allowances and rank structure.
The three staff associations representing all ranks will hold meetings with
senior Home Office officials over the next three days to try to find common
ground.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930723

