FT932-7069

FT  26 MAY 93 / World Trade News: US poised to impose China conditions


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


THE CLINTON Administration is close to announcing a decision which would
impose conditions on China if it is to maintain its Most Favoured Nation
trading status after next year.
As expected, administration officials are recommending that President Bill
Clinton renew China's MFN this year.
Congressional and administration officials said yesterday the conditions
were being discussed with Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill, who have been
pressing to remove China's MFN ever since the bloody demonstrations at
Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Proposals, approved on Monday by administration officials, will go to Mr
Clinton unless key members of Congress raise strong objections.
The Chinese case was not helped by this week's unrest in Tibet, where police
used teargas to try to subdue demonstrators. It is the worst outbreak of
separatist violence in Tibet since 1989, and it comes just a few weeks after
Mr Clinton met the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader.
It is understood the administration is prepared to demand that China
safeguard human rights in Tibet as one of the conditions of MFN renewal next
year.
Also under discussion yesterday as stipulations for MFN renewal in 1994 were
that China account for the number of political prisoners it holds, provide
access by Red Cross officials to Chinese prisons, and allow inspection of
prisons suspected of producing products for export. China would have to live
up to previous commitments on nuclear non-proliferation and market access
for foreign goods.
During his campaign Mr Clinton promised to get tough with China on its human
rights record. However, once in office he came under pressure from the
business and farm lobby whose dealings with China grow each year.
What is emerging is a two-track policy which is more stick and less carrot
than applied by former President George Bush. US trade officials will,
however, continue to work with China to get it admitted to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
In Gatt, most nations automatically grant each other MFN status. China,
however, is a non-market economy. The US grant of MFN within the Gatt will
be bilateral and conditional, in line with US law.
Congressional Democrats are expected to abandon their attempt to condition
MFN by law. Instead, the conditions will be granted under executive order,
which makes them easier to revoke.
The Jackson-Vanik amendment to US trade law requires withdrawal of MFN to
non-market economies which do not allow free immigration. Immigration is not
an issue with China, but because it is predominantly a non-market economy
its MFN status gets reviewed every year.
Tibet trials, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930526

