FT934-11455

FT  01 NOV 93 / India furious at US remarks on Kashmir status


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


   NEW DELHI


A DIPLOMATIC row has erupted between the US and India about an American
State Department official's remarks questioning the status of the troubled
northern Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
India has reacted angrily to the official's comment last week questioning
the validity of Kashmir's accession to India in 1947.
The row comes at a sensitive time with the siege of the Hazratbal mosque,
Kashmir's holiest shrine, entering its third week. Hundreds of Indian troops
surround the mosque, which was seized by separatist Moslem militants on
October 15.
Efforts to negotiate a settlement and secure the release of an estimated 100
to 150 pilgrims trapped inside the mosque have repeatedly foundered over the
militants' demands for safe passage. The Indian authorities want them to
surrender.
If part of the militants' plan was to focus international attention on their
fight to break away from India, they have succeeded. Pakistan, India's
hostile neighbour which claims Kashmir for itself, has protested about the
mosque siege. The issue was raised at last month's Commonwealth heads of
government meeting in Cyprus. Now the US official's comments have prolonged
the international debate.
The official - Miss Robin Raphael, an assistant secretary of state - said at
a press conference last Thursday: 'We view Kashmir as a disputed territory
and that means we do not recognise the Instrument of Accession as meaning
that Kashmir is for evermore an integral part of India. There were many
issues at play in that time frame as we all know.'
Miss Raphael was referring to the controversial way in which the last
Maharajah of Kashmir acceded to India.
Indian ministers at the weekend rejected Miss Raphael's remarks angrily. Mr
Dinesh Singh, the minister for external affairs, said no one had the right
to question the status of Kashmir as an integral part of India.
US officials insist there has been no change in American policy. They point
out that Washington has long regarded Kashmir as 'disputed territory'.
However, it does seem that Miss Raphael committed a gaffe in repeating
Washington's view in strong language at a sensitive time.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931101

