FT932-13342

FT  23 APR 93 / International Company News: United Technologies plunges 32%
for quarter


   By MARTIN DICKSON, PATRICK HARVERSON and AP-DJ


   NEW YORK


UNITED Technologies, the US high-technology company, reported a 32 per cent
drop in first-quarter like-for-like net income, due to plunging profits at
its Pratt & Whitney aero-engine division, which has been hit hard by the
problems of the world airline industry.
UTC reported net income of Dollars 64m, or 42 cents a share, compared with
Dollars 94m, or 68 cents, in the same period of last year before the impact
of a 1992 accounting change. Revenues totalled Dollars 4.9bn, down from
Dollars 5.2bn.
Pratt's earnings totalled Dollars 13m, down from Dollars 151m for the same
period of last year, while its revenues were Dollars 1.4bn, compared with
Dollars 1.8bn.
This more than offset improved performances in other businesses. Flight
systems reported income of Dollars 82m, up from Dollars 40m, due to improved
deliveries of Sikorsky helicopters. Otis elevator made Dollars 94m, up from
Dollars 80m, and automotive parts Dollars 37m, up from Dollars 13m.
The drop in Pratt's sales and earnings was due to lower engine shipments and
sharply reduced spare part sales. Spares are among the most lucrative parts
of the aero-engine business, but during downturns airlines cut back on the
size of their fleets and spares inventories.
The company said commercial spare part sales in the quarter averaged Dollars
94m a month, down from Dollars 154m a month in the same period of last year.
However, after two exceptionally low quarters for orders at the end of 1992,
spares orders had improved in the latest quarter.
Cigna, the Philadelphia-based composite insurer, is reorganising its
property-casualty operations into three business units, in an effort to
become a 'specialist' company, AP-DJ reports.
The reorganisation, which takes effect immediately, will create divisions
focusing on large risks, standard commercial business and special markets
respectively.
Transamerica, the US financial services group which last week sold its
property and casualty insurance unit to the public for Dollars 1bn, reported
first-quarter net income of Dollars 91.8m, writes Patrick Harverson in New
York.
A year ago, the group recorded net income of Dollars 83.6m, although that
included Dollars 12.5m from the discontinued insurance operations.
Transamerica's remaining life insurance business, which posted a 19 per cent
increase in income to Dollars 51.8m, made the biggest contribution to group
earnings.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930423

