FT934-10202

FT  06 NOV 93 / International Company News: Skandia sells stake to Munich Re


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES and DAVID WALLER


   STOCKHOLM, FRANKFURT


SKANDIA, a leading Swedish insurer, is to sell a 26 per cent stake in
Hamburg-Mannheimer, one of the biggest German life insurance groups, to
Munich Re for DM450m (Dollars 265m).
The move is in line with Skandia's strategy of concentrating on the Nordic
market and giving increased emphasis to unit-linked, as opposed to
traditional, life insurance.
The deal increases Munich Re's stake in Hamburg-Mannheimer to 80 per cent,
with the balance of the shares being held by the Allianz insurance group.
Munich Re said it had made the purchase to 'prevent uncertainty in the
shareholder structure at Hamburg-Mannheimer'.
Skandia said the sale would produce a capital gain of SKr1.9bn (Dollars
232m) and increase its operating result by SKr150m a year. It will also lift
Skandia's net asset value by SKr1.33bn, equal to SKr17 per share, and boost
its solvency ratio by five percentage points to 70 per cent.
The proceeds will be used to develop Skandia's rapidly-expanding
international life insurance business further. International life premiums
of SKr12bn in the first nine months of 1993 are well ahead of the SKr7.9bn
figure achieved for the whole of last year.
Mr Bjorn Wolrath, chief executive, said the group was looking to develop its
long-established unit-linked life units in the UK and the US as well as
newly-started operations in Switzerland and Germany.
Munich Re, which is the world's largest reinsurance company, reports group
premium income for the year ended June rose from DM23bn to DM25.56bn.
But losses in mainstream reinsurance business eclipsed an improvement in
primary insurance results and in total underwriting losses - calculated
before investment income - increased from DM1.12bn to DM1.27bn for the year.
Mr Hans-Jurgen Schinzler, chief executive, blamed the losses on a mixture of
negative factors, including overcapacity in world reinsurance markets,
exceptionally high compensation payments and heavy losses in industrial
insurance markets.
After taking account of income from capital investments, net earnings rose
from DM278m to DM287m. The group dividend is to be raised from DM10 to DM11
per share, thus passing on to shareholders the impact of lower German
corporate taxation.
The reinsurer said it was planning a major capital raising issue for next
year involving the issue of new shares with warrants attached.
It also disclosed its shareholdings of less than 25 per cent in other
companies. Munich Re has a 12.6 per cent holding in Salamander, a shoe
manufacturer. Munich Re and Allianz own 25 per cent of each other.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931106

