FT934-11555

FT  30 OCT 93 / Markets: Tax-free schemes that beg for reform - Serious
Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


THE chancellor of the exchequer is unlikely to listen to my advice but I am
going to give it to him, anyway. Please, Kenneth Clarke, when you deliver
your Budget speech on November 30, can you reform all the tax-free schemes -
Peps and Tessas, mortgage interest relief and the rest?
Before you protest, it is not that I want your voters (or FT readers) to pay
more taxes. I just believe that a simple tax regime is a good tax regime.
You will still take the same amount of tax from us, but in a way that is
more straightforward and creates less work for lawyers and accountants.
The present system is pretty generous. One executive confessed to me this
week that he had already stashed away Pounds 75,000 in tax-free form this
year, what with Pounds 40,000 in the BES, Pounds 18,000 in Peps for himself
and his wife, Pounds 3,600 in Tessas and the rest in pension contributions.
Good luck to him. If the government wants to hand out these goodies, Britons
are perfectly entitled to take advantage of them. Indeed, part of the
purpose of the Finance & the Family pages is to point readers in these
directions.
But does it really make macro-economic sense for you to be searching for
ways to squeeze us for tax revenues, such as April's 1 per cent rise in
national insurance contributions, while simultaneously promoting these
loopholes?
Conservatives used to argue that the high rates of tax imposed by Labour
governments distorted the economy. Do not some tax reliefs have the same
effect? Take the business expansion scheme which your predecessor, Norman
Lamont, had the good sense to abolish from the end of 1993. It sounded a
great idea when it was established. Britain needs young, growing businesses;
but such businesses have difficulty attracting finance, so why not give
investors tax relief to buy shares in them?
The problem is that a large number of young, growing businesses tend to go
bust. Investors found that saving 60 per cent (the old top rate) in tax was
little comfort when they lost 100 per cent of their investments. The only
people who seemed to prosper from these schemes were the sponsors, who had
the good sense to take their fees up-front.
Late in the 1980s, the BES was turned on its head. Suddenly, the scheme was
a vehicle for creating private rented accommodation. Again, this is a
perfectly laudable aim since Britain has a shortage of affordable rented
property. In practice, though, the principal beneficiaries seem to have been
Oxbridge colleges.
The distorting effect of mortgage interest relief has been whittled away by
restricting relief to the 25 per cent (and, soon, the 20 per cent) rate of
tax. I know the housing market is weak now but mortgage rates are very low;
many people will have benefited from big falls in interest payments. Why not
announce that the relief will be phased out over five years, by successive
cuts of Pounds 6,000 a year? That way, the pain in any individual year would
not be great.
What about Peps? They are proving amazingly popular, so they might seem to
be one scheme which the government has got right. Certainly, the present
regulations are an enormous improvement on the original Pep which was small,
costly to operate and, inappropriately, encouraged small investors to have a
portfolio of just one or two equities.
Now, most Pep money goes into unit and investment trusts, which give small
investors a properly diverse portfolio. And there is everything to be said
for encouraging investors to break away from their dependence on building
societies and move into equities. But what worries me about Peps is the
trouble they may be creating for the future tax base.
A married couple could already have Pounds 100,000 in a Pep if they had used
the maximum allowances each year. In another five years, if you allow for
further contributions and a bit of growth, their portfolio could easily grow
to Pounds 250,000. Even if they stopped there, and just let the portfolio
grow at 8 per cent a year, they could have a tax-free portfolio of Pounds
500,000 by 2007. Thus, in the foreseeable future, some very wealthy people
could have virtually escaped the tax net altogether. You, or your successor
but five, will have to load the rest of us with even more taxes to
compensate.
Meanwhile, we have the Tessa, a wishy-washy tax break; neither big nor
flexible enough to change the nation's savings habits. So why not combine
Tessas and Peps into a savings allowance, giving people the right to earn a
certain amount of tax-free income from their investments each year, which
they would declare on their tax form? This would be fair; after all, most
people's savings come from money that has already taxed. It could be limited
to a level that would not be too expensive on the nation's coffers, nor be
too generous a shelter for the very wealthy; and it would abolish the need
for special schemes.
Tax relief on pensions has to stay, I suppose, on the ground that the more
you encourage people to save for their old age now, the less the state will
have to provide for them. It could be trimmed back a bit (by, say,
restricting up-front relief to 20 per cent).
For the rest, though, cut out the gimmicks; let us have as simple a tax
regime as possible. Allow people to invest in an atmosphere free of
confusing initials and regulations.

The Financial Times


London Page II

931030

