FT933-5085

FT  06 SEP 93 / Clinton goes campaigning on all fronts: President is trying
to make up for time lost on the budget battle


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's first 100 days in office bogged down disastrously
in the struggle to pass his budget. Now he has set himself an ambitious
autumn agenda to make up for lost time, and even his most resolute
supporters are wondering if he has the capacity to carry it out.
Congress returns to Washington this week to wrap up the unfinished business
of its last session - the confirmation of Dr Joycelyn Elders to be surgeon
general, and a new national service programme - and already Mr Clinton is
preparing to put more indigestible meat on its plate.
Tomorrow, Vice-President Al Gore will unveil the results of his review of
the federal government's managements structures and procurement processes, a
report dubbed 'Reinventing Government' which is expected to produce
substantial savings as well as civil service job cuts.
Next week, the White House is expected to submit to congress legislation
implementing the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico,
raising the curtain on a battle that has already bitterly divided the
Democratic party.
Just one week later, probably on September 22, Mr Clinton will announce the
outlines of his proposals for reforming the US health care system - a
massive undertaking that many politicians believe would on its own amply
occupy a whole presidential term.
And foreign affairs may demand Mr Clinton's attention, with the possibility
of a Middle East peace agreement, the likelihood of continued grief in
Bosnia, and the challenge of his first speech to the United Nations general
assembly.
Mr Clinton on Saturday defended his determination to advance on all fronts
at once.
'Health security, expanded trade and reinventing government really aren't
separate goals. They are part of a comprehensive strategy to promote
long-term growth, increased incomes, more jobs and a stronger American
community,' he said in his weekly radio speech. 'These pieces must all fit
together.'
But critics say that by trying to play too many tunes at once, Mr Clinton
may be ignoring a lesson most Americans learn before they are six from
'Sesame Street', the educational television programme: you've got to put
down the ducky if you want to play the saxophone.
The Gore report offers the best prospects of immediate dividends. White
House officials say around two-thirds of Mr Gore's proposals can be
implemented by executive order, without going through Congress.
But elements which would require legislation - such as a proposal to move
the federal government to budgeting over two years rather than one, as 21
states already do - are unlikely to make any headway in Congress.
Perhaps the greatest danger of the Gore report is excessive expectations.
The Washington Post reported yesterday that Mr Gore would aim for savings of
Dollars 108bn over five years, including Dollars 22bn from simplification of
government purchasing rules. It also said 252,000 civil service jobs would
be eliminated, with 'buy-out' incentives offered to encourage voluntary
departures.
Some administration officials say, however, that Mr Gore wants to avoid
overreaching and will claim much smaller savings, as well as warning that it
will take years to implement all of his proposals.
The review is expected to recommend halving middle management, aiming for a
ratio of one supervisor to every 15 workers, instead of the current ratio of
one to seven.
Nafta is a much more controversial element of Mr Clinton's autumn agenda.
Many of his fellow Democrats hotly oppose the treaty, which they believe
will lead to the transfer of US jobs to Mexico.
Even those who support Nafta in the abstract wonder why Mr Clinton should
waste political capital fighting for a treaty negotiated by his predecessor,
alienating in the process important Democratic constituencies such as the
trade unions.
Mr Robert Matsui, the leading Democratic cheerleader for Nafta in the House
of Representatives, complains that even his wife, who heads White House
efforts to rally grass-roots support for the treaty, will not say Nafta is
her number one priority. That number one priority for most Democrats,
including the White House, is healthcare.
The reform may be controversial. Many Democrats still favour a national
system like Canada's rather than the managed competition espoused by Mr
Clinton, under which employers would be encouraged to group themselves in
purchasing co-operatives in the hope that they will be able to negotiate
cheaper and more comprehensive insurance.
Elements of the plan are likely to face fierce opposition from businesses,
trade unions and industry lobbies, but health care reform is absolutely
essential to Mr Clinton's programme - the country demands it - and he should
receive support in Congress not just from the core of his fellow Democrats
but from many Republicans.
The biggest doubt about Mr Clinton's ability to reach these separate goals
stems from the political style he displayed in his first six months. His
willingness to compromise if opposed has encouraged most members of Congress
 -not just political heavyweights like Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia but
novices like Senator Patty Murray of Washington - to believe they can safely
humiliate the president in any trial of political wills.
That belief may now be impossible to dispel, and will handicap Mr Clinton
when the time comes to fight for his proposals.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930906

