FT932-3097

FT  16 JUN 93 / French private hospitals offer Britons cut-price surgery


   By ALAN PIKE


PLANNING a holiday in Brittany this year? Why not take in an operation at a
French hospital during your stay?
French private hospital operators yesterday launched a bid to attract
non-urgent surgical cases from Britain at a presentation organised by the
French Embassy in London. Hospital directors from four parts of France
popular with British residents and tourists - Paris, Brittany, Nord
Pas-de-Calais and Cote d'Azur - outlined to medical insurers the potential
advantages of contract-ing for treatment across the Channel.
Price is the main advantage. A spell in a French hospital can often cost
about 50 per cent less than the same treatment in the British private
sector. The meeting heard of a British patient quoted Pounds 2,100 for a
cataract operation at home. The patient had the treatment in France for
Pounds 1,100.
Mr David Ashdown, a director of Western Provident Association, Britain's
third-largest provident insurer, said lower costs in France were leading to
some corporate clients seeking provision for French treatment in their
policies. WPA had obtained treatment in France for British patients
'although we have sent hundreds rather than thousands so far'.
British health insurers told the meeting they believed most clients welcomed
the convenience of local treatment and would be reluctant to travel to
France in order to help contain their insurers' costs. Three years ago Bupa,
the largest insurer, reached an agreement with the Clinique Chirurgicale de
Calais to treat British patients. But Mr Jean-Vilhelm Glud, its executive
director, said that while the hospital had treated British patients living
in France, there had so far been no demand from British residents.
The British insurers suggested that the French hospital directors should
target their marketing efforts at uninsured private patients in Britain.
Many medical procedures now involve day-surgery or very short stays in
hospital; in these circumstances a 50 per cent price difference could make
'medical tourism' attractive to patients meeting their own bills.
The meeting also agreed that keen pricing could lead to co-operation between
French hospitals and the National Health Service. Health authorities and
fund-holding general practitioners can purchase private treatment if it is
cost-effective, and some authorities have explored the possibility of
sending patients abroad. But the issue is politically sensitive and,
although NHS representatives were invited to yesterday's meeting, none
attended.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930616

