FT934-11370

FT  01 NOV 93 / Volvo investors wary of merger


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   STOCKHOLM


SHAREHOLDER doubts in Sweden threaten the fate of the proposed landmark
merger between Renault, the state-owned French automotive company, and the
car and truck operations of Volvo. The Swedish group's institutional
shareholders have yet to decide whether to support the deal, which is due to
be determined this week.
The two companies, which have operated a strategic alliance for the past
three years, announced plans in September to combine to form Europe's
second-largest vehicle maker in the face of increasing international
competition and sharply falling car sales on their home continent.
Critics of the deal fear the structure of the merger, which will give Volvo
a 35 per cent share of the new Renault-Volvo company, amounts to a French
state takeover of the country's leading manufacturing outfit. There are
doubts over whether it will be approved at a special Volvo shareholders'
meeting in Gothenburg on November 9.
Most of a group of about 10 institutional shareholders who together control
about 40 per cent of the voting capital, but have yet to say how they will
vote, are due to announce their decisions this week.
A key indicator of the final outcome is expected on Wednesday when the
second largest single shareholder in Volvo, a state pension fund called the
Fourth Fund, makes its decision. Directors of the fund, which holds 7.5 per
cent of the votes after Renault's 10 per cent, are understood to be divided
on the merger and are seeking further information on the deal from Volvo.
Another state fund, the 92-94 Fund which holds 2.5 per cent of the votes,
has already said it will oppose the deal chiefly because of its concerns
over the lack of guarantees about the French government's promised
privatisation of Renault. At the weekend, the insurance group SPP, which has
4.5 per cent, said it would oppose the merger without further clarifications
on privatisation and the French state's intention to hold subsequently a
'golden share' in the merged company.
The other 'swing' shareholders include pension and investment funds of
Scandinaviska Enskilda Banken and Svenska Handelsbanken, the country's
leading banks, and the insurance groups Skandia and Trygg-Hansa. Volvo is
under pressure to delay the merger until after Renault has been sold off to
the private sector.
Background, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931101

