FT932-288

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (6): A lack of harmony - An unlevel playing
field in a European trade barrier battle / Trade Law


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT


MR MIKE FISHER, founder and managing director of Whale Tankers, is sore and
angry. Sore about losing money and perhaps a customer too. Angry because he
believes he was deceived into thinking the political totem pole of '1993'
meant something.
The sale of a hazardous waste tanker from the Solihull company to E. Bourbie
of Issoire in France, is the cause of dissatisfaction.
The tanker has been delivered at a charge to Bourbie of Pounds 46,000, not
all as yet paid. But the cost to Whale, excluding any knock-on effects in
terms of dislocated production for other customers, is Pounds 70,000.
The UK government is pursuing the tanker case, believing an illegal French
barrier to trade has been erected.
'Had we known,' Mr Fisher says, referring to Bourbie's manufacture demands,
'we would never have taken it on.' The company's undoing has been, as it
turns out, an unrealistic assessment of what 1993 has meant as a target date
for the completion of the EC internal market.
'We would not have accepted the order had we believed that 1993 would not
see us with a level playing field,' he says. He interprets level playing
field as 'if it was good in the UK, it was good elsewhere'.
But this has not been the view of the French authorities when following
through, between November 1992 and March 1993, the regulatory procedures for
the import of Bourbie's Whale tanker.
Regarding Whale Tankers' experience, Mr Richard Needham, the UK minister for
trade, has noted in a letter to Mr Iain Mills, the constituency MP for Mr
Fisher: 'There is at present no agreed European standard or EC directive
which covers vacuum waste tankers. Each member state is therefore free to
insist that its national regulations are complied with, where these are
justified and not excessive.'
But Mr Needham continues, 'national regulations cannot be used simply to
create a trade barrier and attempts to do so would breach the Treaty of
Rome' - which forms the basis of the European Economic Community.
Mr Fisher had accepted the Bourbie order for five tankers in October 1992.
By the following month Whale was running into difficulties meeting the
French regulatory demands: 'We were beginning to realise things were not
what they looked,' recalls Mr Fisher.
Talks with the British Embassy commercial section in Paris had brought crisp
and uncompromising advice - Whale had to make the tanker to French
requirements and forget political rhetoric about harmonisation.
Mr Fisher says Whale first approached the Direction Regionale de l'Industrie
et de la Recherche (DRIRE) in Bethune for guidance, but the only person able
to help was on maternity leave. Whale was subsequently directed to DRIRE in
Dijon.
A DRIRE engineer had visited the Whale works in Solihull, at the company's
expense, to confirm the tanker had been made to French criteria. The
engineer, however, asked for all the drawings and paperwork to be supplied
in French. A certificate was also requested confirming the tanker's steel
had been made to order. In fact, the steel, made by Thyssen in Germany, had
been bought from John Tainton, a West Midlands stockholder.
In the meantime, the delivery date had passed, and Bourbie was pressing for
the first tanker, threatening to cancel the order if delivery was not met.
The tanker was finally despatched at the end of March. But Bourbie had said
the fire extinguisher on the vehicle must be French. A new extinguisher was
bought.
French authorities then demanded that a part of the tanker be certified as
unique by a member of the Associated Offices Technical Committee, and not
Whale's usual company. This request was met.
The steel certification issue returned. Whale had sought to meet the
original demand with a letter from Thyssen to the stockholder and a letter
from the stockholder to Whale. But this was not sufficient. DRIRE had said
it would only issue certification, allowing Bourbie to use the Whale tanker
on the road, if the letter came direct from Thyssen.
Whale's relations with Bourbie are now uncertain. Mr Fisher says the episode
has hardened his innate distrust of governments. This manifests itself in
the slogan at the bottom of his company notepaper: 'Home of the great
British Whale and the certainty that nobody does it worse than government.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930629

