FT932-13367

FT  23 APR 93 / UK Company News: Wembley deficit widens to Pounds 12m


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


WEMBLEY, owner of the north London stadium, fell further into losses last
year weighed down by the cost of its high debt and a stagnant market.
Pre-tax losses rose from Pounds 8.4m to Pounds 12m on sales up 13 per cent
at Pounds 191.4m. Losses per share fell from 7.9p to 5.9p after adjusting
for the bonus element of the rights issue in February last year.
The board is not recommending a final dividend and does not anticipate
making a payment until there is 'significant' improvement in profitability.
Wembley also revealed the identity of the investor group behind Orpington
Investments, which has appeared on the share register with an 11 per cent
stake after buying part of the 16 per cent stake owned by United Dutch.
The group is Rolaco Holdings, a Swiss-based company that has stakes in
companies like the Kempinski hotel group and Club Mediterranee.
United Dutch, once Wembley's largest shareholder, filed for bankruptcy
protection in the Netherlands in March.
Sir Brian Wolfson, chairman, said trading conditions had remained tough in
1992. The group would be re-focusing on the management of other
international venues.
Interest charges fell to Pounds 14.4m (Pounds 15.9m) as rates declined and
debt was repaid. But with Pounds 140m (Pounds 160m) of debt gearing is 80
per cent in spite of the rights issue.
Wembley also took a Pounds 13.4m exceptional charge for the costs of
restructuring and re-financing the bank debt. There were also Pounds 21.3m
of extraordinary charges relating to losses on sale of assets.
At the trading level profits grew 5 per cent to Pounds 15.8m. At the stadium
complex, profits rose to Pounds 6m (Pounds 4.3m). Perimeter advertising in
the stadium fell, however, and the Arena held only 148 events compared with
180 in 1991. Greyhound racing profits fell to Pounds 5.4m (Pounds 7.9m).
COMMENT
Nobody could ever accuse Sir Brian Wolfson of lacking enthusiasm.
Unfortunately, with the exception of the upgrading of the core stadium
complex, many of his group's ventures have been less than successful. Hence
gearing of 80 per cent and the current focus on asset disposals. It must
come as some relief, therefore, that Wembley's latest efforts focus on
leveraging the Wembley name by bidding to manage other people's stadiums -
an activity that should not require a great deal of capital. In the absence
of a really strong recovery in the UK, the area offers a dim but
nevertheless real ray of hope. The real question remains whether Wembley can
reduce its debt. For this it requires the sale of the US greyhound
operation, unfortunately dogged last year by an outbreak of kennel cough.
Without such sales, Wembley will remain a speculative play, caretaker of one
the UK's most recognisable assets but perilously close to the banks' problem
lists.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930423

