FT932-3350

FT  15 JUN 93 / Pakistani force in Somalia backed by Security Council


   By MICHAEL LITTLEJOHNS, UN Correspondent


   NEW YORK


THE UNITED Nations yesterday sprang to the defence of Pakistani troops under
its command in Somalia, after the killing of civilians in a bloody encounter
at the weekend.
In a statement last night, the UN Security Council said it strongly endorsed
the Pakistanis' actions. It accused General Mohamed Farah Aideed, the local
warlord, of using women and children as human shields to screen attacks on
UN forces.
In unequivocal backing for the Pakistanis, the 15-nation body said they
acted towards the demonstrators in Mogadishu 'in accordance with UN Security
Council resolutions.'
The statement, issued by Mr Kuan Antonio Yanez-Barnuevo of Spain, the
current Security Council president, stressed that the primary objective of
the UN force in Somalia was 'to put an end to the plight of the Somali
people'. But restoration of law and order was essential if it was to deliver
humanitarian aid and help rebuild the country, ravaged by war and famine.
While the council expressed regret at the civilian deaths, it said
preliminary reports indicated Gen Aideed used 'human shields' as a tactic.
It also appeared that shots were fired from the crowd at UN soldiers.
The deaths, which have further angered Somalis, came as a crowd was
protesting at US air raids against targets of Gen Aideed's forces.
A UN report earlier yesterday charged that Somali gunmen had fired on the
unarmed demonstrators as well as attacking the UN soldiers. It described the
confrontation as a 'staged incident'.
Mr Joe Sills, the UN spokesman, said that Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the
secretary general, had repeatedly but in vain tried to persuade the US to
disarm the Somali factions after US troops entered the country in December.
'Everybody would have been much better off if it had been done sooner,' he
said. The UN force that replaced the Americans last month has made disarming
warlords and their followers a high priority.
Mr Kofi Annan, head of UN peacekeeping operations, said the Pakistani
soldiers, who lost 23 of their colleagues in a Somali ambush 10 days ago,
had behaved 'professionally'. But if there were any evidence of wrongdoing
those responsible would be disciplined.
Mr Sills said a 'routine' investigation was under way.
Editorial comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930615

