FT931-4075

FT  12 MAR 93 / Tough tactics needed to stay in the top three: Rolls-Royce
is restructuring to cope with a changed aerospace industry


   By PAUL BETTS


Restructuring has become a way of life for Mr Terry Harrison, Rolls-Royce
chief executive. 'I seem to spend all my time doing it,' he says.
The latest upheaval came yesterday when the the UK aero-engine group fell
into the red with a 1992 pre-tax loss of Pounds 184m, reflecting provisions
of Pounds 268m; cut its dividend; and announced it would reduce its
51,800-strong workforce by 5,000.
The news was not a total surprise. Rolls-Royce has already shed 12,000 jobs
in the past two years. Along with the rest of the aerospace industry, it has
been buffeted by what Sir Ralph Robins, chairman, concedes is 'the longest
and most damaging recession we've ever suffered'.
Rolls-Royce's two main US competitors, General Electric and Pratt & Whitney,
have also announced plans to cut 4,000 and 10,000 jobs respectively over the
next 18 months.
'In some parts of the world, we don't know what kind of airline industry
will emerge from this recession which has already taken some large airlines
like Pan Am and Eastern out of the game,' Sir Ralph warns.
The concurrent cut in defence spending following the end of the cold war is
also likely to be permanent. 'The defence business has not gone away for
good, but what is clear is that it will be half the size it was,' he says.
The turmoil in the aerospace industry has revived memories of 1971 when
Rolls-Royce was forced into bankruptcy. The company was dragged down by huge
development problems on its RB211 civil aircraft engine. At that time, it
was heavily dependent on the aero-engine business, and lacked a broad range
of civil aircraft engines.
Sir Ralph is adamant that the company will never repeat the mistakes of the
past. It launched a recovery strategy eight years ago to improve its
aero-engine model range, reduce costs, improve efficiency and broaden its
industrial base. 'We believe this strategy continues to be the right one,'
says Sir Ralph. 'The fact there is short-term turbulence in the market
should not divert us from our long-term aims.'
The strategy has started to pay off. Restructuring has led to a 13 per cent
improvement in output per employee. Continuing rationalisation will close
some sites, including the helicopter engine plant at Leavesden in
Hertfordshire and the aero-engine component facility at Parkside, Coventry.
At the same time, the company is consolidating some smaller facilities into
larger ones.
But the job cuts will not go on for ever. 'We want to become more efficient
but we also want to maintain our production capability to take advantage of
the recovery when it occurs,' Sir Ralph emphasised.
In the industrial power activities, the workforce has already fallen from
27,700 in 1990 to 22,300 at the end of last year, and is likely to remain
stable. In the aerospace division, it has dropped from 36,500 in 1990 to
29,500 at the end of last year, and the company's eventual target is around
25,000.
The company has also broadened its civil engine range. Its engines now cover
about 80 per cent of the commercial aircraft market compared with barely 30
per cent a decade ago. Even in a depressed market, Rolls-Royce is selling
more engines than before. 'Until 1989, we were selling about 100-150 engines
a year; it's now around 400 a year because we can offer products to power
many more different airliners than in the past,' says Sir Ralph. In the
longer term, this will lead to a steep increase in the company's engine
spare parts business, a traditional source of high margin business.
Rolls-Royce has also seen its share of the civil engine market increase. Sir
Ralph said the company had captured about 22-23 per cent of the civil
aero-engine market compared with 26-28 per cent each for GE and Pratt &
Whitney.
Equally important has been the expansion of the company's industrial power
operations, initially through the acquisition of Northern Engineering
Industries (NEI) in 1989 and then through the alliance with the US
Westinghouse group eight months ago.
The industrial power group already accounts for about 40 per cent of the
company's Pounds 3.5bn annual turnover. Rolls-Royce wants these activities,
which last year helped offset the slump in the company's aero-engine
business, to grow eventually to around 50 per cent of turnover. This could
involve more joint ventures and possible acquisitions, explains Mr Harrison,
former head of NEI.
The other big challenge facing Rolls-Royce is the Pounds 400m development of
the Trent, its new heavy thrust civil engine to power the next generation of
large wide-body airliners. With these new big jets expected to account for a
growing share of the civil aircraft market over the next 20 years,
Rolls-Royce cannot afford to slow down on the development of the Trent which
is absorbing about half the company's total annual Pounds 200m research and
development expenditure. The competition for this new market is already
intense. Rolls-Royce's two US rivals are also developing large engines and
some aerospace analysts believe that three competing engines are too many.
Some argue that three big aero-engine manufacturers are also too many and
one will eventually have to merge with a competitor.
'I think the three majors will survive but I can't see a place for the
smaller players,' says Sir Ralph, adding that the next few years are likely
to see the consolidation of smaller companies into the big three.
Sir Ralph also believes that the short-term problems facing the three main
aero-engine manufacturers are greater than the longer term. 'I don't see a
change in the world's desire to travel by airplane: the opportunity for us
is clearly still there,' he says.
He concedes that when the market does ultimately pick up, it is unlikely to
roar ahead as in previous cycles. Instead, it will probably take the
industry along a slow, scenic route. In the meantime, there will be no
escape from restructuring. 'This business is not for the faint-hearted,' Mr
Harrison says.
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930312

