FT933-10009

FT  06 AUG 93 / The Property Market: Continental comeback - Interest rate
cuts could relieve pressure


   By VANESSA HOULDER


Could the turmoil in Europe's currency markets mark a turning point for
Europe's stricken property industry? Optimists believe that, if the upheaval
results in interest rate cuts, it could relieve some of the pressure on
Continental property markets.
Some relief is certainly needed. In the three months to June, average
capital values fell by more than 3 per cent; in the year to June, values
fell by 18 per cent, according to a survey of Europe's 13 largest property
markets by Richard Ellis, the chartered surveyors.
It is tempting to draw parallels with the UK market following sterling's
withdrawal from the exchange rate mechanism last September, when the fall in
sterling and the reduction of interest rates paved the way for a change in
sentiment towards commercial property.
It raised the prospect of a revival in tenant demand; it relieved the
pressure on property company balance sheets; and it encouraged investors to
switch out of bank deposits into higher-yielding property.
The comparison with the UK should not be taken too far, however. For one
thing, most countries in Continental Europe appear to be unwilling to make
sweeping cuts in interest rates and the value of their currency. For
another, lower interest rates would have less impact on property companies
on the Continent, where there is a greater use of fixed-rate finance for
property.
Nonetheless, there is little doubt that high real interest rates have
damaged Europe's property markets. Across Europe, vacancy rates are
continuing to rise, albeit from a low base, in most Continental cities.
Development activity is very limited. Investors are generally wary, although
they are beginning to return to some markets such as London.
In general, investment yields are relatively stable, but rents are falling
sharply. But the performances of individual markets vary significantly:
The Belgian property market has, until recently, performed strongly. But
recently a downturn in demand from tenants has pushed vacancy rates up to an
average of 6.5 per cent, according to Richard Ellis. Rents have fallen by
about 5 per cent to BFr8,750 per sq m a year. However demand from investors
has held up, which has pushed investment yields down slightly to about 7.5
per cent.
The French property market demonstrates some similarities with that of the
UK, with a serious oversupply problem in Paris of rental property, along
with high levels of bank borrowings and bad property debts. Prime yields
have risen from less than 4 per cent to 6 per cent, according to Richard
Ellis. Rents, which stand at about FFr3,600 per sq m a year, are still
falling.
Germany's deepening recession has sent rents down across the country, with
the exception of Dusseldorf, according to Jones Lang Wootton, the chartered
surveyors. Investment yields for prime property have, however, remained
steady as investors, faced with declining interest rates, have redirected
funds into property.
Italy's political and economic crises have depressed the property market
even though interest rates, at 9 per cent, are at their lowest since 1976.
Occupier demand in the office market is low and rents are about 20 per cent
below their peak.
The Netherlands' property market is relatively stable. Despite declining
economic growth and a slight drop in letting activity, rents have held up
well and there have even been modest increases in Rotterdam and Utrecht,
according to Jones Lang Wootton. Investment interest, particularly from
foreign investors, has increased.
It is unclear whether the Dutch stand to gain or lose from the crisis in the
ERM. While it may try to lower interest rates, the guilder's continued link
to the D-Mark in the old 2.5 per cent band may put exporters at a
disadvantage.
The Spanish property market is declining rapidly. Rents are falling sharply.
They have dropped by 13 per cent to Pta3,500 per sq m a month in Madrid and
by 14 per cent to Pta3000 per sq m a month in Barcelona, according to
Richard Ellis. Central Madrid has a vacancy rate of 6 per cent, while on the
outskirts the vacancy rates rise to as much as 36 per cent, according to
Knight Frank & Rutley Espana, property advisers.
In Portugal, rents have fallen by 12 per cent in the past three months to a
maximum of Es5,700 per sq m a year, according to Richard Ellis.
Prime yields in Lisbon have risen to about 10 per cent.
In Ireland, commercial property rents are still stagnant. But falling
interest rates in recent months are encouraging private investors back into
the market, even though institutions remain net sellers. The UK is still
working off the ill effects of the surge in credit and development at the
end of the 1980s. However, there is increasing evidence that the market has
turned the corner.
The combination of a fall in yields and the slower rate of decline in rental
values has started a revival in capital values, which rose by an average of
0.5 per cent in June, according to the Investment Property Databank.
In some respects, the fundamental problems faced by the Continental property
markets are less severe than in the UK or the US. Stricter development
controls and less bank lending have limited the extent of surplus property
in most countries.
Over the next four years, average rental growth will remain below inflation
in Europe's top 30 cities, assuming real growth in GDP of 1 per cent,
according to a forecasting model devised by Hillier Parker, chartered
surveyors.
Unless the crisis in the ERM results in a far-reaching change in economic
policies across the Continent, the prospects of a swift recovery in property
markets are poor.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930806

