FT934-8587

FT  15 NOV 93 / Management: Cinderellas en route to the ball - Tim Dickson
and John Authers look at two new training initiatives


   By JOHN AUTHERS


Companies looking to cut training bills could do worse than look at the UK's
further education colleges.
FE colleges, which provide post-16 vocational training, adult education and
increasingly offer an alternative to schools for teaching A-levels, have a
reputation as the 'Cinderellas' of British education, mainly thanks to the
country's traditional preoccupation with academic qualifications. But they
have the resources to produce work tailored directly to the technical
training needs of individual companies.
Large employers already make extensive use of FE colleges, but take-up by
smaller companies remains disappointing. At a CBI conference tomorrow, John
Patten, the education secretary, is expected to announce a package of
measures to help businesses fund or build links with FE colleges.
The experience of Rover and Land Rover in Birmingham highlights the
possibilities for larger companies. Land Rover used to have its own training
school. Trainees and apprentices would then be sent to East Birmingham
College to brush up on theoretical details. However, it closed its school 10
years ago because it seemed more cost-effective and now uses the college's
larger facilities for all its first-year training. Land Rover's trainers
attend all classes, and trainees, who work together in one group, are
sponsored by the company.
Fees are fixed in line with what the college can afford. Since April,
colleges have been 'incorporated', meaning their funding is devolved, but
comes ultimately from central government rather than local education
authorities. This makes costing more transparent, allowing employers to
negotiate more easily over price.
Rover's Longbridge factory has similar links with Bourneville college
outside Birmingham, along with its own education service. John Towers,
Rover's managing director, believes investment in education schemes and
local colleges is 'nothing to do with altruism, it's about competitive
dynamics'.
Working with colleges allows the company to take on young people at 16 and
put them through a common learning programme closely related to their
eventual work, but at the same time allowing flexibility. Rover's programme
allows employees ultimately to earn a university degree, via an arrangement
with the University of Warwick.
Any new government action should allow more companies to benefit in the same
way.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

931115

