FT932-13379

FT  23 APR 93 / Austin Reed and Liberty in board and vote changes


   By MAGGIE URRY


TWO family-run retail groups with non-voting share structures yesterday
announced steps towards opening up their companies.
Austin Reed, the upmarket clothing retailer and manufacturer, said it would
ask holders of its voting shares to enfranchise the non-voting shares at its
June annual meeting. Holders of voting shares would receive a one-for-one
scrip issue in compensation. Austin Reed's non-voting shares rose 25p to
132p, while voting shares rose 47p to 235p.
Meanwhile, Liberty, best known for its Regent Street, central London shop
and its prints, appointed a new chief executive, splitting the roles of
chairman and chief executive. This follows the recent recruitment of two
non-executives. Liberty's shares, taking heart from Austin Reed's move, rose
75p to 655p, and the non-voting shares 48p to 358p.
Mr Brian Myerson, whose Concerto Capital Corporation holds 15.77 per cent of
Liberty's voting shares, said the appointments met the corporate governance
questions he raised at an extraordinary meeting last summer.
Mr Myerson called the meeting which also discussed the enfranchisement of
the non-voting shares. Although that vote was defeated, he said he was now
'quietly confident' that Liberty would move to enfranchise the non-voting
shares.
The Stock Exchange allows companies to maintain two-tier voting structures
but frowns on any attempt to raise capital through issuing more shares. Such
companies are thus prevented from having rights issues or making share
acquisitions.
Mr Chris Thomson, finance director of Austin Reed, stressed that the company
had no intention of making a rights issue. The group had come through
recession and wanted to be able to take opportunities, which could include
acquisitions.
Liberty's finance director, Mr John Pugh, said the group had Pounds 1.2m of
net cash at its January 30 year end. He said the issue of enfranchisement
continued to be reviewed by the board.
The retail conundrum is whether Great Universal Stores, the giant
mail-order, high-street retailing, property and finance group, will
enfranchise its non-voting shares. Lord Wolfson, the group's chairman, told
shareholders at the last annual meeting the matter was under review.
Details, Page 21; People, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930423

