FT934-10180

FT  06 NOV 93 / Rabbit phone network shut with Pounds 100m loss


   By ALAN CANE and SIMON HOLBERTON


   LONDON, HONG KONG


RABBIT, the UK telepoint mobile phone service developed by Hutchison
Whampoa, was killed off yesterday with losses of more than Pounds 100m.
Hutchison, the Hong Kong-based conglomerate, said it was closing Rabbit and
selling Mobile Data, a two-way data service aimed at business users, as part
of extensive restructuring of its UK telecommunications operations. It
planned to take an extraordinary loss of HKDollars 1.42bn (Pounds 122m) in
its 1993 accounts.
Mr Hans Snook, group managing director for the UK telecommunications
operations, said the extraordinary loss represented Rabbit's start-up costs,
capital costs, operating losses and provisions.
The decision to close Rabbit will lead to losses for British Aerospace and
Barclays Bank, which own 30 per cent and 5 per cent respectively of
Hutchison's UK telecommunications business. Neither company would quantify
its loss yesterday.
Rabbit's digital (computer-based) technology requires customers to use
handsets close to a fixed base station. The national network of 12,000
stations, mainly in conurbations and near motorways, will be wound up as a
result of the closure decision.
Mr Snook said Rabbit had been a technological success which was liked by its
9,000 users but more subscribers had been needed to make it a viable
business. By contrast, in Hong Kong where Hutchison also offers the service,
some 70,000 subscribers had been attracted in only 18 months. All current
Rabbit subscribers will be offered a cash refund for the handsets which cost
Pounds 99 or an option to upgrade to two-way portable telephones.
Hutchison said the loss would be offset by an extraordinary gain made by the
group earlier this year. It said ordinary profits for the year ending
December 31 would not be affected.
Analysts said the announcement clarified the company's position in the UK.
Some said they would upgrade their 1994 forecasts because expected losses on
the UK business caused by Rabbit's operations would not now be realised.
Mr Canning Fok, Hutchison managing director, said the company would invest
about Pounds 345m over the next three or four years in a personal
communications network in the UK. The UK company expects losses in the
coming three years but Mr Fok said: 'These losses should be seen as a
strategic investment.'
Rabbit runs out of time, Page 7
Lex, Page 24
Cross-party talks clear way for Deutsche Telekom sale, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931106

