FT932-3125

FT  16 JUN 93 / UK cabinet group to discuss HK policy


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


MR John Major, Britain's prime minister, has called a meeting of his
cabinet's Hong Kong committee for July 1 amid signs that the British
government is losing patience with China over talks about the colony's
political development.
Mr Chris Patten, Hong Kong's governor, will fly to London at the end of the
month for the meeting, which officials say is likely to prove significant in
determining the British government's policy towards Sino-British talks.
According to one official: 'What ministers want to know is: Are these talks
a total waste of time?'
Mr Patten's assessment is seen as pivotal in shaping the government's
attitude towards the talks. The first four rounds of negotiations produced
no significant developments and in the session which ends today little
progress appears to have been made.
A Foreign Office official said yesterday that by the time the cabinet
sub-committee meeting was held a sixth round of talks might have taken place
and 'by then we should have an idea of where they are going or not'. The
objective the cabinet committee agreed to at its meeting in April was for
Sino-British talks to be concluded by the end of July. 'This timetable
either has to be reinforced or shifted,' the official said. 'The committee
is unlikely to approve of policy being made by a process of drift.'
Next month's meeting will bring together Mr Major, Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign
secretary, Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, and Mr Michael Heseltine,
trade and industry secretary.
It comes at a time of increasing restiveness among Hong Kong pro-democracy
groups who feel that Mr Patten is backtracking on his commitment to broaden
democracy before Britain returns sovereignty to China in 1997.
The committee, which last met at easter when Mr Patten was in London, is
however likely to approve the continuation of talks until the autumn and
then decide whether to continue or pull out and present Mr Patten's
legislative programme to the Legislative Council, Hong Kong's law-making
body.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930616

