FT933-12817

FT  22 JUL 93 / Leading Article: UK aerospace


THE UK's House of Commons trade and industry committee has a hankering for
old-fashioned industrial policies. Earlier this year it called for a panoply
of controls and subsidies to shore up the coal industry. Yesterday it served
up a similar recipe for the aerospace sector: a five-fold increase to Pounds
100m a year in government subsidies; more generous aid to launch new
products; and possible additional hand-outs to help companies convert from
military to civilian products. All this, it said, was necessary to prevent
the industry suffering irreversible damage as a result of unfair competition
from heavily-subsidised overseas rivals.
Such talk is unduly alarmist. Though the industry is going through a
difficult patch following sensible cuts in military spending after the cold
war and the recession in civil aircraft, its underlying position in world
markets is strong. Rolls-Royce has built up a large share of the aero-engine
market, British Aerospace is a shareholder in Airbus, which has taken the
number two slot behind Boeing in civil aircraft manufacture, and the
industry continues to perform well in winning overseas military orders.
The committee's call for subsidies is ill-judged. This is not just because
hand-outs breed dependency, cost taxpayers money they can ill afford and
assume that the government is better at picking winning technologies than
the market ' a theory that has been disproved by bitter experience.
In this case, subsidies would be peculiarly counter-productive because they
could help trigger an international subsidy war which Britain would be
ill-placed to win. Although many governments aid their aerospace industries,
such hand-outs are kept in check by last year's agreement between the
European Community and the US. The Clinton administration has been itching
for an excuse to unpick the deal, following pressure from stricken US
manufacturers, and it would be unwise in the extreme to give him one.
Fortunately, the government is unlikely to go down the subsidy route, though
it will pick up the committee's ideas about better dialogue between
officials and industry. But this does not mean that government could not do
still more to enhance the industry's competitiveness. It should push for a
multilateral agreement which rolls back subsidies even further than last
year's deal and includes more countries within its remit. It should also
urge other European governments to abandon Airbus's quasi-political status
and convert it into a normal public company run on purely commercial lines.
Such action could be called an industrial policy, but it would be very
different from the committee's.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930722

