FT934-10086

FT  08 NOV 93 / Peace in Ulster possible by Christmas, says Irish PM


   By TIM COONE


   DUBLIN


NORTHERN Ireland could have peace by Christmas if the British and Irish
governments grasped a unique opportunity for peace, Mr Albert Reynolds, the
Irish prime minister, said yesterday.
He said: 'I believe (the opportunity) is there, and I want to see (Mr Major)
take the courage and conviction in his hands, because we have a moment in
history to do it and it may not be there for a long, long time again.'
Speaking on BBC TV's On the Record programme, Mr Reynolds said: 'I believe
there is an enormous responsibility on us to lead in this situation. We have
an opportunity, let's maximise it. History will never forgive us if we
don't'
In separate radio interviews, Mr Reynolds said: 'I believe that if those
crunch issues are addressed in an open and frank manner, with courage and
conviction on both sides, it is possible we can see the beginning of peace
before Christmas.'
Mr Reynolds' attempt to shift the onus on to Mr Major in part reflects the
pressures from within his own Fianna Fail party that Dublin should win more
open concessions for the nationalist community in the north.
Dublin believes that after its recent signals of willingness to meet
concerns of Ulster Unionists about the future of Northern Ireland's
political system, Mr Major should signal he is prepared to consider
nationalist demands over the north.
In an apparent divergence with the British government over the aims of the
initiative on Northern Ireland that the two prime ministers announced 10
days ago in Brussels, Mr Reynolds insisted the priority should be a
cessation of violence. He said a resumption of political talks between the
main constitutional parties would not be sufficient.
'If you don't get the people who are carrying out the violence to cease
violence, then I don't believe political talks are going to bring an end to
violence.'
He reiterated that if there were to be a proven end to the IRA military
campaign, 'there is a place at the table for Sinn Fein . . . That is the
(sequence) of events as I see them that will bring results'.
However, Mr Reynolds is having to thread an increasingly delicate path
through his own party. At Fianna Fail's annual conference in Dublin at the
weekend he faced criticism from delegates for his move to sideline the
initiative launched by Mr John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and
Labour party, and Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein.
Mr Reynolds responded by praising but not endorsing the contribution to the
peace process by Mr Hume, who was last night admitted to hospital suffering
'flu. 'Mr Hume's contribution is essential to any wide-based overall
framework for peace. (But) the creation of that peace must ultimately be the
responsibility of the Irish and British governments,' he said.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary is to investigate the shooting of a woman by a
soldier last night near Omagh, County Tyrone. The RUC said the woman, later
reported to be 'ill but stable' in hospital, was a passenger in a car. A
number of children in the vehicle were treated for cuts and shock.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931108

