FT934-11530

FT  30 OCT 93 / Food & Drink: Homage to Catalonia - French elegance in
Spanish brandy / Spirits


   By GILES MACDONOGH


THE BRITISH spirits drinker is a wretchedly conservative beast. Take brandy.
This means cognac or, very occasionally, armagnac. Sometimes, it means
rather cheap French grape brandy mixed with soda in the pub; but this is
less a matter of choice, rather the chicanery of brewers who count on the
drinker asking for brandy, not cognac.
Spanish brandy is something else altogether. In Jerez, where 90 per cent of
it is made, they add such flavourings to the casks as sweet, boiled grape
must, caramel and cane syrup, or anything else which might give the spirit
some individuality: plums, apricots, prunes or, in some cases, even nuts.
The result is that many Spanish brandies have big, sweet fruit flavours of
the sort which the Cognacais finds vulgar.
Spain has another brandy producing region, though: Catalonia. And here the
spirits are made in a tamer, more elegant French style. The biggest Catalan
producer is the Miguel Torres winery at Villafranca del Penedes, near
Barcelona. It started making brandy in 1928, mainly to supply the important
local market: in Spain, workers like a slug of brandy in their morning
coffee and are not too fussed about its quality.
Torres, however, has moved steadily up-market over the years and now makes
some of Spain's most prestigious wines. Sooner or later, the brandy had to
follow the same path - out of the column stills, which made spirits for the
workers, and into the expensive pot stills from Cognac which produce a
refined spirit more appropriate to the dinner table.
Torres makes six brandies and a sweet liqueur based on brandy and oranges.
The first two brandies in the range, the Solera Select and the Gran Reserva
(known as Torres 5 and 10), are produced in continuous stills and matured
according to the solera method where older casks are topped-up constantly by
younger spirits.
Fontenac is the cheapest of the pot still spirits and spends four years in
American oak casks. Miguel Torres is aged for eight years in French oak.
Then come the two brandies at the top of the range: Miguel I, aged 10-12
years in French oak, and Honorable, aged 15-20 years. Only limited amounts
of each are made, and both are rather expensive.
The 5 and 10 are produced from the trinity of grapes responsible for the
sparkling wines of the region: Parellada, Macabeo and Xarel-lo. The better
brandies are made from a pure Parellada, with the exception of Honorable
which is distilled from the cognac grapes Ugni Blanc and Folle Blanche.
Almost certainly, Parellada is responsible for something of the difference
of character between cognac and a Penedes brandy.
Unless the grapes are picked early (as they must be for brandy), those on
the Parellada vine achieve monstrous size, averaging more than a kilo a
bunch. Flavour is not their strong point. At 70 per cent, I imagined 1 could
smell the Catalan breakfast doughnut or Xuxo in its slightly sweet bouquet;
but maybe I was simply hungry. After prolonged ageing in Limousin oak casks,
however, the spirit sheds this sweet character and mellows into something
very delicate and much closer to cognac than I might have imagined.
This was amply proven by the blind tasting of three brandies I did with the
distiller Matias Llobet. The first flight of three brandies were all dark
spirits.
The first two, with their sweet, caramelly or raisiny bouquets, clearly were
Spanish - and Jerezanos too. But the third? Though a deep mahogany, the nose
was subtle and the palate grapey. This was the Torres 10. The others were
Osborne's super-popular Magno and Domecq's Carlos III. In the second round,
the same Torres brandy also trounced the tarty three-star cognac from
Courvoisier.
Three more brandies appeared in the next flight. The first I found a little
short on the nose, but elegant and structured nicely on the palate. The two
rivals scored better on the nose but, on tasting them, they were fiery and
slightly coarse. The results of this round were revealing: the smoothest was
Miguel Torres brandy; the others were VS0Ps from Hennessy and Martell at
Pounds 5 to Pounds 10 more a bottle.
Three more brandies appeared in the next round. The first had a superb
bouquet: nuts, prunes, oranges and orange blossom; a classic example of what
the Cognacais call rancio. It was lovely to drink, too. The second was also
exquisite just to sniff, but less impressive to drink. The third paled
slightly before the first two: not in the same league. It was Miguel Torres.
The first two were Martell Cordon Bleu and Hennessy XO at three and four
times the price. It clearly does not pay to be conservative as far as brandy
is concerned.
Torres 10 is available in the UK from Moreno Wines (tel: 071-286-0678 or
071-723-6897) at Pounds 13.99, or from branches of the North-Eastern Co-op
at Pounds 11.95. Miguel Torres brandy is Pounds 19.95 from Moreno; Pounds
20.30 from Rackhams of Birmingham (021-2363333); or Pounds 22.50 from
Selfridges (071-629-1234).

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

931030

