FT933-5130

FT  04 SEP 93 / Gardening: Strictly no secateurs in Hackney - Marilyn
Bentley strolls around the transformed plot of land adjoining the Geffrye
Museum


   By MARILYN BENTLEY


EXCEPT IN an alphabetical index, Hackney and horticulture are not obvious
bedfellows. But 300 years ago, the area east of the City of London was a
notable centre for nurseries, gardens and gardeners. That tradition inspired
Christine Lalumia, of the Geffrye Museum of the British Domestic Interior,
to turn the derelict plot of land adjoining the museum into a herb garden.
Opened in 1992, the garden was the first flowering of the Geffrye's new
status as a charitable trust. The construction of the outside 'room' was a
new departure for the museum. English Heritage consent was needed for the
proposed alterations, which included letting doors into two 'listed' walls
using a specially crafted oak lintel, and building a third wall of used
London bricks to replace the corrugated iron boundary fence.
The plan of the 50ft square garden is derived from monastic designs:
geometric paths and intersecting beds, with space for a wellhead in the
centre. The beds are stocked with 170 varieties of herb. Climbing plants,
such as roses, clematis, and jasmine, have been introduced to colonise the
trellises and the three arbours, adding aesthetic interest and colour.
The garden has developed almost like a tapestry in the course of planting
and growth. Rather than following any chronology, the plants are arranged
according to function: household; medicinal; cosmetic; and so on, creating a
living exposition of the uses to which herbs have been put in the past.
In a bed devoted to plant dyes you can find woad, used by the Anglo Saxons
for cloth and for warpaint. There are culinary herbs such as chives, sage,
sorrel and bay, and for the Elizabethan salad, which might include 50
different ingredients, parsley, chicory, rocket, primrose flower and
nasturtium.
Among the medicinal herbs are wound wort, the herba militaris of legend,
which Achilles used in the siege of Troy to stop his soldiers' wounds.
Feverfew was used to ease migraine, and St John's wort as a sedative.
In another bed is growing proof that herbal cosmetics did not start with
Body Shop. Skin cleansers were made with wild strawberry and lupin seed,
freckles lightened with ladies' mantle, hair tinted yellow with calendula.
Among the household herbs is soapwort, once used by the Romans for cleansing
delicate fabrics.
As well as its obvious function as an educational resource, Lalumia's
project encompasses the traditional ideal of a herb garden as a place of
tranquillity and repose. There is little enough opportunity for either among
the dreary council flats and derelict warehouses which dominate the area,
but visitors are encouraged to enjoy the garden as a 'hands-on' experience,
touching and smelling the aromatic plants which grow beside the seats.
She also sees the garden as an inspiration to aspiring gardeners, although
'I live in fear of ladies with secateurs,' she confesses. 'I hope people
will respect the garden enough not to take cuttings]' Herb seeds are sold in
the newly expanded shop, and in the future she hopes that cuttings from
garden stock will be available.
Access to the garden is via a spiral staircase leading from the museum's
discreetly expanded entrance foyer, the first phase of a series of projected
developments culminating in a new building intended to house a collection
illustrating the 20th century interior. Meanwhile, the herb garden
flourishes as a living museum which - like the best of furnishings - is both
functional and decorative.
The Geffrye Museum Herb Garden, Kingsland Road, London E2 8EA. Open April to
October 10am to 5pm, 2pm - 5pm Sundays and Bank Holidays. Closed Mondays.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

930904

