FT933-10096

FT  06 AUG 93 / Rolls-Royce to close specialised titanium plant


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM and DANIEL GREEN


ROLLS-ROYCE is to close Europe's only supplier of a metal product essential
to the aerospace industry and buy it instead from Japanese and US suppliers.
Deeside Titanium, a Rolls-Royce subsidiary which makes titanium sponge
granules, would shut because demand was falling and imports were cheaper,
Rolls-Royce said yesterday.
It was opened only 11 years ago because the UK wanted its own source of a
material used in engines for both military and civil aircraft.
The plant, in Clywd, north Wales, has been operating at well below its
capacity.
Rolls-Royce said: 'The company has maintained operations to provide the
special quality of titanium which is needed to make the high temperature
alloys used in Rolls-Royce engines. It used to be a strategically important
source. Now there is the required quality from alternative sources.'
Deeside Titanium is near the site of Shotton steelworks where 8,000 jobs
were lost when steelmaking ended in 1979.
It was the first big project to be attracted to regenerate the area and was
seen as a flagship investment symbolising new metal for old. Titanium has an
exceptional strength to weight ratio and corrosion resistance.
The plant, which will close before the end of this year, was set up at a
cost of Pounds 25m with backing by the then Labour government's National
Enterprise Board. The shareholders were Billiton UK, a Royal Dutch Shell
subsidiary, Imperial Metal Industries and Rolls-Royce. Subsequently
Rolls-Royce took a controlling interest of over 80 per cent with IMI
retaining the balance.
Today, the plant sells titanium granules to IMI which uses them to make
special alloys for Rolls-Royce aero engines. IMI sells any surplus alloy to
other aerospace companies in North America, while Rolls-Royce also had other
sources for the special alloys.
Demand for the granules never came up to expectations and the plant never
worked at full capacity, even when the aerospace industry was at its
strongest in the late 1980s. In the last two years the market has
deteriorated. Defence spending has been cut and orders for civilian aircraft
postponed. Titanium prices fell sharply as supplies were swollen by metal
from the former Soviet Union.
The price of aerospace grade titanium dropped from more than Dollars 10 a
kilogram in 1989 to Dollars 3.50 now. In response, Japanese and US companies
cut production by more than one third in 1991 alone.
Any investment for new factories was attracted to the US which has both the
world's largest aerospace industry and an import tariff on titanium products
of 15 per cent, compared with 7 per cent in the EC.
A US-Japanese joint venture, with twice the capacity of Deeside Titanium,
opens this year in Ohio. IMI would test the quality of the new plant's
output as another possible alternative to Deeside, said Mr Peter Fisken,
chairman of IMI Titanium.
Deeside Titanium never employed more than 160 people. The present workforce
is only 73, whose redundancies will be phased over several months.
Clywd county council said yesterday the closure was of great concern. 'It
demonstrates again the fragility of our success in north-east Clywd,' it
said. 'There has been much new investment but there are problems once again
with job losses.' Last month, the area's assisted area status was downgraded
from full to intermediate.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930806

