FT933-10010

FT  06 AUG 93 / Management: The lessons of experience - Christopher Lorenz
explains how companies gain from self-analysis


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


Before Boeing started to develop its 757 and 767 aircraft, a group of senior
employees spent three years on 'Project Homework', comparing the managerial
failures and successes of past development processes. They produced hundreds
of recommendations. Several members of the team then transferred to the 757
and 767 start-up projects.
Guided by this experience, Boeing produced the most problem-free product
launches in its history.
Such systematic self-analysis of a company's experience - especially its
mistakes - is unusual in industry. But it is one of several essential
building blocks for any company which wants to become a learning
organisation, according to David Garvin, a professor at the Harvard Business
School.
Garvin's advice is delivered, in a long article in the latest Harvard
Business Review*, at a time when the learning organisation has become one of
the most popular concepts in management on both sides of the Atlantic. But
the Harvard professor certainly has plenty of practical advice on what he
calls the 'three Ms' of learning organisations.
Meaning. Other authors differ widely over the definition of a learning
organisation - for instance over whether behavioural change is required for
learning to occur. Garvin defines it as one that is 'skilled at creating,
acquiring and transferring knowledge, and at modifying its behaviour to
reflect new knowledge and insights'.
Management. His operational guidelines for practice praise Xerox for its
systematic problem-solving; US General Electric, General Foods, Chaparral
Steel and Allegheny Ludlum for various experimental methods; IBM (in the
1960s), Boeing, BP, and the Arthur D. Little consultancy for learning from
experience; Digital, AT&T and Xerox (with benchmarking) for learning from
others; and GTE, Time Life and the PPG Glass Company for transferring
knowledge throughout their organisations through the rotation of personnel
and other means.
Measurement. Ways of assessing an organisation's rate and level of learning
to ensure that gains have been made. Well-known techniques such as learning
curves and experience curves, which relate learning to a company's or
industry's rising production volume, are incomplete, Garvin points out. They
focus on only a single measure of output, cost or price. They ignore
learning that affects other competitive variables, such as quality, delivery
or new product introductions. They ignore possible 'drivers' of learning,
such as new technology or the challenge posed by competing products. And
they say little about the sources of learning or levers of change.
Instead, Garvin advocates use of the half-life curve, a measure originally
developed by Analog Devices, a US semiconductor manufacturer. This measures
the time taken to achieve a 50 per cent improvement in any specified
performance measure, for instance defect rates, on-time delivery or
time-to-market.
Garvin also advises companies to use a range of auditing techniques to track
progress through three overlapping phases: cognitive learning (the expansion
of knowledge and new patterns of thought); behaviour change; and performance
improvement.
For all this to work, companies should start by providing more time and
skills for employees to reflect, analyse and innovate; by breaking down
internal boundaries and external ones; and by creating 'learning forums' on
specific topics, from the changing competitive environment to the health of
cross-functional processes.
For many companies, Garvin's list of tips may prove quite a mouthful. But,
as his examples of best practice show, they are worth digesting.
*Building a Learning Organisation. HBR July-Aug 93. Reprint 93402. Fax:
617-495-6985.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930806

