FT932-6648

FT  27 MAY 93 / Queens Moat may be relisted in the autumn


   By ANGUS FOSTER and CHRISTOPHER PRICE


SHAREHOLDERS in Queens Moat Houses, the suspended hotel group, may have to
wait until the autumn before the company is relisted.
The relisting depends on a refinancing, expected to be formalised in
September. It will also require asset disposals to reduce the company's
mounting debts, and a new set of accounts. 'It's a pretty standard
refinancing, but it's still big and complex,' a banker said.
Queens Moat's 64 creditor banks, which are led by Barclays and owed about
Pounds 1bn, are due to meet today and will be asked to agree to a further
three-month standstill on interest and principal repayments.
They will discuss a report compiled by Grant Thornton, the accountants,
which is expected to conclude that Queens Moat has positive net assets and a
viable future.
Mr Andrew Coppel, the former finance director of Ratners appointed as a
consultant to Queens Moat in April, is expected to be confirmed as chief
executive. Morgan Grenfell, which worked with Mr Coppel at Ratners and Sale
Tilney, has replaced Charterhouse as Queens Moat's financial adviser.
The company announced yesterday that Mr Martin Marcus and Mr David Hersey,
formerly deputy chairman and finance director respectively, have resigned
from the company.
The two men were suspended once Queens Moat's problems became apparent at
the beginning of April. The two men were closely linked with the company's
controversial management incentive scheme, believed to be partly responsible
for its financial troubles. According to one analyst, they were also 'more
expendable' than Mr John Bairstow, the founder and chairman.
A banker said it was 'no surprise' the two had left, and that their
departure had been held up pending a decision on compensation.
New accountants, believed to be Coopers & Lybrand, are to replace Bird
Luckin, which has been criticised for allowing lax accounting treatment of
Queens Moat's depreciation and incentive schemes. Queens Moat's results for
1992 should be published by October.
The expected delay for the refinancing and relisting has added to worries
among shareholders and some creditors. Queens Moat's rivals have mounted
aggressive advertising campaigns to capture market share, industry sources
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930527

