FT933-9874

FT  06 AUG 93 / (CORRECTED) UK Company News: Kleinwort Benson doubled to
Pounds 42m


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


Correction (published 16th August 1993) appended to this article.
KLEINWORT BENSON Group, the merchant bank, reported pre-tax profits of
Pounds 42.2m for the six months to June 30, almost double the Pounds 21.3m
achieved in the comparable period.
Lord Rockley, chairman, said that all sectors of the business contributed to
the rise. 'Higher operating profits were consistent throughout the group.
There were no one-off contributions'.
The company has given no indication that it expects the surge in
profitability to continue throughout the year. 'The outlook for the
remainder of the year is far from certain given international tensions and
potential problems in world trade, but we believe we are soundly based to
pursue a policy of further growth,' the company said.
However, it did not break down the contributions of its securities trading
activities - which have benefited from strong markets in the first half -
and corporate banking activities which have lost market share in recent
years.
The corporate finance division, although strong in overseas markets with
particular emphasis on privatisations, has lagged in the UK. This
performance was said to be one of the factors which led to the dismissal of
Mr Jonathan Agnew, chief executive, in May.
Lord Rockley said that rebuilding the group's stable of corporate clients
was among his chief priorities, although there would be no change in overall
strategy.
'What we will hope to do is to distinguish in people's minds the competence
that Kleinwort Benson has and sell ourselves with more vigour.' Among the
group's recent successes in the UK was a mandate to handle the floatation of
half of Banque Indosuez's Gartmore fund management subsidiary.
He said the group was still a long way from naming a successor to Mr Agnew.
That point is causing some concern with securities analysts who doubt the
group's ability to revive its fortunes without a strong chief executive.
The bank continued to pare back its loan book which fell to Pounds 1.9bn
from Pounds 2.1bn at year end. Lord Rockley said the group will withdraw
from corporate lending to those unlikely to generate any additional
fee-based business.
The interim dividend is raised from 5.3p to 6p, payable from earnings of
24.1p (10.8p) per share.
CORRECTION
An article in the Financial Times on August 6 incorrectly reported Mr
Jonathan Agnew as having been dismissed by Kleinwort Benson Group. In fact,
as Kleinworts said in a press release on May 4, Mr Agnew intended to resign
in August after the announcement of the interim results. The chairman's
statement of August 5 confirmed Mr Agnew's resignation on August 6. The FT
apologises to Mr Agnew for any embarrassment caused by the error.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930806

