FT933-5236

FT  04 SEP 93 / Media mogul with the mostest: Rupert Murdoch's reach is
global, prompting criticism that he has too much power


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


The older he gets, the faster he seems to move and the more radical and
global his business vision becomes. At 62, Rupert Murdoch is, depending on
who you believe, entering the sinister endgame of a plot to dominate the
media world with his evil empire, leaping over outdated regulatory barriers
and offering unrivalled choice to consumers everywhere, or finally
succumbing to the archetypal media mogul's disease - megalomania.
Even by Murdoch's standards, this has been an extraordinary week. Apart from
the theatricals of the launch of Sky Television's new subscription package,
which by next year will include 20 channels, he pulled the following rabbits
out of his hat: a 24-hour cable channel in the US; a second Sky Sports
channel in the UK; a link with BT to investigate the 'super' communication
highways of the future; and tie-ups with two other significant media players
 -Mr Emilio Azcarra Milmo, of the Televisa empire in Mexico, and Mr Leo
Kirch in Germany, who owns extensive rights to show Hollywood films there.
In addition, there was a venture with National Transcommunications of the
UK, and Comstream of the US, to produce a digital satellite system which
could lead the way to hundreds of television channels in both Europe and
Asia; the Dollars 12m purchase of Delphi, a Boston-based company, looking at
electronic newspapers, a deal seen by Murdoch as an investment in research
and development; and, in the real newspaper world, the decision to cut the
price of his flagship UK daily, The Times, from 45p to 30p.
Just as the flurry of activity seemed to be dying down and Murdoch left
London to head home to Los Angeles for his daughter's wedding next week,
another big development was under way in Hong Kong yesterday.
The chairman of News Corporation was negotiating the sale of a majority
stake in the Hong Kong daily he controls, The South China Morning Post.
Murdoch was clearly increasingly nervous about the difficulties of running a
daily newspaper once Hong Kong reverted to China's control in 1997 and was
happy to take his profits. The long-planned sale was delayed by negotiations
to get into the Hong Kong television market - talks that led to the Dollars
525m purchase in July of a majority stake in Star TV, the Hong Kong-based
satellite television company that broadcasts five channels to 38 Asian
countries.
For Murdoch, Star TV is obviously the 'big one'. He can scarcely restrain
his enthusiasm about the potential of the Asian market, although he is also
keenly aware of the risks he has taken on.
'It's a global dream that you never quite dared have, and suddenly its
there,' he said in an interview before announcing the 'new age' of satellite
TV in the UK.
'India is a huge market. I see Star being split into at least two companies
 -one for India and one for China. They are totally different cultures.' He
added that eventually he foresaw a separate Star service for the 200m people
of Indonesia. In countries such as China the hope would be to run several
joint channels with local broadcasters.
The global gleam in Murdoch's eye is that soon he will own channels that
circle the globe.
'We will now take Sky Sports around the world. We will take Sky News around
the world. There will be a parallel international service and Sky News as we
know it today will be for Britain and Europe,' he said, adding that he
planned to work with local partners for the international service in
different parts of the world.
Such a sweeping vision makes it inevitable that Murdoch will challenge both
the BBC World Service Television - although the BBC's 10-year contract to be
carried on the Star system will be honoured - and, more particularly, Mr Ted
Turner's Cable News Network.
'I don't want to say any more about that (Sky News) because it looks as if
I've got a war with Ted Turner which is what it means. He has said all along
'I know where my competition is coming from; it's Rupert',' Murdoch said.
The risks in Asia are great. Problems range from the difficulty of producing
satellite dishes cheap enough for Asia's mass market, to allegations of
cultural imperialism, and the difficulty of persuading the Chinese
authorities to allow direct satellite broadcasts rather than waiting for
cable networks to be built. Cable would give the authorities more control
over what is viewed. If, for any political reason, Star was no longer
welcome in Hong Kong, Murdoch believes it could be broadcast from Los
Angeles - 'certainly Australia'.
Because of these uncertainties, News Corporation has financed the Star deal
through equity rather than debt. Murdoch has become more wary of taking on
debt since News Corporation came within hours of collapsing three years ago.
The company's borrowings had ballooned to more than Dollars 7bn following a
series of acquisitions, including TV Guide in the US.
The origins of this long march into Asia and his growing ambitions lie in
London, and the creation of a satellite system broadcasting to more than 3m
homes in just over four years.
'There is no question we have shown here (the UK) that first in gets the
market,' Murdoch said. Sky Television was first into the UK satellite
market, followed limply by British Satellite Broadcasting. By the time the
two merged into BSkyB in November 1990, Sky was in the driving seat.
(Pearson, publisher of the Financial Times, has a significant stake in BSkyB
and News Corporation owns half.)
The satellite company is now trying to learn another important lesson: how
to create what is virtually a subscription-only service and persuade people
to pay for at least one channel, Sky One, that until now has been 'free'.
Rather surprisingly, the plan to sugar the pill with an array of new
channels, most from the US - covering everything from country music, family
entertainment, women's features, to children's programmes, a shopping and a
documentaries channel - seems on track.
The growing financial muscle that should flow from BSkyB's subscription
revenues, combined with News Corporation's ownership of five national
newspapers in the UK, from The Times to the News of the World, is leading to
more intensive calls for government action to combat Murdoch's media
hegemony.
Under the headline 'Sky Trek: The Next Degeneration', Labour's shadow
national heritage secretary, Ms Ann Clwyd, issued a statement this week,
arguing that the 'unregulated growth of Mr Murdoch's empire is an affront to
a democratic society'. She called for an urgent Monopolies and Mergers
Commission investigation. Yesterday, Labour formally called on the Office of
Fair Trading, the consumer watchdog, to intervene.
Part of News Corporation's growing power lies in the technology it has
developed for subscription television. Almost all the channels in the Sky
Multi-Channel package are 'scrambled' so that only those who pay can view.
The channels are 'unlocked' by a 'smart card' like a telephone card. The
system is called VideoCrypt. Murdoch plans to take VideoCrypt to Germany in
a joint venture with the German broadcaster Pro-7, which is associated with
the Kirch organisation.
'It looks as if we will get VideoCrypt as the standard,' Murdoch said,
adding he intended to expand into Germany, where there are already 5m
dishes, and carry several Sky channels in English.
'We hope it will become a bigger partnership with Kirch - pay-per-view
(paying for individual programmes or events) and a movie channel. We will
co-operate with anyone who can clear German rights for their programmes,'
Murdoch said.
The German alliance is coming at a time when Murdoch's proposed partnership
wiith Canal Plus, Europe's leading pay television group, is crumbling. 'That
partnership has fallen apart. We are trying to put it together again but the
French are very difficult,' he said.
Murdoch is just as interested in the studios of Televisa in Mexico City,
which specialises in the production of popular romantic soap operas. Under a
joint venture with Fox Broadcasting, Murdoch's US network, more than 500
hours a year will be produced of soaps and events. The first event will be a
search for the best young opera singer in the world.
The multilingual soaps will break new ground in production economies. There
will be a chief executive, a single script and single set, but two
directors. The Spanish-speaking director will work the first eight-hour
shift with Spanish-speaking actors. In the next eight-hour shift, the same
episode will be produced, using American actors.
'This will get out costs down and provide prime-time broadcasting for our
new channel in America,' said Murdoch, who hopes to sell them around the
world.
'We can now go to Procter & Gamble and say: 'Do you want to sponsor this
soap opera around the whole world'?' Murdoch said.
He has got to such a commanding position for two principal reasons. He has
assiduously monitored new technology - always a few paces behind the
visionaries but a step or two ahead of most corporate giants. He has been
prepared to follow hunches in creating markets rather than waiting for
others.
But Murdoch is still restless, looking to see where technology is going
next. This characteristic is highlighted by the joint venture with BT and
the purchase of Delphi. With BT, the trick will be to combine, on an
experimental basis, satellite, cellular and ordinary telephones to provide
information and entertainment direct to 500 homes.
With Delphi, the prospect will be of an interactive electronic newspaper
where subscribers can call up stories, say from The Times on small portable
screens.
But that will not be the end of the story. On Wednesday night, at a
Whitehall banquet to mark the launch of the new Sky package, Murdoch
interviewed by satellite Arthur C. Clarke, the man who first set out the
concept of satellite television more than 50 years ago.
In the conversation, Clarke referred to a device, perhaps like a watch, that
would give instant voice and visual contact with anywhere in the world or
call up information from anywhere in the world.
Murdoch, who claimed this week that technology was undermining the
traditional power of the media mogul, was all ears.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
News Corporation's media network
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PUBLISHING
US: Newspapers
    New York Post, Boston Herald
    Magazines
    Mirabella, TV Guide, FSI Division
    Books
    HarperCollins Publishers, including HarperCollins Perennial &
    Zondervan
UK: Newspapers
    The Times, The Sunday Times, The Sun, The News of the World, Today
    Magazines
    Times supplements, Shoppers Friend
    Books
    HarperCollins Publishers, including Fontana Grafton, Thorsons &
    Tolkien
Australia and Pacific Basin:
    Newspapers
    The Australian (national), 108 local/state newspapers
    Magazines
    7 including New Idea, TV Week, Australian Post
    Books
    HarperCollins Publishers
Hong Kong:
    Newspapers
    50 per cent of South China Morning Post, Sunday Morning Post, Wah
    Kiu Yat Po
Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Hungary:
    Newspapers
    The Fiji Times, The Post Courier, and 50 per cent of 3 Hungarian
    newspapers
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
BROADCASTING
US: Television
    Twentieth Century Fox, Fox Broadcasting Company & 8 Fox affiliated
    stations
Latin America: Television
    Fox is launching cable TV from Mexico to Argentina
UK: Television
    50 per cent of BSkyB
Australia: Television
    15 per cent of Seven Network
Asia and the east: Television
    63.6 per cent of HutchVision, Star TV
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
OTHER INTERESTS
US: Etak, News Electronic Data
UK: Sky Radio (71 per cent), Broadsystem Ltd, Convoys Group, News
    Datacom, News International Exhibitions, The Times Network Systems
Australia and Pacific Basin:
    45 per cent in each of 14 commercial printing firms, between 26 per
    cent and 50 per cent interest in Ansett Transport Industries,
    Australian Newsprint Mills, Computer Power, Eastwest Airlines,
    Festival Records, FS Falkiner & Sons, Independent Newspapers,
    Lanray Industries
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930904

