FT933-10059

FT  06 AUG 93 / Mideast talks 'back on track' - Christopher


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


MR Warren Christopher, the US secretary of state, who is shuttling between
Middle East states, appeared yesterday to be edging towards progress on the
deadlock in peace talks between Syria and Israel.
However, Mr Christopher failed to bridge differences between Israel and
Palestinians, central to a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The developments came as it emerged that Mr Yossi Sarid, a moderate in the
Israeli cabinet, and environment minister, had talks with a senior official
of the Palestine Liberation Organisation with the approval of Mr Yitzhak
Rabin, Israel's prime minister. Mr Sarid's meeting with Mr Nabil Shaath,
adviser to Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman, in Cairo last month, is the first
such contact and will further erode the Israeli taboo on talks with the PLO.
After meeting Mr Rabin yesterday Mr Christopher declared the peace talks
'back on track' and said he would be holding an unscheduled second round of
talks with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria today. His announcement fuelled
speculation of modest progress in talks between Israel and Syria which focus
on an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Golan Heights, seized in the 1967
Middle East war, in return for a full peace including trade and diplomatic
relations and security guarantees.
Mr Rabin said Mr Christopher brought 'good news' from Damascus but he
cautioned: 'It is only the beginning. We still have a long way to go.'
US officials with Mr Christopher refused to specify the nature of the
apparent progress but said the US had increased its role in the peace
process from that of an 'honest broker' to being an 'active intermediary'.
The US wants to lay the ground now for the 11th round of peace talks,
expected to be held in Washington in September. However, discussions between
Palestinians and Israelis on a two-phased settlement remain blocked over the
nature of an interim five-year period of limited Palestinian self-rule in
the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The US is pressing for acceptance by both sides of its draft statement of
principles which promises the Palestinians an early transfer of
administrative functions over areas such as health, education and police, -
but excludes control by Palestinians over Arab East Jerusalem and the Jewish
settlements in the occupied territories.
Palestinians leaders, some of whom boycotted Mr Christopher's visit, reject
the document as being pro-Israeli and are trying to persuade the US to start
talks about the final status of a Palestinian entity. Israel opposes such a
move. The shape of the joint statement has become crucial because both sides
believe what they agree to now will determine the shape of a final
Palestinian entity.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930806

