FT932-13450

FT  23 APR 93 / Topic share service in new hands


   By PETER MARTIN


THE LONDON Stock Exchange is handing its Topic electronic news system, which
publishes company and share price information, over to two information
companies.
Telekurs, the Swiss information group, will concentrate on supplying roughly
85 large Topic customers with a service called Topic Plus.
ICV, based in Woking, which already supplies retail investors with stock
exchange data through the Market-Eye system, will concentrate on up to 1,000
smaller Topic customers, selling them a service called Topic 3.
The exchange is understood to be receiving no up-front payment from Telekurs
and ICV, but they will pay the exchange a royalty for the use of its name
and customer lists. The companies will also pay an 'exchange fee' for the
feed of market data which Topic will retransmit.
Sir Andrew Hugh Smith, Stock Exchange chairman, said yesterday: 'We decided
quite some time ago this was not a core activity.
'With the benefit of hindsight it would have been better to do this six
months ago, but we had a false start in the first round of negotiations.'
Topic customers will be encouraged to 'migrate' to their choice of Telekurs
or ICV systems starting this summer. The transfer of the 10,000 existing
Topic screens to the new systems is expected to be complete by the end of
1994.
The existing Topic system will then be closed down, but there will be no
redundancies.
Telekurs's offering will include a wide range of international financial
data. It will require users to learn a new interface, using a mouse or a
typewriter keyboard. The ICV service will be more narrowly focused on UK
equities. It will allow customers to continue to use the existing Topic
system's codes and numbers on a small keypad.
Both services hope to be supplying clients with test systems from June, with
a 'live' service from September. The aim is to switch all the existing Topic
subscribers to the new systems by the end of 1994.
The new systems will face fierce competition from Reuters, the UK's biggest
financial information company. Reuters launched a rival to the Topic system
in January this year and says that it is making rapid gains of customers.
Telekurs was founded in 1935 as a service company for its owners, the big
Swiss banks. It has an annual turnover of SFr400m (Pounds 160m). ICV,
founded in 1980, had pre-tax profits of Pounds 351,000 on turnover of Pounds
3.8m in 1991, the last year for which figures are available. The company is
privately owned, with principal stakes held by Mr David Taylor, managing
director and Mr Christopher Sharples, the chairman.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930423

