FT934-10214

FT  06 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Takeover hopes boost selected ITV shares


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


SHARES of a number of ITV companies bucked the trend of a falling stock
market yesterday on growing hopes that the government will allow a modest
degree of liberalisation of ITV ownership rules.
The central takeover targets such as London Weekend Television, Anglia
Television and Yorkshire Tyne-Tees rose while Carlton Communications, which
hopes to increase its ITV interests, was one of only three Footsie 100
companies whose share price did not fall.
LWT rose 15p to 502p, Anglia was up 14p to 398p and Central finished up at
2058p, a rise of 25p on the day. The FT Actuaries media sector rose by 0.97
points to 2234.87.
The government has yet to take a final decision on ownership rules, but is
now moving in the direction of a modest liberalisation which would allow
some consolidation in the fragmented ownership structure of Britain's
commercial television system.
Proposals are now being put to Mr John Major, the prime minister, following
an inter-ministerial meeting this week.
At the moment none of the nine largest ITV companies can take each other
over.
There is now considerable political support for protecting the ITV companies
in the national regions of Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland, and a
determination that there shall be two separate companies in London.
If the new proposals are accepted the main changes would come in England,
although the scale would be limited.
Granada Television, Carlton Television and Meridian are all part of larger
groups and therefore likely to be the main predators. The key targets are
likely to be LWT, Anglia, Central and Yorkshire Tyne-Tees.
It is very unlikely that an ITV company will be able to own more than two
large ITV licences. Granada is likely to try to take over LWT in which it
already has a stake and which in turn has a stake in Yorkshire.
Carlton, which owns 20 per cent of Central, may decide to make a move on
Anglia. If the degree of liberalisation now being considered goes ahead,
Carlton and Granada could emerge as the lynchpins of the British commercial
broadcasting system.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931106

