FT932-271

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (23): Honest broker role comes into its own -
Bidding for work in countries of the former Soviet bloc may be complicated
but can be well worthwhile / European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development


   By PETER MAYO ELSTOB


EXPORTERS bidding for build-operate-transfer (BOT) contracts in eastern and
central Europe financed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) face a strictly controlled tendering process. But the
business can be well worth the trouble and the EBRD's involvement has its
advantages.
Exporters have no formal relationship with the EBRD (although the bank may
well pay them directly rather than the procuring body), but as Bernard
Gouveia, who heads the EBRD's procurement department, explains, the bank
feels it can play the role of honest broker between the two parties once
contractors are chosen.
The Bank is bound by its articles of establishment to ensure the absence of
favouritism or bias, and to require the procuring authority, often a
state-owned utility or other authority, to seek open tenders from a wide
range of countries, not just members of the Bank.
The EBRD sets down detailed guidelines on tendering and 'advises and
assists' the client on the procurement process. This includes helping to
publicise the tendering opportunities as widely as possible, helping to
issue invitations to tender, and then the documents themselves, advising on
evaluation and administration of the resulting contracts.
The Bank is not a party to the contracts, but its continued involvement is
not restricted to disbursing funds. In practice, it continues to look over
the client's shoulder during the whole life of the turnkey project.
A recent example was the award this year of the second round of contracts by
Romtelecom, the Romanian state telecommunications operator, under its
15-year, Ecu142m (Dollars 167.7m) loan agreement with the EBRD. Agreements
were signed with Sirti of Italy and Tomen of Japan, to construct the first
1900km of a planned 5,000km fibre optic network which will eventually link
Romania with both Frankfurt and Istanbul.
The Romanians originally wished to purchase the optical fibre and construct
the network themselves, but they were persuaded by the EBRD that this was
too ambitious. Instead, the Bank proposed breaking the first stage of the
network up into three supply-install-commission contracts for which foreign
telecommunications companies would bid, with none being awarded more than
two contracts.
This, Mr Gouveia says, ensured a competitive environment for subsequent
contracts and reduced Romtelecom's reliance on a single supplier.
Neither company won its contract on price alone. The Italians bid Ecu14.80m
for a pair of circular networks in the west and centre of the country, while
the Japanese bid Y985m for the eastern section. Lower bids were received,
but these had either failed to meet quality levels or had not satisfied the
required commercial terms.
The EBRD's honest broker role really came into its own, however, after the
contractors were chosen. The optical fibre specified is still on the Cocom
list, with approval given on a case-by-case basis. When concerns were raised
on the contractor side about possible approval delays, the bank was able to
advise on the legal minefield, and also back up Romania's assurances that
the network would not be used for military purposes.
Peter Mayo Elstob is editor, Finance East Europe

The Financial Times


London Page XX

930629

