FT932-112

FT  30 JUN 93 / Murdoch Asian TV deal fails at first hurdle: Expansion move
founders on ownership laws and complaints from Beijing


   By SIMON HOLBERTON and MARTIN DICKSON


   HONG KONG, NEW YORK


MR RUPERT Murdoch's bid to enter Asian broadcasting through a HKDollars
1.85bn (Pounds 160m) purchase of 22 per cent of Hong Kong's Television
Broadcasts (TVB) was on the verge of collapse yesterday. He was forced to
ask the Hong Kong government to defer its consideration of the acquisition.
His plan to acquire a substantial shareholding in TVB appears to have
foundered on Hong Kong's tough media ownership laws and complaints from
China concerning the deal. It was unclear last night how the transaction
could be restructured to avoid these problems.
Mr Murdoch's News Corporation said discussions were continuing with TVB's
two controlling shareholders - Sir Run Run Shaw and Mr Robert Kuok, the
Malaysian financier. More time was required 'to examine the structure of
their proposals to the government and the Broadcasting Authority'.
Earlier this month Mr Murdoch said he had forged an alliance with Sir Run
Run and Mr Kuok which would create 'the premier Asian company in terrestrial
and satellite broadcasting'. After the deal Sir Run Run would own 23 per
cent of the company, News Corporation 22 per cent and Mr Kuok 21 per cent.
But the proposed deal drew hostility from Hong Kong legislators and the
local journalists' association, who fear the concentration of media power.
It also ran up against what appear to be insuperable regulatory problems.
Hong Kong does not permit an existing broadcaster to own more than 15 per
cent of a local television licensee. Nor does it permit a foreigner to vote
more than 10 per cent of a licensee's equity.
Mr Murdoch would require exemptions from the government for the TVB deal to
proceed. But it emerged yesterday that such exemptions were unlikely to be
given.
Neither the government nor the Broadcasting Authority 'could see good reason
for bending the rules', one Hong Kong government official said. 'I think it
is the end of it.' Mr Murdoch's News Corporation yesterday cleared a final
big hurdle in its bid to take over the ailing tabloid New York Post when the
Federal Communications Commission, the government agency which oversees the
media industry, gave the takeover its approval, writes Martin Dickson in New
York.
The FCC, by a two to one vote, gave Mr Murdoch a waiver of its rule which
normally bars a company or individual from owning both a television station
and a newspaper in the same market. News Corporation, which also owns the
New York TV station WNYW, has been operating the Post since March under a
temporary FCC waiver. Mr Murdoch owned the Post, which is now in bankruptcy
proceedings, until 1988, when he was forced to sell it to comply with the
cross-ownership rules.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930630

