FT934-8697

FT  13 NOV 93 / Drift netting - the shame of England: Fishing


   By TOM FORT


I HAVE a friend, rich and powerful beyond the dreams of avarice and
ambition. There was, however, something missing from his world. He had the
ears of ministers, the respect of the makers and shakers of our society.
Opinion-formers bowed respectfully at the mention of his name. But he could
not catch a salmon. He travelled to celebrated waters, watched the fish jump
over his fly - and returned empty-handed. He learnt, to his displeasure,
that salmon paid no heed to wealth and reputation.
This autumn, my friend was invited by a friend - a man equally powerful in
his field - to a famously prolific Scottish river. I told him that if he
failed again, he should think about giving up the rigours of salmon fishing
and stick to something less demanding - such as feeding his koi carp. He
agreed; it was make or break.
The prospects, though, were grim. North-east Scotland was in the grip of a
mini-drought. The water was dead low and the famous river was showing its
bones. The sun beamed down and the fish were stale and scarce.
I should explain that, while my friend was on the Naver, I was in Ireland,
catching nothing on the Blackwater. I shall, therefore, skim over the
details of his exploits (although, should you bump into him, he will be glad
to fill you in). Suffice to say that he caught two fish, one after another,
and no one else caught anything. So now he is rich, powerful etc etc - and a
successful salmon fisherman. It is intolerable.
He would tell you that his success was due to persistence, self-belief, and
skill, My version - possibly tinged by envy - is that it was a pure,
outrageous, undeserved fluke. The truth probably lies somewhere in between.
The truism is that he caught fish, in hopeless conditions, because the fish
were there.
For the Naver, like many other Scottish rivers, has had a fine season;
reminiscent, almost, of the great days of the 1950s and 1960s before disease
and gross commercial exploitation brought Scottish salmon fishing to its
knees. The weather largely was favourable and the fish were back in numbers.
Tremendous strides have been taken to protect the dwindling stocks of
Atlantic salmon - and just in the nick of time. The chief hero is an
Icelander called Orri Vigfusson, a man of demonic energy and magical
persuasiveness, who has made the salvation of the salmon his moral crusade.
He heads the North Atlantic Salmon Fund, and his most recent coup has been
to negotiate the suspension of the Greenland drift-net fishery.
Drift-net fishing involves stretching a huge net - up to 50 miles long  -
across the salmon's known migratory routes. It can easily annihilate a whole
migration, depriving distant rivers of most of their annual intake of fish.
It is atrociously destructive and - in the age of salmon farming - wholly
unnecessary. Greenland now has joined the United States, Canada, Norway,
Iceland and Scotland in banning drift-net fishing.
And what, you might be wondering, is the British government's position on
the infamous matter of the English fishery, which operates off the
north-east coast and accounts each year for up to 80,000 salmon heading for
Scottish rivers?
If inertia and indifference constitute a position, that is the British
government's. John Gummer, as minister of agriculture, presided over a deal
to phase out the north-east fishery. It was hailed - by me, among others,
I'm sorry to say - as an important step in the right direction. It turned
out to be nothing of the sort, for it allowed the existing licence-holders
to continue their depredations for years to come.
I have no particular urge to join the queue of those wishing to put the boot
into Gummer, who has moved on to higher things. But the fact is that the
only remaining legalised drift-net fisheries for Atlantic salmon in the
civilised world are those off the north-east coast of England, and the west
coast of Ireland.
Within the past couple of months has come the news that the Irish government
is considering banning its fishery. Dublin finally is coming to realise that
vastly greater economic benefits spring from exploiting salmon as a sport
resource than from putting them in tins.
This month, a petition calling for an immediate end to the north-east
England fishery is being handed in at 10 Downing Street. Thanks to men like
Orri Vigfusson and a host of other campaigners, the prospects for the
Atlantic salmon are brighter now than for many years. Is it too much to hope
that Gummer's successor, Gillian Shephard, should rouse herself and erase a
shameful blot from her government's conservation record?

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931113

