FT934-8651

FT  13 NOV 93 / Minding Your Own Business: The good life yields a heady,
hard-won crop - Clive Fewins meets a couple who reacted to large debts by
going back to the land


   By CLIVE FEWINS


CIDER maker Stephen Gillman sometimes thinks he can still smell the aroma
that wafted from 30 empty oak hogsheads delivered to his Somerset home five
years ago from a whisky distillery in Scotland.
'My first year's cider vintage had a delicious whiskyish background to it,'
he said. 'Some cider makers regularly buy discarded whisky hogsheads to give
some brews a distinct flavour.'
At Pounds 750 including transport, Stephen thought the casks good value  -
particularly as the only other equipment he had to buy to continue his
fledgling business was a Pounds 1,200 hydraulic press.
The vessels were ideal for the first brew, which was 1,500 gallons - the
largest permitted without incurring excise duty. Whether it was due to the
hint of whisky or not, the experiment proved a success.
This was fortunate. Stephen and his wife Jill were more than Pounds 100,000
in debt to the bank and building society, having incurred debts buying out
her brother and sister-in-law's half of the holiday flat letting business
they had run in nearby Minehead. They decided to sell the flats and invest
everything in eight barren acres and a few delapidated barns in the hamlet
of Torre, seven miles away.
The Gillmans were yearning for a pleasant style of life. They wanted to
escape from the cramped urban flat they had occupied with their two small
daughters since Stephen, a master mariner, had opted for dry land. Stephen,
who was brought up on a fruit farm in Worcestershire wanted to do something
more adventurous than running the flats and cultivating pick-your-own
strawberries on an acre of land he rented.
They have achieved a good quality of life - but at a cost. Torre fruit farm
is in an idyllic spot, at the foot of the Brendon Hills beside a lovely
stream a mile from 800-year-old Cleeve Abbey.
Having bought the eight acres, the Gillmans increased their debt by
converting the first of the two dilapidated barns into a family home. They
did this in five months. Then they began the Pounds 80,000 conversion of the
house they now live in, which also has two holiday flats.
'While the building work was going on we lived in a caravan on the spot, but
soon realised that in order to make the whole enterprise work we were going
to have to sell the first barn soon after it was completed, otherwise we
feared the bank would make us sell the whole site to reduce the debt,'
Stephen said.
Then disaster struck. Interest rates rose from 7.5 to 14 per cent. To make
matters worse the Gillmans were paying 3 percentage points above base. It
took two years to sell the cottage, borrowings rose to Pounds 200,000 and
have remained at more than Pounds 100,000.
The Gillmans hand-planted 20,000 strawberry plants. When these all failed
they started again. There followed two good seasons, in which the Gillmans
made money, but by 1989 they realised that they were chasing their tails.
They knew that they had to make more money or sell up. Stephen had made wine
and cider on the kitchen table for several years, and when the Gillmans did
their sums they realised that cider was potentially more profitable than the
pick-your-own business.
'Any number of customers coming for strawberries were asking us where they
could get locally produced real scrumpy. We then realised that in west
Somerset there was no small producer of naturally conditioned farmhouse
cider made entirely from local cider apples,' Stephen said.
'With my background in fruit growing and the realisation that we had access
to a dozen or so old orchards round here with a mix of the right varieties
of apples, we decided to brew cider.'
So it was back to the land, but this time picking, collecting and
transporting 11 tons of apples to make the first brew.
By the summer of 1990 all 1,500 gallons had been sold, 400 bush trees
containing all the main varieties of cider apple planted and the strawberry
fields let to a neighbour to cultivate and run.
For September 1990, the Gillmans increased the brew to 10,000 gallons. 'It
seems an awful lot more, but we realised the road to success lay in
increasing volume. The cost was not that much greater. We had to buy 22
storage vessels at Pounds 35 each but apart from that there was little
further investment needed,' Stephen said.
Further, the holiday flats were beginning to bring in a reasonable sum and
they had found that producing non-alcoholic apple juice was a profitable
sideline. There was no need to employ a large staff - casual labour was
readily available to help with pressing and at other busy times.
There was a 60 per cent profit margin on the first brew. Stephen changed
banks, and consequently, bank managers and managed to reduce his borrowings
a little.
The main task for the 1990 vintage was to sell it all. The Gillmans took on
a sales agent, Sally Simmons, on a commission-only basis. By the summer of
1991, Torre Traditional cider was selling in shops and off-licences all over
Devon and Somerset and some of the bigger competitors were beginning to take
notice.
'When we phoned some of the bigger firms for marketing advice we got very
little help, so we then realised we were making inroads,' Jill said.
The Gillmans have received the endorsement of the Campaign for Real Ale,
which sells 1,000 gallons a year.
Annual production is 20,000 gallons. 'It is still a drop in the ocean
compared to the big boys, but at last the borrowing is coming down slowly
and if we go up to 40,000 gallons annually we should soon be able to pay off
our debts and make a good profit,' Stephen said.
Profits were a gross 56 per cent of turnover in 1989-90, they rose to a
Pounds 25,000 on a turnover of Pounds 62,000 the next year, and Pounds
30,000 on a turnover of Pounds 80,000 in 1992-3.
In spite of the aromatic delights of rising early to start pressing in the
brewhouse at this time of year it is still hard work. The couple reckon they
work 80-hour weeks, 52 weeks of the year. Last autumn they had their first
holiday for five years - a week in a friend's cottage in Normandy.
Stephen is away selling cider at 40 shows this year. The final one is the
London Christmas Festival at Earls Court in early December. 'Sometimes I
think all this is very hard on the children,' he said. 'I wouldn't like to
have to work as hard as this for the rest of my life. But we all love it
here at Torre and I enjoy cider making. So we shall just have to slog on
like this until most of the loan is paid off and we feel the business is
financially secure.'
Torre Traditional farmhouse Cider, Torre fruit Farm, Washford, Watchet,
Somerset TA23 OLA. Tel: 0984-40004.
In our article on Cocoon, Macdonald Originals, last week a computer error
caused a 3 to be inserted between the Pounds sign and sterling amounts. The
correct figures can be obtained by removing the leading numeral 3. The
correct price for Cocoon's coats is Pounds 200. These are available from
Cocoon, Macdonald Originals, Lomond Industrial Estate, Alexandria,
Dumbartonshire G83 0TL. Tel: 0389-55511.

The Financial Times


London Page X

931113

