FT933-10266

FT  05 AUG 93 / Union officials see benefits in secret ballots


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


THE LEGAL requirement for a secret ballot before a trade union can call a
strike has been the most important reason for the reduction in industrial
disruption in Britain over recent years, says a survey of officials from the
former AEU engineering union.
The report, from the London School of Economics, also covered most of
Britain's large and medium-sized unions.
It is the first comprehensive study of the effect of recent labour
legislation on union behaviour.
Its main findings are likely to vindicate the government's assertions that
Conservative labour law reform during the 1980s has had a substantial effect
on the way unions act.
The survey was conducted before the AEU's recent merger with the EETPU
electricians union to form the AEEU.
The research among AEU officials found that as many as 61 per cent of those
covered by the study said the law had been 'the most important factor
affecting industrial action'.
Some 56 per cent said they also believed the law 'had been an important
weapon favouring employers in their negotiations' with unions.
A total of 77 per cent of the union's full-time officers said the
introduction of statutory pre-strike ballots had been a 'good thing' for the
unions, with 87 per cent of those held in the AEU producing votes in favour
of industrial action.
Just under a third of officials added that as a result they were 'now more
accountable to their members,' while 83 per cent thought AEU members were
much more reluctant to take industrial action than they had been in the
past.
The report, by Mr Bob Simpson and Ms Jill Elgar, suggests that union members
see pre-strike ballots as a way of strengthening officials' negotiating hand
rather than a signal for the outbreak of industrial conflict.
Apparently 'a convincing yes vote in a ballot could often lead to an
improved offer or withdrawal of proposals in dispute without industrial
action going ahead', the survey argues.
The report says 'the majority thought that members were now less likely to
take spontaneous industrial action than in the 1970s'. The full report will
be published later this month.
As many as 91 per cent of respondents thought employers 'had become more
hardline in their dealings with unions'.
The AEU response rate was 56 per cent and was made up mainly of district
secretaries and divisional organisers.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930805

