FT933-5371

FT  03 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Spectacle lens side sold by Pilkington


   By MAGGIE URRY


PILKINGTON, the glass group, has agreed the sale of its Sola spectacle lens
business for Dollars 315m (Pounds 210m). After costs relating to the sale,
Pilkington will receive Pounds 200m in cash.
Its shares rose 7p to 163p.
The purchaser is AEA Investors, a fund set up several years ago by a group
of wealthy US individuals to buy companies. Sola, which is based in
California, is one of two global companies in the spectacle lens market.
Mr Andrew Robb, Pilkington's finance director, said the sale should cut
gearing by about 20 percentage points to 70 per cent. This would be achieved
by a combination of a Pounds 56m addition to reserves, as the sale is above
book value, and the reduction in debt.
Gearing had risen through the Pounds 95m purchase of the Heywood Williams
glass distribution business in April and the agreed acquisition of a half
share in Siv, the Italian glass company, for Pounds 45m.
The profit and loss account will include the Pounds 56m gain, offset by
Pounds 18m of goodwill written off when Sola was acquired 15 years ago.
Mr Robb said the effect of the sale on on-going pre-tax profits would be
negative since the interest saving on the cash would not match profits from
Sola, which were Pounds 19.1m at the operating level and Pounds 15.7m
pre-tax in the year to March 31 on sales of Pounds 186m.
However, at the earnings level the sale would make little difference, he
said, since Sola's profits were taxable, but the interest saving would be
made in the US and UK where Pilkington paid no tax.
Sola was put on the market last December, and Mr Robb said that Goldman
Sachs had found a number of buyers. This had delayed the sale as the
different potential purchasers had each had to do due diligence
investigations.
Mr Robb said the AEA offer was the best. It was still contingent on AEA
raising some debt finance for the purchase. Completion is expected by
November.
Analysts welcomed the deal, but in the words of one 'it is one step down a
long road'. He said further disposals were essential.
Mr Robb acknowledged the group was looking at making other sales. He would
not be specific about which businesses might be sold but said the group
would not contemplate sales of its core flat and safety glass activities.
Further disposals would help achieve the target of cutting gearing by
another 20 percentage points over the next two years, he added.
Analysts expect the US contact lens business to be sold once its profits
have recovered, and believe Pilkington could sell a half share in its
Australian subsidiary.
AEA keeps a low profile. In February it sold Speciality Coatings
International to Bowater, the packaging and industrial films group, for
Pounds 305m having bought it from James River in 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930903

