FT934-8634

FT  15 NOV 93 / A public humiliation for the outsider of Italy's business
elite: Olivetti's Carlo De Benedetti is interviewed by Haig Simonian


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


SOME 400 miles divide the dank cells of Rome's rambling Regina Coeli prison
on the banks of the Tiber from the warm, cherry-wood panelled offices of Mr
Carlo De Benedetti's business base in Milan.
In the six-hour drive between the two earlier this month, the Olivetti
chairman, sandwiched between two Carabinieri officers in the back of a small
Lancia sedan, found himself transformed from an industrial mogul to a
miscreant.
Rather than take his private jet or 12-cylinder BMW to face the arrest
warrant from Rome magistrates investigating Olivetti's kickbacks to
officials of the post ministry, Mr De Benedetti wanted to avoid the
impression of special privileges, he says. 'I wanted to be treated
normally.'
That self-imposed public humiliation, which included an unseemly episode
when his car was engulfed by newsmen after being blocked by traffic just
outside the jail, illustrates one facet of a character whose contradictions
make him one of Europe's most fascinating, but bewildering, businessman.
He says he holds no grudges against the judges at whose hand he suffered the
indignities of incarceration. 'Accidentally or deliberately, the formalities
of going into prison separate you from your personality. In a way, you
really do become a number. From an emotional standpoint, this is the most
difficult stage,' he says.
Nor does he wish to see the same thing happening to others in Italy's
business establishment also embroiled in the 21-month corruption scandal.
'I'm such an individualist, I'd never think of comparing myself to them.
Wanting it to happen to them is the last thing I'd do.'
Yet it is hard to believe the brush with justice has failed to unnerve even
Mr De Benedetti, whose ability to recover from setbacks and surmount new
challenges is one of the most alluring aspects of a business career that has
taken him from managing director at Fiat in the 1970s to one of the most
daring of the frontier-busting deal makers of the 1980s.
Hearing him retell it now, Mr De Benedetti's sang-froid almost stretches
belief. The 4.30am departure for Rome was timed to avoid his spending the
night in jail. 'I calculated it would take about six hours to drive, another
hour for prison formalities and six or seven more for interrogation. That
meant I hoped I could sleep in my own bed that night.'
As it happened, Mr De Benedetti was released at 11.35pm after two grillings
in which he satisfied investigating magistrates that the 'new' evidence they
had was already in the deposition he had made to their Milan colleagues six
months earlier. Earlier this year Mr De Benedetti admitted that the company
had paid more than L10bn (Pounds 4.1m) to government officials to win
contracts.
Even Mr De Benedetti, however, admits to some harrowing moments. 'At sunset,
when I was waiting for my second interrogation, the prisoners started to
sing. Listening to that chorus, there was a moment in which I seriously
wondered whether I would get out that night.'
Now Mr De Benedetti, like hundreds of others in the scandals, is in a sort
of judicial limbo, presumably to face trial at some later date. After a few
days under house arrest in Rome and then Milan, life returned to 'normal'
late last week. It is hard to think, however, that life could ever be
entirely normal for Mr De Benedetti, who yesterday held a celebratory lunch
with friends and family at his Turin home to toast his 59th birthday and the
removal of restrictions on his liberty.
Always outspoken, sometimes at risk to himself, he is likely to remain a
prisoner of contradictions in his own nature.
He revels in his image in Italy as an outsider, even among the business
elite with whom he has made so much of his fortune. Along with Fiat's
chairman, Mr Giovanni Agnelli, he is one of a brace of businessmen who have
come to represent Italian capitalism abroad.
At home, his image is still one of a slight upstart who is at times
unwilling to accept the confines and unwritten rules of the domestic
business leaders among whom he moves.
Yet while he revels in being different, Mr De Benedetti has not suffered
from being accepted among the Agnellis, Pirellis and their like. His
business success has opened the doors to his membership of the club of core
shareholders in Mediobanca, the merchant bank behind most big business deals
in Italy, and to the controlling ranks of the Confindustria employers'
federation, whose latest Rome meeting he rushed to attend on regaining his
liberty last week.
In politics, he has used his media interests, notably the best selling daily
La Repubblica and the popular L'Espresso news magazine, to scourge much of
the establishment, notably the now discredited Socialist and Christian
Democrat parties.
That so many members of Italy's political old guard, led by the Christian
Democrats who have held uninterrupted power since the post-war return to
democracy, are now under investigation is a visible source of satisfaction
to Mr De Benedetti, in spite of the fact that he claims he is not in any way
vindictive.
'In Italy, we had a sort of Communist regime in which a coterie held power.
Its duration allowed corruption to grow exponentially, rather like in Japan.
It wasn't quite Russia, in that we had freedom of the press. I was not sent
to Siberia. But my Siberia was the Banco Ambrosiano affair.' The reference
is to the big Milanese bank which collapsed in 1982 soon after Mr De
Benedetti resigned after a two-month stint as deputy chairman.
He sees the tortuous 11-year legal case, rather than his latest dealings
with the judiciary over Olivetti, as his true courtroom Calvary. In April
1992, he was sentenced to more than six years in jail for fraudulent
bankruptcy. Although he appealed immediately, his detailed defence can only
begin once the full motivation for the sentence is handed down, which has
yet to happen.
The true events surrounding Banco Ambrosiano and the mysterious death of its
chairman, Mr Roberto Calvi, found hanging under London's Blackfriars Bridge,
may never be known, although some of the mysteries have recently begun to
clear. Among the groups believed to have been involved were the Mafia, the
notorious P2 masonic lodge and the Vatican, through its own financial
institution. Leaked testimony in the latest corruption scandals suggests the
bank may also have been a conduit for illegal political funding.
Mr De Benedetti is convinced the sentence against him was politically
motivated. It exploded as a bombshell, years after the original charges
against him were dropped at an earlier stage in the proceedings.
He says explosive new evidence for the prosecution will be revealed from the
witness box next month in the long-running P2 trial in Rome which he says
will clear his name. Separately, recent Milanese investigations into a
senior judge implicated in alleged bribery has led to what is believed to be
a broader inquiry into the conduct of some top judges, including those
involved in the Banco Ambrosiano case.
It is that affair which lies at the heart of Mr De Benedetti's quarrel with
the judiciary, rather than his recent contretemps in Rome. 'There is nothing
more damaging for an entrepreneur than to be associated with bankruptcy. I
cannot find any other explanation than some form of vendetta,' he says. 'The
other thing is nothing.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931115

