FT933-10026

FT  06 AUG 93 / Talks held on Polly Peck assets


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ISTANBUL


ADMINISTRATORS to Polly Peck International, the collapsed
fruit-to-electronics conglomerate, were in discussion with the authorities
in northern Cyprus yesterday in an apparent attempt to stop the government
taking over the group's local assets and delaying their disposal.
Mr Chris Howells, a partner with Coopers & Lybrand, representing the UK
court-appointed administrators to the group, met Mr Salih Cosar, the
territory's finance minister.
Mr Howells had a separate meeting with Mr Mentes Aziz, the lawyer acting for
Mr Asil Nadir, the fugitive businessman and former chairman of Polly Peck.
The latest negotiations follow threats to sequestrate the group's principal
businesses on the island - two hotels, the Jasmine Court and the Palm Beach;
and Sunzest, the fruit export operation.
Administrators said yesterday there had not yet been a sequestration order
and said they would oppose any move which 'would take the companies out of
direct control of the shareholders'.
The administrators are today expected to conclude the disposal of ICP, a
pharmaceutical company which Polly Peck owns through a Jersey subsidiary.
However, it was unclear whether any cash would be remitted to the creditors.
The company was earlier taken over by the government because of Polly Peck's
failure to pay some TL50bn (Pounds 2.92m) the government says is owed in tax
and social security dues.
Any disposals will be further complicated by the fact that the hotels in
question are leaseholds which can only be transferred with government
permission.
The administrators were said to be in negotiations with various Turkish and
Turkish Cypriot buyers before Mr Nadir's flight from Britain.
Yesterday officials confirmed that Mr Dervis Eroglu, the prime minister of
north Cyprus, had been contacted by Mr Nadir who was said to have requested
a new timetable to settle debts.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930806

