FT932-3282

FT  15 JUN 93 / Post-perfect world


   By JOE ROGALY


The New Right is no longer triumphant. Its precepts are being challenged by
conservatives. Its doctrines are receding into the history of political
thought. Soon it will be regarded as the Old Wrong. The question of the turn
of the century is, what is to come next? One answer (not mine) could be a
mild, unambitious conservatism.
So runs the dream of the Menshevik, or non-Thatcherite, wing of Britain's
Conservative party, which hankers, whether it knows it or not, for a return
to a period of quiet, traditional conservative government, unruffled by the
assertive and divisive radicalism of the New Bolsheviks of the 1980s. The
present chancellor and putative next prime minister, Mr Kenneth Clarke,
implied as much last week when he described himself as standing at the 'hard
centre' of the Tory world; the actual prime minister, Mr John Major, would
not be harmed by a similar appellation.
Ever eager to help, I draw the attention of this centrist duo to a
forthcoming book* by John Gray, a conservative political philosopher and
fellow of Jesus College, Oxford. Mr Major may well find time in which to
read bits of it; Mr Clarke has first to digest the Maastricht treaty and one
or two other documents pertaining to his new job. Mr Gray is described by
his publisher as 'formerly a principal theorist of the New Right,' which
gives added piquancy to his extended critique of the work of the
'libertarian and classical liberal ideologues' whose nostrums continue to
haunt the Tory politicians of the 1990s.
He defines the New Right as properly anti-Marxist, understandably critical
of the failures of big government, questionably monetarist - and blind to
the imperfectibility of market institutions, which were 'understood as a
sort of perpetual motion machine for economic growth'. (Mr Gray, I am
delighted to report, is extremely unsound on growth.) 'It was this Whiggish
fantasy,' he writes, 'that animated the enthusiasts of the New Right; the
failure of its political projects, or the unanticipated consequences of
their success, has rudely dispelled it.' Among the failures, I would list
1980s macro-economic policy on both sides of the Atlantic and, in Britain,
the Tory health and education reforms.
Our author has an explanation for this headlong rush into doctrinal
disappointment. The ideologues behind Thatcherism and Reaganism, like the
Marxists they vanquished, mistakenly believed in the perfectibility of human
endeavour through the application of universal principles. One side-effect
was to introduce a sectarian spirit into conservative discourse. That, as we
know, is still present. So is the worship of the market as an institution
without flaw, not to mention the conception of all human conduct 'in terms
of a calculus of exchange'. This attitude denies the dependency of civil
society on the resources of its culture; it runs contrary to the
common-sense observation that human beings exist as part of families, or
communities. You could say, after reading Mr Gray, that the New Right was
mistaken in its assumption that there is no such thing as society.
'The lesson of the bankruptcy of the New Right,' he writes, '. . . is that
political life is not a project of world improvement in which are invested
the transcendental hopes of an age without faith. It is instead an almost
desperately humble task of endless improvisation, in which . . . the ever
present prospect of disaster is staved off. . .'
I have quoted extensively from this thought-provoking introduction because
the first three chapters of the book have appeared before, as self-critical
pamphlets published by New Right think-tanks. As noted at the time, Mr
Gray's view, as asserted in one of those pamphlets, is that 'a humane social
market economy is the only sort of free economy likely to survive . . . and
the only sort that deserves to survive'. If there is such a thing as
Majorism, these recycled chapters contain it. Traditional one-nation Tories,
and continental Christian Democrats, will grasp the point, even as they trim
spending on the welfare state.
The prime minister should, however, run a mile from the brand-new fourth and
final chapter. It takes the argument too close to the truth of the present
human condition. Entitled 'an agenda for Green conservatism', it soars
beyond the immediate needs of Mr Major and Mr Clarke. The problem is not Mr
Gray's adoption of a green mantle; Lady Thatcher herself did that. Anyhow,
he neatly disposes of the excesses of green theories. His arguments, that
private property and market mechanisms are essential tools for protecting
most of the environment, should appeal to Tories, even while greenery is
relatively unfashionable. He does see regulation as necessary to deal with
threats to the global commons, like the upper atmosphere, and he is
Malthusian about the population explosion. But some Conservatives might
swallow this medicine too, even if they have to swallow hard.
They will, however, gag on this: 'Though the eradication of involuntary
poverty remains a noble cause, the project of promoting maximal economic
growth is, perhaps, the most vulgar ideal ever put before suffering
humankind. The myth of open-ended progress is not an ennobling myth, and it
should form no part of conservative philosophy.' He goes on to deride the
'malady of infinite aspiration', and asks rather that we 'keep in good
repair those institutions and practices whereby human beings come to be
reconciled with their circumstances . . .' He offers as an alternative J S
Mill's conception of a 'stationary-state economy'.
I love it. Here is a Tory philosopher telling us what we know to be true -
that economic expansion allied to exponential population growth cannot
continue forever, and that we had better start thinking about the ethical
consequences of that stark arithmetic. I picked up Mr Gray's book after
returning from a seminar on the moral foundations of a democratic society,
organised by the Social Market Foundation, a newish think-tank. The seminar
affirmed the current absence of moral underpinnings for western thought.
Something has to replace Marx-based philosophies, and perhaps reinvent
Christianity. Mr Gray's fourth chapter suggests where to start.
* Beyond the New Right;
Routledge; Pounds 19.99

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930615

