FT932-51

FT  30 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Colombia gives go-ahead for BP
consortium's oil development


   By SARITA KENDALL


   BOGOTA


THE COLOMBIAN government has given the go-ahead for the development of the
Cusiana oil fields, discovered by British Petroleum and its partners Total,
Triton and Eco Petrol.
BP estimates crude reserves for the Cusiana and Cupiagua structures in the
eastern Andean foothills at 2bn barrels, though the state oil company Eco
Petrol tends to be more conservative. There are also large gas deposits.
Production will rise from 10,000 barrels a day to 150,000 b/d by the end of
1995, with the state companies sharing development costs. Investment in this
first phase is expected to reach about USDollars 1.2bn and involve the
expansion of the central pipeline, which runs from the eastern plains across
the Andes mountains. A 1,600-hectare (3,950-acre) settlement-free zone has
been established around Cusiana in an attempt to cut off guerrilla access.
A second stage of development could take output above 600,000 b/d in 1998.
That would mean investing another Dollars 5bn or more, depending on the
exact production level and which transport option was chosen.
One possibility would be the use of the Cano Limon-Covenas pipeline as
output from Cano Limon declines, another would involve taking the crude
through Venezuela to the gulf of Maracaibo. Mr David Simon of BP said
earlier this month at the Latin American energy conference that improved
technology would allow very high well productivity and that the costs of
drilling the deep Cusiana wells had fallen by 50 per cent.
Colombia produces about 450,000 b/d of crude at present and exports some
180,000 b/d. The Cusiana and Cupiagua fields ensure a big increase in
foreign earnings and fiscal income from the mid-1990s - the discussion as to
how the extra income should be used is hotting up. After 1998 Cusiana
exports could be bringing in Dollars 3bn to Dollars 4bn a year, equivalent
to half of Colombia's current total exports. Despite the need for spending
on infrastructure and social projects, economists are worried about
inflationary pressures and exchange rates. International reserves are
already high at Dollars 8bn and exports are losing competitiveness because
of the slowdown in devaluation. Part of the Cusiana income may be frozen for
the future and some used to pre-pay foreign debt.
Although the Cusiana discovery has focused interest on Colombia -
particularly on the eastern plains - some foreign companies are discouraged
by guerilla problems and tax rates. Exploration drilling has dropped off in
the last two years and Eco Petrol is offering some of its 'reserved' areas
in an attempt to boost interest. To help fund refining and pipeline projects
the state company recently launched a Dollars 150m Eurobond issue, with
immediate success.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930630

