FT932-6654

FT  27 MAY 93 / Hunt for winning ideas heads science research proposals


   By CLIVE COOKSON, Science Editor


THE FIRST new government strategy for science and technology for 21 years
was unveiled yesterday, with the emphasis on linking research more closely
to wealth creation.
The most innovative feature of the white paper on science is to introduce
'technology foresight' - a new method for picking the areas of research that
are most likely to produce winning products for British industry.
Mr William Waldegrave, minister for science, said the foresight exercise
would involve widespread consultation between his Office of Science and
Technology and experts from industry and universities.
They will look for a fit between promising areas for research and the
ability of UK companies to exploit the results - and the fields selected
will receive additional funding.
Another unexpected change in policy concerns new arrangements for training
postgraduate scientists and engineers. The master of science (MSc) will
become the normal first post-graduate degree and fewer students will go on
to earn a PhD.
The white paper also announces widely expected changes in the way the
government manages its Pounds 6bn-a-year spending on research and
development. For example, its two main advisory committees are replaced by a
new and more powerful Council for Science and Technology, chaired by the
science minister and containing senior representatives from industry and
universities. The five existing research councils, which disburse government
grants, are rearranged into six.
But there is no deep transformation of the existing science policy structure
and some government departments, notably the Ministry of Defence, which
spends 40 per cent of public R&D funds, are hardly affected.
Industry broadly welcomed the white paper as providing a clear and
sympathetic policy framework for the next five to 10 years, while academic
bodies and scientists were more guarded - and opposition parties were
vociferous in their condemnation.
Mr Lewis Moonie, the Labour science spokesman, called it 'a complete
failure' and predicted that it would be a 'bitter disappointment' to
scientists. He said it failed to meet expectations 'on almost every key
issue facing British science and engineering today'.
Save British Science, the main scientific lobby group, complained that Mr
Waldegrave had failed to obtain any of the additional resources that would
be needed to implement the new strategy.
Picking winners, Page 10
Editorial Comment, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930527

