FT932-7172

FT  25 MAY 93 / International Company News: Government to oversee
liquidation of bank - Japanese Corporate News and Results Round-up


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


THE JAPANESE government is to oversee the liquidation of a
financially-troubled credit association in Kamaishi, northern Japan, after
fears that a disorderly collapse of the institution could undermine
confidence in the regional banking system.
Assets of Kamaishi Shinkin Bank, which has Y44.8bn (Dollars 406m) in
deposits, will be distributed among a larger bank in the same area, Bank of
Iwate, and two other institutions under a liquidation plan drafted by the
Bank of Japan and the finance ministry.
The government plans to use funds from the Deposit Insurance Corporation
(DIC), which insures deposits for up to Y10m, to ensure the success of the
liquidation.
Funds from the DIC have been used in the past to facilitate a merger of a
troubled bank, but this is the first time money will be used for a
liquidation, suggesting that the government was unable to find a larger
institution willing to take over the bank, as is customary in these cases.
It is expected that between Y10bn and Y20bn in funds will be needed from the
corporation to cover losses at Kamaishi Shinkin, an institution similar to a
credit union and traditionally reliant on small companies for its business.
Officials at the bank, which has 12 outlets, blame its plight on a
particularly severe recession in the area brought on by troubles in the
fishing industry and the closure of a large steel mill. However, they also
hinted that 'illegal lending' could also be responsible and promised to
launch an investigation.
Government officials indicated that there were 'management' problems at
Kamaishi Shinkin, which generally means that an institution became carried
away during the frenzied years of the late 1980s, when lending to stock and
property speculators by Japanese banks was common.
Kamaishi Shinkin says there has been no evidence of a run on its deposits,
which have been stable over the past year, but it has an increasing pile of
non-performing loans. A bank official said yesterday that 'we thought there
may be trouble because of the publicity', but there were no queues of
depositors.
The Bank of Japan and the finance ministry were particularly concerned an
unseemly collapse would fuel rumours that a range of small regional
institutions are unstable, prompting a run on those banks or credit
associations.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930525

