FT934-8481

FT  15 NOV 93 / De Benedetti warns of populist backlash


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


MR CARLO De Benedetti, the chairman of Olivetti and one of Italy's best
known entrepreneurs, has raised the spectre of a populist backlash in his
country after new elections, expected early next year.
He warned at the weekend that it might take a second poll before Italian
politics and business returned to normal after the convulsions of the
political corruption scandal, which has cut a swath through much of the
domestic establishment.
Mr De Benedetti, who has himself been implicated after admitting his
Olivetti computers group paid more than L10bn (Dollars 6m) in bribes, was
released from house arrest last week after being briefly imprisoned in Rome.
In his first press interview since his ordeal, he said Italy ran the risk of
a social conflagration if the forthcoming elections produced the expected
upsurge in support for the regional autonomist Northern League and the
Democratic Party of the Left, the former Communists.
The two groups are forecast to dominate the new parliament, along with the
remnants of the Christian Democrat party, which is likely to become ever
more dependent on votes from the economically depressed south.
Mr De Benedetti said the danger was that the three parties would fail to
agree on appointing some form of apolitical government of technocrats, along
the lines of the present government of prime minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.
A government of that type would be the only way to steer Italy through the
difficult period ahead until stable new political groupings took shape and
the economy started to pull out of recession, he said.
Mr De Benedetti recognised a government of technocrats was 'the most rosy
scenario' among a variety of possibilities. Failing such an outcome,
populism, which would be the only unifying factor between the three -
extremely diverse - parties likely to dominate the next parliament,
threatened grave political and economic instability.
In spite of the risks, however, Mr De Benedetti said new elections were
essential as soon as possible to replace the present discredited
legislature. Only a fresh parliament could push through the new laws
required to find a popularly acceptable solution to the corruption scandal,
which otherwise threatened to drag on for years, debilitating Italian
business and damaging the country's image abroad.
Humiliation for the outsider of Italy's business elite, Page 3

The Financial Times


International Page 1

931115

