FT932-3209

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Bonds: GMAC's issue price seen as aggressive


   By SARA WEBB


ATTENTION in the Eurobond market focused on an aggressively-priced deal for
General Motors Acceptance Corporation yesterday.
GMAC, which is General Motors' financial services subsidiary, launched a
Dollars 300m, five-year bond deal with a coupon of 6.25 per cent and priced
to yield 105 basis points over the US Treasury bond.
Several houses claimed that lead manager Morgan Stanley had priced the deal
very aggressively and in the course of the afternoon, the deal traded
outside fees at 99.10 and the yield spread was quoted at 117 basis points
over Treasuries by a couple of traders.
Some co-managers were seen dumping the bonds, and Morgan Stanley was forced
to buy the bonds back to support the deal. However, by late afternoon the
price recovered somewhat and Morgan Stanley cited a yield spread of 108-109
basis points.
The only other substantial deal, in an otherwise uneventful day, was a
Dollars 150m collared floating-rate note for Citicorp. The 12-year deal has
a coupon of six-month Libor minus 0.125 per cent (six-month Libor is
currently 3.5 per cent), and there is a floor of 6 per cent and a cap of 10
per cent.
Citicorp, rated BAA3/BBB+ on its subordinated debt, last launched a collared
FRN in April this year and joins a steady stream of bank names in this
particular sector of the market including BankAmerica, Goldman Sachs,
Merrill Lynch, and Bankers Trust.
Kidder Peabody, lead manager, said demand was for higher floors. The bonds
will be swapped into plain FRNs as the collar portion is detached.
With so little activity in the market, there was some speculation about
imminent deals. Osaka Gas is rumoured to be looking at the dollar and
sterling sectors, while the European Investment Bank was reported to be
looking at the yen bond market.
The International Swap Dealers Association said yesterday that it plans to
change its name to the International Swaps and Derivatives Association,
subject to approval from members.
The trade association represents participants in the Dollars 4,000bn
over-the-counter market in swaps and options.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930615

