FT932-7042

FT  26 MAY 93 / Miners co-op in Scotland needs Pounds 3m to beat crisis


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent and JOHN MASON


MONKTONHALL Mine-workers, the miners' co-operative which is leasing a mine
near Edinburgh from British Coal, needs a capital injection of Pounds 3m to
overcome its financial crisis and become viable.
A report by Quayle Munro, the Edinburgh merchant bank, says that Monktonhall
is unable to develop new coalfaces because of lack of finance - due to
initial underfunding and to subsequent operating losses.
The losses have exceeded the Pounds 1.6m of initial capital, all of which
came in Pounds 10,000 subscriptions from the 160 miners.
More coalfaces are needed 'as a matter of urgency' to make the whole
operation viable. Quayle Munro said the company had failed to break even
since production began in January, but was capable of earning 'potentially
attractive rates of return at increased volumes at current market prices'.
Monktonhall has contracts to supply ScottishPower and British Coal, but
needs to finalise contracts with other customers. It has one producing face
but has been unable to open a second because of financial difficulties.
The Quayle Munro study was financed by Lothian Regional Council after
Monktonhall got into financial difficulties and for several weeks stopped
paying its employees. The company is retaining the bank to try to raise the
Pounds 3m, which will cover the opening of two new faces.
Mr Bert Brown, Monktonhall's managing-director-designate, said he hoped the
money would be raised from a variety of sources, which might be both private
and public sector.
'We would like to keep as close to the present format of ownership as
possible, but everything is negotiable. We will have to see what price we
have to pay for the money.'
In March the consortium decided not to negotiate with Caledonian Mining, an
English mining company which said it would put in new capital if it was
given management control.
The High Court will rule today on whether British Coal can go ahead with the
closure of the first 10 coal mines in its pit closure programme, John Mason
writes.
The corporation last week asked for a declaration that its use of Boyds, the
US mining consultancy, amounted to independent scrutiny of the closure
process.
This scrutiny was demanded by the High Court last December when it ruled
that British Coal's original procedures were illegal.
The corporation's move is being opposed by the National Union of
Mineworkers.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930526

