FT932-3135

FT  16 JUN 93 / Azeris recall Brezhnev era leader


   By STEVE LEVINE


   BAKU, AZERBAIJAN


AZERBAIJAN'S Brezhnev era KGB and communist party chief, Mr Heidar Aliyev,
made a remarkable political comeback yesterday, winning election as chairman
of the former Soviet republic's parliament.
The election makes Mr Aliyev, 70, nominally the second most powerful leader
to Azerbaijan President Abulfaz Elchibey.
But diplomats and other foreign observers in Baku, the capital, believe that
the wily Mr Aliyev has carved himself out a significant chunk of Mr
Elchibey's power and that new elections are likely. Given the present
despondent political mood, Mr Aliyev probably would be Azerbaijan's
strongest presidential candidate.
The political and economic deterioration was demonstrated when Baku
newspapers yesterday announced that Mr Elchibey had postponed complete
introduction of Azerbaijan's new currency, the manat.
The government, which began circulating the manat on June 2, had announced
that the rouble would be invalidated on June 15, but the move now has been
delayed at least until July 1. 'We need to wait until the situation
stabilises. As soon as that happens, the reforms will take place,' said Mr
Elman Rustamov, deputy chairman of the ministry of foreign economic
activity.
On Monday the US embassy recommended that American nationals leave the
country, and many foreign businessmen, including oil company employees, have
departed on flights to Istanbul and Moscow.
It was not clear whether Azerbaijan's political upheaval was over. Mr
Aliyev's comeback was forewarned a week ago, when rebel troops seized
Azerbaijan's second city, Gyanja, and demanded Mr Elchibey's resignation.
Though the troops, led by a charismatic businessman, Mr Surat Huseynov, have
voiced their support for Mr Aliyev, they now have taken control of up to
half the Caspian Sea nation, and are within 70 miles of Baku.
Mr Elchibey, whose popularity has steadily waned since he came to power
about a year ago, has threatened to use force to defend his government. But
it is unclear how much loyalty he still enjoys in the military, or among the
Azeri population of 7m.
The key factor in Mr Elchibey's loss of popularity have been the lack of
economic improvements and a string of military defeats in the war in the
enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh. On Monday night ethnic Armenians from
Nagorno-Karabakh finally agreed to a brokered settlement. But at the same
time ethnic Armenian troops appeared to be encircling yet another important
city in the region, Agdam, which actually lies outside Nagorno-Karabakh.
The continued fighting was bound to put new pressure on Mr Elchibey, and
give Mr Aliyev a stronger hand ultimately to topple him.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930616

