FT934-8498

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Texas (6): Local power slips away - Financial
institutions


   By RICHARD WATERS


IS this the future of banking in the US? Dominated until recently by a
handful of proud and independent banks, Texas's biggest financial
institutions are now owned by groups based in New York, Ohio and North
Carolina rather than Dallas or Houston.
For most other states, the steady advance of 'super-regional' banking groups
such as NationsBank and BancOne has been a phenomenon of the 1990s.
Texas, by contrast, succumbed to the outsiders back in 1987, when a real
estate collapse - coming hard on the heels of an oil bust - pushed most of
the state's biggest banks over the edge into insolvency.
Six years on, the aftermath of the 1980s banking collapse still hangs
heavily over the financial districts of Dallas and Houston.
For a state which has always boasted its spirit of self-reliance, it remains
a galling fact that several of Texas' largest banks were bailed out by the
federal taxpayer in the form of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Capital supplied by commercial banks from outside the state was also needed
 -by some estimates, 40 per cent of the capital behind Texan banks has been
provided by non-Texan institutions.
Of the 10 largest Texan banks before the collapse, only one - San
Antonio-based Cullen/Frost - remains independent.
The leading institutions now are owned by NationsBank (which acquired
Dallas-based First Republic); BancOne (MCorp); and Chemical (whose
subsidiary, Texas Commerce Bancshares, still operates under its old name.)
The aftermath of the collapse continues to haunt the banks for other
reasons. Many Texan businesses found themselves declared in default, even
though they continued to service their debts.
The reason: the collateral backing their loans, in most cases property, had
fallen in value. Rather than take on such loans with inadequate collateral,
the new bank shareholders in many cases opted to call them into default,
leaving them in the hands of the FDIC.
The resentment among Texan businesses lingers. NationsBank, which was known
as NCNB at the time of its takeover of First Republic, quickly acquired the
nickname 'No Credit to Nobody' - a joke which is still widely repeated.
'I don't doubt it affected people's relationships (with their banks). It
will take a period of time for that to heal,' says Mr Harvey Mitchell,
chairman of BancOne in Texas.
In some ways it was easier for new bank managements, coming to the state
from outside, to call troubled loans into default, he says: also, the new
shareholders would not have been prepared to put in capital if they had had
to take on weakened assets.
The names are not the only things which have changed about Texan banks.
Since the rebirth of the banks under 'foreign' control there has been a
revolution in Texan banking - in part due to changes in regulation even
before the bust.
Until 1986, restrictive state banking law did not allow banks to operate
through branches (although from the early 1970s they had been able to set up
separate subsidiaries around the state.) The result: nearly 2,000, mostly
small banks, and a handful of big institutions which concentrated on
corporate and property lending.
Now, the state's banks are mostly pursuing a strategy familiar elsewhere in
the US: build a network of branches that covers all the main urban centres,
then develop an array of 'products' (including investments) which can be
sold through those branches.
Outside shareholders, aside from putting up the capital to make such
expansion possible, have also been able to provide other resources to help
these more diverse banks develop.
'We picked up some good consumer products from Chemical,' says Mr Robert
Hunter, chief financial officer of Texas Commerce. 'We don't want to develop
all our products from scratch if we can get them off the shelf.' Mr Mitchell
at BancOne adds that the Ohio-based banking group has also brought better
management information systems to its Texas subsidiary.
BancOne and NationsBank have built the largest networks, in part by
acquiring failed savings and loan institutions.
MCorp had 56 branches before it was acquired by BancOne in 1989: it now has
200.
Texas Commerce, by contrast, has remained largely a corporate bank -
benefiting in part because, while its main rivals suffered the upheaval of
passing through the hands of the FDIC, it remained solvent.
This year, though, Texas Commerce has also been actively growing its network
through acquisition - while at the same time shedding branches in smaller
centres where it had a minor presence.
The concentrations of commercial lending which led to eclipse of Texas'
banks in the 1980s are unlikely to recur soon.
In common with banks elsewhere in the US, those in the state are making
fewer commercial loans - thanks to a lack of demand from businesses and a
full-scale retreat from property lending.
As a result, competition for credit-worthy corporate customers has been
rising in the last year, pushing down lending margins. 'You either have to
lower credit quality or lower pricing - most people would start out by
lowering pricing,' says Mr Mitchell. What demand there is comes from small
oil and oil services companies - the biggest finance themselves from
cashflow or in the capital markets - residential construction companies and
a range of small businesses.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

931115

