FT934-8709

FT  13 NOV 93 / Seasonal food and drink - The best of British: How Britons
keep their bottle - Giles MacDonogh samples some beer . . . with a little
help from his friends


   By GILES MACDONOGH


AS PART of a series of occasional beer tastings at the Weekend FT we decided
to look at British bottled bitters and bottle conditioned ales. In the last
few years there has been a laudable tendency to want to put traditional
British ales back into bottles and the results are stocked by supermarkets
as well as wine chains.
In many cases the beers are simply bitters, pasteurised and carbonated to
give them sufficient shelf life to please the supermarket buyers and then be
run off into glass. Others are real bottle-conditioned ales to which the
brewers add sugar and yeast to keep the beer fresh and lively until the
moment comes to drink it; a bit like a cask-conditioned beer writ small.
These were some of the best beers we tasted.
The age of tin has not yet passed, nor have the years of unrestricted
canning helped traditional brewing skills: many brewers seem to have lost
the knack of knowing how to keep beer alive in bottle. One can only hope
that with time they will be able to iron out these problems. Only one beer
in our tasting survived the introduction of tin and that was the legendary
Worthington White Shield.
Once again the team was composed of lain Loe from the Campaign for Real Ale;
Max Wilkinson, Weekend FT editor; and myself. We tasted 26 beers and scored
them out of 20.
1) 16.4. Samuel Smith's Imperial Stout, Oddbins Pounds 1.49. Something of a
speciality drink: an old fashioned dry stout with a hefty 7 per cent
alcohol. This beer put Wilkinson in mind of smoked duck, which is not as
far-fetched as one might think, the beer is distinctly smoky with good
bonfire aromas and a liquorice-like taste.
2) 15.7. King & Barnes Festive Ale, Oddbins Pounds 1.39. Our panel was
deeply impressed by this authentic bottle-conditioned ale with its big,
fruity aroma and taste.
3) 15.5. Batemans' Victory Ale, Oddbins Pounds 1.49. Brewed to assert the
independence of this Lincolnshire brewery which has been plagued by takeover
bids, this strong ale has complex aromas of malt and hay with a full,
refreshingly fruity taste.
4) 15.3. Worthington White Shield, Tesco 79p. This much-loved old favourite
has returned in a new bottle which seems to have been designed to prevent
you getting at the yeast. The panel found a slight bottle variation but in
the end there was considerable praise. I noted a yeasty fruity note:
apricots and pineapple, almost like a German wheat beer.
5) 14.8. Shepherd Neame Spitfire Ale, Safeway Pounds 1.49, Tesco Pounds
1.39. This bottle-conditioned ale was originally brewed to celebrate the
50th anniversary of the Battle of Britain. Iain recognised the aromas of
Kentish hops and praised its local character.
6) 14.5. Nethergate's Old Growler, Oddbins Pounds 1.89. This another
speciality beer: a rich and powerful porter which had the team thinking
about matching it with food.
7) 14.3. Shepherd Neame Original Porter, from Shepherd Neame pubs and select
off-licenses Pounds 1. A lot of chocolate malt had gone into this porter to
the point that Loe thought it was almost too chocolatey. Others found a big
aroma of burnt toast.
8) 14.2. Eldridge Pope's Hardy Country, Safeway Pounds 1.25. A
bottle-conditioned version of the popular draught. Our sample was slightly
hazy from the yeast with deliciously big, fruity character.
9) 14. Tolley's Strong Ale, Considerable enthusiasm greeted this spicy,
traditional ale.
Equal 10th) 13.8. Ridley's Old Bob Strong Pale Ale. This ale started out
well with its malty, honeyed aromas and its full, banana-like taste, but it
did not stay the course. We suspected it would be better for
bottle-conditioning.
Equal 10th). Black Russian. Thresher, Bottoms Up, Oddbins, Waitrose Pounds
1.69. Brewer Jim Prior rediscovered this old English recipe which had been
made popular in the Baltic States and recreated it. The result, according to
Loe, is something between a mild and a stout.
It is certainly highly individual with a bouquet of cherries, blood, dust
and burnt toast. A fine antidote to tasteless lagers.
Equal 12th) 13.3. Jennings' Cumbrian Ale. Wilkinson found this beer a little
cloying with its toffee, banana and apple character but it went down well
with Loe and me.
Equal 12th). Bishop's Finger, Pounds 1.39, Oddbins. A non-bottle conditioned
version of the Shepherd Neame bitter; firm and long; BCA, Oddbins Pounds
1.39. The unlovable label of this beer came in for a lot of criticism but
the beer in the bottle was approved. I found it spicy; Wilkinson discovered
bananas.
The following ales failed to come in the first 12 but all, with the
exception of the last two, found support from one or other of the team:
Eldridge Pope Royal Oak; Moreland's Old Speckled Hen; Nethergate N;
Bateman's XXX; Shepherd Neame's Master Brew; Thwaites Big Ben; Paul
Theakston's Black Sheep; Wadworth's Old Timer; Belhaven's Premium;
Caledonian's 80 shilling Natural; Banks' Mild; Federation Export IPA.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

931113

