FT931-3874

FT  13 MAR 93 / Governor throws down the gauntlet: Patten's decision to
proceed with democracy legislation has shocked China


   By SIMON HOLBERTON and EDWARD MORTIMER


For the Chinese leadership sequestered in Zhongnanhai, Beijing's Kremlin,
the decision by Governor Chris Patten of Hong Kong to proceed with
publication of his democracy legislation must have been profoundly
perplexing.
Previous governors, who were senior Foreign Office officials, and their
masters in Whitehall had always taken care to clear in advance any changes
in Hong Kong's political arrangements. Beijing, as Mr Qian Qichen, China's
foreign minister, confided recently to a group of sympathetic Hong Kong
politicians, has always known that if it stands firm Britain will back down.
When Britain did show signs of independence, it had to be punished, Mr Qian
said.
Beijing's leadership was already seriously angered by what it saw as Mr
Patten's insubordinate behaviour last October when he announced the outline
of his proposals for Hong Kong's 1995 elections - the last to be held before
the Chinese takeover in 1997. They disliked both his ingenious exploitation
of loopholes in their own Basic Law for Hong Kong to introduce a much
broader franchise than they had envisaged, and the fact that they were not
first consulted.
Their 'punishment' of Mr Patten was played out in November and December when
China threatened the validity of contracts which span the 1997 transfer of
sovereignty. Beijing also attacked Jardine Matheson, the trading house, and
tried to scare Hong Kong's civil servants by raising questions about their
future pension entitlements. This produced a sharp fall in the stock market
and business antagonism towards Mr Patten, but not a British back-down.
Earlier this year China changed tack, perhaps thinking that where
sabre-rattling had failed diplomacy would succeed. Informed by Mr Douglas
Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, on February 6 that Mr Patten was about to
proceed with publication of a bill to give effect to his proposals, China's
Mr Qian replied, one day before the February 12 deadline, that Beijing was
prepared to talk.
During February and this month, Mr Patten put off publication of his bill on
four successive occasions as London and Beijing wrangled about the precise
terms on which talks could be held. The stock market went up again while the
hearts of Hong Kong's liberals - supporters of Mr Patten's reform package -
slowly sank.
By last weekend some of those who had been among Mr Patten's most vocal
supporters were suggesting that he was just another British governor who
would end up dancing to Beijing's tune.
But yesterday Mr Patten delighted them and must have shocked the decision
makers in Beijing, by showing that he did after all have what he likes to
call a 'bottom line'. Put simply, he and the British government were not
prepared to let China dictate the composition of his team for the proposed
negotiations between the two sides.
China refused to lift its objection to two ethnic Chinese Hong Kong civil
servants being part of the team, one of whom already has participated on
numerous occasions in Anglo-Chinese talks. China also sought to amend a
previously agreed text of the announcement the two sides would have made
once the date of any talks had been fixed.
As one senior British official suggested yesterday: 'The Chinese may have
got trapped by a device which was shoved into the negotiations by some of
those who did not want talks, and then suddenly found themselves confronted
by problems of face in scrapping that device.'
The most likely candidate for the role of spoiler is Mr Zhou Nan, director
of the New China News Agency, Beijing's unofficial embassy in Hong Kong. Mr
Zhou's deputy said yesterday Mr Patten's announcement would 'make talks
impossible'. Britain, he said, had 'ruined the chances for talks and it
showed Whitehall had no sincerity'.
The first reaction from Beijing itself echoed the point about lack of
sincerity, though attributing it to the governor personally, but merely
added that it 'creates difficulties' for the resumption of talks. This may
reflect the more moderate line associated with Mr Lu Ping, head of the
Chinese government's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office.
If it is true, as some in the Hong Kong government think, that most of the
principal Chinese decision makers are anxious for an agreement with Britain,
they could be expected after a brief display of indignation to return to the
quest for talks. Mr Patten stressed in his speech yesterday that he remains
ready to talk to China.
The same British official admitted, however, that it might be easier for the
governor to carry public opinion with him if his proposals were made more
acceptable to China in the course of debate in the Legislative Council
(LegCo), than if he has to persuade the council to accept amendments agreed
in secret Anglo-Chinese talks in Beijing.
Mr Patten's preference would be to satisfy the calls from local liberals,
such as Mr Martin Lee, leader of the United Democrats, to introduce his bill
into LegCo sooner rather than later. In the normal course of events a bill
published in the gazette - as Mr Patten's democracy bill was yesterday -
would be tabled in LegCo the following Wednesday. Mr Patten refused
yesterday to commit himself to such a tight timetable, but his officials
indicated he would be unlikely to wait more than a few weeks for a
favourable Chinese response.
If such a response is forthcoming it will indicate that China has recognised
the need to soften its position in response to Britain's tougher stance. But
it is equally likely that Beijing will conclude that such a 'provocation'
calls for even sterner punishment.
In this case Hong Kong could be in for a very rough time over the coming
months, as investor confidence would be shaken. Important projects, such as
the HKDollars 175bn (Pounds 15.8bn) airport and the further development of
the colony's container port, would have to be kept on hold.
Mr Patten is convinced that the people of Hong Kong want a chance to
participate in shaping their political future. Their representatives in
LegCo will have to evaluate the consequences of this unprecedented contest
of wills between an economically resurgent but politically uncertain China
and a Britain, in economic and imperial decline, which belatedly has decided
to stand up.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930313

