FT933-5098

FT  06 SEP 93 / Report predicts further rises for D-Mark: James Blitz on the
likely effects of repaying Bundesbank for intervention


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE French franc, Danish krone and Belgian franc have weakened in recent
weeks against the D-Mark, as currency dealers take the view that their
central banks need to reduce short-term interest rates to stimulate economic
growth.
But foreign exchange analysts believe these currencies could come under more
pressure in the next few months as a result of their central banks' reserve
management operations, in the wake of the recent crisis in the European
exchange rate mechanism.
In a report published today, Idea, the market intelligence group, says
reserve management should strengthen the D-Mark over the next few months.
The central banks of France, Denmark and Belgium need to buy D-Marks from
the foreign exchange market to repay the Bundesbank for supporting their
currencies through intervention during last month's ERM crisis.
Under ERM rules, the Bundesbank would need to be repaid within three months
of the intervention, giving these central banks a repayment deadline of
mid-November.
The central banks also need to build up their foreign exchange reserves if
they are to regain control over short-term movements in their currencies'
exchange rates. In France's case, these reserves were heavily depleted at
the height of the crisis.
As they buy D-Marks and sell their own currencies, central banks will tend
to have an impact on short-term movements in exchange rates. Foreign
exchange dealers, therefore, have been wondering what impact this will have.
Idea calculates that there are likely to be some DM75bn (Pounds 30bn) of
D-Mark purchases by European central banks over the next six months. 'To
place these flows in perspective, central banks are likely to effectively
finance more than two years worth of German current account deficits in the
next six months,' says Mr Alan Ruskin, the report's author.
The report suggests that these operations put a cap on the value of the
dollar against the D-Mark. But their impact on European currencies will
depend on exactly how the central banks manage their reserve building
operations.
Idea's report says the Bundesbank and the Bank of France could, between
them, buy DM91bn of the German currency and sell FFr320bn (Pounds 36.6bn) of
the French currency, in a move that would greatly strengthen the D-Mark's
rate against the French franc.
But both central banks could diversify the operations, using other
currencies to cap the rise in the D-Mark. Instead of buying DM91bn, they
could, for example, buy Dollars 10bn (Pounds 6.5bn) of the US currency and
DM76bn of the German. 'The net effect is still very D-Mark positive,' says
Idea.
The report suggests the scope for central banks to recoup reserves without
hurting their currencies will be far more limited than in previous crises.
In the old ERM system, there was a propensity for the newly devalued
currencies to move towards the top of their ERM bands after a realignment,
on the expectation that the new bands would last. This time, the widening of
the ERM bands and the expectation of interest rate cuts means the value of
these currencies will weaken in any event.
The reserve transactions of the central banks could also be difficult to
interpret if the French authorities take advantage of provisions to roll
forward borrowings under the EC's very short-term financing facility.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930906

