FT933-12740

FT  22 JUL 93 / International Company News: G30 sets new benchmark for
derivatives industry - Tracy Corrigan assesses the latest report


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


What sets yesterday's Group of 30 report on derivatives activity apart from
the clutch of reviews published in recent months is not the thrust of its
conclusions, but rather the detail and scope of its recommendations.
Unlike the reviews already published - most importantly by the Bank of
England and the Bank for International Settlements (the Promisel report) -
the G30 report was written by, and primarily for, market practitioners.
It has little to add to the regulatory debate on derivatives, and indeed
eschews some of the important issues that trouble regulators.
For example, Mr Paul Volcker, a former regulator and chairman of G30, notes
in his foreword to the report the 'virtual absence of comment about the
appropriate level of capital requirements . . . Plainly the authors believe
that the amount of capital needed to support derivatives exposure is a
matter of judgment for individual institutions.'
Indeed, the potential weak spot of the report, in spite of the status of the
G30, is that it is largely compiled and written by bankers, with a vested
interest in promoting a positive view of their market.
However, the recommendations, which provide the most detailed guidelines on
managing derivatives business to date, are expected to be studied closely by
market participants - although they may find some of the smaller ones,
particularly those involving information technology, expensive to implement.
The recommendations may be used by regulators as a benchmark for good
derivatives management.
According to Mr Paul Sproos, publisher of Swaps Monitor, a trade
publication, the recommendations 'set extraordinarily high standards. I do
not think that there is a single swaps dealer who meets all of them in
full.'
The report makes a total of 20 recommendations, backed by research into
practice among market practitioners and end-users conducted by Price
Waterhouse, accountants.
The Price Waterhouse survey, which is only sporadically quoted, has not been
published with the recommendations. The most important are:
Senior management should determine and control derivatives activity.
The Price Waterhouse report found that two-thirds of firms responding to the
survey involve senior management in authorising traders to commit the firm.
That means up to a third of senior managers may be broadly unaware of how
their derivatives business is run.
Dealers should mark their positions to market (adjust the valuation of their
positions in line with market movements). The survey found that more than
half the end-users do not follow this practice although most plan to do so.
The report gives detailed recommendations on market valuation methods, which
are subject to wide variation, according to the survey.
Dealers should run stress simulations to determine how their portfolios
would perform in worst-case scenarios. Stress testing is conducted mainly by
large dealers, according to the survey.
Credit risk should be reduced by broadening the use of netting provisions
(allowing banks to focus on net rather than gross exposure) and by ensuring
that contracts can be legally enforced across different jurisdictions.
There should be independent market and credit risk management, so that this
is separated from the dealing function.
The recommendations were welcomed as fair by the International Swaps and
Derivatives Association (ISDA), the industry's trade association. 'It's a
question of fine-tuning but they are likely to contain some things that are
not being done even in the largest firms,' said Mr Joe Bauman, chairman of
ISDA and head of derivatives business development at Citibank.
Meanwhile, a number of reports on the derivatives market are still in the
pipeline, including three studies in the US by the Securities and Exchange
Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and, most important,
the General Accounting Office.
If the conciliatory tone of reports published so far persists, it may be
that the heat is off the derivatives industry, and regulators' concerns have
been largely addressed.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930722

