FT932-241

FT  30 JUN 93 / D-Mark 'still anchor of ERM'


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


THE D-Mark's role as 'the anchor' of the European exchange rate mechanism is
not endangered despite its recent weakness, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the
Bundesbank president, said last night.
Speaking at a dinner in Frankfurt, Mr Schlesinger said that there was no
question of the D-Mark losing its central role in the ERM despite the fact
that other countries have recently been enabled to lower interest rates
below German levels for the first time in decades. Last Monday, for example,
the French cut rates below German levels for the first time in 26 years.
'Occupying the role of anchor does not mean that our interest rates must
necessarily be the lowest (in the ERM),' he said. 'Other countries may have
higher or lower interest rates.'
He argued that more important for the D-Mark's status as anchor of the
system was that it retained its position as 'reference point' for other
currencies - and that it remained the most important reserve currency for
other European countries. He pointed out that 75 per cent of transactions in
ERM currencies last year were in the D-Mark.
Other currencies, notably the Belgian franc and the Dutch guilder, had the
necessary credibility to act as co-anchor to the system. As for the French
franc, he said: 'It was on the way (to gaining that credibility) if it had
not reached it already.'
His remarks, coupled with the traditional assertion that the Bundesbank
would do its utmost to preserve the value of the D-Mark, will be scrutinised
by currency traders today ahead of tomorrow's meeting of the German central
bank's policy-making council in Leipzig.
Opinions are divided about the likelihood of a cut in the discount rate,
against a background of a D-Mark weakening against the dollar and the yen,
as well as European currencies. Analysts expect the discount rate to come
down from its current level of 7.25 per cent to 7 per cent by the end of
July at the very latest.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930630

