FT932-7129

FT  25 MAY 93 / London Stock Exchange: Late rebound eases gloom on rate cut


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


GLOOMY perceptions of the outlook for interest rates and for the recovery in
the UK economy kept London stocks subdued for most of yesterday's session,
and traders drew little comfort from a successful rebound from the FT-SE
2,800 area. With the institutions still evidently unwilling to move ahead of
the BT III sale, which was launched yesterday, and the outcome of the Zeneca
rights issue, the new equity trading account made an unimpressive start.
The market rallied from the day's low point with the help of a sizeable
trading programme, weighted towards the buy side and thought to have been
operated by the London arm of a Swiss bank. In early deals, London was
depressed by the combination of Wall Street's weakness on Friday and a slow
start in UK stock index futures. The low point of 2,804.3, down 7.9, was
reached early, however, and shares began to steady as the trading programme
took effect.
But the rally proved extremely shallow and the market remained no more than
a shade either side of Friday's close until late in the session. Not until
New York had opened with a gain of 15 Dow points in UK hours did London turn
distinctly higher.
The success of New York's Dow Industrial Average in stemming its fall
comfortably above the sensitive 3,480 mark cheered the UK market. At its
final reading, the FT-SE Index was 13.4 up at 2,825.6. The stress on the
international blue chips was reflected in the relative underperformance of
the FT-SE Mid 250 Index which, although at another new peak of 3,168.4,
added only 3.3.
Seaq volume slipped to 510.5m shares in a trading session generally agreed
to be uneventful, with non-Footsie business around normal averages at some
64 per cent of the total. Friday's 699m shares through the Seaq network was
worth Pounds 1.43bn in retail value. Retail business, the most significant
guide to the market's health, has remained high as the Footsie Index has
given ground recently. The market's growing doubts about the outlook for the
Zeneca rights issues were not helped yesterday by negative views on the
pharmaceutical sector by analysts at a leading US investment bank. The
opening of the sales campaign for the BT III issue, which will comprise
virtually all the remaining government stake at a price of more than Pounds
5bn, served to remind the stock market of the weight of demand on
institutional cash.
On the broader economic front, the UK stock market's dwindling hopes of a
base rate cut were bruised by reports that a member of the Bundesbank
council had dismissed any likelihood of a cut in German rates within the
next few months. The chances of a cut in UK rates are regarded in the stock
market as a political decision hinged on the progress of the recovery in the
domestic economy, but news yesterday of a slight narrowing of Britain's
trade gap with non-EC countries last month had little effect. In any event,
any move on base rates is thought highly unlikely ahead of tomorrow's
auction in the UK government bond market.
Against this uncertain background, UK shares appeared hesitant. Some brewery
stocks extended the losses suffered last week in the wake of trading results
from Bass, but consumer stocks were generally indecisive.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

930525

