FT934-10158

FT  06 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Goodbye Sid and bonjour Pierre / A
look at privatisation opportunities elsewhere in the European Community


   By CATHERINE MILTON


THE fragrant onion-seller pacing the Square Mile in London this week to
publicise French privatisations was not as out of place as she looked. The
European Community outlaws discrimination against the nationals of one
member state who apply for shares in the privatisations of other member
states.
But will it be as worthwhile being a Pierre as it was being a Sid when
Britain floated its monopoly utilities?
The best-known EC programmes are in Spain, France and Italy but KPN, the
Dutch postal and telecommunications group, and Deutsche Telekom are expected
to float in 1994.
The French government is committed to transferring 21 companies to the
private sector over the next five years, making the programme possibly the
largest and most attractive for retail investors.
At present, the partial flotation of Argentaria in Spain is under way, while
that of Rhone Poulenc in France is imminent and shares in Italy's Credito
Italiano should be available before the end of 1993. It all adds up to an
opportunity for private investors. But professionals will tell you that
cross-border applications are complex and best left to them. They may have a
point.
The first pitfall is that, unlike the UK privatisation programme, the
majority of governments are issuing stocks in commercial ventures rather
than monopoly utilities. Paul Killik, of stockbroker Killik, which offers a
French privatisation service, says: 'They are serious businesses. The
quality of earnings is not the same as the quality of monopolies and
utilities where you have to live with the regulator and perhaps a political
risk. But, apart from that, they are pretty nice areas to be in.'
Another snag for the independent-minded private investor is that, for the
privatisations of Banque Nationale de Paris and Rhone Poulenc, the French
government required all applicants to have French bank accounts for
settlement.
Under the Killik service, investors and up to four more members of their
families hand over the money they wish to invest. The firm then sets up a
French account earning about 5 per cent interest and sends out application
forms as the flotations are announced. Under EC rules, standard-rate
taxpayers who keep their shares will not attract extra tax on dividends, but
higher rate investors will have to pay the additional 15 per cent.
Killik says clients' French bank accounts will be credited with dividends in
francs. It is not yet clear just how retail investors will collect dividends
in other countries.
Private investors have found it virtually impossible to secure shares from
the pool the French government makes available to international investors.
Officials seem to fear that individuals could make multiple applications
through friendly brokers in several countries. Brokers say that private
investors have a greater chance of buying shares from the domestic pool.
There are also different settlement arrangements. Unlike the UK government,
the continental European authorities seem to require investors to pay only
for the shares they are allocated, rather than for those for which they
apply.
In France and Italy, though, the settlement process takes a month which
means investors could find their money tied up for longer than expected.
Perhaps the main barrier for private investors is that privatised companies
and their advisers may be reluctant to welcome what are, for them, small and
fiddly transactions.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

931106

