FT932-13317

FT  23 APR 93 / Government Bonds: Cut in Lombard rate puts life back into
European markets


   By JANE FULLER and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


BOND markets across Europe sprang back to life following the Bundesbank's
decision to cut German interest rates yesterday. The German central bank
announced a  1/2 point cut in the Lombard rate, taking it down to 8.5 per
cent, and a  1/4 point lowering of the discount rate to 7.25 per cent.
The relief was all the greater because dealers said some news agencies
initially mistakenly reported that there had been no change in German rates.
That false alarm briefly sent the bund futures contract down to 95.58,
compared with the opening 95.73.
This was rapidly reversed after news of the cuts came through, and the bund
futures contract closed at the day's high of 96.28.
Trading volumes were very heavy, with about 94,000 futures contracts traded.
The change in mood followed a couple of weeks of pessimism, culminating in
disappointment at the first-quarter M3 money supply expansion and at the
German finance minister's warning on the budget deficit earlier this week.
The interest rate cuts were all the more unexpected in the wake of a tiny
reduction in the repo rate on Wednesday.
Next week's repo rate is expected to be cut by at least 25 basis points from
the current 8.09 per cent, and one economist was looking for it to come down
to 7 per cent by the end of June and 6 per cent or less by the end of the
year.
The interpretation put on the Bundesbank's action was that it was
acknowledging the serious weakness in the real economy.
Italy, Austria, Belgium and the Netherlands followed suit with interest rate
cuts. Among the rallying bond markets, Italy gained more than a point.
On the Paris-based Matif exchange, the futures contract gained about half a
point as the Bundesbank's move raised hopes of another cut in French
interest rates, possibly as soon as the beginning of next week.
The Spanish market also rallied, particularly at the long end, although
dealers said the peseta remained under pressure.
THE UK government bond market ended the day a little lower, although the
German news led to some recovery after the market had been punctured by the
surprisingly good UK unemployment figures.
A second month's fall in the jobless was taken as a sign that the economy
had turned the corner, ruling out hopes of a further cut in interest rates
and raising concern about inflationary pressure later in the year.
At one stage, the 10 to 15-year bonds were down more than a point and the
futures contract was down by a similar amount. After the Bundesbank came to
the rescue, bonds at most maturities recovered to end down by only a quarter
point.
However, because of nervousness ahead of next Wednesday's auction, one
analyst said some downside risk remained. For example, if today's retail
sales figures indicate a further strengthening of the economy, selling
pressure could again be exerted.
US TREASURY prices were little changed late yesterday, after early losses at
the long end, as dealers and investors in the US Treasury market mostly
ignored a cut in German interest rates and a rise in weekly jobless claims.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was steady at 104
27/32 , yielding 6.742 per cent. At the short end the two-year note was
slightly firmer, up  1/32 at 100 9/32 , to yield 3.705 per cent.
Normally, the Bundesbank's decision to cut German interest rates would be
bullish for US bonds. In theory, lower German rates should help lift the
dollar, making US assets (including government securities), a more
attractive investment to foreigners.
However, yesterday the dollar did not rally particularly strongly on the
Bundesbank's move, leaving Treasury investors with little cause for
celebration. The news that weekly unemployment insurance claims rose 26,000
also failed to stir much interest, although the data confirmed that the
labour market was still struggling to keep up with the economic recovery.
Early trading was dominated by selling in the futures market, which hit
longer-dated prices. Two dealers unloaded June Treasury bond contracts just
before the jobs numbers were released.
The long end was pressured by a newspaper report that said Mr George Soros,
the influential US money manager, was turning bearish on US bonds.
Prices recovered their lost ground later in the session amid some
short-covering and reports of buying by the Federal Reserve on behalf of a
foreign central bank.
JAPANESE cash bonds and futures responded positively to yet another record
high for the yen against the dollar and to the fifth consecutive day's fall
in the Nikkei average index.
The June futures contract rose to 109.53 from 109.30, trading in a range of
109.14 to 109.60. The yield on the benchmark 145 due 2002 moved from 4.22
per cent to 4.15 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930423

