FT934-11186

FT  02 NOV 93 / Arts: A prize commitment to painting / Review of the 18th
John Moores exhibition at the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool


   By WILLIAM PACKER


Despite all the brouhaha about the Turner Prize, the televised dinner,
speeches and fuss with envelopes, it is still the John Moores Liverpool
Exhibition that artists want to win. Perhaps this is because the John Moores
was the first of the open submission prize exhibitions; and the peculiar
affection in which this competition is held reflects the late Sir John's
personal enthusiasm and support for it over many years following its
creation in 1957.
Of course there will be grumbles and speculations about the collective
interests and judgments of the jury, and disappointed incredulity
afterwards, as much at failure to get in as at the disposition of the
awards. But the Moores is the talking point among artists, who show a degree
of interest and involvement much greater than they do for the Turner Prize.
Sir John Moores' recent death at 97 has naturally cast this exhibition, the
18th, as his memorial, while throwing some doubt on its future. The doubt
was quickly put to rest, however, when the Moores family said it would
continue to support the exhibition in principle. Although the form might
change, this is good news. The Moores has often modified itself in any case,
and its current limitation to paintings and but the lowest of reliefs is a
long-standing grief and irritation to sculptors. I am firmly on the side of
the painters and see little need for change. The commitment to painting in
particular, in a time when it seems to be increasingly discounted by the
orthodox apologists and promoters of the institutional avant-garde, is its
greatest strength.
In an intriguing essay in the catalogue, Andrew Brighton, one of this year's
jurors, dilates upon the ever-shifting relationship that the Moores has
enjoyed with its critics. It began 36 years ago as an opportunity for the
more advanced artists, who were at that time excluded by the Royal Academy,
to set themselves against their peers. Ironically, it has now become the one
serious opportunity to remind the avant-garde itself of one of the principal
disciplines in the great tradition of art, putting paint on canvas.
There is nothing of controversy to this year's Moores, nothing of the
conceptual bias or feminist agenda of last time or the time before. And it
is precisely its disengagement, its lack of controversy that makes it
useful. It is a straightforward survey of current British painting, the 54
works that the jury considered the best of the 2,013 submitted. There are,
in proportion, more figurative paintings than I can remember, and inevitably
particular inclusions, indeed prize-winners, that I find inexplicable. But
overall the emphasis is placed, as it should be, on good painting of
whatever kind.
Little in this exhibition is objective, that is derived from direct
observation of the real and visible world. Sarah Raphael's small portrait of
a friend, Joshua, is the outstanding example of that sort and certainly
deserved a prize. There is no landscape or interior that is not to some
extent photo-based in its reference (Paul Winstanley, Geoff Stalker, Martin
Greenland), or schematic (Adrian Berg, Adrian Henri). Perhaps this is
nothing more than fair reflection of the submission, but, by my own
experience as juror on the Moores, I doubt it.
The first prize of Pounds 20,000 has gone unexceptionally to Peter Doig for
his large and characteristically elegant and mannered amplification of a
photograph of a man standing on ice - or perhaps in a puddle - in a winter
forest landscape. But the best of the painting is, perversely, abstract,
notably Trevor Sutton's minimal roundel; a low relief panel in white and
gold that is as physical as it is seductive, by Stephen Buckley, a former
prize-winner; and Simon Callery's large, allusive, exquisitely reticent
canvas worked in horizontal bands of pink and grey, red and violet. Best of
all is Michael Ginsborg's sharply cursive, linear image, as taut as a
carriage spring, pale red on paler pink and orange. I would have given it
the prize.
Am I damning this Moores with faint praise? Not at all. 'Has the Moores
become an exhibition of, perhaps, relatively sophisticated, consensual (sic)
painting?' asks Mr Brighton. 'Or can it still within its limitations . . .
attract . . . work which is part of the tradition of modern art? Which is
the case and which desirable seems to me the general issue . . . now for
critics to address.' This seems to miss the point. I only wish that the
Moores would embrace a wider scope to take in that more objective strain,
worked direct from model or landscape that sustained Cezanne, Matisse,
Giacometti, Balthus, Freud. Even so, by its very sophistication, and the
professional consensus it celebrates, the Moores still and most effectively
displays work that is indeed truly 'part of the tradition of modern art'.
John Moores Liverpool Exhibition 18: Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, until
January 23.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931102

