FT933-12653

FT  23 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: Smith and Ashdown warn PM against
exceeding power of office


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


MR JOHN SMITH, the Labour leader, yesterday warned Mr John Major that if he
sought to defy the will of the house on the Maastricht treaty he would have
'exceeded the power of his office'.
Calling on MPs to support the social provisions of the treaty, Mr Smith
claimed that the debate was more about the 'tattered reputation of a
discredited prime minister' than the national interest.
This theme was taken up by Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, who
told Mr Major that if the vote went against the government 'we expect him to
obey it'.
To Labour cheers Mr Smith insisted that Britain had no future as the
'sweatshop of Europe', and forecast accelerating economic decline if the
policies of social devaluation which lay behind the attempt to opt out from
the social chapter continued.
Brushing aside suggestions from Conservative backbenchers that acceptance of
the social chapter would mean a return to union domination he emphasised
that it did not extend to pay the right of association and the right to
strike.
Mr Smith said Britain was alone among the 12 member states of the European
Community in opposing a modest extension of its competence to such matters
as the protection of health and safety of people at work and equality of
opportunity between men and women.
He accused the prime minister of increasingly inhabiting a 'Walter Mitty
world' in which he alone suffered from the delusion that getting Britain
excluded from a decision making process of considerable consequence
constituted a triumph.
Mr Smith said the members of the EC who embraced the social chapter had more
impressive records of competitiveness and productivity than Britain.
He added: 'What the Conservatives fail to understand is that low wages,
inadequate skills, and persistent under investment are the real drag anchors
on Britain's economic performance.'
Denouncing the government for what he said was its 'crude' approach to
international competition, Mr Smith said it sought to compete with Taiwan on
wages rather than against Germany on skills.
In the real world the new economic agenda required a new approach - a
positive combination of skills development, decent and humane standards, and
ever widening employment opportunities.
Mr Ashdown denied earlier assertions by the prime minister that the Liberal
Democrats would be opposing ratification of the treaty by joining with
Labour MPs and voting against the government in both divisions at the end of
the debate.
Mr Ashdown insisted that the votes were about accepting the social chapter
which his party believed could be improved through Britain being part of it
and not outside it.
He said: 'It is not the great new monster of socialism stalking across
Europe which the government tries to persuade us to believe.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930723

