FT933-5295

FT  03 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: India tries to smooth out silk
trade problems - Chinese imports are being blamed for depressed domestic
prices


   By KUNAL BOSE


THE INDIAN silk trade, which has a powerful lobby in New Delhi, wants the
government to impose further restrictions on imports of Chinese silk, which
it blames for the depressed prices of indigenous silk that are damaging the
livelihoods of nearly 1m growers.
Exporters of silk goods, who mostly use the Chinese silk yarn because of its
superior quality, have warned, however, that exports will fall sharply if
any more restrictions are placed on the import of raw silk.
At present only the exporters are allowed to import silk yarn, on condition
that they add 150 per cent to its value value in producing goods for export.
Last year, India exported silk goods worth Rs7.34bn (Pounds 155m).
To placate the growers the federal government has reintroduced the
pre-inspection of export shipments of silk goods to ensure that the imported
yarn has been properly used. There may have been some diversion of imported
silk into the market during the one year period when there was no
pre-inspection, admits Mr S. Shah, spokesman for the Silk Association of
India. 'But this certainly did not call for checking silk export cargoes.
'The system breeds corruption. The inspectors' prime concern is to collect
money from the exporters (rather) than to ensure that the goods are in
order.'
India is the second largest producer of silk after China. But the domestic
demand, particularly in the form of women's sarees, is so strong that only
about 15 per cent of the indigenous silk production of about 13,000 tonnes
is available for weaving silk fabrics and carpets for export. Moreover, as
Mr PSS Thomas, secretary of the Central Silk Board, admits, Indian silk yarn
is not strong enough for use in high speed weaving machines.
India must depend on imported yarn for the production of high-value,
flawless silk for the export market. Nevertheless, there is an overseas
market for silk fabrics produced by hand loom units using Indian raw
material.
India officially imports nearly 3,000 tonnes of silk from China. 'There is
very little evidence that the Chinese silk is also smuggled into India,'
says Mr Thomas. The incentive to smuggle in Chinese silk remains, however,
as it is at least 30 per cent cheaper than the Indian silk. Some imports
also come from South Korea.
The Central Silk Board, says Mr Thomas, favours the discontinuance of the
import of ungraded Chinese silk.
China, with a production of over 55,000 tonnes, controls 90 per cent of the
world trade in silk. But, more than the imports from China, it is the
continuous increase in domestic production since 1986-87 that has depressed
Indian silk prices. Even so, Indian prices remain the highest in the world.
Mr Thomas says the farmers will have to seek better returns by way of
productivity improvement. India produces less than 40kg of raw silk per
hectare (2.471 acres), compared with 80kg in China and 120kg in Japan.
The twin problems of low productivity and inferior quality are being tackled
through the World Bank and Swiss Development Corporation funded Rs5.5bn
National Sericulture Project. The seven-year project, now in its fifth year,
is bringing about an improvement in silk growing practices by making
available to the farmers high-yielding mulberry saplings (on which silk
works feed), quality silk worm eggs and scientific methods of silk worm
rearing.
The project is designed to strengthen the sericulture infrastructure in the
traditional silk growing states of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
West Bengal and Jammu & Kashmir and promote silk growing in 12 other states.
Mr Thomas says that it has already resulted in an additional 64,000 hectares
of land being brought under mulberry cultivation, beating the target of
56,000 hectares. The project will raise silk production by 6,000 tonnes and
create employment for another 1m people.
Under another sericulture programme funded by Japan, attempts are being made
to develop bivoltine, a superior quality of silk worm, for the Indian
tropical climate. And a breakthrough is confidently expected.
India is also hoping for getting technical know-how from China in the near
future. Mr Thomas thinks it will facilitate the production of 'a good
quantity of high quality silk in India if private corporations are involved
in sericulture'. The corporations can get into the business either by
acquiring land or by entering into some kind of arrangement with the
farmers. Among the more important Indian business houses, which are looking
into sericulture seriously are the Kirloskars, the Thapars, RPG Enterprises
and SPIC, Mr Thomas says.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930903

