FT934-11392

FT  01 NOV 93 / Arts: Romeo and Juliet - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


The Royal Ballet paid fine tribute to the memory of Sir Kenneth MacMillan
during the past weekend, which marked the first anniversary of his death.
His Romeo and Juliet was given superb revival - the ballet and the company
looking fresh, vital - with three interpretations of exceptional interest.
Two of these - Irek Mukhamedov's Romeo and Stephen Jefferies' Tybalt on
Friday - are familiar, though none the less magnificent for that. The third
was the debut, at Saturday's matinee, of Sarah Wildor as Juliet. It was one
of those rare, rare occasions when a young artist seems to discover her own
powers, and we watch, fascinated, as a talent reveals itself, unerring,
beautiful, true.
We have seen Miss Wildor since she was a child at the Royal Ballet School -
most memorably as gentle Clara in Nutcracker. She is now a lovely young
woman, two years in the company, blonde head exquisitely placed on a long
neck, with delicately-boned physique. From her first entrance as Juliet
there was a sense of concentration about her playing, an artist securely
inside the character, and as the performance progressed - its development
sure, organic, inevitable - we saw how deeply this Juliet believed in her
role, and we believed with her. She managed, and with what subtlety, to
suggest the conflict in Juliet's temperament between girlishness and nascent
passion, matching the sensuality that Romeo awakens with a child-like
obstinacy. (Her flight to Friar Laurence was ecstatic, womanly; running from
her family in the third act, she showed us a Juliet still awkward,
impetuous). The third act rightly crowned her reading: every moment had
meaning, every least action spoke. And there were incidents to which she
gave entirely individual and thrilling identity - surest sign of great
things to come. Miss Wildor is a talent to watch, to treasure, to nurture.
Michael Nunn made his debut as Romeo to this Juliet. It was a sincere,
well-considered reading: the role does not offer him such challenges as did
Rudolf in Mayerling, which he so admirably assumed last year, but it was an
intelligent first sketch which he will develop. It was inevitably shadowed
by the interpretation Irek Mukhamedov had given the night before.
Mukhamedov's Romeo is a complete portrayal. The life of the character is
vivid and ablaze with feeling: how grand is Mukhamedov's daring as he tells
us of Romeo's infatuation for Rosaline before the Capulet ball - he looks
up, as if at a full moon, and rejoices in the night's romantic
possibilities. The thunderbolt of Juliet's presence, the sensual charge
Mukhamedov gives everything that follows, burns through the dancing. The
relationship with Tybalt is no less bold. I think Stephen Jefferies' is the
best Tybalt the Royal Ballet has shown us. There is menace, of course, but
Jefferies tells of the frustrations and innate fury of the man. As in
Giselle, where his Hilarion is the ideal match for Mukhamedov's peerless
Albrecht, these two artists respond thrillingly to each other: their duel
was ferocious, far more intense than mere stage sword-play.
Mukhamedov's Juliet was Viviana Durante, giving a clear, slightly
self-conscious reading, but one danced with lovely finesse. And, on a note
of regret, I must record that the present run of Romeo and Juliet will mark
the retirement of Leslie Edwards, the Escalus of the staging. On November 22
he will give his last performance as member of a company he joined in 1933.
His qualities - not least a blessed enthusiasm that meant no role has ever
become routine - have made him seem the very spirit of our national ballet,
for which he has also guided many choreographic talents.
His reward has been our unfailing admiration and affection.
'Romeo and Juliet' continues in repertory at Covent Garden until Nov 22

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931101

