FT933-12521

FT  23 JUL 93 / UK Company News: William Hill subject of 'serious'
approaches


   By MAGGIE URRY


BRENT WALKER, the pubs, betting and property group, has had a number of
serious approaches for its William Hill subsidiary since it emerged that SG
Warburg had put together a Pounds 360m consortium bid for the betting shop
chain.
The approaches, which could involve taking an equity stake in William Hill
rather than a complete takeover, value the business at significantly more
than the consortium bid.
It is also understood that one of the equity investors lined up by Warburg
is unwilling to participate if the bid is regarded by Brent Walker as
hostile.
Brent Walker also announced that it had sold the Golden Horseshoe Casino in
London for Pounds 6.1m, of which Pounds 5.9m was paid into Brent Walker's
bank yesterday afternoon after the change of ownership was approved by
magistrates in the morning.
The buyer was City Clubs, a private casino operator.
Sir Keith Bright, chairman, is understood to be considering all
possibilities for William Hill, which is ring-fenced from Brent Walker and
has its own syndicate of banks owed a total of Pounds 350m.
That loan has to be refinanced by March 1 1994.
The options range from persuading the existing lenders to continue with the
debt to a flotation.
Some analysts estimate that a full flotation of William Hill could raise
Pounds 500m. However, they acknowledge that there would have to be a
discount on that if Brent Walker retained a large stake.
One analyst said a flotation would be a 'non-starter' if Brent Walker kept
more than 50 per cent.
Brent Walker is keen to retain an investment in William Hill so that any
rise in its value benefits Brent Walker's creditors.
Sir Keith is expected to tell shareholders at next week's annual meeting
that trading results from William Hill have improved, despite the Grand
National fiasco, with evening opening bringing a significant increase in
turnover.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930723

