FT932-13391

FT  23 APR 93 / Leading Article: Funny business


POLITICIANS do not normally shy away from trumpeting apparent good news in
the monthly economic statistics. This makes it surprising that Britain's
Conservative government is reticent about celebrating two consecutive
monthly falls in recorded unemployment. Their hesitancy is probably wise,
given the misreading of the economic runes that the Treasury has
demonstrated over the past two years. But there is also more to the
unemployment figures, and the Department of Employment's caution, than meets
the eye.
The government does not need to rely on the unemployment figures to make its
case that recovery has begun. This year's pick-up in consumer demand and
confidence has now fed through to output, with manufacturing production up
1.2 per cent in February over the previous month.
It is also not surprising that business is more optimistic. Exit from the
European exchange rate mechanism has delivered an injection of lower
interest rates to Britain's ailing economy. Sadly, the Bundesbank's
continued slow monetary easing looks likely to deny continental Europe a
similar remedy for many months yet.
It would be a mistake to be too excited about the 51,500 fall in
unemployment since January. Maybe employers are rehiring workers they
mistakenly shed in a fit of gloom last autumn. Service sector employment did
rise by 36,000 in the final quarter of last year, having fallen 225,000 in
the previous quarter. Perhaps workers are accepting lower pay increases in
order to preserve jobs. Average earnings have also fallen further, though
not faster, than in previous recessions. More companies have also embraced
profit-sharing arrangements, although largely to take advantage of tax
breaks rather than achieve wage flexibility, as the FT reports today on the
management page.
Yet the figures do not, on closer inspection, quite support the bullish case
that some economists, even some 'wise' ones, want to make. It is too early
to tell whether this year's fall in unemployment has been accompanied by a
surge in re-hiring. Manufacturing employment fell by a further 11,000 in
February, only marginally less than in previous months, while average
overtime hours and vacancies are flat and also lower than they would
normally be when unemployment falls. The suspicion remains that the
Department of Employment has become increasingly skilled at finding ways of
moving the unemployed off the claimant count into training schemes or into
sickness and disability, as it has been doing over the past six years.
For now, the fall in unemployment remains a puzzle. If falling unemployment
over the next few months were matched by rising employment, and if wage
inflation were to stay low as the recovery accelerates, then the government
could celebrate. Until then, Mrs Gillian Shephard, the employment secretary,
is right to bite her lip.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930423

