FT932-7051

FT  26 MAY 93 / City welcomes SIB proposals: SROs back plan for regulation
of financial services


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


THE NEW dawn of financial services regulation received a cautious welcome
from the self-regulatory organisations which will have to live with the
changes. They said tighter control of their own activities by the Securities
and Investments Board was inevitable.
Sir Gordon Downey, chairman of Fimbra, the SRO for independent financial
advisers, and chairman of the proposed Personal Investment Authority, said:
'It is true to say that the relationship between SIB and the self-regulatory
organisations has been a difficult one. Any move to define responsibilities
between them is a good one.'
The chairman of another SRO said: 'There is a lot in the report which is
inevitable and which is quite sensible.'
He added: 'I do not expect my board of directors to react violently to it.'
City officials said they were particularly pleased at the suggestion that
SIB could outline standards to be met while allowing the SROs to write the
rules intended to achieve that effect.
SIB chairman Mr Andrew Large, in his report on improving the efficacy of
financial regulation, concluded that the theft of more than Pounds 440m from
pension schemes controlled by the late Robert Maxwell demonstrated that SIB
had been too lax in how it monitored SROs' activities. Moreover, the
'arm's-length' relationship that the SROs had demanded with SIB had
undermined its effectiveness, he said.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, said Mr Large had the government's full
backing to use his powers to get maximum co-operation from the SROs and that
the Treasury would be prepared to take additional action if that was not
sufficient to raise standards.
His remarks appeared to be an implicit threat to rewrite the Financial
Services Act in way less agreeable to those regulated by it.
Support for the report was not unqualified. Chairmen of the various SROs
expressed concern about SIB's plans to monitor their enforcement of their
members by paying supervisory visits. 'That is a recipe for disaster,' said
one chairman.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930526

