FT934-10125

FT  06 NOV 93 / Motoring: An unruffled estate - Test Drive


   By STUART MARSHALL


THE UNPAVED track to the quarry was long and rough and the load of stone in
the back of the Citroen XM estate weighed well over half a ton. But the big
car seemed not to notice. It rode the bumps with the tranquility of an ocean
liner in a slight swell.
Back on the tarmac, it handled and cornered as it had on the outward
journey, running light. There could have been no better demonstration of the
merits of the Citroen's unique suspension, in which high-pressure gas
replaces steel springs and hydraulics keep the car at a constant level,
regardless of load.
The system is semi-active. Electronic sensors detect when the car is
cornering and stiffen the suspension on the outside of the curve, minimising
body roll. As a bonus, ground clearance can be increased instantly by about
2 in (5 cm) at the touch of a control. In the year and 12,000 miles (almost
20,000 km) I have been driving the XM Turbo SD estate, this has come in
handy when I have met floods or driven down ridged farm roads on which a
more conventional car might have left its exhaust system behind.
The XM is a turbo-diesel with automatic transmission. Its worst fuel
consumption - full tank to full tank - has been 30.8 mpg (9.17 l/100 km),
its best 38.5 mpg (7.34 l/100 km), and the average, 34.9 mpg (8.1 l/100 km).
For a large, two-pedal estate car with air-conditioning - which is bliss in
summer but does nothing for fuel economy - I rate this very good. It means I
have to fill up only at 500/550-mile (800/880-km) intervals. Fuel economy
would be even better if the transmission changed up earlier when
accelerating gently, and were less eager to change down on hills.
Citroen obviously decided that the XM turbo-diesel should drive as much like
a petrol car as possible. It is satisfyingly quick off the mark and
overtakes confidently but the 12-valve engine is on the small side (only
2,088 cc) and has to work quite hard. With the lightest of feet on the
accelerator, the transmission does not go into top under 50 mph (80 kmh)
and, on the over-run, drops down to third at about 45 mph (72 kmh).
On hills, it will hunt between third and second unless these gears are
selected manually but, once in top, the XM has a long and economical stride.
At 81 mph (130 kmh), the French autoroute limit, the engine is turning over
at well under 3,000 rpm and there is more noise from the tyres and wind than
under the bonnet.
The only time the engine has failed to fire first time was a failure of the
gizmo that prevents the starter from working unless the transmission
selector is in park or neutral. A faulty relay was diagnosed. The only other
minor blot in the XM's copybook was a drive belt that came off the
alternator pulley last winter.
Like all big Citroens, the XM, with its armchair ride and roomy interior, is
at its best on long journeys. Few cars leave driver and passengers so
unstressed. On French D roads - or British A or B roads, for that matter -
it swoops along, unruffled by surfaces that disturb cars suspended less
well. Back-seat leg and hip room is generous for two, adequate for three.
The slab-sided load space swallows two golf bags and trolleys with room to
spare for weekend luggage. Fold the back seat and the XM's carrying capacity
rivals - although, for load floor length alone, does not quite match - that
of a Volvo 940, Vauxhall Carlton or Mercedes E-Class estate.
Useful features include twin information read-outs. They give specific
information: which door is not closed properly, the temperature outside, and
which suspension mode (automatic or the stiffer sort, which I never use) has
been selected. The radio controls built into the steering wheel hub are a
boon although they probably will have to give way to an air-bag when the XM
has its mid-life facelift.
The foot parking brake, which is enough to put some potential buyers off a
manual gearbox XM, is fine on the automatic. That is because you need it
only for parking, not for starting, on a steep hill. Then, I follow the
sensible American practice of left-foot braking, as I do when manoeuvring in
confined spaces.
The list price of the XM 2.1D Turbo SD automatic estate is Pounds 21,980,
which includes ABS brakes but not air-conditioning, a Pounds 1,450 extra.
Footnote: Many readers have written agreeing with this column's comments two
weeks ago on the way officialdom appears not to take seriously driving
without insurance. I shall give a selection of your views when I return to
the subject next week.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

931106

