FT933-12497

FT  23 JUL 93 / International Company News: Alphandery confirms first
sell-offs


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


MR EDMOND Alphandery, the French economy minister, has confirmed that
Rhone-Poulenc, the chemicals group, and Banque Nationale de Paris, will be
the first of the four state-owned groups selected for privatisation to be
sold.
The government was considering privatising Elf-Aquitaine, the oil group, in
tranches, he was reported as saying in an interview published yesterday.
This was due to the size of the company which, with an estimated market
value of about FFr100bn (Dollars 17.2bn), was the largest of the four
companies named in Wednesday's privatisation shortlist.
Banque Hervet, the smallest company on the list, with an estimated market
value of FFr1bn, is to be sold privately, the economy ministry said. Credit
Commercial de France, which has built up a 34.4 per cent stake in Banque
Hervet, over the past year is expected to take control through an agreed
purchase of shares.
Last year, Banque Hervet took provisions of about FFr250m to cover bad
loans, particularly in the property market. As a result, the bank suffered
losses of FFr186m. It has net assets of FFr24bn and 1,600 employees.
BNP, Rhone-Poulenc and Elf, the three principal companies in the first batch
of privatisations, will be privatised through a public offer. Mr Alphandery
described the companies as the jewels of the economy and said that the
shortlist was the natural choice.
The economy minister said he was optimistic that the government would
achieve its target of FFr40bn of privatisation receipts by the end of the
year. 'The size of the market is not an obstacle because the Balladur bond
has already prepared the ground,' he said.
The Balladur bond, which was issued earlier this month and can be converted
into equity in privatised issues, has raised FFr110bn.
Mrs Pamela Harriman, the US ambassador to Paris, has expressed concern about
the 20 per cent limit on non-EC shareholdings of privatised companies.
Addressing a meeting of French and US businessmen earlier this week she
said: 'We would prefer to see no limit on such investments'.
However, investment analysts in Paris said that the limits on non-EC
investors would not necessarily be restrictive. 'Most big foreign
institutions have European operations which could buy shares in the French
companies,' said one analyst.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930723

