FT933-5277

FT  04 SEP 93 / Hungary reburies its wartime leader: The mixed emotions
raised by the return of Miklos Horthy


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


HISTORY in eastern Europe has a disturbing tendency to rise up from the
grave to haunt the living. Hungary's deceased leaders make a particular
habit of it.
The latest is Miklos Horthy, disinterred from his resting place in
Portuguese exile, who is to be grandly reburied today in the family tomb at
Kenderes in the great plain of Hungary.
While generally one of the more forward-looking of the new democracies,
Hungary has a rather morbid practice of digging up and then reburying
long-dead leaders.
The reburial of nationalist communist Laszlo Rajk marked the end of
Stalinist terror. That of Imre Nagy, prime minister during the failed 1956
uprising against Soviet occupation, signalled the bankruptcy of communist
rule in Hungary in 1989.
There is also a touch of the comic to the figure of Horthy, the sailor on a
white horse, admiral of a country without a sea, and regent of a kingdom
without a king. Nevertheless, nearly 40 years after his death, Horthy
remains a powerful and controversial symbol.
Anti-semite, war criminal, Nazi ally, revisionist and moral coward to some
Hungarians, he was above all a tragic hero, noble anti-communist and patriot
to others, including the governing conservatives.
Critics of Horthy say he allied with Nazi Germany; his defenders counter
that he preserved Hungary's tattered sovereignty - and the lives of many
Jewish refugees - for as long as he could.
Horthy stood by as German occupation forces in 1944 transported hundreds of
thousands of rural Jews to their deaths in Nazi concentration camps; but he
blocked the deportation of Budapest's Jews.
'I consider Miklos Horthy a Hungarian patriot ..he should be placed into the
continuity of the nation and the awareness of the people,' says Mr Jozsef
Antall, Hungary's prime minister.
Today's ceremony in Kenderes is not an official state funeral. But many
ministers will attend nevertheless and state television plans live coverage.
The state mint has even issued coins to commemorate the event.
But liberal and Jewish groups are outraged at the public homage to a ruler
they say acquiesced in persecution of Hungary's Jews.
For the Horthy reburial has touched nerves already frayed by the recent
formation of the far-right Hungarian Justice Party by anti-semitic writer
Istvan Csurka. Jewish organisations protested yesterday against the 'revival
of the spirit of the inter-war years' outside the ghetto memorial to the
600,000 Hungarian victims of the Holocaust.
At the same time the Democratic Charter, a liberal group led by some of
Hungary's prominent intellectuals, bade a 'final farewell' to the Horthy
system.
Horthy's attitude towards Hungary's Jews may have been ambiguous. There is
less room, however, to interpret the Regent's singleminded campaign to
reverse the Trianon peace settlement which took away two-thirds of Hungarian
territory after defeat in the First World War.
The Regent's alliance with Hitler allowed him to regain territories from
Slovakia, Romania and then Yugoslavia between 1938 and 1941.
Hungary is in its neighbours' eyes, therefore, honouring the arch
'revisionist' and underlining its current reluctance to enshrine existing
borders in bilateral treaties.
'It feeds suspicion about what Hungary's real aims are,' says Miklos
Haraszti, MP of the opposition liberal Free Democrats.
Suspicion is all it is, say conservatives, who deny any territorial
ambitions and reject charges that the reburial of Horthy is insensitive.
'We must be allowed some patriotic feelings: we can't ask every day what the
reactions of Romanians, Slovaks and Yugoslavs are going to be,' says Istvan
Bethlen, MP of the governing Hungarian Democratic Forum.
For supporters of the public reburial of Horthy, the last line of defence is
that the Regent was part of Hungary's past. 'It is something that had to be
done,' says state secretary Tamas Katona. 'We are paying homage to a quarter
of a century of Hungarian history.' Some would prefer to forget.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930904

