FT932-7

FT  30 JUN 93 / Management: Thrown in at the deep end / Experiencing the
pleasure and pain of outdoor training courses


   By CATHERINE MILTON


There were three of us, up to our waists in a swamp - and blindfolded.
The engineer, whose trousers I was clutching by the waistband, was
describing the muddy horrors he could feel ahead and I was doing my best to
warn the personnel assistant, who was clinging to the back of my swimming
costume.
This apparently showed the importance of communication.
The marsh is the bit most people who complete a Raleigh International
(formerly Operation Raleigh) selection course remember best, but it was not
the trek through the mud that defeated me. I was beaten by 10 poles lying on
the ground, of which more later.
Raleigh's demanding selection weekend was designed to test young people to
see if they are ready to be sent to the developing world to work on
community projects such as building bridges and clearing rivers. It is now
aggressively marketing the scheme to employers as a management development
product.
The initiative reflects the pressure on charities whose rules permit them to
raise money by offering their services commercially.
Raleigh now has a respectably long list of sponsors, an increasing number of
which encourage their junior employees (aged 17 to 25) to apply. They then
sponsor those picked to go on the 10-week adventures.
Organisations including TGI Friday's, the US restaurant chain owned in the
UK by Whitbread, and British Rail, are prepared to provide Pounds 3,950 for
each successful candidate to become a 'venturer'.
The fortunate few join teams of other young people who have applied off
their own backs. Raleigh also funds places for young offenders and socially
and physically disadvantaged people.
Raleigh is developing its management products. The organisation recently
appointed Sue Wilkins, formerly group training and development manager at
bookmakers William Hill.
The charity is also setting up an overseas course for managers with Ashridge
Management College, and offers customised outdoor staff development courses
in the UK.
When I arrived for my selection weekend, probably not even averagely fit, in
lipstick and high-heels, the Raleigh staff smothered smiles. 'It will be fun
picking on you tomorrow,' one said at the pub in East Grinstead, East
Sussex, where we met.
I was already nervous. Candidates on selection weekends have been injured
and the expeditions themselves involve risks. Two venturers and one staff
member have died, all in freak accidents, the charity says.
After last orders it was off to the candidates' quarters where, jammed
between a snoring signalman and an inflatable dinghy, I slept.
At 9am sharp we started 30 hours of non-stop problem-solving which tested
logic, physics, stamina and temper.
This included skinning a frozen rabbit, hiking through the darkness to
rescue an 'injured' person who had to be carried back on a stretcher,
answering personal questions and giving three-minute speeches.
In the middle of all this were the judges, both hectoring and helpful.
Scurrying around making notes in little blue books, they laughed at our
suffering and chose all the wrong moments to remind us to 'keep smiling' or
to ask: 'So, why Raleigh?'
Much went wrong. Our bridge broke, our raft sank, our egg catapult went 10
yards instead of 70, our bivouac collapsed, we didn't finish building the
Lego house and the porridge was burnt and spilt. Everyone got soaked from
head to foot.
None of this fazed me. I was beaten by the 10 poles, lying parallel on the
ground.
On Sunday morning, stupid with cold and wet, we were told to make five
crosses, each of which could only be created by one pole skipping two others
to land on a third.
The other team members failed too. We were firmly ticked off and made to do
10 star jumps: 'It does happen on expeditions you know. You are cold and you
are wet and you can't just give up and let someone else do it,' the judge
said.
Despite the disasters and the misery, I could understand why employers see
them as a good management tool.
The value of team work and planning was spelled out: the rewards and
difficulties of giving and taking help, of accepting weaknesses and using
strengths with confidence.
Alan Percox, BR personnel director for production services, believes it is
leadership skills which show the biggest improvement. Staff are willing to
take on responsibility and need less support.
Percox says the scheme makes solid financial sense: 'For about Pounds 2,000
we are saved 12 to 18 months' formal training which would probably cost up
to Pounds 6,000.'

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930630

