FT934-11323

FT  02 NOV 93 / Clarke wins battle over spending: Transport, housing and
local government budgets hit hardest as government agrees freeze on
expenditure


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and JAMES BLITZ


THE government yesterday agreed the terms of the toughest public spending
round for a decade, heralding a freeze in real terms in most Whitehall
budgets for the next three years.
In an unexpected announcement, Downing Steet signalled that a row over
defence spending had been settled by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, and
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, ahead of a special cabinet
meeting this morning.
With only some minor details for the main Whitehall budgets still
unresolved, the planned meeting has been scrapped. The remaining details of
the spending package will now be finalised at Thursday's regular cabinet
meeting and will form part of the first unified tax and expenditure Budget
on November 30.
It was clear last night that the transport, housing, local government and
agriculture budgets had been the principal victims of the public spending
cuts.
Among the projects facing delay or cancellation were the London Crossrail
link and the Channel tunnel rail link. The City Challenge urban regeneration
scheme is also under threat.
Despite the risk of a Tory backbench rebellion and Mr Rifkind's own threat
of a full-scale defence review, the defence budget has also suffered
significant cuts from the mid-1990s onwards.
Officials confirmed that a proposed spending ceiling of Pounds 253.6bn for
all Whitehall departments for the 1994-95 financial year had been met. In
the following year, the total would rise to a maximum of Pounds 263.3bn. The
ceiling for the third year allowed for an increase of no more than 1 per
cent in real terms.
Mr Clarke's success in freezing expenditure at present levels will please
Conservative right-wingers by reducing the pressure to increase taxation.
The Pounds 80bn budget for social security spending - by far the largest of
any department - would continue to rise in real terms. Ministers conceded
the threat of backbench rebellions had curbed the Treasury's ambition for
radical cuts in the welfare state.
But Mr Peter Lilley, the social security secretary, had agreed to
legislation to curb invalidity benefit and a clampdown on fraud.
The biggest source of tension in recent weeks had been the level of defence
spending for the next three years. Treasury officials had threatened to cut
the Pounds 23bn defence budget by several billion pounds, but Mr Rifkind
enlisted the support of 20 Tory MPs in resisting deep cuts.
Agreement yesterday followed a meeting between the prime minister and
defence chiefs last week. But last night Sir Nicholas Bonsor, the chairman
of the Commons select committee on defence, was said to be among those still
threatening rebellion if defence spending was reduced by more than Pounds
1.3bn over the next three years.
Health and education were said last night to have won real increases in
their spending, though much less than in recent years.
Yesterday's statement took MPs by surprise because there had only been a
limited opportunity to discuss spending at last Thursday's cabinet meeting,
which was dominated by Northern Ireland.
Last year, five sessions of the cabinet were required to reach general
agreement on spending levels before the Autumn Statement.
The spending agreement will allow Mr Clarke to finalise his proposals for
revenue. Treasury officials have yet to inform ministers of their taxation
plans.
Budget 1993: The secret art of disguising tax rises Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931102

