FT934-8353

FT  16 NOV 93 / Open season on the fate of goodwill: Andrew Jack explains
why a UK accounting practice which has proved popular with acquisitive
companies is under threat


   By ANDREW JACK


The Christmas season of goodwill is likely to be rapidly transformed into
one of illwill for finance directors as the UK Accounting Standards Board
tackles one of the most controversial topics in financial reporting.
At issue is goodwill: the difference between the purchase price of a company
and the net assets on its balance sheet. 'We've got to lance this boil once
and for all,' says Mr David Tweedie, chairman of the board.
Reforms could cut British companies' profits, and reduce the advantages they
have traditionally held. The UK's anomalous treatment of goodwill has given
them an edge in acquisitions over their foreign competitors.
In a discussion document scheduled for release on December 16, the board is
proposing to take a measured line, weighing three options. They are:
Write-off goodwill immediately on acquisition to reserves in the balance
sheet.
Capitalise goodwill on the balance sheet and amortise it through the profit
and loss account over a fixed period - probably 20 years.
Maintain goodwill as an intangible asset in the balance sheet and depreciate
if regular re-evaluations show it has diminished.
At present, the first two approaches are permitted under SSAP 22, the
existing statement of standard accounting practice on goodwill.
Immediate write-off is by far the most popular in the UK. According to a
sample of 500 most recent accounts by Company Reporting, the Edinburgh-based
monthly monitoring service, just 4 per cent of companies with goodwill
capitalised and amortised it. Mr Paul Rutteman, technical partner with
accountants Ernst & Young, says companies dislike the approach because it
reduces earnings and introduces an arbitrary period for writing off
goodwill.
But amortisation is the favoured approach elsewhere in the world, with the
period varying between five years in Germany (where there are tax incentives
to go for the short period) to 40 years in the US.
The International Accounting Standards Committee will endorse the
capitalisation and amortisation approach over 20 years in IAS 22, its own
version, to be issued in January. Mr David Cairns, the committee's
secretary-general, says: 'No one else does it the British way. There is a
feeling that if companies have paid for something worthwhile, it is
misleading to write it off. It should be in the balance sheet.'
The third approach to goodwill requires companies to develop a 'ceiling
test' based on projected cash flows to examine whether the value of the
goodwill has fallen. The problem is whether these measures will be
sufficiently robust. It will also raise the spectre of whether, for the sake
of consistency, companies should include internally generated goodwill, such
as home-grown brands, on their balance sheets.
There is also a legal difficulty: the seventh EC directive on company law
seems to permit only the first two approaches. It does not allow intangible
assets to be held at market value without amortisation. The ASB's lawyers
are struggling with a way to permit the third approach.
The board is split internally about which approach it favours. An
illustration of this tension is that it has still not approved a final
version of the text of the discussion document. This will only take place in
two weeks' time, at its next full meeting. It has yet to decide whether to
favour one of the three options over the others.
At the earliest, a proposed exposure draft of a standard on goodwill could
be issued by autumn next year. But that assumes there is a clear consensus
on which of the three approaches to adopt.
More likely, it will take many months, during which the ASB will be faced
with one of the toughest tests of its legitimacy and democracy. Mr Tweedie
says if there is strong disagreement, there may well be open hearings at
which interested parties will be forced to debate in public.
The current policy of discussing accounting issues behind closed doors could
damage the board's credibility if followed on an issue as contentious as
goodwill.
Judging by previous accounting standards that have touched on the topic,
disagreement will be rife and reforms strongly contested. In 1989, ED 47, an
exposure draft of a proposed standard by the Accounting Standards Committee,
the board's predecessor, which would have made amortisation compulsory, was
widely criticised by industry.
More recently, the board's urgent issues task force - which tackles
loopholes in existing standards - introduced UITF 3 in late 1991 to great
consternation. This requires companies to write off goodwill through the
profit and loss account when they subsequently sell an acquired business.
Companies have been forced to comply, but many did so only with clenched
teeth. The ructions have forced the board to consult on its proposals far
more widely since then. A number of companies have also bent the rules to
obey the letter rather than the spirit.
That said, if the ASB is to tackle the issue, the timing is probably right.
Companies might do well to prepare themselves now for any change of
accounting policies, while acquisition activity is subdued compared with the
late 1980s. The impact on profits could be far more damaging if they wait
for the next wave of purchases.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931116

