FT932-17

FT  30 JUN 93 / Catalan MPs courted by Socialists: Gonzalez in search for
government partners


   By TOM BURNS and REUTER


   MADRID


SPAIN'S parliament yesterday met for the first time since the general
election earlier this month, re-electing the speaker and paving the way for
Mr Felipe Gonzalez to be sworn in for a fourth term as premier.
King Juan Carlos now begins formal consultations with party political
leaders and is expected to inform the speaker next week of his candidate for
prime minister - certain to be Mr Gonzalez.
Mr Gonzalez, whose Socialist party (PSOE) lacks a parliamentary majority,
said he might include the PNV, the small Basque nationalist party, in the
government and that he still hoped to persuade the more reluctant Catalan
nationalists of the larger CiU party to become junior partners in a
coalition administration.
The PSOE won 159 seats in the elections two weeks ago, 17 short of an
overall majority in the 350-member chamber.
An investiture debate, in which Mr Gonzalez would seek a vote of confidence,
could be held as early as Thursday next week and the new government
announced shortly after.
The Socialist leader is expected to present his programme to parliament some
time next week before the vote of confidence. He needs an absolute majority
to be confirmed at the first vote. Should he fail to get it, he can be
confirmed by simple majority in a second vote two days later.
The need for a broad-based government has been heightened by a back-bench
revolt among Socialist MPs against Mr Gonzalez' nomination of Mr Carlos
Solchaga as the party's parliamentary leader.
Mr Solchaga, a former economy minister, is widely distrusted by the left
wing of the party and by the unions. He secured the nomination by 87 votes
to 66 with six abstentions. Spokesmen for the rebel group said, however,
they would respect the majority decision and pledged loyalty to Mr Solchaga.
The Catalan politicians are understood to be under considerable pressure
from Barcelona business leaders to overturn their initial refusal last week
to back Mr Gonzalez. CiU support would ensure a stable government and its
business-orientated policies would reassure the markets.
Hopes for a final agreement between Mr Gonzalez and the nationalist parties
were fuelled yesterday when PNV and CiU members of parliament voted
alongside the Socialists to re-elect Mr Felix Pons, a Socialist, as speaker.
Fellow Socialist Juan Jose Laborda was returned as speaker of the 256-seat
Senate.
Mr Solchaga meanwhile tendered an olive branch to the nationalists by
co-opting a Basque MP to the parliamentary standing committee in place of a
member of the Communist-led United Left (IU) group.
Reuter adds: The Basques, whose five seats would not alone be enough to give
the PSOE a majority, are still open to the possibility of a coalition and
have guaranteed to co-operate in creating a viable administration,
Urged by a strong current of orthodox Socialist opinion, Mr Gonzalez also
has the option of some sort of parliamentary deal with the United Left,
which has 18 seats. He is due to meet an IU official today.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

930630

