FT932-13540

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (8): Law stifles more than it enables -
Emerging capital markets


   By MARK NICHOLSON


TO DESCRIBE Egypt's present capital market as a market at all is wild
flattery. Shares of debateable real value trade thinly on an antiquated and
near comatose stock market, while the sole other negotiable financial
instruments in the country are government bills. These are snapped up by the
banks, and held there.
Even the treasury bills introduced under the continuing reforms ordained by
the IMF are a recent revolution. For the 30 years since Gamel Abdul Nasser
nationalised swathes of Egypt's industry, capital movements have largely
comprised cosy transfers between big public sector enterprises and big
public sector banks, or the privately-arranged share sales of closely-held
companies.
This must change if Egypt is to see the structural economic adjustments on
which it embarked in 1991 under co-ordinated IMF and World Bank programmes.
Pressed by the twin imperatives of creating a market into which it can make
public offerings under its privatisation programme and that of invigorating
the country's existing private sector, Egypt is trying to create a capital
market, almost from scratch. 'If this mystical privatisation is ever to take
place, we need the capital markets in place first,' says one foreign agency
official.
Thus, with much help from the World Bank, Egypt produced and passed a
capital markets law last June. 'We have established the playground and the
rules of the game, now we can let the players play,' as Mr Ashraf Shams
el-Din of the Capital Markets Authority puts it.
The aim, he elaborates, is to produce a 'fair, honest, disciplined,
professional and transparent market' in both equities and bonds, open to
local and foreign investors and encouraging the growth of a slew of new
financial intermediaries.
In particular, the new law aims to remove two basic impediments to the
evolution of a capital market: a severe fiscal imbalance between securities
and bank deposits, and an arbitrary ceiling on permissible returns from
bonds.
The appeal of securities has been hugely dimmed: money in bank deposits
earns good interest and incurs no tax; share transactions have carried both
stamp duties and income taxes.
In total, the combined taxes on a single share transaction could reach 25
per cent of the equity's value.
The new law exempts shares in companies which issue to the public no less
than 30 per cent of their total equity, and in which shares are held by at
least 150 separate shareholders, from all but a 2 per cent capital gains
tax.
On bonds, the law removes at a stroke a dusty 1948 edict which clamped a
maximum 7 per cent coupon on any such instrument - a law which, essentially
because of the high interest rates available on bank deposits, had alone
scotched entirely any prospect of an Egyptian bond market.
Financiers and bankers unanimously agree that these two measures alone
constitute enormous progress. But that is where optimism about the new law
within Egypt's nascent financial services industry largely ends.
'In comparison to what we had, it's a huge leap forward,' says Mr Ahmed
Foda, managing director of Investments & Securities Group in Cairo. 'But it
falls short of our expectations.'
The basic criticism is that the law has still not been enacted. Although
passed in June last year, the executive regulations which were supposed to
follow 90 days later were still under debate in late March.
Critics of the law consider it flawed both in detail and approach. Specific
complaints focus on the requirement that companies demonstrate at least 150
independent shareholders before they can win full tax exemptions on their
share trading - a constraint seen as particularly limiting in a country
where the stratum of potential direct investors in securities is likely to
be narrow.
Many financiers also worry that the law fails to outline in sufficient depth
the terms and conditions for the creation of new financial intermediaries.
But the broadest concern is that the law is simply too stifling.
'Rather than ask how we can create the right climate for a capital markets
law,' says one merchant banker in Cairo, 'the Capital Markets Authority is
saying, 'how can we take control?' There's too much emphasis on regulating a
market where there's no market to begin with.'
Several bankers suggest that the Capital Markets Authority, which is both
the author and enforcer of the new law, has been excessively influenced by
its experience in dealing with collapse, in the late 1980s, of several
Islamic finance houses. 'They've been traumatised into excessive
regulation,' says one banker.
Whatever its limitations, though, everyone in Cairo's now expectant
financial services industry is willing to accept the new law as a start. And
as we explore elsewhere in this survey, there are some early signs that
investors in the stock market might be willing to bite.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930422

