FT932-6779

FT  27 MAY 93 / Mandela plea after radicals quit talks


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   JOHANNESBURG


MR Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, yesterday
sought to maintain the momentum of the country's democracy negotiations
after the ultra-radical Pan Africanist Congress said it was suspending
participation in the talks.
PAC President Clarence Makwethu announced the PAC would boycott
constitutional negotiations until police released all members of the PAC and
its armed wing, the Azanian People's Liberation Army, detained since
Tuesday. Police said 73 people had been arrested, with 15 released
yesterday.
Mr Makwethu also called for the return of documents and computers seized in
raids on PAC offices throughout South Africa.
But Mr Mandela urged South Africans not to panic over the issue, saying:
'Since we began the negotiating process in 1990, we have had a number of
problems. This is one of them.
'I'm sure that the democratic forces are strong enough to overcome this
crisis.'
The PAC's decision to boycott talks could make it difficult for the 26
negotiating parties to meet their self-imposed deadline of June 3 for
agreement on a date for the first multi-racial elections.
But on its own the PAC, believed to have only limited electoral support,
cannot block progress.
Controversy has arisen over the fact that the government's chief negotiator,
Mr Roelf Meyer, was not informed about the arrests, which have come at a
critical stage in the negotiating process.
The PAC responded angrily to the arrests, saying it would act 'brutally and
ruthlessly' against white South Africans unless police immediately freed
their members.
Government officials said racist rhetoric such as this prompted police to
act against members of the PAC, whose followers have adopted the slogan 'one
settler, one bullet'.
Although the military strength of the PAC armed wing, APLA, is minimal,
individuals claiming to be APLA members have carried out numerous murders of
white farmers and holidaymakers in recent months, seriously damaging white
morale.
The PAC leadership has been ambivalent at best when asked to condemn such
attacks. Police say they expect to charge many of those held for various
crimes, including murder.
Meanwhile, the ANC distanced itself from a demand made last weekend by Mr
Mandela for the official voting age to be lowered to 14. Mr Mandela shocked
politicians across South Africa's spectrum when he made the call in an
apparent bid to win support from militant township youths.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930527

