FT932-3285

FT  15 JUN 93 / Japan's best face forward: The hosts of the G7 summit in
Tokyo could emerge as the winners


   By PETER NORMAN


In their heart of hearts, the leaders of the Group of Seven industrial
countries must be wishing that next month's Tokyo economic summit was not
taking place.
The US, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada - as well as
Russia and the European Commission, which have supporting roles at the
meeting - will be sending politicians of much-diminished stature to Tokyo's
Akasaka palace between July 7 and 9.
The euphoria that accompanied the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of
communism - which infused the three previous G7 summits in Houston, London
and Munich - has long gone. Instead of providing a rich harvest of support,
the triumph of democracy and the market economy after more than 40 years of
cold war has left the seven government heads deeply unpopular.
The reasons are not difficult to discern. The industrialised economies are
either in recession or, at best, fitful recoveries that will do little to
foster the 'feel-good factor' among disgruntled voters.
Unemployment, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, is heading upwards towards 36m in its 24 industrialised member
states and is likely to keep rising in most countries over the next 18
months.
The geo-political outlook, is, if anything, worse. The brutal civil war in
Bosnia has all but buried hopes of a 'new world order' to follow the
collapse of Soviet power. The latest crisis in Somalia casts serious doubts
on the ability of the United Nations to grow into the role of a
supranational referee bringing order to regional conflict.
Problems at home have made G7 governments and electorates increasingly
inward-looking. In today's parochial times, G7 leaders could lose as much as
gain from being seen with their counterparts at yet another international
meeting.
Governments like to think that G7 summits can increase consumer and business
confidence. But it is difficult to believe that three days of strutting,
eating and talking in Japan's mini-Versailles will gull the west's
increasingly cynical television viewers into believing that happy days are
here again.
However, it is possible to take a more optimistic view of the summit - both
for the world and for the host nation, Japan.
The hope, propagated by the US and encouraged by this month's OECD annual
ministerial meeting in Paris, is that Tokyo will mark a vital step towards
final agreement on the much-delayed Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation
talks.
Trade ministers from the US, Japan, Canada and the European Community are
negotiating an extensive tariff-cutting agreement for industrial products
and services to form part of a final Uruguay Round settlement. If their next
round of talks in Tokyo on June 23 and 24 produces an agreement that can be
finalised and endorsed by the G7 leaders, the summit may give a decisive
boost to the seven-year-old Round and so have helped solve the trade talks
impasse.
But the so-called market access agreement is only one of many problems to be
solved if the trade round is to be completed by the new deadline of
mid-December. The US and Japan are at loggerheads over US demands that Japan
accept numerical targets to reduce its huge trade surplus. A fight is also
brewing between Japan and the EC over limits to the sales of Japanese cars
in the community. Big difficulties have to be overcome within the EC and
among the G7 before agreement is reached on agriculture and other open
issues in the trade round.
Mr Koichiro Matsuura, the Japanese government 'sherpa' responsible for
preparing the economic side of the summit for Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the
Japanese prime minister, last week put a slight damper on hopes that the
Uruguay Round might be settled this year. 'I cannot be totally optimistic,'
he told visiting journalists in Tokyo.
Other big problems offer little chance of a summit 'success'. Although Mr
Miyazawa has said that helping the former Soviet Union become a democracy
with a market economy 'is going to be the most important issue', it is
difficult to see the G7 doing much more. A strategy for helping Russia was
agreed in April. It is now up to President Boris Yeltsin, who will join the
talks on the final day, to implement agreed plans so that Russia can qualify
for promised western financial assistance.
Despite US pressure, there is little chance of action by Japan or Germany to
boost the world economy. Japan insists that it has done enough to boost
demand through two fiscal stimulus packages in the past 10 months. Fears for
the D-Mark's stability are limiting the Bundesbank's appetite for decisive
interest rate cuts in spite of recession in Germany.
While there will be much serious talk about regional conflicts, the
non-proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, and a
greater role for the United Nations, it is unclear whether initiatives will
emerge in these areas.
Little wonder, therefore, that the Japanese government has begun the
time-honoured pre-summit ritual of downgrading expectations. 'Don't expect
much out of a three-day meeting,' warns Mr Matsuura. Mr Kunihiko Saito, the
deputy foreign minister preparing the non-economic side of the summit, says
he does not 'think we can expect any tangible specific results'.
But that, for Japan, might be the best of all possible outcomes. This summit
 -the third in Tokyo since the late 1970s - could break the rule by which
Japan, as host, emerges as the loser.
In the past, Japan's G7 partners have been able to capitalise on the
reluctance of governments in Tokyo to have international rows occurring on
home territory. This year, the hosts seem in a feistier mood.
Japan has already taken the high moral ground on trade, rejecting the US
goal of setting bilateral numerical targets for deficit reduction as
'managed trade'. Japan also has offered widespread tariff reductions to help
bring about a market access agreement.
Although Japan itself is likely to emerge only gradually from its current
period of very slow growth, its economic performance this year is likely to
be better than nearly all its G7 partners. It can also present itself as
sole representative at the summit of east Asia, a region that is growing
faster and, in Tokyo's view, is politically more stable than other parts of
the world.
Tokyo is likely to step carefully in pressing claims such as Japan's desire
for a permanent seat on the UN security council. But officials are unusually
forthright when putting their case. 'We think Japan is qualified to be a
member of the security council,' was Mr Saito's comment last week.
Although Japan has stressed that the summit will not be a decision-making
event, it will nonetheless be an important event in the Japanese calendar.
Out of the mess of the post-cold war world, Japan may emerge with its
standing raised rather than lowered.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930615

