FT934-11768

FT  29 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Companies seek index reclassification -
Unhappiness over allocations to FT-SE Actuaries share quotation sectors


   By MAGGIE URRY


DOZENS OF companies have written to the FT-SE Actuaries Industry
Classification Committee objecting to the sectors or sub-sectors they have
been put in under the new classification system announced last month.
Companies have until the end of this month to make submissions asking for a
change.
Among leading groups which are understood to have asked for reconsideration
are Rank Organisation, RTZ, Inchcape and BTR. Many of the letters are
suggesting relatively minor changes, for example a move between sub-sectors,
or asking for a change of a sector name.
The new classification system will come into effect at the start of 1994. It
involves three tiers, economic groups, sectors and sub-sectors. Indices for
economic groups and sectors are published daily.
For the first time the ground rules for deciding how companies will be
placed in sectors were published. Essentially, they are allocated according
to the business from which they derive most of their profits.
Companies believe that the sector or sub-sector they are put in can affect
their share rating. They also fear that if included in a sector which they
regard as wrong for them they may be followed by stock market analysts
unfamiliar with their business.
One investment manager, who is a large shareholder in Inchcape, said
yesterday: 'The sector makes a considerable difference to the rating, and
eventually to the cost of future equity finance'.
However, one broker who has made a study of share price movements following
sector reclassifications, said yesterday: 'I can't find any evidence
supporting the theory that stocks are re-rated after moving sector.'
In a strongly worded letter to the committee, Sir David Plastow, chairman of
Inchcape, said the group was 'deeply concerned' by its classification in the
'retailers, vehicle distributors' sector and wants to shift to
conglomerates. He says only 14 per cent of group profits come from retailing
cars, although this is aggregated in the group's accounts with profits from
motor importing and distribution, to form 46 per cent of total profits.
Further, Inchcape is much larger than other companies in the sub-sector, and
would tend to distort the sector's performance. Another company in the
sector is understood to have asked the committee not to include Inchcape for
that reason.
Rank Organisation has been placed in the office machinery sub-sector of the
electronic and electrical equipment sector. This is because more than half
Rank's pre-tax profits, according to the classification system, are derived
from its Rank Xerox associate.
Mr Nigel Turnbull, finance director, said Rank should be included in
leisure, because of its interests such as Butlins holiday camps and bingo
clubs, rather than office machinery.
The group does not provide a split of pre-tax profits between activities,
but Mr Turnbull said it was a question of how interest on the group's debt
was allocated between its businesses. The committee has not attributed any
to the Rank Xerox activities. Further, Rank Xerox, as an associate, is not
directly managed by Rank.
RTZ is unhappy to be included in the copper mining sub-sector, although
broadly content in the extractive industries sector. RTZ said it was
impossible to say what proportion of profits came from copper, but the metal
accounted for less than 20 per cent of sales.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931029

