FT932-6787

FT  27 MAY 93 / Ruling puts democracy back on track: Why business confidence
is likely to return to Pakistan


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


THE BALL is back in the court of Pakistan's politicians. Yesterday's
decision by the supreme court in Islamabad has returned the country to the
path of democratic development five weeks after it seemed in danger of being
derailed.
In a landmark decision, the court reversed last month's dissolution of the
National Assembly and restored to office the government of Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif.
President Ghulam Ishaq Khan's dismissal of the government on April 18 was
the third time since the lifting of martial law in 1985 that a prime
minister had been sacked while in office, under powers introduced by the
late military dictator, General Zia ul-Haq.
The constitutional amendments had strengthened presidential powers, allowing
him to remove prime ministers, dissolve parliament and call fresh elections.
But the supreme court's ruling has apparently ended those arbitrary powers,
or at least severely curtailed their use by any president in the future.
Mr Sharif's attempt to secure a vote in the National Assembly on curbing the
president's powers had led to his dismissal by Mr Khan.
Mr Sharif was due to call a session of the 217-seat assembly to seek a fresh
vote of confidence, intended to reinforce his political credentials, close
aides said after the court verdict.
However, the session could equally provide an opportunity to unseat him
again. Mr Sharif's opponents in parliament, including those loyal to
opposition leader Ms Benazir Bhutto and to the president, had been
discussing ways to vote Mr Sharif out should the assembly be restored.
Mr Hamid Nasir Chattha, who resigned from Mr Sharif's cabinet before his
government was sacked, said last night that 'the matter is not over'. He
said dissidents from Mr Sharif's party would continue to oppose him in the
assembly.
Politicians loyal to Mr Chattha said the dissidents were examining the
possibility of an alliance with the opposition People's Democratic Alliance,
led by Ms Bhutto, in an effort to remove the restored government. However,
the extent of support on both sides in the assembly is unlikely to become
clear until members begin to express their opinions in parliament.
The Sharif camp remains convinced that it has the support of enough members
to block any such moves.
If Mr Sharif survived the vote, it would clearly be difficult for him to
co-exist with Mr Khan, since the two men are now bitter enemies. Mr Sharif
could be further undermined by the four provincial governments, which are
known to be loyal to the president and have an uneasy relationship with the
prime minister.
In Pakistan's 46-year history, army generals have ruled for 24 of them.
Under civilian rule, Pakistan has seen 13 prime ministers, most of whom were
removed from office or resigned before completing their terms.
Despite the army's past role in running the country, yesterday's court
decision followed several weeks of assurances from military officials that
they have no plans to take power.
Nevertheless, the restored government faces huge political as well as
economic challenges. Mr Sharif has overseen a period of radical economic
reform but appeared to be running into problems at the time of his
dismissal.
The fiscal year which ends on June 30 is expected to close with one of
Pakistan's largest budget deficits. Tax evasion and substantial expenditures
on defence as well as debt servicing have left little room for increasing
development expenditures. A thriving black economy which is estimated by
some to be almost half the size of the national economy has set back efforts
to improve revenue collection.
Foreign exchange reserves dipped to Dollars 450m (Pounds 292.2m) from
Dollars 800m when the government fell. However, Mr Sartaj Aziz, who was
finance minister under Mr Sharif and is now likely to return to the same
position, said last night that the court's decision will end the
uncertainty.
'The restoration of the government will restore business confidence,' Mr
Aziz said, adding that economic reforms would be put back on track.
Government officials said last night that Mr Aziz and other ministers would
hold a series of meetings with business leaders within the next week, in an
effort to revive confidence.
They are expected to assure businesses that initiatives such as the
privatisation programme will go ahead unhindered.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930527

