FT934-11466

FT  01 NOV 93 / Growing labour strife looms across Europe


   By TOM BURNS, DAVID GOODHART, JOHN RIDDING, QUENTIN PEEL and Our Foreign
Staff


   MADRID, LONDON, PARIS, BONN


WORKERS across Europe appear to have taken strength from the spectacular
victory of Air France employees in forcing a government climbdown last week
over cost-cutting plans for the troubled airline.
In Germany, Belgium, Italy, Spain and France, employers are facing
increasing militancy as they demand job cuts and flexibility in an attempt
to prune costs.
Much of the recent disruption is about job security rather than pay, and it
has been directed at governments rather than private sector employers. But
the wave of protest reveals potentially ominous developments for industrial
peace in Europe.
The decline of trade union power in Europe appears to be no guarantee of
harmony and may, indeed, have the opposite effect. France, the centre of
recent disruption, has the lowest level of unionisation among countries in
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Unionisation is higher in the French public sector than in the private
sector but the weak hold that union leaders have over the rank and file,
even in the public sector, prevented an early conclusion of the dispute at
Air France.
All of the national protests have domestic roots, but the domino effect
seems to be playing a part. In Spain and Belgium in particular, two
countries strongly influenced by France, union militancy seems to have been
fuelled by the success of their French colleagues.
In France itself, while the airline strike has ended, the dispute is far
from over. Fresh negotiations on a new package start this week. Force
Ouvriere, one of the unions which spearheaded the Air France protest, has
threatened further action if the new plan is unacceptable.
Strikes are also threatened later this month at Groupe Bull, the computer
manufacturer, Pechiney, the aluminium producer and several other companies
listed for privatisation. Rail, post office and telecommunications workers
backed a day of protest on October 12 over planned job losses and pay cuts.
In Germany, three factors have combined to raise the prospect of a bitter
autumn and winter of labour unrest: the threat of mass redundancies, efforts
by employers to cut labour costs, and sharp reductions planned in public
spending, not least in social benefits.
The key is the looming confrontation in the 4m-strong engineering industry,
where the employers have symbolically announced the termination of current
wage and holiday contracts, due to expire anyway at the end of the year.
IG Metall, the engineering workers' union, has called for open conflict in
the New Year, in a desperate effort to preserve real wages and generous
holiday benefits.
The temperature is rising in many other sectors.
Last week in Bonn, 120,000 building workers protested against government
plans to scrap their winter lay-off payments. It was the largest union
demonstration in recent years.
A week before, tens of thousands of steel workers protested in the Ruhr
region over reductions in social payments.
At the end of September, 60,000 coal miners demonstrated against the planned
closure of the Haus Aden-Monopol pit at Bergkamen, and two weeks ago,
workers occupied a power station nearby which is threatening to switch to
cheap imported coal.
On Friday, unemployed workers demonstrated in more than 200 towns and cities
across the country at the 'destruction of the welfare state'.
Among the threatened job losses are those of 14,000 at Mercedes for next
year, after cuts of 22,000 in 1992 and 1993. A further 16,000 are set to go
at Deutsche Aerospace. In the machine tool sector almost 50,000 jobs will be
shed.
In Spain, union leaders meet government ministers on Thursday to discuss
wage restraint and more flexible labour regulations but demonstrations are
already planned for later this month over the very economic policies they
are ostensibly negotiating.
'There is no objective reason why what is happening in France and Italy will
not happen here as well,' said a member of the employers' confederation who
is attending the talks.
Faced with rising unemployment, the government wants to peg wage rises over
the next three years to below annual inflation levels.
The unions are adamant that job security should be protected. The issue has
surfaced at SEAT, Volkswagen's troubled Spanish subsidiary, where 9,000 jobs
are to go.
Unrest over wage restraint is highest among 70,000 steel-workers at the
state-owned INI group, following a management decision to delay salary
rises.
In both Spain and Belgium the unions appear determined to reject 'social
pacts' restraining wages, which are ostensibly designed to create jobs. In
Spain, the pact also involves an overhaul of costly dismissal procedures and
in Belgium a reduction in employers' social security payments.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931101

