FT934-8649

FT  15 NOV 93 / Insurance companies will have to review 5m pensions


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


INSURANCE companies are to be forced to examine up to 5m personal pensions
policies sold since 1988 and compensate any individuals who have taken them
out against their best interests.
According to one regulatory official, the companies could face a bill of
millions of pounds.
The action follows concern among regulators that hard-selling sales agents
encouraged customers to transfer out of attractive occupational pension
schemes into far less advantageous personal pensions. These carry high
administrative charges and have no employer contributions.
Lautro, the self-regulatory body for the life insurance industry, has set up
a working party to devise a system for member firms to examine their
records. It will issue instructions to them early in the new year.
The working party, which will also advise on the compensation scheme,
includes Lautro staff, insurance industry representatives, independent
actuaries and representatives of the National Association of Pension Funds.
The move is a response to an initial review ordered by Lautro for the third
quarter of 1992, which found that 50,000 personal pensions contracts had
been terminated. All of these had been taken out in the previous two years.
Although Lautro has not determined the reasons for this high rate, it has
found that mis-selling has been a significant factor in early cancellations
of long-term savings contracts.
Last year, Lautro issued guidance to sales agents saying that there were
almost no circumstances under which a sales agent could justify selling an
occupational scheme member a personal pension plan. Prior to giving that
guidance, Lautro found that 'in most cases the documentation for each sale
was so poor you could not tell whether the advice given was good'.
Since then, Lautro has found a marked improvement in the quality of
documentation.
Watchdog widens talks, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931115

