FT931-3983

FT  12 MAR 93 / London Stock Exchange: Equities hold steady in brisk
turnover


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


PRE-BUDGET caution was only disturbed on the UK stock market yesterday by
company announcements and by the disturbing news that the London Stock
Exchange has abandoned Taurus, its plan for a paperless settlement system of
securities deals. Member firms of the London Exchange, which are believed to
have already spent around Pounds 350m on the project, reacted strongly to
the Taurus decision, questioning whether the resignation of the chief
executive of the Stock Exchange fully allayed their alarm. Overseas-based
securities firms, in particular, expressed strong criticism of the
exchange's behaviour.
Equities opened steadily but market indices were hurt by the unexpected
resignation of the chief executive of Glaxo, once the market's favoured drug
stock but a significant under-performer in London over the past six months.
Nervousness was emphasised by the prospect that Wall Street, also a strong
player in Glaxo shares, had yet to make its response to the news.
Heavy trade in Glaxo made up nearly 3 per cent of the day's total, with the
rest of the drug sector also active as several London brokers advised
clients to switch into other leading pharmaceutical names. However, not all
the advice was negative; some analysts shrugged off the boardroom news,
pointing out that Glaxo was probably less likely to make a rights issue in
the wake of the latest developments.
However, the setback in Glaxo's share price was responsible for more than
three points of the day's fall of 3.3 points in the FT-SE Index, which
closed at 2,953.4. The important Footsie 2,950 mark was lost again in early
trading when the Index fell by 14 points, so analysts were left to make up
their own minds as to whether the market was sound at present levels.
Seaq volume was brisk, with the day's total of 822.3m shares, comparing with
687.5m on Wednesday. Non-Footsie business made up around 65 per cent of the
day's total trading. Retail volume in equities has remained high this week,
and was worth Pounds 1.61bn on Wednesday.
The disclosure of a substantial loss, dividend cut and workforce layoffs by
Rolls-Royce had been to a large extent foreseen in the stock market. A
higher payout from Enterprise Oil offset lower profits and left the oil
exploration sector little moved. In terms of the effect on the FT-SE Index,
weakness in Glaxo was counterbalanced by gains in other drug stocks and also
in ICI.
Market firms continued to focus on reducing commitments ahead of the end of
the equity trading account today and the Budget speech from Mr Norman
Lamont, the UK chancellor of the exchequer, on Tuesday. The stock market
believes that the chancellor will avoid any strong moves towards tightening
taxation at this stage.
In particular, no changes in corporate taxation are expected next week, and
the domestic question of tax relief on mortgage interest payments is thought
unlikely to be addressed at this stage. A further modest reduction in UK
base rates is regarded as virtually certain, although for the longer term,
there is still a question over the implications for inflationary pressures
of the substantial devaluation of sterling since mid-September.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

930312

