FT934-11722

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: Australian Air write-offs push
Qantas into red


   By BRUCE JACQUES


   SYDNEY


QANTAS, Australia's state-controlled international airline, has slumped into
the red in the June year following heavy write-offs associated with
acquisition of the domestic carrier, Australian Airlines.
Qantas, in which British Airways last year acquired a 25 per cent interest,
turned a ADollars 147.6m (USDollars 95.2m) pre-tax profit into a ADollars
413.5m loss despite a revenue jump from ADollars 4.02bn to ADollars 5.81bn.
The chairman of Qantas, Mr Gary Pemberton, said yesterday the loss reflected
abnormal provisions of ADollars 446.4m (ADollars 45m abnormal profit
previously), of which ADollars 282.3m related to Australian Airlines.
Before abnormals, earnings fell from ADollars 102.6m to ADollars 32.9m. The
result, which included 10 months of Australian Airlines' operations, was
after a jump from ADollars 371.8m to ADollars 446.7m in financing costs.
Mr Pemberton said Australian Airlines' domestic network added significant
value to the group, but the write-offs represented the intangible assets
associated with the merger and the loss of the Australian brand.
He said over time the Australian acquisition would prove to be a turning
point for Qantas. 'Although many opportunities for cost reductions from the
integration of activities have been taken, it is clear that the
single-minded pursuit of rationalisation can have broader implications for
customer service and revenue earning capacity,' he said.
'There is no question that the demands and distractions of the merger have
provided a window of opportunity for Qantas' competitors.'
Mr Pemberton said the partnership with British Airways had provided access
to new markets and promised cost benefits for both companies.
He said the decision, earlier this year, by the Australian government to
defer the proposed public flotation of its remaining shareholding in Qantas
had afforded time to strengthen the group's financial performance.
The result excluded a ADollars 36.7m tax credit, against a ADollars 10m
provision last time.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

931029

