FT934-8414

FT  16 NOV 93 / Manchester bus sale angers union


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


UNION LEADERS attempting an employee buy-out of half of Greater Manchester's
buses are to complain to the Office of Fair Trading about the planned sale
of some operations to British Bus.
They say that the sale would give British Bus, which owns Bee Line and North
Western, a monopoly in some parts of Greater Manchester, including 70 per
cent of the market in Wigan. They want the OFT to rule the sale against the
public interest and will be asking local MPs to help them.
Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Authority was told by the government
earlier this year to split municipally owned GM Buses, which has more than
4,000 employees, into two businesses and privatise them.
Services in the south of the conurbation are being sold to their employees,
but the authority has named British Bus the preferred bidder for the
northern business.
Mr Frank Moore, joint chairman of the employee buy-out team, said yesterday:
'The point of splitting up GM Buses was to increase competition. This does
the opposite. It cannot be in the public interest.'
The sums involved are not being disclosed, but British Bus is understood to
have bid one-third more than the employees.
Coopers & Lybrand, which has been advising the employee bids, said: 'This is
not just sour grapes. There is a genuine grievance. We also understand the
rival bid has yet to be finalised.'
The sale of Mainline, the bus service operated by the South Yorkshire
Passenger Transport Authority and centred in Sheffield, to its 2,200
employees is expected to be announced tomorrow. Following the decision to
split the sale of GM Buses, Mainline was the last metropolitan service being
sold intact.
The government yesterday approved the sale of Leicester CityBus by Leicester
City Council to GRT Holdings. Leicester CityBus has 217 vehicles. GRT
Holdings operates buses in the Aberdeen and Falkirk areas.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931116

