FT932-13387

FT  23 APR 93 / Russian defence minister faces corruption charges


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin last night faced the gravest threat to the success
of his referendum campaign when the prosecutor- general's office issued a
statement implicating the Russian defence minister in 'illegal deals'
involving former Soviet military property in east Germany.
General Pavel Grachev, the defence minister, has strongly supported Mr
Yeltsin and has so far ensured the loyalty of the military. One source close
to the security services said last night that he would be forced to resign.
The allegations came at the end of a day in which the bitterness between Mr
Yeltsin and parliament erupted in a series of charges and counter charges.
The parliamentary press office distributed a statement, claimed to be based
on security services' information, that Mr Yeltsin planned to falsify the
results of Sunday's referendum and to impose presidential rule with the help
of armed Cossack regiments.
The country's main hardline groups announced the formation of a public
committee for the protection of the constitution, uniting nationalist and
communist parties and previously centrist parliamentary factions.
Mr Vladimir Isakov, leader of the Russian Unity faction, said the group
would use 'all means including civil disobedience and resistance . . . if we
encounter open violence to the constitution this means we will defend the
constitution by the use of force'.
Mr Yeltsin, on a campaign trip to the city of Izhevsk in the Udmurt
Republic, promised 'tough measures' against the opposition.
The corruption allegations against Gen Grachev come a week after Gen
Alexander Rutskoi, the vice-president, who has emerged as the main opponent
of Mr Yeltsin, alleged massive corruption on the part of close presidential
aides - including a charge that Mr Mikhail Poltaranin, head of the Federal
Information Service, has been involved in the sale of Soviet army property
in Berlin.
The prosecutor-general's office said that Mr Gennady Burbulis, the former
first deputy prime minister and long-time confidant of Mr Yeltsin - also
named by Gen Rutskoi - together with other senior officials, would be
interrogated in a seperate corruption case.
The key passage in the statement says: 'The prosecutor-general's office,
investigating illegal deals involving the property of the Western Group of
Forces, discovered new facts of abuse of official position by the commanders
of the group, of the defence ministry and personally by defence minister
Pavel Grachev'.
Gen Grachev was made defence minister over more senior general officers
after he sided with Mr Yeltsin during the August putsch in 1991.
Mr Yeltsin's hardline opponents plan a rally in Moscow today.
Russian referendum, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930423

