FT933-12645

FT  23 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: Major urges Tory rebels to think
again


   By ALISON SMITH and DAVID OWEN


MR JOHN MAJOR yesterday delivered an impassioned warning that unless the UK
honoured its obligations it would lose its growing influence within the
European Community.
In a vigorous speech opening yesterday's set-piece debate on the social
chapter, the prime minister made an urgent and direct appeal to potential
Tory rebels to think again before joining opposition parties in a 'cynical'
vote for the social chapter.
He was particularly vitriolic about the Liberal Democrats, describing their
tactics as 'frankly contemptible' given the party's pro-European stance.
His attack incensed Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, who rejected
Mr Major's analysis, insisting that voting against the government amounted
to support for the social chapter. The prime minister called him
'ludicrous'.
The electric atmosphere in the packed Commons chamber alternated between
uproar and rapt silence, as Mr Major said that the true will of parliament
had been expressed by the 71 votes in favour of the Maastricht act. They
'should not be frustrated by one parliamentary motion'.
If there were a free-standing debate on the social chapter, he asserted, MPs
would reject it. He had been acting 'within the remit of parliament' when he
negotiated the treaty, including the opt-out from the social chapter.
Insisting that the UK would ratify the treaty, Mr Major made it clear that
the Tory Euro-sceptics were wrong to have convinced themselves that voting
with Labour would prevent ratification.
The alliance lined up against the government was 'not based on any
conviction whatsoever'. A vote cast with the aim of preventing ratification
of the treaty would be 'a cynical and disreputable vote'.
Two former rebels intervened in the prime minister's speech to announce that
they would vote with the government. 'I am always delighted to accept a
sinner returning home,' Mr Major replied.
He later earned a standing ovation from a private meeting of Tory
backbenchers with an uncompromising appeal for party unity.
The Conservative party 'does not understand and does not like division', the
prime minister said in a 20-minute speech. MPs should 'examine their own
consciences' and consider how unity could be restored.
There were also more harsh words for both main opposition parties, much to
the appreciation of his partisan audience. The Liberal Democrats had
indulged in 'breathtaking hypocrisy'. Labour was 'rehashing 1950s claptrap'.
The response from MPs filing out of the meeting was guardedly positive. One
senior backbencher intending to vote with the government in spite of
reservations described the speech as 'well judged'.
Earlier, Mr Major outlined to the cabinet the argument he intended to put to
MPs. In spite of successes, such as the British rebate, the UK had too often
allowed itself to be sidelined by uncertainty over its commitment to the EC.
To reform the community and shape the agenda on issues such as enlargement
and free trade, Britain had to work from within.
In the debate he resisted the conclusion drawn by opposition MPs that this
analysis showed that the UK should be part of the social chapter also.
'The good European does not accept every piece of nonsense from Brussels
because it has a European label,' he said. It was just one example of the
direct and plain language that marked a Commons speech studded with
soundbites for much of its 40 minutes.
'The one certain impact of the social chapter is that jobs will be lost,' Mr
Major said.
Even before such a significant debate, Mr Major had to undergo his
twice-weekly ordeal at the hands of a noisy and high spirited Commons at
prime minister's question-time.
This occasion developed into a duel between Tory loyalists, and Labour MPs
goading him over Maastricht.
But the light-heartedness that can overcome the Commons even at some moments
of high drama showed too. Mr Kevin Barron, Labour MP for Rother Valley,
asked whether Mr Major thought the other 11 EC member states were 'mad' for
supporting the social chapter. 'I don't think I would precisely put it that
way myself,' the prime minister replied, smiling broadly.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930723

