FT932-13266

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (30): Make the most
of slow recovery - As recession keeps the spotlight on gilts and other
fixed-interest securities, the wisest approach for many is through
collective funds / The experts' panel / Bond Funds


   By PHILIP COGGAN


MANY commentators are currently urging investors to consider bonds, because
of the high and fixed returns they offer.
But how should they do it? It is possible to buy bonds direct, via the Post
Office. But many investors might prefer to rely on the expertise of a
professional, and gain exposure to the sector via a bond fund.
Accordingly, we asked our experts to select bond funds, either UK or
internationally-based, which they would recommend to the private investor.
David Harris, of Chantrey Vellacott: 'Given the dramatic fall in UK interest
rates in the past nine months, attention has become focused on alternative
investments that offer a high level of income, together with a lower degree
of investment risk than that associated with the equity market.
'International bonds and fixed-interest securities offer investors the
opportunity to secure high rates of interest, and, unlike cash, provide the
prospect for capital growth as interest rates fall.
'The background for bond funds is generally agreed to be quite positive.
Most of the world's major economies have either negative or slow economic
growth, and low inflation. Thus reductions in interest rates to boost
economic recovery are one option still open to governments worldwide. As a
sterling investor, now that the pound is outside the exchange rate
mechanism, the potential for currency gains is undoubtedly higher.
'As with all investments, however, it is important to determine the level of
investment risk you are prepared to take. It is vitally important to retain
a prudent balance between equity, fixed interest and cash deposits within a
portfolio.
'Since the majority of gilt-edged stocks are now trading 'above par',
investors may care to consider gilt funds in order not to lock into a
capital loss at maturity date. My own preferred gilt funds at present are:
Whittingdale Gilt Income Fund and Kleinwort Benson's offshore Gilt Fund.
'Given that many of the major world economies are still in recession, and
recovery is believed to be lagging the UK by six to nine months, I believe
that there are considerable opportunities available for investors within the
international bond market. The majority of international, fixed-interest and
bond funds are based offshore, but in the last 12 months there have been
some 30-plus UK authorised onshore international bond and fixed-interest
funds launched.
'My current recommendations are: Mercury Global Bond Fund and Baring Global
Bond Trust (both onshore); and offshore, Baring International Bond Fund and
Hambros Emma Sterling Bond.
'Deposit rates in the UK have fallen dramatically over the last couple of
years, and many savers will have suffered a huge cut in their deposit
income. I would suggest that clients should, therefore, be looking at
opportunities that fixed-interest and global bond funds offer. In many cases
they have consistently outperformed building society investments, even
during times of high interest rates, and they currently provide an extremely
competitive yield.'
Richard Boyton, of Boyton Financial Services: 'Investors in the UK are still
under-weight in gilts and bond funds. Whilst many investors buy gilts
direct, the most frequently chosen route for international bonds is a bond
fund via a unit trust, because of the management element, ease of dealing,
known costs and quantifiable performance.
'International bond funds also give investors an exposure to other
currencies as well as other economies.
'In addition to the choice between gilts and international bond funds, there
is the further complication that there are both onshore and offshore funds.
'In my selection of authorised gilts and fixed-interest funds, I have also
included preference funds, simply because one of the top-performing funds in
the long, medium and short term is Commercial Union's Preference Income
fund. In the medium term, my selection would include Whittingdale's Short
Dated Gilt fund, Abbey's Gilt and Fixed Interest fund and Henderson's Fixed
Interest fund.
'Over the long term, many of the offshore gilt-edged funds have not
performed as well as their onshore cousins, although Foreign & Colonial's
Sterling Bond fund, TSB's Gilt Edged fund and Guinness Global Sterling Gilt
fund all merit inclusion in the medium term.
'When looking at the international bond funds over the long term, there is
little to choose between the onshore performance of Save & Prosper's
International and Abbey's Worldwide Bond fund when compared with their
offshore competitors of GT's Bond and Baring International's Bond funds.
Over the medium term, however, the offshore funds have performed better,
with Baring's International Bond being consistently the pick of the bunch.
'As someone once said, 'you pay your money and you pick your bond', but with
interest rates in Europe set to fall further and the possibility of further
falls in sterling, international bonds remain my favourites. The pedigree of
GT and Baring, coupled with their performance, make these two funds
outstanding.'
James Higgins, of Chamberlain de Broe: 'Probably the most fundamental reason
for looking at bonds and bond funds is that, at a time when yields are as
good or better than cash, and there is no upward pressure on interest rates,
bonds seem a very good and secure complement to cash.
'However, because low interest rates have been with us for a while, the
market has already moved to a large extent. Buying a gilt for the high yield
implies that, ultimately, the investor will suffer a capital loss on
redemption. At the longer end of the market, where the differential between
running and redemption yields is not so great, the investor runs the risk of
being locked into a fixed income for a long term - when (eventually) rising
inflation may begin to bite.
'Foreign bonds - in particular, European ones - appear to offer rather more.
Their interest rates are still on the way down, and there is still some room
for gain as well as an attractive yield. However, buying overseas bonds,
taking into account the currency risk etc., becomes incredibly difficult for
the private investor. It can also be a little expensive and, getting up to
the minute advice is not easy. So, despite my dislike for collective funds
in general, I have to confess that we have been moving clients into managed
bond and currency funds for a while.
'We like companies such as Guinness Flight and Hambros. GF offers funds
which invest almost entirely in bonds, and their long-term performance has
been quite impressive. They are also able to offer a portfolio of funds
which will produce a monthly income from fixed interest vehicles.
'Both GF and Hambros offer a range of funds denominated in specific
currencies and dealing in specific markets. They also offer broadly-based
managed funds in sterling, which I think are the most suitable, and long
term investments for most investors.
My preference is for the Hambros EMMA Managed fund, which is rather unusual
in that it combines currencies with bonds and is global in nature. For our
clients, with commission rebated, the cost of getting into the fund is only
0.86 per cent. The fund has grown by 26 per cent over the past year, and by
nearly 95 per cent over the past five years. The past year has obviously
been a particularly good one, but I think the bonds/currency market will
remain attractive. The fund is managed offshore, as are many of the GF ones.
GF also, though, have a range of UK-based unit trusts which are very
attractive.
Presently, the yield on these funds compares reasonably well with
straightforward sterling deposits. My particular preference for the currency
and bond mix, relates to the reason for buying management in the first
place.
Ultimately, there will be a time when one should move out of bonds. Interest
rates will rise again one day and, when they do, investors will be better
served by a fund manager who has gradually reduced his exposure to bonds in
favour of cash. A fund manager whose remit is to make money solely in the
bond market might not have this option.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXIX

930423

