FT933-10030

FT  06 AUG 93 / Business mail brought under data control


   By RACHEL JOHNSON


BUSINESS-to-business mailing lists are covered by the Data Protection Act,
the Data Protection Registrar ruled yesterday.
Mailing lists increasingly contained personal data and were vulnerable to
abuse, said the registrar, Mr Eric Howe, who is seeking stronger safeguards
against the 'black market' in personal data.
'The direct marketing industry has sometimes felt that the act does not
affect business-to-business lists because they do not contain personal
data,' said Mr John Lamidey, assistant Data Protection Registrar.
He said this argument was no longer tenable as business-to-business direct
marketing became more sophisticated and personalised and the volume of
direct mail increased from 251m items in 1980 to 610m in 1992.
The new guidance is aimed at ensuring that marketing organisations using
business-to-business lists obtain and process personal data 'fairly and
lawfully'.
Such lists are compiled by brokers, which provide 'cold lists' for companies
seeking new customers to target for products.
When personal data on such lists are processed with reference to the person
concerned - rather than the company or job the person holds - the data comes
within the scope of the act, the registrar said.
'For example, John Smith, finance manager of The Widget Production Company,
identifies a particular individual. If that data is then processed so as to
produce information about 'John Smith' rather than 'the finance manager'
then it is processed by reference to the data subject and comes within the
scope of the act.'
This means that the individuals concerned must be told at the time data is
collected who the data user is, what are the uses to which the data may be
put and to whom the data may be disclosed.
Mr David Clark, of Ibis Information Services, one of the brokers which
compile lists, said the guidance would not constrain the company's business
because Ibis mostly processed data 'by reference to some characteristic of
the company rather than the individual'.
The company, one of the biggest producers of business lists, is registered
under the Data Protection Act. Mr Clark said most of the businesses and
professions it traded with were also registered.
The Direct Marketing Association said the overall size of the industry was
more than Pounds 7bn in terms of income and trade generated. 'We have never
argued that business lists were not covered by the DPA,' said Mr Colin
Fricker, the legal adviser.
The guidance has been produced after discussions between the registrar's
staff and various representative bodies and direct marketing companies that
use business-to-business lists.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930806

