FT934-11160

FT  02 NOV 93 / Red bookfails to explain red ink: Divergent valuations of
the QMH chain


   By ANDREW JACK and MICHAEL SKAPINKER


Ask chartered surveyors about property valuations and - in the spirit of
Chairman Mao - they raise their little red book of professional guidelines.
This revered text - just like that of the former Chinese leader - has been
called into question following the widely divergent valuations given to the
assets of Queens Moat Houses, the hotels group.
In the audited accounts of QMH for the year to December 31 1991, Weatherall
Green and Smith, a leading firm of chartered surveyors, valued the company's
properties at Pounds 2bn. One year later, a draft valuation by the same firm
offered a figure of Pounds 1.35bn. QMH opted instead for a rival valuation
from Jones Lang Wootton, for the 1992 accounts, which was still lower at
just Pounds 861m. QMH's assets include 22,000 rooms in 189 hotels - mainly
three and four-star hotels in the UK, as well as interests in Germany,
France, the Netherlands, Belgium and the US.
The size of the discrepancies has become a talking point in the profession.
One surveyor said yesterday: 'It doesn't help our reputation, but there are
very few incidents where you have a disagreement as large as this.'
Mr Terry Knight, senior partner of Weatherall, would not discuss the QMH
valuation in detail on the grounds of client confidentiality, but said his
firm stood by its figures. Jones Lang Wootton also refused to comment.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, which produces the red book,
has launched an investigation into the differences and requested the
valuation certificates produced by the two firms for QMH. Officials were
keen to stress yesterday that they needed to gather more information. There
was no evidence the two firms had breached its valuation guidelines.
A number of factors may account for the divergent figures. The hotel sector
was in decline during 1992, which could account for the fall between the
1991 and the draft 1992 Weatherall valuations - although the downward trend
may have been detectable as far back as late 1989.
In contrasting the two firms' figures, Weatherall's 1992 estimates were
prepared several months before those made by Jones, by which time even more
pessimistic views on the market had developed.
Equally, it is unclear whether the two sets of figures were prepared on the
same assumptions. Jones may have been asked to estimate a worst-case for
sale of hotels in the current depressed market; while Weatherall may have
assumed the hotels did not need to be sold and could remain more in line
with its previous figures.
The UK's other principal hotel groups were yesterday keen to reject
suggestions that they needed to reduce the value of their assets any further
in response to the position at QMH.
Mr Donald Main, finance director at Forte, said the group revalued its
entire portfolio last January - cutting the total by Pounds 344m - against
its normal practice of revaluing a third each year. Ladbroke, which owns the
Hilton International chain, said the book value of its hotels had been
reduced by Pounds 195.6m last year and by Pounds 56m the previous year.
Speaking on the position at QMH, Mr Andrew Cherry, senior valuation partner
with Healey & Baker, and immediate past chairman of RICS' assets valuation
standards committee, says: 'If both valuations are in accordance with the
red book, what we have is a genuine difference of opinion. Professional
judgment counts for an awful lot.'
That may suggest that the RICS guidelines - notably the seven pages of
statement of asset valuation practice 12 - need to be more tightly drafted.
Mr Russell Kett, an associate with the hotel and leisure consulting division
of Touche Ross, says: 'The reason that many hotels have gone into
receivership in the last two years is as a result of properties being
ascribed values which have proved unsupportable against their debts.'
That has led to the insolvency arm of Touche Ross reputedly becoming one of
the largest hotel operators in the country. It has also led to consideration
by RICS of new guidelines, as well as a draft statement of recognised
accounting practice on valuation from the British Association of Hotel
Accountants, of which Mr Kett is chairman.
What is less likely to change is the commercial pressures - to which
surveyors admit only in private - to deliver figures in line with what the
directors of a company may want.
There have been no public statements and just a handful of confidential
reprimands of RICS members related to asset valuations. A more likely
pressure for change may come from litigation. Mr Kett says his firm alone is
acting in three imminent legal battles where banks are suing surveyors on
the basis that their figures were too optimistic.
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 25

931102

