FT934-8776

FT  13 NOV 93 / International Company News: Karstadt share transactions
could raise up to DM1.5bn


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


DEUTSCHE Bank and Commerzbank, two of Germany's big three banks, are likely
to raise as much as DM750m (Dollars 440m) each from the sale of
shareholdings in Karstadt, Germany's largest department store group.
The sale is part of the complex transaction whereby Karstadt will acquire
control of Hertie, the third biggest department store group, to create a
group with turnover of DM27bn.
The transaction, widely expected in Germany, was announced formally
yesterday.
Mr Ulrich Cartellieri, a main board director of the Deutsche Bank and
chairman of the Karstadt supervisory board, said yesterday that Deutsche
Bank's stake in the enlarged group would 'not fall below 10 per cent' from
its current 25 per cent level.
Under the deal, Karstadt will buy the whole of Hertie from its current
shareholders, chiefly a charitable foundation whose main purpose is to
support research into the causes of multiple sclerosis. The foundation will
use the sale proceeds to finance the purchase of shares in Karstadt from the
banks, leaving the Hertie foundation as the largest shareholder in the
enlarged group.
Pricing details remain confidential, Mr Cartellieri said yesterday, but it
seems likely that the shares will be sold at more than the current market
price of Karstadt's shares.
As the group has a market capitalisation of DM5.2bn, the sale of the two 15
per cent stakes would thus raise at least DM750m before tax for each of the
banks. This will bring a windfall gain to the two banks' 1994 profits.
Mr Walter Deuss, Karstadt's chief executive, said there would be no need for
a rights issue to finance the purchase of Hertie. Analysts suggest that
Hertie will be sold for DM1.5bn to DM1.8bn.
The banks' move to sell the bulk of their stakes in Karstadt comes ahead of
Deutsche Bank's imminent sale of a DM1bn part of its 28 per cent holding in
Daimler-Benz.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931113

