FT931-3972

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (8): Outdated lease laws due for
reform - Companies think the changes could take place within three to four
months / Portugal


   By PETER WISE


IN Lisbon city centre, ancient stucco peeling from buildings near ruin
contrasts sharply with massive construction sites and ultra-modern
developments nearing completion.
The striking differences highlight the complex condition of the Portuguese
property market, where outdated lease laws frighten away institutional
investors but a strong demand for offices and retail outlets has led to a
development boom.
The current lease laws provide tenants with perpetual security of tenure
without any open-market rent reviews. They also allow tenants to sell on
their lease, or 'trespasse', in a way that enables the new tenant to
maintain the same rent. This leaves landlords without the financial means or
incentive to refurbish or repair and results in the common sight of
dilapidated buildings that literally collapse with an alarming regularity.
Foreign property investors, unable to negotiate market-level rents or regain
possession for updating and refurbishing, have shied away from Portugal and
left the investment market almost dead.
However, the long-promised revision of commercial lease laws has finally
appeared on the horizon and property companies, although they have been
disappointed by government promises before, now believe the reforms could be
enacted within the next three to four months.
Drafts of the new law indicate that perpetual tenure will be replaced by
five-year, fixed-term contracts for retail lets and three-year fixed terms
for office rents. Rents would be renegotiated at market level at the end of
each period. At the same time the landlord would either be entitled to a
share of the capital or be able to renegotiate the rent when a 'trespasse'
was sold.
The investment market is expected to soar when this law changes. Companies
from Britain, the Netherlands, France and Spain are already showing a strong
interest as they wait in the wings for the climate to change.
'We hope the reform of the commercial lease laws will create the basis of a
true investment market in Portugal,' says Mr Eric van Leuven, managing
director in Portugal of Healey & Baker, 'particularly as yields are so high
here compared with other European countries.'
Office building yields are at the level of 11-12 per cent, compared to about
4-5 per cent in Germany, for example. Yields will come down as the market
structure grows more normal and more rented office space becomes available.
Portugal experienced an office development boom between 1986 and 1991 after
joining the European Community. It enjoyed the fastest economic growth of
the 12 member states.
In the late 1980s, developers saw that there was hardly any supply and
started to acquire sites. Prices soared 30-50 per cent between 1986 and
1991. But in the wake of the growth, supply today surpasses demand. Top
prices have dropped some 10 per cent to about Es6,500 a sq m in the central
business district of Lisbon.
According to Mr van Leuven, demand has levelled off to a steady
60,000-70,000 sq m a year and is likely to remain at that level for the near
future. Estimated supply will be 85,000 sq m in 1993, 70,000 sq m in 1994
and 777,000 sq m in 1995 and beyond. 'Per capita rent is not that high,'
says Olle Arnoldsson, managing director of the Swedish property group Bygg
Fast in Portugal, 'if you consider that occupancy in Portugal is around one
person per 12 sq m compared with one person for 25 sq m in northern Europe.'
Despite this, he notes that office prices are at the same level as in
Stockholm or Frankfurt.
More and more companies such as Philips, Glaxo, L'Oreal, J Walter Thompson
and Saatchi & Saatchi are planning to move to out-of-town business parks.
Three are already planned for easy-access locations on the motorways and
planned ring-road around the capital.
The Colombus Centre, a massive mixed development in Benfica, 15 minutes from
the centre of Lisbon, is presently in the marketing phase. The centre, which
is being developed by Sonae, Portugal's largest private entrepreneurial
group, will offer 56,000 sq m of prime office accommodation in twin towers.
It will also have 133,000 sq m of shopping, making it one of the most
extensive shopping areas in Europe. It will also make a claim to the best
sports and leisure complex in Lisbon.
'Retailers are very excited about the Colombus Centre,' says Mr van Leuven,
'and from that point of view it is a big success even before it leaves the
drawing board.' But the project could come up against financing difficulties
if the world economy continues to slow down.
Chiado, the old city shopping centre, part of which burnt down, is also
being developed as a mixed area of residential, office and retail property.
Financing has been helped by government loans.
Retail is the growth sector of Portugal's property market as the Portuguese
take their increased consumer power on a shopping spree. Leading retail
chains have already moved in and are expanding rapidly; others are in the
pipeline. Banks are also taking prime units and paying top prices.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

930312

