FT932-6848

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (13): The yen's role in east Asia


   By ROBERT THOMSON


WHEN THE strengthening of the yen gathered momentum last month, the cries of
anguish from Japanese politicians and executives suggested that the currency
is close to the pain threshold for companies which have successfully endured
a decade of appreciation.
The past decade has also been characterised by appreciating expectations
that the yen will play an important role in international markets, but those
forecasts are in need of review with the collapse of the financial 'bubble',
pumped ever larger during the easy-money era of the late 1980s.
Japanese direct investment has fallen sharply, while the country's banks,
troubled by a mounting pile of non-performing loans, are wary of new lending
to international customers. At the same time, the Japanese corporate focus
is still firmly fixed on the traditional measure, the yen-dollar exchange
rate, as 83 per cent of import contracts and 60 per cent of export contracts
were denominated in dollars last year.
But Japanese interest and investment in east Asia remains strong.
Manufacturers are relocating factories to cut costs, and companies generally
expect strong growth from the region's economies, particularly China, in
contrast to their expectations of a weak recovery in the US and difficult
times ahead in Europe.
The emphasis on Asia is becoming increasingly apparent. Asian markets
accounted for 41 per cent of total trade last year, while north America
accounted for 30 per cent - five years ago, both regions were equal at 35
per cent. The Bank of Tokyo estimates that yen-denominated imports rose
almost 50 per cent over the past five years, due to 'a relative increase in
trade with east and south-east Asia, where the share of yen-denominated
transactions has traditionally been high'.
But it was to Washington that Tokyo turned in April, when the yen hovered
around Y110 to the dollar and Japanese executives feared that the Y100 mark
would be tested in the following weeks. The currency had appreciated 10 per
cent in just over two months, prompting the Bank of Japan to intervene and
Japanese politicians to warn about foreign exchange 'instability'.
By 'instability', the politicians meant tougher conditions for Japanese
export industries, but they thought it inappropriate to plead to the US on
behalf of a sector blamed for fuelling the bilateral trade surplus. The
Japanese government also felt some justification because it considered
President Clinton's apparent support for a strong yen partly responsible for
the 'instability'.
Japan's Economic Planning Agency calculates that a 10 per cent yen
appreciation, in theory, creates a 0.48 per cent contraction in gross
national product. But the EPA also estimates that the change leads to a 1.3
per cent fall in consumer prices, presumably stimulating final consumption,
which has been unusually weak in recent months.
The full benefits of a stronger yen are denied to Japanese companies,
because of the reluctance of the energy sector, which imports most of its
resources, to pass on the savings to consumers. Oil companies have announced
a 0.5 per cent trimming of prices at the petrol pump, but other industries
have yet to make similar reductions, arguing that raw materials costs have
risen over the past year.
Yen appreciation is another good reason for Japanese manufacturers to
relaunch restructuring programmes begun after the currency's sharp rise in
the mid-1980s, inspired by the Plaza Accord in September 1985. The Y110
level, where the currency has settled in recent weeks, should not pose
unexpected threats to these companies, as the dollar rate hit Y120.45 six
years ago.
But the present bout of appreciation comes as the manufacturing sector is
recovering from a serious case of over-capacity, brought on by a rapid
expansion in Japan-based factories during the late 1980s, when capital was
relatively cheap and the yen was relatively weak, distorting these
companies' projections for return on investment.
Manufacturers are being forced to look to cheaper production facilities in
China, Malaysia and Vietnam, which will spread the regional influence of the
yen. During April, Suzuki Motor, Aiwa, the audio equipment maker, and YKK,
the zipper manufacturer, announced new production facilities in east Asia.
A related trend strengthening the yen's role in east Asia is a surge in
re-imports, products made abroad by Japanese companies and sold in the
domestic market, which have increased at an annual rate of 20 per cent over
the past five years.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930526

