FT932-13292

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (4): A tax blow to
equity investors - Change in ACT is likely to boost bonds / The Budget


THE CHANCELLOR's alteration to advance corporation tax (ACT) and the
taxation of dividends was one of the more significant, and more complex,
measures in the Budget.
Private investors who are higher-rate taxpayers may suffer particularly. But
the details of the change are difficult to grasp.
The key factor to understand is that companies do not pay gross dividends at
all. They pay shareholders a net dividend and send a sum to the Inland
Revenue, which is regarded as meeting the tax liability of investors. This
sum is an advance payment against the company's corporation tax liability -
hence the name 'advance corporation tax'.
The Budget change reduces the amount that companies must pay in advance.
This helps their cash flow, although they still have to pay the same
corporation tax bill in the end.
But what the chancellor is giving with one hand, he is more than taking away
with the other. Non-taxpayers are entitled to reclaim the tax paid by the
company, and this tax credit was previously set at 25 per cent. The budget
reduced the credit to 20 per cent.
The effect can be seen in the table. Assume a net dividend of 7.5p. Under
the old system, this would be grossed up to 10p for tax purposes.
Non-taxpayers would thus be able to reclaim 2.5p in tax.
Under the new system the dividend is only grossed up to 9.375p (since
9.375p, minus 20 per cent, is 7.5p). The effect is to reduce the tax credit
to 1.875p and to cut the non-taxpayer's dividend income by 6.25 per cent.
For the vast majority of basic-rate taxpayers, the effect will be neutral,
since basic rate tax on dividend income has been cut to 20 per cent. They
will still receive the net dividend of 7.5p.
Higher-rate taxpayers will face an extra tax charge (the difference between
20 per cent and 40 per cent). The effect will be to reduce their net
dividends by 6.25 per cent.
Holders of personal equity plans (Peps) will also suffer. They count as
non-taxpayers, so will incur a cut of 6.25 per cent in dividend income. The
effect is most marked on basic-rate taxpayers, because the change affects
them inside a Pep but not outside. This may make some of those Peps with
additional charges unattractive.
Higher-rate taxpayers are 6.25 per cent worse off, both inside and outside a
Pep. So the tax advantage of a Pep remains the same; but, since the overall
dividend return of a Pep has fallen, the attractions of a Pep, relative to
non-equity investments, is reduced.
Since, for most Pep investors, it is the income tax saving which represents
the prime benefit, this change is important.
Debate in the City has concentrated on whether equities have become less
attractive overall. Pension funds, which are non-taxpayers, would certainly
appear to suffer. But some companies may be able to increase their net
dividends in order to leave their investors no worse off. Other measures
which the chancellor has taken on ACT will benefit those companies with high
overseas earnings.
But overall the measure seems to boost bonds at the expense of equities;
and, within the field of equities, to favour capital gain at the expense of
income.
The BES: investors will still be allowed to borrow
Non-recourse loans, which allowed BES investors to make a safe exit from
their investment after only six months, were stamped out. Mr Lamont twisted
the knife by making the measure retrospective to the midnight before the
Budget.
The new legislation disallows tax relief on any BES shares issued after the
deadline if loans are secured against them. Note that this does not affect
loans secured on any BES shares issued before the deadline.
Tax relief will also be allowed to investors who hold on to shares in a BES
company which originally offered a loan facility, if they maintain their
investment for the full five years. It is the exercise, rather than the
offer, of the loan which is disallowed.
After the Budget, the Inland Revenue clarified this ruling slightly. The
prohibition on loans will not apply when the lender has recourse against a
broad range of the borrower's assets and not just the BES shares. However,
BES shares must not be specified as 'all or part of the security', according
to the Revenue. This should allow those who have a sudden change for the
worse in their financial circumstances to borrow.
Investors will still be allowed to borrow to fund a BES investment. The
Revenue simply intends to prohibit loans which are tied by the lender to the
offer of BES shares.
Once the full statutes are available, it is a fair bet that BES sponsors
will look for a new way around the rules, and allow investors to exit from
their investment early. In the meantime, the BES returns to its old ground
rules. The scheme will now run until the end of 1993, and any investments
taken out will have to be maintained for at least five years if they are to
receive tax relief.
Income tax: value of marriage allowance to fall
The lower rate tax band of 20 per cent introduced by the Chancellor last
year has been extended from the first Pounds 2,000 of income to Pounds
2,500, increasing taxpayers' income by Pounds 25 for the 1993-94 tax year.
It will be extended to Pounds 3,000 next tax year.
However, Lamont chose not to implement the traditional measure of increasing
personal allowances in line with inflation. The Pounds 150,000 threshold for
inheritance tax and Pounds 5,800 for capital gains tax also remained
unchanged. The married couple's allowance was also frozen and from April
1994, the extent of its relief will be curtailed. Tax relief will be
restricted to 20 per cent instead of at the taxpayer's marginal rate.
This means that the maximum value of the allowance will be reduced to Pounds
344 instead of the previous Pounds 430 to a basic-rate taxpayer and Pounds
688 for someone in the higher-rate band. Married people aged 65 and above
will see their allowance increased by Pounds 200 in 1994-95, to compensate
for most of the loss.
Stamp-duty: a sweetener for first-time buyers
The announcement that mortgage interest tax relief would be reduced was
sweetened by the immediate doubling of the threshold for stamp duty from
Pounds 30,000 to Pounds 60,000.
The stamp duty measure is intended to help first-time buyers and those at
the bottom end of the housing market. Someone who buys a house for Pounds
60,000 or less will therefore save Pounds 600. However, from April 1994, the
rate at which Miras will be given will be restricted to 20 per cent instead
of 25 per cent. At mortgage rates of 7.99 per cent, the maximum loss will be
just under Pounds 120 a year.
National Savings: holdings limits on certificates raised
The First Option Bond was reintroduced, to further the Chancellor's
intention that National Savings should make an 'important contribution' to
government funding. The new rate of 4.75 per cent net on a Pounds 1,000
minimum is competitive but not yet high enough to cause panic among the
building societies. The limit for index-linked National Savings certificates
was doubled to Pounds 10,000, and holding limits for most other National
Savings products were also raised.
Commentary by: Philip Coggan, John Authers and Scheherazade Daneshkhu
 --------------------------------------------------
            Dividends: the ACT factor
 --------------------------------------------------
                                 Old        New
                                system     system
 --------------------------------------------------
Notional gross dividend            10p     9.375p
Return to Pep holders              10p     9.375p
Tax credit                        2.5p     1.875p
Net dividend                      7.5p       7.5p
Return to basic-rate taxpayer     7.5p       7.5p
Higher rate tax                   1.5p     1.875p
Return to higher-rate taxpayer    6.0p     5.625p
 --------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930423

