FT932-6975

FT  26 MAY 93 / Fiat chief under investigation


   By ROBERT GRAHAM and HAIG SIMONIAN


   ROME, MILAN


MR CESARE ROMITI, chief executive of the Fiat group, is being formally
investigated by Milan magistrates for alleged corruption and illicit
financing of political parties.
Mr Romiti, the most senior management figure in the Turin-based auto group
below Mr Giovanni Agnelli, the chairman, was reported to have been placed on
the list of those under investigation on May 18.
Although not officially confirmed, the news comes from leaks from the Milan
magistrates' office which have been accurate over the 15 months of
corruption investigations.
Twelve executives in the Fiat group have been arrested and given testimony
to Milan magistrates in the past year. The involvement of Mr Romiti, aged
69, in the investigations into illicit funding of Italy's political parties
through kickbacks on contracts is a big blow to the prestige of the motor
group.
It also raises questions over how much longer Fiat will be able to retain
its existing management structure, which was reorganised only six months ago
to take account of Mr Agnelli's plans to step down in 1994.
The news drove down the share price of Fiat and most of its subsidiaries on
the Milan stock exchange. Fiat was fixed at L6,546, down from L6,575 on
Monday, before falling further to L6,400 after hours.
The group, which will announce its 1992 results next week, is expected to
report net profits fell by more than half to about L500bn (Pounds 219m) Fiat
warned yesterday it may have to cut more jobs.
Mr Romiti last month handed in a dossier of Fiat's relations with political
parties over the past decade. Unlike Mr Carlo De Benedetti, chairman of
Olivetti, he did not assume personal responsibility for any of the alleged
kickbacks.
It appears the magistrates, after cross-checking, believe Mr Romiti has more
to tell and some of his testimony conflicts with statements by his managers.
Ex-PM at centre of probe, Page 4
Code of honour, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930526

