FT931-3964

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (16): Vienna poised to leap the
Danube - Despite the recession - and with a lot of office development
already in progress - the city is about to begin the third-largest urban
redevelopment project in Europe / Austria


   By CHRISTINE MOIR


WITH each circuit of the revolving restaurant high above Donaupark on the
bank of the Danube in Vienna, a large depression of bare earth comes into
view. Once the city's rubbish tip, it was excavated back to clean soil in
1989 as the city fathers prepared for the Austrian capital to host Expo
1995.
But the Viennese roundly rejected their leaders' ambitions in a referendum
and the site remained just a hole in the ground while the city's planners
went back to the drawing board.
Vienna's mayor was this week due to turn the first sod on the site,
signalling the official start to the infrastructure phase of what is to
become Vienna's 'city over the water' - a full-scale urban centre directly
across the river from St Stefansdom and only seven minutes by underground
from the city centre.
Not only will it be the third-largest urban redevelopment project in Europe
 -creating 470,000 sq m of new space over 10 to 15 years - it will also
represent Vienna's first civic attempt to leap the Danube.
Hitherto, the Viennese have seen the river as their implacable northern
border; expansion has always been southwards. But they have now gone as far
south as they can without tripping over the province of Lower Austria. And
expansion westwards is barred by the Vienna Woods, far too sacred to be
sacrificed to commercialism.
The pull across the river is also dictated by the opening of eastern Europe,
even if that has so far delivered less trade for central Europe's hinge
state than it has exposed deep-seated chaos in the former Soviet satellite
economies. So, in the teeth of recession, the city is poised to make the
leap, using Wiener Entwicklungsgesellschaft fur den Donauraum (Wed) a joint
public-private sector vehicle.
Wed is 70 per cent held by five Austrian banks and two local insurance
companies; 10 per cent by the holding company which controls Vienna's civic
enterprises; and 20 per cent by Nomura as reward for the ground work put in
by the Japanese securities house to the original Expo idea and the
subsequent market research for what will be called Donau City.
It will be a true city centre, not a business park or garden suburb. There
will be a town hall; schools; public and private apartments; possibly a
language institute; and a conference hotel to serve the nearby Austria
Convention Centre. Wed is poised to announce the winner of a beauty parade
of international architects to build the two focal tower blocks.
One will be a corporate headquarters; the other a mix of uses, including
apartments, shops and specialist offices.
A media centre or a diplomatic centre would be natural targets, together
with an aparthotel for medium-term lets, since the site adjoins UNO-City, a
complex of three towers housing the United Nations Industrial Development
Organisation (Unido), the International Atomic Energy Agency, and the
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec).
Wed officials deny any parallels with London's Canary Wharf development,
beyond the scale. Their site, says Mr Helmut Reisenberger, manager for
strategy and information, has excellent existing traffic infrastructures; it
is close to a large green space, the Donaupark, within seven minutes of the
city centre and enhanced by its proximity to buildings of international
quality in UNO-City.
Donau City will also be architecturally innovative. Taking advantage of the
pit in the centre of the site, the masterplan allows for two or three
storeys of service roads and car parking below ground level but still, open
air with pedestrian bridges at ground level between the buildings.
But the best thing Donau City has going for it is the fact that the city is
at one with the private sector over its development. Both agree that
Vienna's historic inner core is unsuited to large scale future development.
Planning permissions are now unlikely for large schemes within the Ring
which marks the old city walls. There is also agreement on the need to
prevent dormitory suburbs and on the potential of the river banks as
development sites.
Such civic harmony is a feature of the city which has a 10-year-old
institution - the Vienna Promotion Fund backed by the city, the Chamber of
Commerce and several banks - devoted to promoting inward investment while
avoiding urban sprawl.
This approach still encourages competition between sites and developers.
Donau City is not the only large urban project underway. A kilometre or so
north is the old Aspern airfield whose days of glory as Vienna's inter-war
airport are long gone.
The district - an area the size of Salzburg - is now earmarked for
industrial development.
Detailed zoning is expected this autumn and Profund, meanwhile, is building
a list of developers, industrialists and craft operations interested in
moving in where General Motors already has a large gearbox and motor
assembly plant.
There is also an unusually high level of office development under
construction at present - perhaps 300,000 sq m is due to come on the market
this year.
At a time when take-up is not in excess of 100,000 sq m a year, this does
not bode well for rents which have already weakened by between 5 per cent
and 15 per cent, depending on which agent's review you read.
Mr Anthony Sutcliffe, who manages central Europe business from Richard
Ellis's Vienna office, confirms that there are letting problems in most
schemes, especially those in secondary locations.
But some of the schemes under way, either just within or just outside the
Ring, will benefit in the medium term from the clampdown on development in
the first district. They include a 19,000 sq m office development by the
Swiss insurance group Winterthur on the Karntnerring, which is to be
connected by bridge to a mixed 40,000 sq m retail, office and hotel
refurbishment by All Nippon Airways, also under way.
Scandinavian groups continue to be active. At Wien Mitte, above the railway
and underground station, SPP/LET is working with local partners on an 80,000
sq m office and retail scheme, having just finished the 37,000 sq m Concorde
Business Park, close to the airport. Bygg/Fasst has two large schemes - on
Maria Hilferstrasse and Handelskai - on the way. Jones Lang Wootton and
local agent Linikus Consulting have just begun pre-marketing for Pharos
House, a 12,300 sq m courtyard office complex by Skandia Insurance on
Nordbahnstrasse, close to the station in the second district.
These will all take ingenuity to fill at rents near the current record,
which Richard Ellis estimates to be the equivalent of Dollars 36 a sq ft. To
call it a crisis, however, would be far from the truth. Austria's stable
economy, the careful phasing of larger projects and the consensus on
location and quality architecture provide a solid foundation.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

930312

