FT932-13541

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (5): Simple answers look attractive -
Religion is both a political tool and a threat


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


THE politicisation of Islam is nothing new in Egypt. The strong religious
attachments of Egyptians has long been both a tool and a threat for the
ruling elite.
President Nasser used religion to broaden the appeal of his pan-Arab
socialism. He nationalised its main teaching institutions in Cairo in order
to strengthen his domestic base. He banned the Moslem Brotherhood, blaming
it for attempts on his life.
President Sadat, in his turn, encouraged and fostered Islamic groups to
counter the threat posed to him by Nasserites in the early years of his
regime. He employed Islam to help justify his most controversial foreign and
domestic policy initiatives, before falling victim to the Moslem extremists
who assassinated him in October 1981.
President Mubarak has permitted himself to become no less entangled. But it
has happened against a fast-changing international background and persistent
economic deprivation at home, both of which are feeding the aspirations of
his opponents.
The collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, the
demonstrable power of religious fundamentalism in Iran, and the frustration
in many Arab countries at the perceived failures of leadership, have
combined to create a situation in which the simplistic slogan 'Islam in the
solution' is gaining credibility.
Dr Fouad Zakariya, one of the leading authorities on Islam in the Arab
world, believes that the failure of other ideologies has given a boost to
the Islamic fundamentalists.
'They argue that Islam is the only thing that has not been tried,' he says.
'It also exploits the deep religious feeling among the Egyptian people and
its activists are very well disciplined.'
He has no doubt that it is a growing political force in the country, and
cites the example of recent rioting in the town of Qalyoub outside Cairo as
evidence of the public mood.
In this episode, a teacher was transferred from a school and four students
expelled for listening to tapes of an extremist cleric in the classroom.
'The rioting by the people was immediate and spontaneous. There was no time
for it to be organised. A church was burned, police had to be called from
Cairo to restore order and the ruling against the teacher and students was
reversed,' says Dr Zakariya.
Such an incident claimed fewer international headlines than the spate of
bombs and attacks on tourist targets, but it may better illustrate the
dimension of the challenge faced by the government in trying to halt the
erosion in its public support which has been noted at all levels of Egyptian
society.
Recent moves by the government to change the voting requirements in
elections for the professional organisations representing doctors, dentists,
engineers and lawyers were designed specifically to break the hold
established by the religious factions.
It is not just women students and those women from lower income groups who
are increasingly covering their hair in public, but also the wives of the
affluent who attend cocktail parties in Cairo's five-star hotels.
Society may be becoming broadly more conservative, as some Egyptians say,
but it is more difficult to understand why men and women with higher
educational qualifications would be persuaded by the arguments advanced by
the Moslem Brotherhood.
Although still officially banned, the Moslem Brotherhood is just tolerated
by the government. Until the last parliamentary elections it was represented
in the National Assembly under the coalition umbrella of the otherwise
politically irrelevant Socialist labour and Liberal parties.
An hour spent talking to Mr Mustapha Mashour, a spokesman for the party,
offered plentiful criticism of the government but little enlightenment about
the alternative which it seeks to represent.
Islam is the solution, he says, because the Koran is the word of God, and
God knows what is best for the people. All other systems, particularly
communism and capitalism, have failed precisely because they are man-made.
On taking power - 'hopefully within 20 years' - Mr Mashour says that the
first task of an Islamic government would be the simple, easily-applied
teachings of the Koran.
Alcohol and gambling would be banned and women would have to be veiled.
Structural adjustments, such as the abolition of usury, would be introduced
more gradually. But beyond that Mr Mashour could not be drawn. Critical
problems, such as unemployment, would be resolved by 'independent' ulema
(clergy) being attached to government ministries. They would sit down with
ministry officials and together apply the appropriate solutions provided by
the Koran.
'We cannot provide a solution to just one of the country's problems in
isolation. Islam has to be applied fully and only then can everything be
arranged to satisfy and please the people,' Mr Mashour says.
Some academics in Cairo argue that the best way of blunting the appeal of
the Moslem Brotherhood would be to legalise the party and force it to reveal
how little content there is to the Islamic solution. But it is not an
argument which will be accepted by Mr Mubarak, who views the Algerian
example as a dire warning to any Arab leader who is tempted to go down that
particular path.
Other suspicions remain about the tactics of the Moslem Brotherhood, and not
just at senior government level. Mr Mashour insists that it is totally
opposed to violence and has no links with any of the extremist Islamic
groups, such as the Gama'a al-Islamiyya and Islamic Jihad, which have been
responsible for recent bombings.
'They could fight against terrorism much more emphatically if they wished
to,' says one academic. 'The message could be spread from the mosques which
they control, and they could probably do it directly to those who are
responsible for the bombs. There is no evidence that this is happening. This
could lead to the conclusion that the Moslem Brotherhood is playing the role
of the more politically acceptable face of Islam, while the real game is
being played in secret. It is very tempting to believe that there is some
form of co-ordination which is being very carefully concealed.'
Even if such co-operation could be proved it is unlikely to impress the
poorest sections of society in Upper Egyptian towns such as Assyut, or in
the most deprived areas as of Cairo such as Imbaba, where thousands of
heavily armed police last month bloodily stormed an extremist hideout.
A walk through Imbaba reveals, however, not the tension and hostility which
might be expected of an area where Islamic militants are supposed to hold
sway, but rather the charm and humour of people who have learned to expect
little from their government. Should their proven patience ever snap, it
would be more a condemnation of government than the affirmation of an
Islamic alternative.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930422

