FT934-11391

FT  01 NOV 93 / Arts: Circus fun and High Art / A look back at the life of
Federico Fellini


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


I always direct the same film,' Federico Fellini once said, 'I can't
distinguish one from another.' But Italian cinema's greatest veteran, who
died yesterday aged 73, kept directing the same film only in the sense that
each great artist always remakes the same work. Genius cannot disguise its
signature. From Variety Lights to La Dolce Vita, from 8 1/2 to Ginger And
Fred, Fellini's films were like whirlwind variety shows that had strayed
into High Art. Jaunty music abounded; crowd scenes bristled with exotic or
outlandish characters; and pneumatic women were paraded like circus horses
whenever the director's whip cracked.
At centre-screen there was usually Fellini himself - or his favourite alter
ego, the actor Marcello Mastroianni. And to emphasise the monomaniac aspects
of the work, filled with surfeit and self-mythologising, the film titles
themselves often incorporate their maker's name: Fellini Roma, Fellini
Satyricon, Fellini Casanova.
There were occasional glimpses of a different kind of film-maker, especially
early in his career. Movies such as I Vitelloni and Il Bidone proved he
could subtly, comically inflect the Italian neo-realist tradition; while
sombre melodramas like La Strada and Le Notte Di Cabiria were modern
cinema's answer to operatic 'verismo'.
But the carnival Fellini is still the best-known. Appropriately, he was born
in Rimini, the Adriatic holiday town; as a teenager his first job was as
comic-strip artist for a Florence-based magazine - an experience which gave
him the background, later, for his first film as director, White Sheikh
(1952), gently debunking the world of comic-book heroes.
In Rome he played truant from university law courses to work as a crime
reporter for the newspaper Il Popolo di Roma; he then did a spell of
cartoon-work and storywriting for a satirical magazine, Marc'Aurelio. During
the 1940s he escaped military service when his medical records were
destroyed during a hospital bombing; he joined a theatre troupe as
set-designer and all-purpose factotum; wrote radio scripts and co-wrote film
scripts.
He even helped to open a shop: the Funny Face Store, a novelty portrait
studio for American GIs, specialising in instant caricatures and
voice-recordings. In 1944 a visitor to this shop, Roberto Rossellini, the
film-maker, made Fellini his first important movie offer. The 'documentary'
for which Rossellini was seeking a script collaborator finally became the
classic neo-realist film Rome Open City (1945).
Five years (and several Rossellini collaborations) later, Fellini began
directing his own films. His early movies were witty, protean variations on
neo-realism; often showcases for the impish pathos of the actress Giulietta
Masina, whom he had married in 1943. But with La Dolce Vita, in 1960,
Fellini's film direction broke definitively with neo-realism. This
extravagant tale of Roman high life is decked out with surreal symbols (a
flying statue of Christ, a beached sea-monster) and mischievously inflated
minor characters, notably Anita Ekberg's fulsomely-endowed,
fountain-splashing film star.
Marcello Mastroianni's bemused hero in the film - a Fellini surrogate,
adrift in wonderland - returned three years later for the master's
masterpiece. 8 1/2 (1963) is a fantasia on themes of autobiography. Though
its story has few literal convergences with Fellini's own life apart from
the hero's profession, that of film-maker, symbolically it skywrites all his
favourite obsessions: the diversity of womanhood; the artist as ringmaster
in his own circus; fear of failing creativity; the conspiracy of the
philistines. Fellini's two great stylistic trademarks, perpetual-motion
camera and a post-dubbed babble of voices, created a film whose garrulous
forward flow seemed to sweep up every object in its path, hurling them
briefly into the air, one by one, for inspection.
To the regret of many of his admirers, Fellini did not arrest his style at
this point of development. The black-and-white baroque of 8 1/2 turned into
the gaudy rococo of Juliet and the Spirits; rococo soon became a filmic
version of fairground kitsch in movies such as Fellini Casanova and The City
of Women.
But even in his fitful final decades Fellini made films or individual
sequences that still ran rings round most orthodox modern cinema.
Fellini Roma is an unclassifiable mixture of documentary, travelogue and
mickey-taking; its climax is a Papal fashion-show, with ecclesiastical
models parading on roller-skates. Fellini Satyricon gives a surreal modern
gloss to ancient myths. Amarcord is an album of childhood memories
punctuated with moments of dazzling make-believe - the cut-out ocean liner
riding a midnight polythene sea, for example. And Fellini Intervista is a
satire on film-making which joyously mixes the impertinent (Anita Ekberg in
an in-joke cameo) with the impossible (Red Indians attacking the Appian
Way).
Like Orson Welles, perhaps his only true soulmate in Western cinema, Fellini
believed that movies were a magician's medium where even the open
acknowledgment of trickery could be part of the charm. He also spent much of
his artistic life removing barricades between the arts. For him cinema was
not just cinema: it was theatre, vaudeville, opera, circus and street fair.
His aesthetic taste may sometimes have been questioned, but never the size
or grandeur of his aesthetic appetite.
At a time when Europe became concerned about US cultural imperialism,
especially through the cinema screen, Fellini stood out as a movie-maker who
thrived while owing nothing to Hollywood. He was, indeed, one of the very
few post-second world war European directors who was able to make films on
his own terms and achieve a wide degree of popularity on both sides of the
Atlantic.
Our monthly column on arts sponsorship will appear later this week

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931101

