FT931-4141

FT  12 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: City seeks action to curb deficit


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Correspondent


OPINION in the City is hardening in favour of action by Mr Norman Lamont in
next week's Budget to curb the growing government deficit.
Tax increases of Pounds 3bn to Pounds 5bn to take effect in the financial
year starting next month are favoured by an increasing number of City
economists.
Many would like Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, to tighten fiscal policy
but to delay any measures until the Budget in November, which will apply to
the 1994-95 financial year.
The fear that tax increases in the Budget will threaten any recovery is
misplaced, according to Mr Roger Bootle, chief economist at Midland Bank. He
says a fiscal tightening of up to Pounds 4bn, accompanied by cuts in public
spending, would reassure financial markets that Mr Lamont was acting to
limit the rising fiscal deficit, set to reach about Pounds 50bn in the
coming financial year.
However, Mr John Shepperd, economist at the SG Warburg Securities investment
house, says any increase in taxes would depress confidence among consumers
and industrialists, and might delay an upturn. 'The government then might be
faced with a nightmare scenario of the recession lasting even longer, with
the deficit also growing because of the effects of a slowdown on pushing up
spending and cutting into tax revenues,' he said.
Among those economists wanting to see an increase in taxation, favoured
moves are to widen the scope of value added tax, through applying this to
some currently zero-rated items such as food and books.
Extra revenues could also be raised through putting up income tax allowances
at less than the inflation rate, or raising excise duties on alcohol and
tobacco by more than inflation.
Also being mooted among economists in the City are 'green' taxes such as
extra taxes on fuel and petrol which could be presented as helping the
environment.
'Mr Lamont should tackle the rising fiscal deficit through a tax increase in
1993-94 of Pounds 4bn-Pounds 5bn. More tax rises should be phased in for the
next financial year, with monetary policy loosened to compensate. Interest
rates should come down from 6 per cent to 5 per cent immediately, with
possibly more cuts later.'
Michael Saunders, Salomon Brothers
'Mr Lamont should cut government spending in the coming financial year by
Pounds 2bn-Pounds 3bn, at the same time putting up taxes by Pounds
3bn-Pounds 4bn. The measures would hit consumers' pockets, but would lift
confidence in financial markets. They would show the government was at last
taking tough measures rather than drifting.'
Roger Bootle, Midland Bank
'Taxes should rise by about Pounds 3bn in the coming financial year, through
measures such as increased value added tax, especially on fuels where the
change could be presented as a 'green' measure. I am increasingly confident
about a recovery, at the current level of interest rates.'
Peter Spencer, Kleinwort Benson
'The chancellor should announce tax rises, but taking place not until
1994-95. This would help convince markets that the government was taking the
deficit seriously. Mr Lamont should also announce a proper framework for
running the economy based on monetary targeting, possibly with further cuts
in interest rates.'
Peter Warburton, Robert Fleming Securities

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930312

