FT933-5196

FT  04 SEP 93 / Money Markets: Belgian futures recover


   By JAMES BLITZ


BELGIAN interest rate futures rallied sharply in yesterday's late European
trading as the central bank of Belgium looked increasingly as though it was
losing the battle to maintain its currency's link with the D-Mark, writes
James Blitz.
In the morning, the September Belgian franc contract dropped another 10
basis points after crashing on Thursday in the wake of the rise in the
country's official interest rates.
But, later on, all the contracts rallied as the Belgian franc fell below the
BFr21.70 level against the D-Mark and the currency slipped in the exchange
rate mechanism's grid. Dealers appeared to be taking the view that, as the
franc floated more freely against the D-Mark, there would be renewed
incentive for Belgium to cut rates.
The September contract closed up 20 basis points on the day at 88.00, and
the December contract was up 40 basis points at 92.10.
As on Thursday, the sentiment in the Belgian market affected the outlook for
French interest rates, with dealers taking the view that prospective cuts in
Belgian rates would make it easier for the French to do the same.
The December contract therefore rose 7 basis points to close at 93.99,
pricing 3 month month money at around 6 per cent by the end of the year, a
drop of around 140 basis points from the current cash level.
With the D-Mark performing strongly against European currencies and the
dollar, dealers also felt there was a greater chance of official interest
rate cuts in Germany later this month.
One dealer recalled that Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank president-elect,
had said last month that a strong D-Mark would not be good for German
exports. The December Euromark contract was therefore up 4 basis points at
94.06 at the close.
The sterling market was a great deal calmer after a tumultuous week which
has seen the overnight rate at anything from 2 per cent to 8 per cent.
There was a comparatively small shortage of Pounds 700m, most of which was
removed by lunchtime, bringing the overnight rate to 5 per cent. Three month
money was about  1/16 per cent easier with a very narrow spread around 5 7/8
per cent. The December short sterling contract was up 3 basis points at
94.47.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930904

