FT932-13551

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (6):
Computers speed up drug dossiers - Technology available for management of
data


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


THE pharmaceuticals industry has been slow to harness the rapidly-improving
power of personal computing for clinical trials and registration of dossiers
for new drug applications to regulatory authorities.
But a combination of changing demands from the US Food and Drug
Administration and other national licensing bodies, together with the need
to speed drugs through the development process has led to a huge expansion
in the use of computers.
Mr David Matheson, senior vice-president at Boston Consulting Group, warns:
'Drug development is like a paper factory churning out endless pages.
Managing the logistics of data is shot through with difficulties and you can
easily trip yourself up.'
He claims buying personal computers for investigators so they can enter data
remotely is not a difficult investment decision.
The amount of time it takes to organise data in a critical study following
the last patient entry can be cut from 40 weeks to a fortnight, he
estimates. Given that every day a top-selling drug is delayed can cost a
company Dollars 1m, the savings can be immense. Mr Matheson reckons about
half of drugs groups have started using computers, but few are totally
automated.
'Remote data entry for clinical trials is one of the big issues for the
industry at the moment. The theory is very attractive,' claims Dr
Frank-Joachim Morich, director of pharmaceuticals R&D at Bayer.
Dr Poste, research and development director at SmithKline Beecham, explains:
'The Utopia would be that an electronic case report connected up to
electronic hospital notes. You would then have a software system that acted
as a gate, flagging any values that might cause concern. That would identify
problems early before the data got into the main database and ruined it.
Essentially you'd have an electronic quality control system in place that
ensured consistency of case notes.'
The electronic system would also help clean up the data before it can be
analysed.
'There is a lot of duplication in quality control,' says Dr Poste. 'Since
people know the data is going to be checked by someone else, they don't do
it properly, but the dossier gets held up nonetheless. It should be done
properly first time.'
'The problem is that it's a real software headache,' admits Dr Poste. At
Bayer, Dr Morich says the software problems are such that although the
company is slowly starting to use remote data entry, it is only beginning
with smaller trials and before moving on to bigger ones.
Computers are also having an impact in computer-assisted new drug
applications - known in the sector as Candas.
Traditional dossiers for new drug applications have consisted of thousands
of pages of documents, that have been long to prepare and difficult to read.
The aim of Candas is to submit dossiers on CD-Roms.
One of the first was Ciba's Voltaren, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
used for arthritis. The medicine was submitted electronically after the
company discovered the FDA reviewer was interested in computers. Although
the dossier was well behind many paper-based submissions, it was third on to
the market. Dr Max Wilhelm at Ciba says Canda is the group's prefered way of
preparing dossiers.
The advantage of submitting in electronic format is both internal and
external. Dr Poste says the real advantage of Canda is it allows several
people to interrogate several hundred thick documents simultaneously - which
helps the company and the regulator.
In addition, the company is better placed to respond to the regulators'
questions. 'It's all far less traumatic,' concludes Dr Poste.
'I genuinely believe that the higher quality of information may accelerate
approval from the regulators,' says Dr Leon Rosenberg, president,
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute.
There remain problems with Canda. Speaking recently at an London-based IIR
conference DR Don MacLean, regulatory affairs manager in Europe for Syntex,
warned of the problems of incompatible systems among European and US
regulators.
Meanwhile, other companies must adjust internally. 'Our scientists are are
suffering,' laments Prof Gunter Stock, board director in charge of R&D at
Schering,
'They are used to working on paper. People in registration have become
experts over 20 years. Overnight, we can't expect them to become experts in
computers. We certainly can't throw them out. We need young people who are
used to technology but we can't afford both,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

930422

