FT934-10182

FT  06 NOV 93 / British Steel to raise price of strip mill output: Fourth
increase in under a year will hit small users


   By ANDREW BAXTER


BRITISH STEEL is to raise by up to 5 per cent list prices for strip mill
products, used in everything from car bodies to building cladding.
The increases, which take effect on January 2, will tighten the squeeze on
margins faced by small and medium-sized users of steel in the UK.
They were announced at the end of a week during which Mr Eddie George,
governor of the Bank of England, urged businesses to help curb inflation by
generating higher profits through increased output and capacity use, rather
than higher prices.
The rises will be British Steel's fourth in less than a year, including a
rebate reduction in October, and mean that prices for some products will
have risen by 20 to 25 per cent if the latest increases are fully
implemented.
But British Steel said last night that, even with January's increase, prices
will not fully have recouped the 'disastrous' 30 per cent decline from 1990
to the end of last year. It said it could not rule out more rises in 1994.
British Steel's share price rose 1p yesterday to 126 1/2 p in a sharply
falling market. Mr Peter Fish, managing director of Meps Europe, the
Sheffield-based steel consultancy, said he was surprised by the size of the
rises. 'It will be difficult to obtain such a big rise in one quarter,' he
said, 'and if British Steel does press hard for the rise, it would only
succeed in sucking in imports.'
Demand is rising slowly in the UK market, which would become more attractive
to continental producers, whose own markets are still falling.
British Steel is raising its basic list prices from Pounds 310 a ton to
Pounds 324 for hot-rolled coil, from Pounds 385 to Pounds 400 for
cold-rolled, from Pounds 445 to Pounds 469 for hot-dipped metallic coated
steel and from Pounds 400 to Pounds 418 for electrozinc-coated (galvanised)
steel.
Market prices paid by stockists and steel users are much lower than these
current figures, meaning that the effective increases could be as much as 7
per cent.
The rises are likely to hit smaller stockists and users hardest because they
do not have six-monthly or annual contracts with British Steel.
In contrast, big users such as automotive and packaging companies take
contracted tonnages, and many would not have had to accept the earlier price
rises this year. One City analyst said it would be difficult to imagine them
accepting anything but a small increase.
Strip mill products accounted for Pounds 1.7bn of British Steel's Pounds
4.3bn turnover in the year ended April 3. The company has argued that
restoring remunerative prices, with the drive to cut costs, is critical if
it is to remain an efficient and competitive producer.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931106

