FT931-4093

FT  12 MAR 93 / Italy's real revolution: Milan's magistrates are targeting
corrupt state-owned companies


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


The revolution sweeping away Italy's postwar system of corrupt party rule
has begun in earnest.
The Milan magistrates investigating corruption have begun to disentangle the
intricate web of influence and control that politicians have exercised over
the main state-owned companies. The politicians' ability to manipulate these
companies has lain at the heart of a complex system of kick-backs and
pay-offs which has been the lifeblood of the main political parties - the
Christian Democrats and Socialists.
In four days this week Eni, the state oil concern which is the third-largest
company in Italy, has seen its management hierarchy decapitated. Mr Gabriele
Cagliari, the politically appointed president, is under arrest, as are the
heads of Eni's four principal subsidiaries. All have been accused of illicit
party financing and falsification of company books.
Milan magistrates are convinced Eni had a dual personality. One side was a
successful international oil group - a market leader - operating at the
frontiers of technology; the other was a fount of political patronage,
carefully controlled since the 1980s, predominantly by the Socialists.
Through such patronage in Eni and other state entities, politicians were
able to secure the funds which oiled the wheels of an increasingly greedy
political establishment. According to politicians who have already confessed
to corruption, such illicit funds amounted to at least L5,000bn (Pounds
2.18bn) a year.
Eni's split personality was yesterday symbolised by the differing fortunes
of the company's directors. A board meeting in Rome comprised just two
people - Mr Franco Bernabe, the technocrat chief executive who has assumed
full powers of the group, and a representative of the Italian Treasury, the
sole shareholder since last August. Meanwhile, in Milan's San Vittore jail,
the five imprisoned Eni group heads were answering charges of passing money
illicitly to their political masters.
Earlier in the week, Mr Cagliari, the first of the five to be imprisoned,
revealed the extent to which the old political system had degenerated. He
admitted to the magistrates that he had been involved, under duress, in the
payment of L4bn to a representative of the Socialist party to win a contract
on a power station being built by Enel, the state electricity authority.
Thus one state company had to pay an 'entry fee' to become a contractor for
another state concern.
Such practices explain why the country should have lagged so far behind the
rest of its EC partners in slimming down its large state sector and in
liberalising its economy. State companies provided jobs in areas where the
political parties could extend patronage, especially in the south; the same
companies also were in a position to back politicians' friends through
contracts.
Just as important, the state companies acted as financial sources which
complemented official party funding, which is limited by law to a total of
about L100bn for all of the political parties. That sum is wholly
insufficient to maintain an infrastructure of party faithful in the
bureaucracies, in the city and local councils, and in municipally owned
enterprises which include more than 200,000 employees. Not surprisingly, the
politicians wanted the system closed to prying eyes; and it suited the state
companies and most private ones to exclude foreign or domestic competition.
The first break in the circle arguably came from Brussels. The closer
scrutiny of competition policy by the EC Commission from the late 1980s
onwards, combined with moves towards the single European market, forced the
Italian public sector to become more transparent.
The second break came last August when the Amato government, faced with the
need to curb the uncontrolled rise in the public-sector deficit, opted for a
programme of large-scale privatisation. The initial step in this process was
the conversion of the four main state entities into publicly quoted
companies - Iri, the state holding company, Ina, the insurance institute,
Eni and Enel.
Privatisation has involved the removal of the existing politically appointed
boards and the concentration of management in professional hands, including
those who already worked within these companies. Thus in the case of Eni,
the company has been run for the past six months by Mr Bernabe, while Mr
Cagliari, installed as president in 1989 by Mr Bettino Craxi, the former
Socialist leader, has become a figurehead. The next stage in the programme
will be the appointment of a new board and moves to privatise subsidiaries.
But the politicians have been fighting a rearguard action to retain their
influence and slow the pace of privatisation. This is where the action of
the magistrates is so significant. Over recent months, and increasingly in
recent days, through arrests and confessions of state company executives and
private contractors, the full extent of the corruption network is being
exposed. These exposures have profoundly discredited the political
establishment and begun to dismantle a central pillar of the old system.
In the short term, the companies affected are likely to suffer in the
turmoil. But in the longer term, there should be an opportunity to put in
place a more transparent, slimmer state sector with a coherent privatisation
programme. It should also force the politicians to focus on legal means of
financing political parties - the issue at the centre of the anti-corruption
drive.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930312

