FT933-12724

FT  22 JUL 93 / Money Markets: German M3 worries


   By STEPHANIE FLANDERS


THE ODDS lengthened yesterday for a cut in German official interest rates
before the Bundesbank's summer recess with the news that German monetary
growth had risen to an annualised 7.1 per cent, writes Stephanie Flanders.
Forecasters had predicted that the growth in German M3 would be around 6.6
per cent. This would have skirted the edges of the German central bank's
target range, giving it some leeway to reduce official rates at next week's
council meeting. But the revelation that money growth had accelerated in
June compared to the previous month's figures left many seeing little chance
of a pre-recess rate reduction.
Rumours that the figures would disappoint had spread through European
markets on Tuesday. But the Bundes-bank's decision yesterday to allow a
lower repo rate of 7.15 per cent, compared with 7.28 per cent last week,
left many analysts not knowing what to expect.
'The balance of market opinion now considers a discount rate cut unlikely,'
said one London-based economist. 'Particularly when we could see German
inflation figures of around 4.4 to 4.5 per cent sometime over the next few
days.'
The new pessimism remains tempered, however, by the fact that the new pact
left the repo rate only 45 basis points above the current German discount
rate of 6.75 per cent. There are those who think that the Bundesbank will
feel uneasy entering the thin markets of the summer recess with only this
limited scope to react to renewed ERM tension.
Amid such imponderables, European money market rates were a little subdued
in yesterday's trading. But both D-Mark and French franc future contracts
fell in response to the German money supply data. The D-Mark September
contract closed at 93.16, down 11 basis points from the previous day.
September Pibor futures were similarly affected, dropping 13 points to
finish at 92.69.
In London money markets, conditions tightened through the day due to a
lingering shortage, initially forecast at Pounds 1.3bn but later revised
upwards to Pounds 1.45bn. Overnight rates started the day at around 6 3/4
per cent, but rose consist-ently to reach 8 per cent towards the close.
Trading in sterling futures was also affected by the German data, with
September sterling ending 8 points lower at 94.04.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930722

