FT932-13444

FT  23 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Parties jostle to fight off
election battle fatigue - The Tories have most to lose in next month's local
polls


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


THE Conservatives are promising that this time the recovery is real. Labour
is attempting to play the competence card. The Liberal Democrats are
pledging grassroots diligence. So far, the electorate seems unmoved.
The elections in 47 shire counties across England and Wales on May 6 are the
first real test of the mood of the country since last April's general
election. If they so choose, 25m adults can cast their votes.
In theory, control of up to a dozen councils could change hands, with all
that entails for local spending, education, law and order and social
policies.
The powers of local authorities have been curbed greatly during the
Conservatives' 14-year reign, but they still hold significant sway over
their citizens.
The elections have broader implications. Along with the Newbury by-election
on the same day, they might severely dent Mr John Major's hopes that his
beleaguered government has turned the corner. An unexpectedly good
performance would buttress Mr Major's claim that his administration has
drawn a line under the traumas of the past year.
The Tories start with most to lose. When the counties last went to the polls
in 1989, they emerged with control of 18 of the 39 English shire counties.
Labour took eight in their traditional northern strongholds.
The newly merged Liberal Democrats took only the Isle of Wight. The
remaining 12 were left with no party in overall control. In Wales, Labour
took four councils, leaving two in the hands of independents and two with no
party in control.
Privately, ministers have sought to contain expectations by suggesting they
might lose both Newbury and control of up to six councils. But preparing the
ground now will not make the prime minister feel any better on May 7 if the
predictions prove accurate.
For the opposition parties, the opportunities are not commensurate with the
risks facing the government. The shire counties are Labour's weakest ground.
The results will not reflect its 10-15-point lead in national opinion polls.
Mr John Smith would regard anything close to 40 per cent of votes cast as a
triumph.
Mr Paddy Ashdown has higher hopes. A strong Liberal Democrat performance
would provide the party with the public profile it has been denied since the
election. Combined with victory in Newbury - the Liberal Democrats need a 9
per cent swing - it might also give Mr Smith another shove along the road to
electoral reform.
None of the parties could claim that their campaigns have ignited the
enthusiasm of a sullen electorate. The politicians have indulged in
ritualistic mud-slinging at occasional press conferences and in party
political broadcasts. Ministers and their shadows have been despatched to
boost local party activists' morale. But the campaign has done little to
dispel the mood of battle fatigue at Westminster.
The election battlegrounds are familiar. Local issues - council tax bills,
schools, crime statistics - have dominated doorstep campaigning. But the
economy will act as a powerful influence on the voters.
The harsh impact on the south of the middle-class recession has left the
Conservatives vulnerable to the classic protest of their party's supporters
 -a vote in local elections for the Liberal Democrats.
But confirmation in the latest economic indicators that recovery is under
way is sustaining government hopes that the results may be disappointing
rather than disastrous.
The second Tory theme is equally familiar: the Conservatives cost you less.
In a foretaste of things to come, Mr Smith has decided to fight the Tories
on their own ground. Selective use of statistics (of which both sides are
guilty) is being used to promote a Labour image of cost-consciousness and
competence.
If the Conservatives' ambition on May 6 is to limit the damage, Labour's is
to set off again on the long haul back to persuading the voters it can be
economically prudent as well as socially ambitious.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930423

