FT932-3121

FT  16 JUN 93 / LDP officials wrestle with reforms: Scuffles in the
corridors of the Diet before ruling party meeting


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


SENIOR members of Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic party, who claim to be
wrestling with their consciences over political reform, yesterday grappled
physically with each other in an unseemly, unscheduled bout in Japan's
corridors of power.
In one corner were the reformers, frustrated by the LDP's reluctance to
change a scandal-prone political system, and in the other were officials who
have prospered from the present system and fear that change would threaten
their political privileges.
The two sides confronted each other outside the party room in the Japanese
parliament (Diet), and within range of the television cameras, giving
Japanese viewers a ringside seat and providing them with vivid documentary
evidence of the urgent need for political reform.
After pushing, shoving, headlocks and half-nelsons, the LDP party meeting
convened. It decided not to make a decision on political reform, passing the
responsibility to Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister, and four other
party elders.
The argument is over whether the current multi-seat constituencies, which
are prone to manipulation by party factions, should be replaced by a
single-seat system, by proportional representation, or by a cocktail of the
two. Tougher controls are also proposed for political funding.
Mr Miyazawa, who has delegated all responsibility in the issue, is now
confronted by the need to make a clear statement either deferring reform or
extending the present parliamentary session. His colleague, Mr Seiroku
Kajiyama, the LDP's secretary-general and head-counter, has conveniently
suggested that the debate be delayed for at least two years.
But the previously favoured tactic of putting reform on permanent hold may
not work, as the Social Democratic party of Japan, the largest opposition
party, has promised to launch a no-confidence motion against the government
before the parliamentary session ends on Sunday.
Under normal circumstances, the LDP would easily have the numbers to defeat
such a motion. But a pro-reform LDP faction headed by Mr Tsutomu Hata, the
former finance minister, claimed to have enough support yesterday to tip the
balance against Mr Miyazawa by abstaining from the vote.
Mr Miyazawa has said he will call an election if the LDP loses the vote, and
the SDPJ said yesterday: 'We are not afraid of an election.' Suddenly the
prime minister, who hoped to have his prestige untarnished by remaining
above the fray, may have to make a decision.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930616

