FT934-11276

FT  02 NOV 93 / World Trade News: US warns of action to defend rights of
airlines


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   DALLAS


MR Federico Pena, the US transportation secretary, yesterday delivered a
strongly worded threat that the US would 'vigorously defend' US airlines
against foreign competitors whose governments discriminated against US
carriers.
He said the US would take action 'through all available means' against
airlines whose governments failed to honour the rights of US airlines under
bilateral agreements. 'We reserve the timing and force of our actions to our
own judgment,' he said.
'No one should underestimate our resolve in this regard.'
Mr Pena, addressing the world's airline industry at the annual meeting of
the International Air Transport Association, said the strong defence of
existing bilateral agreements was part of the US strategy of moving towards
full airline liberalisation.
Protectionism, he said, imposed 'huge' costs on the travellers and
businesses in the very countries that attempted it.
By protecting inefficient carriers instead of prodding them to adjust,
governments harmed every other sector of their own economies and constrained
the entire world economy.
Mr Pena singled out for attack the efforts of 'a group of airlines in the
east Asian markets' to curb the access of US carriers to the world's fastest
growing aviation market, accusing their governments of 'playing with fire'.
'The US is weary of running chronic, multi-billion-dollar trade deficits
with nations whose governments lecture Americans on the need to produce more
efficient, more desirable products,' he said.
'Let me be direct: US air carriers are providing exactly the sort of highly
efficient, competitive services that Asian customers will buy - if only
their governments would let them.'
Mr Pena said the US planned to explore the formation of a global coalition
of like-minded, free-market-oriented nations that recognised the benefits to
citizens and national economies of expanded air travel.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931102

