FT932-3171

FT  15 JUN 93 / (CORRECTED) Insider dealing trial abandoned


   By JOHN MASON, Law Courts Correspondent


Correction (published 15th June 1993) appended to this article.
THE INSIDER dealing trial of Mr Alton Byrd, a former account manager with
the stockbroking arm of Svenska, the Swedish bank, was abandoned yesterday
because a crucial witness was too ill to give evidence.
Mr Byrd, who is also a British international basketball player, and his two
co-defendants, Mr Roger Wilcocke, a director of a shop-fitting company, and
Mr Graham Shear, a London solicitor, were all formally acquitted of the
charges against them. No evidence had been presented at their trial, which
started last Tuesday.
The Department of Trade and Industry, which brought the prosecution, denied
the trial's collapse was caused by faults in insider dealing legislation,
which has proved notoriously difficult to enforce.
The collapse was caused purely by the absence of a material witness, the
department said. The new insider dealing legislation being drawn up would
not have made any difference in this situation, it added.
Mr Edmund Lawson QC explained to the Old Bailey jury why the department was
dropping the prosecution. He said that Mr Vincent Donohoe, a director of
International Media Communications (IMC), a video and entertainment company,
and the 'insider' from whom it had been alleged Mr Byrd obtained
price-sensitive information, would be unable to give evidence.
Defence lawyers would therefore be unable to question him on issues such as
whether he had passed on the information concerned to people other than Mr
Byrd.
The judge, Mrs Anne Goddard QC, had ruled it would be unfair for the
prosecution to proceed in the circumstances, Mr Lawson said. The proper
course was for the jury to be instructed to acquit the three men rather than
leave matters in a state of 'permanent limbo' by leaving the charges on the
file, he added.
Mr Byrd had faced four charges of communicating unpublished price-sensitive
information while being a prohibited person and one charge of procuring
another person to deal in shares, all contrary to the Company Securities
(Insider Dealing) Act 1985. Mr Wilcocke and Mr Shear had faced single
charges of insider dealing. All three had denied the charges.
Mr Lawson had originally alleged that in early 1990 Mr Byrd passed on
unpublished, price-sensitive information about IMC to his co-defendants when
the company had been in financial trouble and its share price had fallen. Mr
Lawson alleged that Mr Byrd passed on the information that buyers were set
to take over the company and invest in it - information, he said, that was
likely to boost the company's share price.
Mr Wilcocke and Mr Shear had both bought IMC shares and sold when the price
rose, Mr Lawson had said.
CORRECTION
IN YESTERDAY'S report of the collapse of the trial in which Mr Graham Shear,
a London solicitor, was acquitted of insider trading, we incorrectly
reported that Mr Edmund Lawson QC, prosecuting counsel, alleged that Mr
Shear bought shares in International Media Communications, a USM-quoted
company, and sold them after the price rose. In fact, Mr Shear had sold his
shares at a loss after the share price had dropped.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930615

