FT932-3426

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (10): New source of wealth from the sands
of the desert - The challenges of developing the southern provinces


   By FRANCIS GHILES


   DEVELOPING THE southern provinces of Tunisia


running from the Algerian frontier around the Shott El Jerid, the salty
flatlands which, during the hot summer months turn into a hard salty crust
stretching for miles, to the port of Gabes, opposite the tourist island of
Jerba - presents a unique challenge.
The western provinces of Tozeur, Gafsa and Kebili traditionally belong to
the bled siba, the land of dissidence whose inhabitants led a nomadic life
until the 1960s and seldom paid taxes to the rulers in Tunis.
Though often illiterate, the inhabitants of the Jerid and Nefzaoua region
south of the Shott had a rich tradition of urban life and boasted one great
source of wealth, the deglet nour or date of light, considered by
connoisseurs the finest in the world.
During the past few years tourism has emerged as a new source of income but,
even more important, is the development of fruit and vegetables such as
melons and tomatoes, which are grown in greenhouses using the many local hot
water springs and whose produce can be shipped to Europe between
mid-November and mid-May when no EC quotas or tariffs impede their entry.
If not carefully managed, however, the fast development of such crops and
the spread of new hotels could seriously threaten the environment and the
balance of human resources of a fragile desert region.
The new face of Tunisian agriculture can be seen near Gabes, where a
Tunisian agricultural engineer, Mr Nejib Zarrouk, has established a joint
venture with a group of French businessmen who grow melons near Chinon in
the Loire valley and market them through a company called Derby. Half the
DT1.7m capital, of which DT500,000 is so far paid up, is provided by the
so-called Beregovoy line of subsidised credit and administered in Tunisia by
France's Caisse Centrale de Cooperation, the rest is spread among Tunisian
banks, most notably the Tunisian Saudi Development Bank, Stusid.
A long lease for the necessary three hectares has been secured from the
Tunisian state and in 1992, the first year of activity, 220 tonnes of
tomatoes and 76 tonnes of high quality melons were exported to France.
Figures will more than double for the second season ending in May.
The Chenchou success story is a pointer to the future as the Tunisian state
is leasing an ever growing surface of its 500,000-hectare domain, foreigners
are allowed to invest in land and bright young Tunisian engineers are keen
to start up their own business.
Thanks to an ambitious deep water drilling programme financed by the Gulf
states and Saudi aid, undreamed of riches in water have been discovered. As
the standard of living increases and more people establish irrigated crops,
the authorities face two problems. The first is how to control irrigation
schemes that are increasingly set up without permission, the second is how
to drain water after it has been used.
In traditional oases the date palms and the fruit and vegetable which grow
below were set up on slopes to allow the water to drain away. Faulty
drainage can have a lethal effect as it allows salt to accumulate, a sure
way to sterilise the land and kill date palms.
Ensuring proper drainage is essential, particularly at the 1,152-hectare
oasis of Rjim Maatoug, a new oasis being created west of Kebili and financed
by EC aid worth DT15m, Italian aid worth DT7m and DT10m worth of Tunisian
funds. The high cost of the Rjim Maatoug project is justified in terms of
the broader security of an area close to the Algerian frontier. When
completed, the project will help settle local nomadic tribesmen. The project
is being managed by the army, together with civilian authorities, a
combination that in the harsh and difficult to reach surroundings appears to
be working well.
The fast development of tourism poses a different challenge. Quite apart
from the danger of spoiling a unique landscape with hotels whose style jars
surrounding buildings, hotels attract labour away from farming and that
means essentially looking after date palms. This is a very labour intensive
and skilled job. The palms must be individually pollinated by hand, the
dates hand-picked. The sight of young boys scrambling up date palms may be
picturesque. Such skills, however, are becoming less available, but
essential for future crops.
A further challenge is to improve the marketing of dates abroad. Despite the
high quality of the deglet nour, half the dates the Jerid produces are
marketed through a few traders in Marseilles, depriving Tunisia of direct
access to many markets. Packaging is way behind modern international
standards. In other words, Tunisia lacks access to a good international
distribution network. Dates are the kind of farm produce from which the
country should be earning good foreign income. They are labour intensive and
do not compete with any EC equivalents.
Many older oases have been virtually abandoned, their intricate foggara
water channels ill kept, if not abandoned. Inhabitants of such remote places
are often not keen to work in hotels.
In the mountain oasis of Tamerza due north of Tozeur, the only local baker
refuses to deliver bread to the Tamerza Palace, a hotel which opened last
year. On Sunday he remains closed forcing the hotel to send for its bread 20
kilometres away in Redeyef. People from Tamerza show no interest in jobs
provided by the hotel, but small settlements further afield are less
disdainful of such jobs.
Developing this remote area of Tunisia presents a unique set of challenges.
Three constraints, which are intimately related, touch on water resources,
human skills and the environment. They must be taken into account if serious
damage is to be avoided. Mistakes here carry a heavier price than in the
more temperate northern or maritime provinces.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930614

