FT932-6791

FT  27 MAY 93 / Guatemalan president tightens grip: Government controls
broadcasts, police surround newspaper offices


   By EDWARD ORLEBAR and STEPHEN FIDLER


   GUATEMALA CITY, LONDON


THE Guatemalan government yesterday moved to tighten its control over the
country, a day after President Jorge Serrano suspended the constitution and
closed down congress and the supreme court.
Although Mr Serrano said early on Tuesday that his move would not affect
freedom of expression, the government was yesterday controlling radio and TV
broadcasts. It has sent censors to monitor newspapers, while police
surrounded the offices of the two largest morning papers.
Opposition to Mr Serrano's action came at home and abroad. Mr Mario
Solorzano, the minister of labour and a vice-president of Socialist
International, resigned in protest at the moves.
He said the president had removed the possibility of reaching peace in
Guatemala and believed it would no longer be possible for international
financial institutions to continue support for the government.
The constitutional court, the highest judicial body in Guatemala, declared
the president's actions invalid.
The US put its Dollars 67m (Pounds 43.5m) aid programme to Guatemala under
review, the State Department said, but did not say if the aid was suspended.
Foreign ministers of the Organisation of American States are expected to
meet in Washington on June 3 over Guatemala, following condemnation of the
move by the US and almost all Latin American states, except for Peru.
A suspension of lending from international financial institutions could
follow the OAS meeting.
Mr Serrano, whose action is seen as emulating Peruvian President Alberto
Fujimori's so-called 'self-coup' in April 1992, said he was thinking of
telephoning Mr Fujimori.
The government has a 15-month standby arrangement with the International
Monetary Fund which started last December, although the government has not
drawn the Dollars 54m available under the programme. Loans for the country
from the World Bank and the InterAmerican Development Bank, which has
Dollars 110m of loans awaiting approval in the second half of the year,
could be jeopardised.
Soldiers yesterday surrounded the offices of a large union umbrella group.
Mr Alberto Villar, a committee member, said that his members would discuss
the possibility of calling a nationwide protest.
The human rights ombudsman, Mr Ramiro de Leon Carpio, came out of hiding to
protest at the move.
'The president doesn't have constitutional, legal or moral rights to take
the measures he did,' he told journalists. He called on different sectors of
society to put pressure on the regime to reverse its measures.
The British Foreign Office said the events in Guatemala had not led the
government to rethink its decision to remove its garrison of 1,400 troops in
neighbouring Belize.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930527

