FT934-11332

FT  01 NOV 93 / Russian banks opt to invest overseas


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


RUSSIAN banks have more than Dollars 15bn dollars stashed away in accounts
in the west but have made hard currency loans worth less than half a billion
dollars to customers within Russia.
Thirteen banks, which account for 80 per cent of Russian hard currency
operations, had Dollars 10.03bn in correspondent and investment accounts in
western banks at January 1 this year, according to a western study. The same
banks had outstanding loans of less than Dollars 300m lent to customers
inside Russia. By this June, all Russian banks held about Dollars 15.5bn
abroad, according to central bank figures. Loans within Russia were worth
about 3 per cent of that sum. The figures compiled from official sources and
the banks are an index of the financial chaos within the Russian economy.
While the banks have large amounts of hard currency abroad, the government
is rescheduling debts owed to the west, seeking other forms of international
finance help it promote business investment. Many Russian companies with
export potential have money but do not trust the national currency or the
authorities enough to keep it at home in roubles. Despite Russia's hunger
for investment finance, banks avoid lending within the country - except to
clients which earn hard currency and are well-known to them  - due to a lack
of mechanisms to ensure repayment.
Mr Francis Gelibter, director of Eurosiris Russie, the St Petersburg-based
joint venture of Eurosiris, the Paris based consultancy, which conducted the
study said: 'If I were the manager of a Russian bank I would do the same
because there are few alternatives to placing the money abroad. Lending is
risky because you don't know if the person will disappear tomorrow or
whether new legislation will come along to ruin the project.'
The money in correspondent accounts partly services the needs of Russian
companies which trade with the west. But the report's authors say that with
exports of just Dollars 30bn a year, a lot of money is in western banks
simply because it is the safest place for it. If dollars are not lent to
customers inside Russia, they are automatically transferred to correspondent
accounts in the US for lending on capital markets there.
The state owned Veneshtorg Bank, the foreign trade bank, had Dollars 3.54bn
in correspondent and investment accounts at January 1 this year, with
Dollars 36.8m lent inside Russia. This is separate from illegal capital
flight.
According to Foreign Economic Relations Ministry figures quoted by the
report, Russia in 1992 lost Dollars 6.4bn through unfavourable barter deals
where Russian exporters underestimated the value of what they were bartering
to keep the difference abroad in undeclared accounts.

The Financial Times


International Page 1

931101

