FT934-11228

FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of The Slovak Republic (9): Unwanted tanks - Patrick
Blum visits an unemployment blackspot


   By PATRICK BLUM


IN A large industrial area on the outskirts of Martin, a small town lying on
the foothills of the Lower Tatra mountains in picturesque north-western
Slovakia, a sprawling group of factories is fighting for survival.
Martin, population 60,000, is home to ZTS, one of Slovakia's biggest
companies and heart of the country's once thriving military-industrial
complex. But military production, which represented about half of ZTS
Martin's output, collapsed in the wake of the 1989 revolution that ended
communism, and the company's future looks uncertain.
Turning the tanks made at ZTS Martin into ploughshares is more easily said
than done. The decision taken in Prague during the heady days of the velvet
revolution to abandon the 'dirty' trade in armaments has had a catastrophic
impact on Slovakia's industry and economy, causing much local bitterness.
Between 1988 and 1992, military production which accounted for about 32 per
cent of the output of Slovakia's engineering industry declined by almost 90
per cent.
'It was the hardest blow', says Mr Jaroslav Kubecka, economy minister.
'Armament production was virtually liquidated in the course of two years
without any replacement.'
At the time, around 40 major plants were involved in military production.
Many have been closed down, and some 60,000 jobs have gone, and many more in
related industries.
Ironically, the decision that devastated a major part of Slovak industry has
since been reversed in the Czech Republic whose government is now seeking
export markets for its own military hardware. The Slovak authorities, who
encouraged the conversion of military facilities to civilian production, now
believe they can re-enter the market, albeit under much more difficult
conditions and on a smaller scale than in the past.
It will not be easy. 'No country in the world is able to rebuild all its
main industries in two years. Restructuring requires enormous capital
investment beyond the capacity of local resources,' Mr Kubecka says.
ZTS Martin provides a striking example of the efforts and costs involved. In
the 1980s, about half of military production in the former Czechoslovakia -
which then ranked among the world's top 10 exporters of weaponry - and about
80 per cent of Slovak military production came from ZTS Martin which
specialised in heavy equipment, notably tanks, most of which were sold to
the former Czechoslovak and Warsaw Pact armies.
In 1988, the company produced military and civilian equipment worth SK14bn
(Dollars 450m); it had 13,000 employees, and made a SK1.6bn profit. Last
year production was down to SK6bn, its workforce was cut to 9,000, and it
made an operating profit of SK32m, but this was wiped out by restructuring
costs and mounting debts.
Mr Josef Skrko, the company's financial director, will not disclose the
volume of debt, but says one third is primary debt and two thirds is caused
by non-payment by customers. He says about SK1bn of the debt was the result
of conversion.
The social consequences for the people of Martin have been dire. 'Every
family in town used to have a worker here,' says Mr Skrko.
The pain is not over. The company has borrowed SK2bn to modernise production
lines to improve productivity and develop new products, but there have been
more lay-offs since the beginning of the year. Short-time working has been
introduced on some lines, and the marketing and strategy department closed
recently to save costs. The buildings badly need repairing, and new markets
are difficult to find even for new products such as diesel engines produced
under licence from Lombardini of Italy for sale only in former Comecon
markets,
The agreement with Lombardini was signed in 1990 with production starting
that year on existing lines. The objective was to manufacture up to 40,000
engines a year, rising eventually to 60,000. New equipment and machinery
worth SK1.3bn was imported to develop a new production line which is now
almost completely installed. Current capacity is 15,000 engines, but even
that smaller number is proving difficult to sell as shown by the stocks of
new engines lined up in the factory warehouse.
The ZTS company now produces a wide range of engines, is improving the range
of its tractors, and producing bulldozers and loaders under licence from
Hanomag of Germany with the hope of establishing a joint venture with the
German company in the near future. Large engines of 1,000 horse power used
in giant trucks are produced under licence from a French company while other
products include forest tractors. Production of the latter, however, is down
to about 150 a year, compared with exports of more than 1,000 such tractors
a year to the former Soviet Union.
Overall, military production at ZTS Martin declined from SK10.3bn in 1988 to
SK2.7bn last year, but production of the heavy T-72 tank and other armaments
has resumed. 'As far as we could see, other countries including members of
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe continued to sell their
armaments, and nobody really helped us to convert our factories. We think we
should do what we are able to do, though the situation now is more difficult
because we have lost our former markets to competitors,' Mr Skrko says.
Foreign interest in the T-72 tank remains high, especially from potential
third world buyers with little cash.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

931102

