FT934-10308

FT  05 NOV 93 / Lithuania and Poland haunted by old conflicts


   By MATTHEW KAMINSKI


   VILNIUS


HISTORY'S ghosts are again straining relations between Lithuania and Poland.
The latest dispute, ironically, centres on a prospective friendship treaty
 -and illustrates the barriers to co-operation and potential for friction
across eastern Europe.
Since negotiations began in July, Lithuania has demanded that Poland admit
the 1920 annexation of Vilnius, the capital, by the Polish General Lucjan
Zeligowski was illegal.
The temporary loss of Vilnius remains a bitter pill in Lithuania, and a
potent symbol for the right.
On the barricades around parliament, left over from the television tower
battle with Soviet troops three years ago, a large hand-scrawled slogan
reads 'Ribbentrop-Molotov-Zeligowski', drawing together the German, Russian
and Polish figures who cut up the Baltic country this century.
But the Polish government refuses to take the historical blame, partly out
of concern that this would place the legal rights of the Polish minority  -
around 18 per cent of Vilnius' and 8 per cent of Lithuania's 3.7m population
 - in jeopardy, in that they could be be seen as illegal colonists.
The roots of the conflict go back to 1385 when the two states united and
eventually formed the formidable Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, which ruled
from the Baltic to the Black Seas. By 1920, Vilnius had an overwhelming
majority of Polish and Jewish residents, and few Lithuanians.
Today's Polish community is a fraction of the pre-war population, and
presses for political and language rights.
But at the Polish-Lithuanian border, the dispute over Gen Zeligowski's
annexation has held up progress on opening the frontier. Cars and trucks
still queue up for as long as a week, holding up trade at an important link
between central and northern Europe. Partly as a result, the Via Baltica
project, a 1000km super-highway connecting Germany with the Balts and
Finland, remains a distant dream.
Lithuania's tattered economy has benefitted little from a common border with
Poland, its wealthiest neighbour. Foreign investment, essential to recovery,
has been a disappointment: Poland still has the most joint-ventures in
Lithuania, but total capital inflow will be only Dollars 40m this year,
according to World Bank estimates.
A fifth round of negotiations with Poland's government is expected to start
soon.
Mr Czeslaw Milosz, a Polish writer and Nobel laureate who grew up in
Vilnius, says the Lithuanian right has opened a 'Pandora's box' on the
issue. 'There comes a time when we have to say: no more, for the common good
of these nations.'
But Mr Tomas Venclova, a leading Lithuanian poet and Yale literature
professor, believes quite the opposite. The whole world, including Poland,
must see 'that Vilnius belongs to Lithuania,' he recently told Kurier
Wilensky, a Polish language daily.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

931105

