FT934-11222

FT  02 NOV 93 / Technology: Power to the people - The UK's National Grid has
just invested in a sophisticated control network


   By ANDREW FISHER


The sight of Chris Waddle missing a vital penalty at a World Cup soccer
semi-final three years ago may not appear to have much to do with
electricity use, but the behaviour of television viewers after England lost
to Germany led to a record surge of power that night.
The management of power demand is a complex task. To ensure it continues to
be handled smoothly, from times of normal use to emergencies such as
hurricanes, the National Grid - which distributes electricity in England and
Wales - has spent Pounds 32m on a computerised energy management system it
believes is the biggest and most modern in the world.
Electricity demand in the area covered by the National Grid can vary between
16,000 megawatts early on a summer morning to nearly 48,000 MW on a very
cold winter evening. Power consumption also rises sharply after popular TV
soap operas or blockbuster films. Viewers get up after a long evening's
viewing, switch on the lights and put on the kettle for a cup of tea.
This is what happened after Waddle and his team-mate missed the deciding
penalties at the end of one of the most exciting matches of the
championship, televised from Italy. Electricity use briefly shot up by as
much as 2,800 MW after the game, equivalent to the output of a very large
power station.
On an average day, enough electricity is used in England and Wales to keep
10m kettles boiling round the clock; in winter, the equivalent is 17m. This
is what the National Grid's new system, formally opened last month after 100
days in faultless operation, is designed to manage. From the new control
centre at Wokingham, Surrey, with the help of four area centres in St
Albans, Birmingham, Leeds and Bristol, electricity is routed around the
7,000km of the country's transmission routes.
By spending some Pounds 80m on its new control network (including the energy
management system), the National Grid has streamlined its activities and
closed two regional sites at Manchester and East Grinstead. It now has an
array of new computers and sophisticated software capable of evolving in
line with future advances in technology.
The previous system dated from 1970, when the national control centre was at
London's Park Street, south of the River Thames. Its Argos computers made by
Ferranti of the UK - now the subject of a humiliating 1p a share bid from
General Electric Company of the UK - were kept running until earlier this
year, although new equipment was also added over the past two decades.
'In the early 1980s, we realised we needed to get to the next level of
technology,' says John Tomlinson, system control manager. After going out to
tender, National Grid narrowed the choice down to Ferranti and
Minnesota-based Empros Power Systems Control, then owned by Control Data of
the US but now part of Siemens, the German industrial group.
Having decided on Empros, which has more than 400 energy systems installed
around the world, the National Grid went to great lengths to ensure its
systems would be as error-free as possible. It subjected the hardware and
software to 14 different audits each. Testing was so rigorous that the test
plans took up 45 feet of paper.
As a result, the company believes it has a system which is as reliable as it
is possible to obtain. Roger Hunter, EMS project manager, is suitably
cautious, however, when he says: 'As far as we know, at the present time,
there are no errors.' The system was also delivered on time and within
budget, a rarity for such big computer projects.
The National Grid went to such lengths to ensure both quality and robustness
because it wanted a system which could do much more than its previous one.
The Empros system, with its host of computers, workstations, display units
and 4m lines of software code (capable of running 46 applications and 40,000
displays) is not just designed to switch energy around the grid system,
including the import of power from Scotland (where distribution is handled
by the generating companies) and France. It also has a far greater capacity
to deal with emergencies such as freak storms or terrorist bombs.
To ensure the utmost degree of fail-safe security, each centre has three big
Cyber computers from Control Data for normal, stand-by and emergency use. If
a disaster causes the Wokingham centre to go down, national control can be
switched to St Albans which controls the London region.
Here, there is a fourth Cyber, normally used for training - faults such as
those caused by the 1981 blizzards have been modelled into the simulator
with frightening realism - but which can be switched to run the whole grid.
'You can't have a day off while you put something right,' says Tomlinson.
In the old system, this degree of integration did not exist. Nor was it able
to perform advanced applications at a level far beyond the normal ones of
monitoring power flows, voltage levels and other daily functions.
With the Empros equipment, says Hunter, the grid system can be subjected to
'limits and capabilities never before possible.' Readouts on any aspect of
the grid system can be obtained in seconds rather than minutes; 22,000
separate items of information are checked every five seconds.
This vast flow of data is needed not only to update the rate of daily power
flows from the privatised energy groups to the regional electricity
companies (who own the National Grid), but also to deal with the unexpected.
'This system can handle the most onerous of power station conditions,' adds
Hunter. The Empros system was tested to see how it would stand up to all
types of use from normal demand to the impact of lightning strikes and
hurricanes.
Now its system is in operation, the National Grid is keen to work with
Empros and Siemens, on foreign contracts. 'The whole market place is worth
nearly Dollars 1bn (Pounds 714m),' says Tim Kenealy, general manager of
Siemens Empros, which has a share of around 20 per cent. He sees strong
possibilities in eastern Europe and other developing areas, despite scarce
funds, as well as in industrialised countries wanting to update electricity
distribution.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

931102

