FT932-3385

FT  15 JUN 93 / Shake-up at EBRD may be postponed


   By DAVID MARSH and ROBERT PESTON


TOP MANAGEMENT changes at the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development are likely to be postponed following the intervention of Mrs
Anne Wibble, Sweden's finance minister, in a row that has split the bank's
directors.
At a board meeting in London yesterday, Mr Claes de Neergaard of Sweden,
acting on Mrs Wibble's instructions, recommended the directors set up a
committee to negotiate with the EBRD's president, Mr Jacques Attali, on any
restructuring. A decision on the proposal will be taken by the directors
later this week.
However, one director said yesterday he was now hopeful that the proposed
management changes, which had led to threats of resignation from the present
first vice-president, Mr Ron Freeman, would be delayed until after an audit
committee report, due next month, into criticisms of overspending at the
bank.
The planned management changes would involve the appointment of Mr Ernest
Stern, the World Bank number two, as a senior vice-president, in effect
displacing Mr Freeman as Mr Attali's deputy.
Mrs Wibble, who is chairman of the bank's governors, had made it clear she
felt all EBRD shareholders - 54 countries and agencies - should be involved
in the management re-organisation decision. Sweden and some other countries
are concerned at manoeuvring by the Group of Seven industrial countries to
force through management changes.
Many directors also made clear they were unhappy about proposals in an EBRD
report by Mr Stanley Katz, a former bank executive, commissioned by Mr
Attali, to shift the organisation's emphasis towards development banking
along the lines of the World Bank. The EBRD's original philosophy was
promotion of privatisation in eastern Europe, a policy most directors still
favour.
Directors of the bank said last night the board was split roughly 50-50 on
whether the management changes should be postponed, with the G7
representatives under instructions to push for immediate changes.
At yesterday's inconclusive day-long board meeting, Mr Attali proposed
appointing Mr Stern to the new post of number two at the EBRD. Mr Attali,
the focus of the recent allegations of EBRD over-spending, said Mr Stern had
accepted the job in principle to help strengthen management.
But Mr de Neergaard, who is chairman of the bank's audit committee and is
overseeing examination of alleged cost over-runs, spoke out against changes
until the investigation was completed on July 15.
Mr Attali's future was not broached at the meeting. But several directors
feel an early decision on creating a new job for Mr Stern could pre-empt
wider changes - including Mr Attali's own position - which may become
necessary once the audit report is concluded.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930615

