FT934-11499

FT  30 OCT 93 / Aristide's opponents call strike


   By WILLIAM SPINDLER


   SANTO DOMINGO


OPPONENTS of Haiti's exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide called an armed
general strike yesterday which left the streets of the capital,
Port-au-Prince, almost deserted.
The strike came the day before Mr Aristide was due to return to the country
under the terms of a United Nations-brokered peace deal.
Yesterday's action was called by extreme rightists with close links to the
military. The stated aim of the strike is to force Haiti's pro-Aristide
civilian government to reopen petrol stations, which have been closed as a
result of a UN embargo imposed because of the military leaders' refusal to
give up power.
Army chief Lt Gen Raoul Cedras, in an interview on the pro-army Radio
Liberte, said Mr Aristide had overstepped the terms of the peace accord by
calling for the resignation of the army high command and police chief Joseph
Michel Francois.
The impasse over Mr Aristide's return and deteriorating conditions in the
country have led many ordinary Haitians to try to flee the country. Ships
enforcing the embargo have intercepted two refugee boats this week carrying
a total of 43 people. Fifteen people sent back were promptly arrested by
armed men.
The Dominican Republic, with which Haiti shares a border, has traditionally
offered an avenue of escape in times of crisis. This week, however, the
Dominican government has been repatriating thousands of Haitians, including
people who have lived there for decades, and even black Dominicans suspected
of having Haitian descent. Although President Joaquin Balaguer of the
Dominican Republic has said that the deportations would stop, the message to
prospective Haitian refugees is clear: they are not welcome.
The deportations might serve another purpose. According to Mr Ruben Silie,
an expert on Haitian-Dominican relations at the Technological Institute of
Santo Domingo, they 'are a clear signal to the Clinton administration that
the Dominican Republic is not prepared to pay the costs of US policy in
Haiti.'
With traditional channels of escape being closed, desperate Haitians can be
expected to seek refuge in other shores.
Britain could soon find itself drawn into the crisis. The Turks and Caicos
Islands, a British protectorate, has been also receiving Haitian refugees.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931030

