FT932-6857

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(6): An unstoppable march - Mid-range systems


   By MICHAEL DEMPSEY


THERE was a time when computers fitted neatly into one of three categories.
If it wasn't a PC or a mainframe, then it had to be a mini. The decline of
the mainframe and the emergence of the powerful workstation as a serious
scientific tool have given rise to a new category of system, the mid-range
computer.
Mid-range systems have taken the centre stage of business computing. In
power and price they overlap with both extremes of IT hardware, nudging
aside some top-end PCs and intruding on the domain of the mainframe. The
machine that made the mid-range is IBM's AS400. Depending on the
configuration, it can cost between Pounds 6,000 and Pounds 1m. Since June
1988 IBM has shipped well over 200,000 systems worldwide.
Northern Foods owns Express Dairies and supplies quality food to Marks &
Spencer and other retailers. It has a Pounds 2bn turnover and manages
production across 65 operating companies using 75 AS400 machines. They have
replaced a fleet of IBM minis and a mix of mainframes from ICL and Digital
Equipment.
Mr Alan Earnshaw is Northern Foods' Hull-based IT director. He says the move
to mid-range computing has proved highly cost-effective. 'The mid-range idea
suits Northern Foods' style. We're a highly decentralised organisation. With
its high ease of use, the AS400 requires very few technical staff.'
Workstations spread access to the system across the site, running a whole
raft of stock control applications while Electronic Data Interchange ensures
rapid and frequent exchange of data with customers and suppliers.
The change in staffing requirements has been dramatic. Mr Earnshaw
characterises the standard local system manager as the site accountant. The
mid-range box is happy in an office. A mainframe operates in a purpose-built
computer room with dedicated support staff.
With its diversity of business software, distributed workstations and
extensive data links to third parties, Northern Foods typifies the mid-range
user. It also highlights the decline of the mainframe. 'Had there been no
mid-range option we would be running several mainframes and be faced with a
different order of IT costs,' says Mr Earnshaw.
IBM's critics have made much of the declining market for mainframes. The
largest computer company in the world grew fat on dominance of the mainframe
market only to see revenues undercut by the latest generation of systems.
IBM's own success with the AS400 is a measure of the demand for cheaper and
more practical processing power rather than a case of a manufacturer
undermining its own market.
There will always be a place for the mainframe. Processing vast arrays of
statistics or hosting huge specialist programs such as airline reservation
systems will continue to require a mainframe processor. But industrial
management means buying in off-the-shelf software and a continuous
throughput of factory data. The mid-range computer is designed with this
function in mind. In particular, its operating system is written to host the
very programs that business users find most practical.
The London International Group, the large medical equipment to
film-processing concern, has followed the downsizing path, dispensing with
IBM mainframes in favour of AS400s. But taking this plunge was not easy. Mr
Pratt, in charge of London International's IT, was involved in writing its
custom-built mainframe software application.
A mid-range program was installed from an external software house. 'There
was over 10 years worth of loyalty to that software on the mainframe. We had
to tell the end-user to change the system he was used to working with.' Mr
Pratt still says the move was well worth this disruption. Without the
hideously complicated mainframe operating system to worry about he can shop
around for business software packages to meet emerging requirements. 'Now we
don't spend time designing software inhouse we can concentrate on
implementing the right system, not trying to develop it ourselves.'
The mid-range threatens more than large hardware. It has also decimated one
species of employee. Mr Pratt notes the demise of the systems programmers
who kept mainframe applications functioning. 'They were skilled boffins,
very peculiar animals.' They may be missed for the colour they added to
computing, but the cost of finding and retaining their esoteric skills was
an incentive to change IT purchasing policy.
The march of the mid-range system seems unstoppable. But while the mainframe
will always be around to cater for some needs, so the term mini-computer is
still applied to small business computing. Hewlett-Packard splits its HP9000
range between minis (Pounds 20-100,000) and mid-range systems (Pounds
150,000-1m). The contemporary mini delivers much more power than its
predecessors, but HP finds it useful to preserve the term to define user
communities.
If specialist programmers have been a casualty of the mid-range revolution,
purchasers have felt the benefit. Taking the processing power from an
air-cooled computer room can only bring it closer to the business customer's
real needs.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930526

