FT933-10206

FT  05 AUG 93 / Leading Article: The choice over Sarajevo


AT ALMOST every turn during the grisly demise of Bosnia-Hercegovina, the
governments of the US and the European Community have somehow contrived to
make a desperate situation worse. By prematurely recognising a state which
did not enjoy the support of many of its own citizens, they helped to
precipitate the civil war. By issuing threats against the Serbian
aggressors, they raised hopes among the mainly Moslem victims; by failing to
carry out those threats, they further emboldened the aggressors. In the
absence of effective western pressure on the Serbs and Croats the
international mediators have merely assisted in Bosnia's dismemberment.
Now, unless the latest flurry of international concern produces radically
different results, the final humiliation seems to be at hand. In Bosnia
itself, the fighting rages as fiercely as ever with UN humanitarian troops
looking impotently on. In Geneva, EC and UN mediators play midwives to the
partition of Bosnia into ethnic mini-states and press the Moslems formally
to accept their defeat. Worst of all, in Sarajevo, defeat for the Moslems
looks like turning into disaster as the Serbs complete a ring of artillery
on strategic heights round the capital.
And what is the west's response? More meetings, which may - provided command
structures and objectives can be agreed - result in air strikes against the
Serbs. Small wonder that President Milosevic and his Bosnian proxies seem
unconcerned.
There is, in fact, at least a possibility that Tuesday's Nato agreement  -
under heavy US pressure - to resort to air strikes unless the Serbs stop
their 'strangulation' of Sarajevo, will produce results. America's allies
having swallowed their reservations about the risks to their ground troops
and agreed to so explicit a threat, it is hard to see how they can avoid
following through.
The question remains: what can air strikes on their own be expected to
achieve? The Bosnian conflict, as much as any war, is about control and
denial of territory; it is fought on the ground, with infantry, tanks and
artillery. Air power may be of some use as a political signal, but its
influence on the actual fighting will be marginal at best unless it forms
part of a more carefully thought-out overall strategy for the defence of
Sarajevo. Given that the Clinton administration has refused to deploy ground
forces in Bosnia, it is ill-qualified to take the lead in elaborating such a
strategy. Those who do have troops in situ under the UN flag must thus
urgently start work on one themselves.
To demand this is simply to ask that western countries fulfil their own
pledge to create, and defend, 'safe areas' for the Moslems and prevent
Serbia and Croatia from completely carving up Bosnia between them. If
Sarajevo falls, that pledge, like all the others, will be exposed; two-way
partition will be complete; and Europe east as well as west will be faced
with an increasing influx of uprooted, stateless, desperate people. It is a
tragedy that must be prevented.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930805

