FT932-6708

FT  27 MAY 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): An emerging taste
for strategic alliances - An alternative to takeovers


   By TIM DICKSON


In the absence of any new wave of cross-border takeovers, are joint ventures
and other strategic alliances a better means of penetrating new markets?
Many European businesses seem to think so.
The absolute number of such deals fell last year, which is not surprising in
the depths of recession.
More significant perhaps is the position of joint ventures and strategic
alliances relative to the mergers and acquisitions arena. Figures from IFR
Securities Data and Amdata show that M&A deals comfortably outpaced
alliances by more than six to one in 1990. But in the first four months of
this year the ratio had fallen to less than three to one.
That picture is confirmed in a report just published by the Conference
Board*, which indicates the 'high degree' of interest in joint ventures and
strategic alliances among respondents polled in a recent survey of top
European managers. It is also endorsed by advisers such as Price Waterhouse,
recently appointed to manage a UK government programme intended to help
small and medium-sized UK companies to establish closer links with US
businesses.
PW's John Peacock says: 'Joint ventures and strategic alliances have become
an increasingly popular way of developing new products and entering new
markets, often at a somewhat lower capital cost than investing directly or
by acquisition'.
Strategic alliances - distinct from mergers in that both sides retain their
separate identities - can take many different forms, and meet different
objectives. Take the late 1991 joint venture between Coors of the US and
Scottish & Newcastle, the UK regional brewer, specifically to market and to
promote Coors' Extra Gold premium lager in the UK.
From S & N's point of view, the licencing and distribution agreement added a
further brand to its portfolio of premium lager, allowing marketing and
promotion costs to be shared.
For Coors, the attraction was immediate, low-cost access to a new
geographical market via a proven distribution network.
Unilever has traditionally preferred to have full control of its businesses.
In the last year, however, the Anglo-Dutch group has formed a joint venture
with PepsiCo, the US soft drinks and snacks group, to sell canned iced tea
and with France's BSN to develop and market products combining ice cream and
yoghurt. An attraction for Unilever, which will have operational control,
was the chance to respond quickly to demand from US consumers.
Both the Unilever deals, and the 50:50 joint venture between General Mills
and Nestle to use the combined potential of their brands to develop a ready
to eat breakfast market, are offensive moves intended to create businesses
from scratch and build on the complementary strengths of acknowledged
industry leaders.
By contrast the decision by Pepsico and General Mills to merge their
existing European snack food operations - excluding the UK - in a 60:40
joint venture is a defensive move by two relatively weak players explicitly
limited to one region.
Elsewhere, the sale to Bell Canada of a minority shareholding in Cable &
Wireless's Mercury telecoms subsidiary shows how different objectives can be
met.
For C & W, the deal served to crystallise the value of Mercury into its
share price and reduced its gearing. From Mercury's point of view, it opened
a closer relationship with Bell's UK cable TV operators and access to
marketing and technology skills and a retail distribution network. For Bell
Canada, the deal not only provided a way into a new market, but offered
competitive market experience for a company faced with the ending of its
monopoly in telecom services.
The 50:50 joint venture between Wessex Water, one of the smaller UK
privatised water companies, and Waste Management of the US, also reveals
different agendas. Wessex was keen to diversify from its price-regulated
core water business into the waste management field. The deal leaves it
virtually bid-proof (having made its contribution via the issue of shares to
its partner). Waste Management has access to a new geographical market.
The apparent enthusiasm for strategic alliances goes against the grain of
executives trained to accept full responsibility for what they do. Many
fail, despite the amount of management time devoted to them.
It is too early to judge the recent crop of ventures. But the Conference
Board's report makes a useful contribution in this regard. Based on many
more established cases and also on new information from the European survey,
it seeks to set guidelines for successful alliance management. Among the
recommendations, the author suggests that participants should:
Conduct a cost/benefit analysis of favourable and unfavourable conditions.
Where possible, start an alliance small and build it up on trust.
Identify and address conflicts about activities critical to success,
deadlines, or government regulations.
Generate widespread internal political support.
Place operating managers on the negotiating team.
Send divisive topics to higher-level negotiation groups.
Structure the alliance with its own board of directors to speed the approval
process.
Not require the alliance to prepare two sets of financial control reporting
systems, one for each partner.
Stay alert to early signs of termination: inflexibility in adapting
operating procedures; combative negotiation style; conflict about management
appointments; a reluctance to re-invest.
In the termination process, determine what must be accomplished in order to
allow the remaining partner to keep the former joint activity going.
*Strategic Alliances: Guidelines for Successful Management. Available from
Avenue Louise 207, Box 5, B-1050, Brussels. Tel(32) 2 640 6240. Price for
associates Dollars 20, non-associates Dollars 80.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930527

