FT932-13374

FT  23 APR 93 / Institutions force management change at Alexon Group


   By ROLAND RUDD


THREE of Alexon Group's biggest institutional shareholders yesterday secured
the removal of the chairman and chief operating officers at the womenswear
retailer.
Mr Lawrence Snyder stepped down as chairman and Ms Ruth Henderson and Mr
Peter Ridsdale resigned as joint chief operating officers. The shares rose
6p to 89p.
The three executives were confronted with the demand for their resignation
48 hours earlier.
Mr John Sadler, a former finance director of the John Lewis Partnership was
appointed non-executive chairman and Mr John Osborn, a former director of
Sears took over as chief executive.
Gartmore Pension Fund Managers, Scottish Amicable Investment Managers and
Mercury Asset Management took the usual step of forcing a change of
management after last month's dismal results.
Alexon lost nearly Pounds 1m before tax last year and passed its final
dividend. It had made an Pounds 11.3m profit in the previous year.
At its peak Alexon's shares touched 444p since its demerger from Claremont
Garments (Holdings), the Marks and Spencer supplier in July 1991.
Earlier in the year Alexon stripped Ms Henderson of her chief executive's
title and promoted Mr Ridsdale, who had come from the Burton Group in
September 1991.
But the three big institutions told the group's adviser, Schroders, and its
two non-executives, Mr David Hewitt and Mr Brian North, that it would not
subscribe to any rights issue without wholesale board changes. With net debt
of Pounds 23m one of the group's main options to reduce its borrowings was
to tap its shareholders for cash.
The new management is expected to speed up the repositioning of the Dash
leisure wear chain, which used to account for the majority of the group's
profits. It is planning to replace tracksuits with more co-ordinated
leggings, knitwear and casual jackets.
Mr David Cohen remains as finance director. He has been involved in
renegotiating the group's banking facilities after Alexon breached its
covenants.
Mr Patrick Cooper, a director of Goode Durrant, an industrial conglomerate,
has joined the board as a non-executive director.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930423

