FT933-12559

FT  23 JUL 93 / Arts: Fedora made for comfort - Bregenz Festival


   By DAVID MURRAY


Each summer Bregenz hosts an outdoor opera, with a spectacular lakeside
setting, and an indoor one in the Festspielhaus. As I write, it is
touch-and-go whether the opening of Verdi's Nabucco will be rained off the
lake and into the hall; but at least the premiere of Giordano's Fedora was
safe and comfortable.
Too comfortable, perhaps, in Jonathan Miller's production, for Giordano's
brand of Italian verismo. His first Fedora, Gemma Bellincioni, was after all
the fiery Santuzza of the original Cavalleria rusticana; and his opera was
based on a Sardou play (like Tosca) in which Sarah Bernhardt had starred.
Giordano hoped to match the success of his Andrea Chenier (1896), though
this time without the mob scenes. Again there is revolution in the air, but
mostly at a distance: after the rich Russian princess Fedora finds her
fiance murdered in St. Petersburg, the later spyings and betrayals are set
in Paris and the Swiss Oberland.
Miller's style of verismo is all genteel decorum - rather nicely observed,
but in need of hyper-emotional principals to suggest tormented inner lives.
Though Mara Zampieri's Fedora sings with unforced eloquence, matronly
concern is what she mostly conveys here; the role surely predicates more
volatility and voracious possessiveness. From Sergey Larin's Count Loris,
first her prey and then her lover too, we get ringing delivery, unarguably
good to hear, and plain, blunt acting. Alfonso Antoniozzi's cultivated
baritone is well found for the French diplomat De Siriex. Young Mary Mills
makes a fetching Countess Olga, the second soprano, a romantic soubrette
with daring taste in period costumes.
As her transient Polish lover Lazinski, Markus Schirmer is not required to
sing, but plays an artistic piano. Chopin pastiche, in a opera crammed with
pastiches - folk-Russian, French, even an offstage Savoyard song with
accordion and cowbells for the denouement in the Oberland (whither Giordano
transferred it: Sardou had kept it in Paris). Tobias Hoheisel's high, airy
sets, basically screens and scrim, are cleverly lit by Paul Pyant. However,
their platform base is set some way back, so none of the singers can
electrify the audience from footlights-distance - an unfair deprivation in
verismo opera.
The conductor Fabio Luisi is stylish and tender with the score, and in later
performances should find the extra thrust needed to buoy up his principals.
The Vienna Symphony is only moderately good at sounding Italian: as in
Catalani's La Wally a couple of festivals ago, the lively and picturesque
music comes off better than candid pathos or anguish. Still, the ear of
faith will certainly find and treasure those qualities in the luscious
melodies. Agnostics may not have their withers wrung.
Co-production with the Vienna State Opera. More performances until August 5.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930723

