FT932-6807

FT  27 MAY 93 / Kohl may axe welfare benefits


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


THE GERMAN government is considering politically explosive cuts in welfare
payments such as unemployment benefit, and a new delay in the German
government's move to Berlin, because of the need to make drastic savings in
its budget.
Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, has confirmed that the stormy issue of
when and how the government moves to Berlin is under question once again, as
he seeks to cut DM20bn (Pounds 7.9bn) a year out of his spending plans for
the next three years.
The government is considering delaying the start of any new government
buildings in Berlin to 2000, instead of 1994 as planned.
He is also putting back on the agenda a series of social spending cuts
furiously opposed by the opposition Social Democrats and trade unions.
The plan is to freeze most spending next year. This could mean no pay rises
for civil servants.
Other targets on the hit list - needed just to keep the central government
budget deficit down to DM70bn a year - include further cuts in defence
spending, transport (including rail reform plans) and subsidies for German
emigrants returning from Russia and eastern Europe.
Top of the cuts is unemployment benefit, with a reduction of 3 per cent
proposed. That would save DM3bn a year. A similar cut in support for workers
undergoing retraining - many of them in the former East Germany - would save
another DM2bn.
An increase in unemployment insurance contributions by 0.5 per cent, instead
of a planned decrease, could bring in an extra DM8.4bn a year.
The threatened delay in the move to Berlin has already unleashed a
predictable backlash from the pro-Berlin lobby, fearful that the delay could
become indefinite.
Yet given the narrow parliamentary majority for the move in the first place,
it could prove a popular compromise.
Cuts in social spending are acutely sensitive, and could founder on the
Social Democrats' majority in the upper house, the Bundesrat.
Other possible savings include postponing increases in student grants and
cutting the allowance for second children.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who is throwing his weight behind the savings plan,
has promised that pensions benefits will not be affected. But it is thought
pensions contributions will have to go up in 1994, by as much as 2
percentage points.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930527

