FT932-13437

FT  23 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Warning on social chapter


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


MR Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, gave a new warning last night that
Britain's competitiveness would be endangered if the government's refusal to
accede to the social chapter of the Maastricht treaty was overturned by the
Commons.
He refused to speculate about the government's response to such an
eventuality when agreeing that MPs should have a separate vote on the
principle of the social chapter before the bill enacting the treaty in UK
law takes effect.
Mr George Robertson, Labour's spokesman on Europe, hailed the acceptance of
a new clause providing for the separate vote as marking another 'government
surrender' during the passage of the Maastricht legislation.
He claimed that as a result a 'time-bomb was ticking away' under the
government.
Mr Robertson explained that Labour would use the opportunity provided by the
separate vote to ask the House to instruct the government not to ratify the
Maastricht treaty unless it agreed to accept the social chapter.
He said the government would not be able to 'wriggle away' from such a
challenge, and that those Conservative Euro-sceptics who had argued that the
Maastricht treaty was unacceptable with or without the social chapter, would
find themselves on the spot.
Mr Hurd said the government had agreed to the separate vote on the principle
of the social chapter because it believed its view would prevail.
Refusing to answer hypothetical questions about the government's attitude in
the event of the result going the other way he said 'we will take one step
at a time'.
In the course of a series of clashes with Tory Euro-sceptics, Mr Hurd
repudiated the view of Sir Teddy Taylor, Conservative MP for Southend East,
that Britain could be forced by her EC partners to adopt burdensome health
and safety and other provisions even if it remained outside the social
chapter.
The foreign secretary insisted that Britain would resist such attempts and,
if necessary, challenge them in the European Court of Justice.
He stressed that the social chapter would 'substantially enlarge the risks'
and by adding to the costs of commerce and industry make it still more
difficult for Britain to compete with overseas countries, particularly
Taiwan and South Korea.
Mr Hurd maintained that acceptance of the social chapter would be like a
householder who had already been burgled deciding to opt for an open door
with a welcome mat.
Mr Robertson said the people of Britain were entitled to the rights and
protection which the social chapter provided.
In the final speech from the Labour front bench Ms Joyce Quin complained
that the foreign secretary had 'skated over' the implications of a
government defeat on the social chapter.
The committee stage, which occupied 163 hours extended over 23 days and
included contributions by 161 MPs, was concluded.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930423

