FT932-44

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (5): Hopes for a modest recovery - After a
tough budget, Robert Graham analyses the economic slowdown


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


THE CIAMPI government is hoping the economy will begin to shake off
recession in the last quarter of the year, and will witness a modest
recovery in 1994. Such an assumption could be optimistic.
With the economies of Italy's main partners sluggish, there are limits on
the advantage exporters can exploit from a heavily devalued lira. At home,
the climate will be strongly influenced by the continued need for a tough
adjustment programme to remain in force throughout 1994 to reduce the public
sector deficit to the levels of its EC partners. This year's budget has been
one of the toughest in the post-war era, depressing domestic demand and
forcing the first drop in private consumption in 40 years.
Growth during the current year is unlikely to be more than 0.3 per cent.
This compares with 0.9 per cent in 1991. The economy formally entered
recession in the third quarter of 1992. Nevertheless, the slowdown had been
in evidence since late 1991.
The extent of the slowdown was masked by the way in which public spending
was boosted in the first half of 1992 for electoral reasons. This spending
merely delayed the arrival of recession which had already hit Italy's main
trading partners. For a while Italians even had the illusion their economy
might be able to ride out what promised to a dip in the production cycle.
But such an illusion underestimated the accumulated size of the public
sector deficit, which by last year had reached more than 10.5 per cent of
GDP. The currency crisis of last September, which savaged Italy's reserves
and forced the lira to float outside the European Monetary System (EMS),
inculcated a sense of reality among the politicians.
As a result the Amato government was able to force through a tough 1993
budget and an accompanying series of structural reforms. The budget sought
to raise L93,000bn in extra revenues and spending cuts to hold the public
sector deficit down to L150,000bn. The new fiscal measures included
increased property taxes, stamp duties, and a generous tax amnesty to recoup
unpaid taxes over the previous five years. The spending cuts covered
limiting public sector wages to below inflation and ceilings on local
government transfers.
The Amato government also introduced the concept of a 'minimum' tax in
arguably the first serious attempt to crack down on tax evasion. The finance
ministry drew up notional average earnings for specific jobs and then
applied tax demands on such a notional base - a move intended to catch
especially those in the professions who have been notorious for
under-declaring their incomes.
The other novelty in 1993 budget was the structural reforms which provide
for savings in subsequent years on a cumulative basis. These reforms covered
changes in the generous system of pensions, a shake-up of the national
health, tighter controls over government transfers to the regions and local
authorities, and reform of the civil service.
Pensions in particular have come to be a huge burden on the budget. If the
system had been left unchanged, the entire budget threatened to be taken up
with covering pension payments in under 30 years. The reforms raise
gradually the retirement age from 55 to 60 for women and from 60 to 65 for
men. Limits are also placed on the size of benefits available to public
sector employees.
The health system is also in the process of being changed, with hospitals
placed under professional management, the greater availability of private
medicine, and medicines being no longer free for all on prescription. These
changes in the nature of the welfare state should bring significant
long-term savings, although on the pensions side future governments may have
to introduce even more restrictive legislation.
Public finances should also be helped by allowing greater autonomy to local
authorities to raise revenue and to control expenditure. Until this year
local authorities simply received transfers from the central government
without any sanction for over-spending or premium for good management. Now
local authorities will have their central government transfers capped but
they will be able to raise a share of property taxes, impose their own car
taxes and have at their disposal several other fiscal devices. This, coupled
with tight control over new hirings in the civil service, and greater job
accountability in the public sector, should provide savings.
Despite these positive attempts to introduce structural change, instead of
mere temporary palliatives, the budget deficit remains difficult to control.
As a result of the recession the tax take has declined, eroding the chances
of sustaining a primary surplus without corrective measures. Recession also
puts pressure on the government to expand unemployment benefits or spend on
job creation. Already the Ciampi government has been obliged to carry out a
mini-budget in mid-May (foreshadowed by its predecessors) raising L12,500bn
in new taxes and spending cuts. The mini-budget is still being discussed and
could undergo some modification - although the overall amount to be raised
will not be changed.
The public sector deficit should thus be held down to L155,000bn, in line
with promises made to the EC earlier in the year when an ECU8bn loan was
contracted. But the government will have to find a further L45,000bn or more
in the 1994 budget. Only with such a continued adjustment can spending be
controlled and the deficit gradually rolled back towards the 1994 target of
8.4 per cent of GDP.
If interest rates can be reduced, the pressure will be further alleviated.
At present interest on the debt is almost equivalent to the budget deficit;
while the debt itself is more than 104 per cent of GDP, well above the 60
per cent ceiling set in the Maastricht Treaty criteria. Each one percentage
point movement in interest rates adds or detracts more than L13,000bn in a
full year to debt service.
Following Italy's exit from the EMS in September last year, the Bank of
Italy has been able to steadily reduce the discount rate. From the September
crisis high of 15 per cent, it was down to 10 per cent by mid-June, and
commercial rates have also fallen accordingly. However, real rates remain
high in European terms since inflation is running at just over 4 per cent on
an annual basis. The authorities are still caught in the dilemma of having
to retain interest rates attractively high to encourage purchasers of
treasury bills which finance the huge debt.
So far inflation appears to have been kept under control. The heavy
devaluation against the dollar and D-Mark, the main traded currencies,
occurred at a time of depressed domestic demand and importers have kept
prices down. But it is questionable how long the economy can remain immune
from the effects of a 25 per cent devaluation. Economists predict that
year-end inflation could be running at around 5.7 per cent on an annualised
basis.
Manufactures have been able to hold prices down because they have cut
margins and wage costs have been almost two percentage points below
inflation. The latter has been due to a pact between the unions, employers
and government last July ending inflation-indexed pay (the so-called scala
mobile). The continuance of such a pact will be vital to domestic costs and
inflationary pressures as a whole.
The agreement is due to be renewed at the latest by next month. The unions
are seeking a limited re-introduction of wage indexation; but in the end
they will play job security above wages. Over the past year some 200,000
jobs have been lost in industry and unemployment as a whole has risen to
more than 10.5 per cent of the workforce. This understates the picture since
a large number of workers in industry are covered by temporary lay-off
schemes, funded mainly by the government. As these schemes exhaust their
two-year statutory limits, the jobless could rise to more than 12 per cent
by 1994.
The bright spot in the economy has undoubtedly been the devaluation induced
surge in exports. Italian industry has been able to compensate at least in
part for declining domestic demand through an aggressive export performance.
Overall exports are expected to increase by 7 per cent in real terms this
year, perhaps more; while imports are projected to decline by 1.5 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

930630

