FT931-3970

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (10): Well placed to ride out
downturn - Not only is the national economy a stable, low-inflationary
environment but the Dutch property market is funded by equity instead of
bank debt / The Netherlands


   By CHRISTINE MOIR


   EACH of the four cities which comprise the Randstad


The Hague, Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Utrecht - has a big urban redevelopment
scheme either planned or under way in the midst of recession. Some of them
have better prospects than others.
In the capital, The Hague, city planners are trying to reverse the
decentralisation policies of the past two decades. As part of an ambitious
redevelopment scheme around the Central Station, which will include a new
town hall, they plan to rejuvenate rundown buildings in the central core to
meet what is estimated to be 100,000 sq m of unsatisfied demand for quality
space.
Unfortunately, no big buildings are yet available, but the plan will gain
strength from the decision to re-centralise government and municipality
departments. It remains to be seen, however, whether unsatisfied private
sector businesses, which drifted out to places such as Zoetermeer, will be
attracted back in.
The Dutch have a saying: 'In The Hague they just talk. In Amsterdam they
agonise. Rotterdamers get on with the job'. Rotterdam has the only true
central business district of any Dutch city. Mr Thom Dijksman, who heads
Jones Lang Wootton's Dutch office, pays tribute to its well-ordered street
grid and its high-rise, high-quality modern buildings. Thus it is no
surprise to find Rotterdam pressing ahead with its version of London's
Docklands development, Kop van Zuid.
On January 30, the city signed a contract with Laing Management of the UK,
SAE of France and MBO, the property arm of the Dutch Internationale
Nederlanden Group (ING), for a feasibility study for Wilhamenapier,
Rotterdam's planned version of London's Canary Wharf. This could provide as
much as 400,000 sq m of office space plus 1,000 apartments and shops on the
south side of the river directly across from the city centre and with good
views of it, according to Mr Dijksman. Advisers to the Wilhamenapier joint
venture are Jones Lang Wootton, Ove Arup and Sir Norman Foster.
Says Mr Dijksman: 'The money is there, the will is there. A new bridge will
be completed within two years. New metro stops are agreed. The area will
house the Court of Justice and provide a new HQ for the port authority.'
Utrecht, the smallest of the four cities, is developing as a niche centre
for the electronics industry. Last month, for example, IBM began building a
new 25,000 sq m training centre in the town, at a time when it is
contracting savagely elsewhere in the world.
Development patterns in the town therefore reflect the needs of companies
such as Digital for stand-alone headquarters on which they can impose their
own corporate image. As a result, relations between the private and public
sector are good.
The same cannot be said in Amsterdam where the private sector is far from
convinced of the merits of the municipality's favoured expansion zone.
Traditionally, ever since business exploded out of the historic canal zone
which is now the museum district of Amsterdam, the city has expanded
southwards. Now the municipality wants to balance that trend with a push to
the north east. It has identified a site, Ij-oevers, on the banks of the
River Ij, and taken on ING as a 50 per cent partner.
But the private sector is not convinced. 'A municipality cannot create a
prime location by decree' is one of the dismissive sayings going the rounds.
The area is none too prepossessing and the plans so ambitious that even the
presence of the port authority and the Chamber of Commerce may not prove a
sufficient magnet.
ING is thought by some merely to be playing a spoiler's game. It refuses to
give up its partnership rights yet only last month again coyly declined to
start work on a plan it deemed 'unviable.'
Amsterdam also has a second development zone in the north at Sloterdijk,
where the municipality is promoting a teleport and B-grade business space
for tenants such as unions or the print works of Elsevier-Reed. But the real
dynamism - as always - is in the south.
Outside the Zuid area and the south east zone with its magnet World Trade
Towers, the area around Schiphol Airport continues to buzz with activity
despite weak rental patterns and the absence of institutional investment
interest elsewhere.
A number of separate developments are under way in and around Hoofddorp,
including a business park by Chipshol Forward, one of the few public
companies confident that a share placing in February would find
institutional takers.
Chipshol is a neat neologism derived from Schiphol (to stress the airport
connection) and microchip. It plans to become Amsterdam's Silicon Valley,
expanding in synch with the airport (which is doubling its capacity) and the
development of new technologies.
Elsewhere, says Mr Glen Cowan, JLW's head of research and consultancy,
investment activity is close to zero. The problems of international
investors, such as the Swedes and Japanese, need no rehearsing.
Dutch investors have also been scorched in ventures abroad.
But Mr Cowan believes the revival has begun. In late February, Rodamco
announced a big retail joint venture in Australia. Back home, Mr Cowan also
detects stirrings in the retail market and he believes drooping bond yields
will soon entice investors back into modern offices with sound covenants.
Meanwhile, the Dutch property market is well placed to ride out the
downturn. Not only is the national economy a stable, low-inflationary
environment, its property market - more than 90 per cent institutional  - is
funded by equity not bank debt.
And, as a further sweetener, the authorities' commitment to the environment
is promoting a concentration of development in the inner ring of the four
main conurbations - just where rents can be maximised.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

930312

