FT934-8843

FT  13 NOV 93 / Unlucky or unwise?: The troubles at Euro Disney


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER and JOHN RIDDING


IS EURO Disney going to ground Dumbo the Flying Elephant, lock the door to
Sleeping Beauty's Castle and abandon its theme park to rodents less cuddly
than its current presiding mouse?
The closure of Euro Disney looks unlikely, despite the announcement this
week of a net loss of FFr5.3bn (Pounds 600m) for the year to September 30.
Too much money and prestige have been invested in the theme park for it to
close. The embarrassment to the French state would be enormous. Bringing
Euro Disney to its site east of Paris, rather than to Barcelona or London's
Docklands, was an all-party achievement.
The planning and building of Euro Disney spanned the periods in office of
one Conservative prime minister, Mr Jacques Chirac, and three Socialists -
Mr Laurent Fabius, Mr Michel Rocard and Mrs Edith Cresson.
The employment consequences of closure would be severe, adding 10,000
jobless to the 3.2m already unemployed in France.
The embarrassment would be no less severe for Walt Disney, which has a 49
per cent stake in the park. It was the strength of Disney's management and
marketing reputation which convinced many investors and lenders that the
park could not fail. US followers of the company flicked aside any European
doubts.
The moment Euro Disney's gates opened, its boosters said, visitors would be
overwhelmed by the professionalism and artistry of it all. Europeans would
flock to the park; its share price would soar. Says one analyst: 'I wonder
what they were all on. I'd like to smoke some.'
Nor would closure solve the problems of the French banks and financial
institutions, including the Caisse des Depots, the state investment arm,
which are owed the bulk of Euro Disney's FFr21bn debt. If the park were to
close, they would lose it all; there would be few buyers for six hotels 32km
east of Paris.
A fairground operator might like to run some of the rides for day trippers
from the capital, but they would be unlikely to generate the cash to provide
the banks with any reasonable return. Ripping the rides off their moorings
and selling them to operators elsewhere would not make much of a dent in the
debt either.
Receivership is also difficult to envisage. The receivers would have to find
an operator to run the park. There is probably only one company with the
expertise to run an amusement park the size of Euro Disney: Walt Disney.
Disney would have to be paid to run the park, of course, which shareholders
and creditors might find difficult to take.
Despite the depth of the park's financial crisis, Euro Disney, its creditors
and France appear to be stuck with one another.
Euro Disney and its creditors will attempt to construct a financial
restructuring between now and next spring. Analysts expect the period to be
marked by brinkmanship. Walt Disney has already issued a veiled threat that
it will refuse to provide any more money. It said this week that it had
'agreed to help fund Euro Disney for a limited period.' The banks might
start speculating about receivership.
In the end, analysts expect an agreement to be struck. It might involve a
rights issue, a debt for equity swap or further investment by Walt Disney.
Whatever the outcome, all sides will be stuck with the question of what they
do next. Euro Disney's management has already taken some steps to improve
the park's attractiveness to visitors. Last month it said it was cutting its
winter hotel prices. As from January, a family of four will be able to stay
in the Santa Fe, the cheapest hotel, for FFr300 rather than FFr375. Earlier
this year, the company said it would cut winter admission prices by 30 per
cent.
Euro Disney frequently points out how unlucky it has been since it opened in
April last year. Europe has been blighted by recession; the French franc has
been strong, deterring visitors from the UK and Italy. If the recession has
been the full cause of Euro Disney's problems, the financial restructuring
only has to carry the park forward to more clement economic times.
Only when Europeans begin spending freely again, will investors learn the
answer to a more uncomfortable question: was the whole idea misconceived?
Will Euro Disney fail to recover even when other European companies do?
There were some who argued before the opening that the park was a mistake.
They focused on culture and the weather. The park does feel as if it is in
the wrong place. Why build a fake castle on a continent full of real
castles? Where is the thrill in a simulated flight over Big Ben when
millions of package tourists routinely fly in and out of London? Why, in
short, bring a theme park to a continent which is already a theme park?
Consumers do not have to share French intellectuals' objection to US culture
to avoid Euro Disney. They merely have to feel they would prefer the real
thing - at the Disney park in Florida. Florida does appear to be violent,
but its theme park is no more expensive per night than Euro Disney and the
sun shines.
The problem is not that visitors are put off Euro Disney by the Parisian
weather; many of the attractions are covered. The difficulty is that they do
not see Euro Disney as the place to take their annual holiday, given the
sunny alternatives. Too many visitors are day-trippers. Hotel occupancy
averages only 55 per cent.
It might have been a good idea for Disney to build the park without hotels,
or with fewer hotels. Its ambitions were bigger than that; those who were
convinced by them might be living with the consequences for many years to
come.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931113

