FT934-11436

FT  01 NOV 93 / Funds seek to fend off tax squeeze


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


ONE OF the UK's largest pension-fund managers has written to its clients
urging them to lobby the government against any plans to tax dividend income
earned by pension schemes.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd Investment Management, with Pounds 18bn in UK pension
fund assets under management and about 250 UK corporate pension-fund
clients, is urging its clients and the largest companies it invests in to
press the government not to tax pension schemes further.
'A chancellor short of revenue could be tempted to tax pension funds a
second time,' Mr Alan Rubenstein, director of BZW Investment Management said
in a letter sent late last week.
In the March Budget, Mr Norman Lamont, then chancellor, reduced to 20 per
cent from 25 per cent the amount of advance corporation tax paid on
dividends which pension schemes could reclaim from the Treasury.
The effect of the tax change has cut income for pension schemes by about
Pounds 600m a year, equivalent to a reduction of 6.25 per cent in the income
earned on UK corporate equities. The change has forced several companies,
including British Telecommunications, to make substantial increases to their
pension schemes or to end contributions holidays.
The change took the pensions industry and employers by surprise. The
National Association of Pension Funds, the trade association, has since been
seeking assurances that there will be no further taxes on pension schemes.
BZW Investment Management and several accountancy firms, including Price
Waterhouse, believe that Mr Clarke may abolish the tax refund which pension
schemes earn on ordinary UK share dividends.
Mr Rubenstein said he believed the chancellor would propose a two-stage
abolition, reducing the tax credit next year to 10 per cent from the present
20 per cent, following with a complete abolition the next year.
Mr Rubenstein said a cut to 10 per cent would deprive pension schemes of
Pounds 1.5bn in income, equal to a reduction in their dividend income on UK
shares of 12 per cent.
If investors decided to value share prices in line with the present dividend
yield on shares, it would wipe roughly 300 points off the FT-SE 100 stock
index, he added.
In his letter Mr Rubenstein points out: 'Many companies, perhaps yours
included, would then have to question their support for final salary pension
schemes and the open-ended commitment this entails.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931101

