FT932-316

FT  29 JUN 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar/DM rally falters


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE DOLLAR moved down sharply against the D-Mark in European trading
yesterday after earlier failing to break through the DM1.72 level, writes
James Blitz.
At the start of London trading, the US currency was boosted by suggestions
that the Bundesbank might ease its official interest rates this week. Mr
Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank's Deputy President, said that the DM1.70
level was an appropriate level for the dollar/D-Mark exchange rate and that
developments concerning the German budget deficit could provide more room
for lower interest rates.
These developments helped push the dollar up to a high of DM1.7180, but it
drifted back to a close of DM1.7000, down a net 0.20 pfennigs on the day.
Technical resistance at DM1.72 was one reason for the dollar's failure to
advance. Compounding this was a belief that Friday's non-farm payroll figure
for June may come out somewhat weaker than expected.
Last week's higher-than- expected weekly jobless claims figures and poor
durable goods figures have forced some economists to pare back their
expectations for the net payroll number to plus 25,000.
Mr Steve Hannah, a director at IBJ International in London, believes that US
economic weakness may continue to undermine the dollar. 'The dollar will
regain ground,' he said, 'but there is not enough substance in the price to
say that we have definitely pierced the DM1.70 level.'
The dollar's performance against the yen was even less robust as dealers
took the view that next week's G7 summit in Tokyo will see growing pressure
on the Japanese authorities to reduce their huge trade surplus.
Dealers believe that the US government has adopted a policy of dollar
depreciation in an attempt to reduce its trade deficit with Japan. The
current political crisis in Japan will ensure that Tokyo finds it
particularly hard to respond to US pressures with a concrete trade
agreement.
In London, the yen closed unchanged yesterday at Y106.05.
Sterling gained sharply against both the D-Mark and the dollar yesterday
after a report from IDEA, the market analysts, suggested that the pound
would be one of the strongest currencies in the coming quarter.
The pound surged more than 1 1/2 pfennigs against the D-Mark at the start of
London trading, to peak at DM1.5470, before being sold off for the rest of
the day. But it still closed at DM2.5375, up 2 1/4 pfennigs on the day.
Sterling was much stronger against the dollar, closing at Dollars 1.4930
from a previous Dollars 1.4780.
On its trade weighted index, which measures the pound against a basket of
currencies, sterling closed some 0.8 percentage points higher at 80.3.
Dealers said there was very active buying of the UK currency in the early
London morning.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930629

