FT934-11310

FT  02 NOV 93 / Romanian 'pyramid' suspends payments


   By REUTER


   BUCHAREST


A PYRAMID investment company which launched a money-spinning craze in
Romania said yesterday it had suspended payments to investors for two days
because of 'organisational problems' but denied reports it was about to
collapse, Reuter reports from Bucharest.
The Caritas company described as unfounded a wave of local press stories
saying the money chain was losing momentum and that it would soon grind to a
halt.
'It is true Caritas suspended payments for two days,' a company official
told Reuter by telephone from Cluj. 'But this was only because the company
wants to organise its work better.'
It was the second time in a month that Caritas has interrupted payments for
several days. More than 4m Romanians have billions of lei tied up in the
scheme, which works like a chain-letter game and promises depositors a
return of eight times their initial deposits after just three months.
This has captured the imagination of a nation where monthly pay rarely
reaches Dollars 60 (Pounds 40), the annual inflation rate runs at almost 300
per cent and bank interest rates lag behind at 70 per cent.
'Caritas is agonising. . . investors will withdraw their money and the
scheme will collapse,' the independent daily newspaper Romania Libera
claimed yesterday.
The daily Evenimentul Zilei said: 'Caritas has run out of steam. The
decision to suspend payments will spark panic and concern among investors
and cut the number of investors.'
The Caritas official, however, said payments would resume today.
A fall-off in the number of new depositors would erode the base of the
pyramid. Pyramid schemes have spread like wildfire in Romania since Caritas
hit the limelight last July.
Eyewitnesses in Cluj said there was no panic outside Caritas offices there
yesterday. 'Everything is quiet here,' a local reporter said.
The company said in a fax that payments had been suspended because it was
understaffed and wanted to avoid 'mistakes which might occur in handling the
large volume of work'. 'It is more and more difficult for us to adjust our
schedule to the programme of banks, which close down over the weekend, while
we stay open round the clock,' it said.
Last week, Caritas opened a branch in the Jiu Valley coalfield and thousands
of miners lined up to deposit funds.
The scheme has drawn warnings from opposition critics, and even from
President Ion Iliescu, that it could spark financial chaos or riots if the
chain broke down.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931102

