FT934-8826

FT  13 NOV 93 / Nissan's strategy shies away from the R-word: Richard Donkin
and Chris Tighe find the union sceptical of the 'no-tears' deal


   By RICHARD DONKIN and CHRIS TIGHE


NISSAN'S PLAN to reduce staffing at its Sunderland plant was presented
yesterday as a 'no-tears' severance package and a triumph for industrial
relations.
But seasoned union officials greeted it as a traditional job-shedding
announcement in face of a fall in demand. Mr Harry Morgan, regional officer
for the AEEU engineering union, said: 'It's a new company with new ideas,
rapidly learning they aren't all that different when it comes down to basics
like job losses.'
Faced with falling demand across Europe Nissan had reduced line speeds and
redeployed 200 production-line workers. This week it closed its night shift
to halve production, a measure that will last until the end of February.
Yesterday it said it had decided to use its employee consultation machinery
rather than to impose a job-shedding plan from above.
Last month Mr Peter Wickens, Nissan's personnel director, asked the 10
employee representatives on the company council if they would take soundings
from the 4,600 employees - of which 2,400 are on the manufacturing floor.
He said: 'We told them we have no monopoly of wisdom, 'we are prepared to
listen to anything you and your constituents have to say about the handling
of the situation'. It was asking one hell of a lot of the elected
representatives. I wasn't aware of any company that had done this before.'
The hard fact facing the employees was a reduction in volumes from the
270,000 cars originally planned for this year - reduced to 246,000 in late
September - to between 200,000 and 240,000 cars for next year.
Mr Kevin Reah, a manufacturing staff representative on the council, said the
consensus among the workforce was to return to the day and night shift
pattern that had existed since 1987 as soon as possible.
Employees, he said, wanted to protect their earnings but did not want to
sacrifice job security by accepting conventional redundancy, in which the
company would have fixed targets for shedding labour.
He added: 'It was important to everybody that there should be no compulsion
on anyone to leave. When I joined the company I genuinely believed I was
joining the company for life.'
But the employees decided that some kind of severance deal might be
desirable. Mr Pat Quinn, production supervisor and a member of the company
council, said: 'We asked if a way could be found to allow people to leave
the company who wished to leave it.'
The management's formula presented to the employees yesterday was that the
company should attempt to move to a five-day/three-night shift pattern by
the beginning of March and that all employees be offered six months' salary
 -in most cases between Pounds 7,000 and Pounds 7,500 - to apply for what
Nissan terms 'a discretionary separation payment'. Because there are no
job-shedding targets, the company has had to include flexible arrangements
for returning to the full shift pattern.
Nissan retains the right to turn down applications to leave so that a
suitable balance of skills can be maintained.
The Inland Revenue has agreed to treat the deal as a tax-free payment under
its rules for redundancies although Nissan itself refuses to use what Mr
Wickens calls the 'R-word'.
Union officials pointed out, however, that the stark fact remained that a
Japanese company was shedding jobs.
'A rose is known by many names but it's still just a bloody flower,' said Mr
Tom O'Neill, AEEU divisional organiser.
He questioned Nissan's suggestion that the deal was a 'milestone'. He said:
'If you don't accept what the works council have discussed, what's the
alternative? The alternative is two-day working.' The AEEU had not been
involved in negotiations but he suggested the union could have been useful
to the works council, whose members lacked experience. 'Short-time working,
redundancy and complete closures - we're virtuosos at it. You achieve it
through experience, not overnight.'
Nissan said it was too early to gauge the uptake, but the average age of the
manufacturing workforce was about 26 and it believed some might welcome the
opportunity to change career.
Worker representatives said working practices and training programmes at
Nissan meant ex-employees were often sought after by other manufacturers.
But the success of the plan may hinge on whether workers who take the
severance terms qualify for benefit. Mr O'Neill doubted they would.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931113

