FT934-8591

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Harrogate (3): The spa resort with a sparkle -
Tourism


   By HARRIET ARNOLD


THE centre of Harrogate is exceptionally easy on both the eye and the shoe
leather thanks to its spa resort elegance and the rare proximity of its many
tourist attractions.
The town boasts probably the most sulphurous springs in the country,
bringing the sweet stink of success in the late Victorian and Edwardian eras
when the town enjoyed its heyday as the hydropathic (water treatment)
industry took off. The Harrogate curative concoction was described by Bertie
Wooster, in Carry on, Jeeves, as 'practically equivalent to getting outside
a couple of little old last year's eggs beaten up in sea water.' He was
possibly understating the case.
The Harrogate water can still be sampled at the Royal Pump Room Museum, on
the site where a famous early nineteenth century Harrogate figure, Betty,
dispensed a sulphurous brew. Today's luckier visitor can follow up the
experience with a visit to a completely different Betty's establishment, the
town's most celebrated cafe tea-rooms.
The spa may have gone but the town has continued to develop its status as a
tourist spot and a base from which to make forays into the rest of
Yorkshire. The result is that the tourist information centre now handles
275,000 inquiries a year, says Mr Stuart Mackay, head of marketing and sales
at the Harrogate International Centre (HIC).
Visitors are drawn by the graceful architecture, the antiques and other
shops - the number of fashionably hatted ladies testifies to the well-heeled
atmosphere - the floral displays and the restaurants. That's just the town.
The surrounding area is bristling with stately homes and historical sites as
well as being close to the natural wonders of the Yorkshire Dales.
Tourism contributes about Pounds 80m-Pounds 90m to the local economy
according to Mr Stuart Quin, economic development officer for Harrogate
borough council. In 1987, Peat Marwick McLintock estimated that 3,500 jobs
in the area were directly attributable to the centre's activities. Another
2,500 are estimated to depend on holiday tourism.
'The centre's economic impact has been greater than expected,' says Mr Quin,
whose own figures indicate that employment in the Harrogate travel-to-work
area rose from an index of 100 in 1981 to 178 in 1989.
The centre promotes tourism opportunities as part of the mix which it can
offer its customers and is also responsible for maximising the number of
accompanying visitors and holiday tourists.
Local businesses have also become involved in shaping the area's strategy.
The A Group has started to contribute funds to developments at the centre on
a results basis. Its chairman Mr Frank Flaherty, general manager of the
Majestic hotel, says this 'indicates to the town that we are prepared to
work closely with the centre'.
In return, Mr Flaherty and his colleagues expect a say on what is planned.
For instance, he observes, 'a residential-based policy was critical.' A
Group also participates in the centre's marketing exercises to potential
customers.
The UK and international recession has affected Harrogate and it has come as
something of a shock to the town that even some of its more significant
hotels have been unable to avoid financial problems and in some cases have
gone into receivership.
There is concern that more could be done to target the holiday visitor. 'The
holiday tourist has been somewhat neglected,' says Joy Allan, president of
the Harrogate Chamber of Trade and Commerce, and part owner of the
privately-owned Green Park Hotel near the town centre, 'as the marketing
emphasis has been towards the business tourist.'
The marketing mix could change soon, as the council is currently debating
proposals on the direction holiday tourism should take. Mr Quin says that
two main points have emerged from a consultation process undertaken for the
council: 'There is overwhelming agreement that the district should be
marketed as an integrated product, and there is a great deal of goodwill on
the part of those operating private facilities towards the idea of
co-operating more fully with HIC.' Suggestions have been made for
enhancement of all-weather facilities, and a visitor management strategy has
been mooted, with greater co-ordination of tourism information.
Harrogate's spa industry may also live again, this time as a leisure
attraction. The council is examining the prospective rewards, based on
growing interest across Europe in spas. Much of Harrogate's spa
infrastructure, such as the wells and the Royal Baths Assembly Rooms
building (where a municipal Turkish Bath still operates), is still in place.
Other developments being closely watched by the council include the
recommendation by the Countryside Commission that the Nidderdale area should
officially become an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and North
Yorkshire's bid for European Community Objective 5B status, which allocates
cash to poor rural areas. If the area is designated eligible on January 1
1994, the council plans to use some of the funds to enhance local rural
tourism.
Transport to and around the town is a weakness, and the council is keen to
see a bus station restored to the town, having already campaigned
successfully for improvements to the railway station. It is also supporting
Leeds/Bradford Airport's application for authorisation for round-the-clock
flights.
Plans for marketing the area's attractions are many but, as Mr Quin points
out, the rich heritage alone will not keep Harrogate's well-heeled ladies in
hats or their menfolk in the latest cars.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931115

