FT932-7113

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (10): A key role for Filipino
skills abroad - Earnings by overseas contract workers help to offset the
stagnation of the domestic economy


   By JOSE GALANG


THE STORY of how Mrs Pascuala Dastas, a Filipina domestic worker and
mother-of-three, met her death illustrates the cruel consequences of a
supposedly resource-rich economy that cannot provide enough jobs for its
people.
Mrs Dastas left her three sons in the Philippines to seek employment in Hong
Kong. She was killed in March while saving her five-year-old ward from a bus
accident. Her body was brought home to a heroine's welcome - and President
Fidel Ramos gave her a posthumous Bagong Bayani (new hero) award, handed out
annually to outstanding Filipino overseas contract workers at the Labour Day
celebrations.
The government long ago proclaimed OCWs as the nation's modern-day heroes
for their contribution to the economy. During its debilitating slowdown in
the mid-1980s, earnings sent home by OCWs eased the situation in many
Philippine communities.
Over the past two years, foreign exchange remittances have again partly
offset the stagnation of the domestic economy. This year, remittances are
projected to reach Dollars 2.5bn, making Filipino manpower the country's
leading export item.
From about 40,000 in 1975, the number of Filipino skilled and semi-skilled
workers winning employment contracts abroad has reached 680,000 a year. This
number does not include those who sneak away to find employment illegally.
There are now two million Filipinos legally employed as construction
workers, seamen, domestic helpers, hospital staff or nightclub entertainers
in many parts of the Middle East, Europe, east Asia including Japan, and the
US. Most of them earn up to five or six times what they would be paid in
similar jobs back home - if they could ever get one. According to the
Department of Labour and Employment, of the total 25.3m employable persons
in 1992, nearly 2.3m were out of a job. By January 1993, the unemployed
total had declined to 2.18m people.
However, even among the ranks of the locally employed, there remains a high
'under-employment' rate, which makes working overseas an attractive option
for many. But as the deployment of OCWs has increased, so has the range of
problems involving their relationships with their employers and with the
families they leave behind. Charges of physical abuse and non-payment of
correct wages are the most prominent.
This has put a strain on the staff of Philippine embassies abroad. In areas
with large number of Filipino OCWs, the country's diplomats have a hard time
coping with the social problems that arise, and are sometimes accused of
indifference.
At the same time, the Philippine foreign service has benefited from the OCW
movements. Where there are large concentrations of such workers, Philippine
embassies register large cash surpluses from fees related to the workers'
tenures. For instance, the embassy in Saudi Arabia, where there are an
estimated 250,000 Filipino workers, reportedly provides financial support
for the operations of 12 diplomatic posts in Europe.
Yet social workers are increasingly worried about the rising number of
inter-marriages among migrant workers and local nationals that lead to
broken homes and other problems. A recent case involved the death, from
hepatitis, of a Filipina who worked as a nightclub entertainer in Japan.
According to the police, the body of the victim bore torture marks that
indicated foul play.
Owing to the failure of Japanese authorities to give a credible account of
the death, there were calls in Manila for an end to the deployment of
Filipinas to entertain in Japan. Instead, the government imposed a 'partial'
ban: no Filipino aged below 23 is now allowed to work there as an
entertainer.
Japan, South Korea and other more advanced economies have cut industrial
costs by investing in factories in south-east Asia. Although the Philippines
has missed out on much of this investment wave, its officials are hoping
that some day - when the local economy starts generating enough jobs to
absorb the 800,000 people who join the labour force annually - the OCWs
could return home and bolster the quality of technical skills for the
expected industrial boom.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930525

