FT931-3921

FT  13 MAR 93 / Tough times on catwalk leave designers struggling


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


THE LATEST Paris ready-to-wear fashion collections kicked off in the Louvre
yesterday against a drab economic backdrop and a row among the leading
designers which threatens to split the French fashion industry.
The Paris designers, which flourished in the buoyant 1980s, are now
struggling in more competitive conditions.
Sales of French designer fashions have fallen sharply since the peak of
FFr5bn (Pounds 627m) in 1990 to just FFr4.3bn last year, according to the
Chambre Syndicale, which represents the industry.
This season the Paris fashion houses are hoping for an improvement in US
demand, but expect further problems with Japan. They also face the handicap
of the strong French franc, which makes it more difficult for them to
compete against the Milan and New York designers.
Yves Saint Laurent, one of the leading Paris houses, was forced this year to
sell out to Elf-Sanofi, the state-controlled French pharmaceuticals group.
Others, including Givenchy and Jean-Louis Scherrer, have shed staff.
Philippe Venet, an old established couture business, last month fired its
entire workforce.
This week's ready-to-wear collections have a subdued air. Yohji Yamamoto and
Commes des Garcons, the Japanese designers, are staging small shows instead
of their usual lavish events in the Louvre. Jean-Paul Gaultier, the French
designer known for his theatrical collections, is holding a small show in
his shop. Martin Margiela, leader of the younger avant garde, is not showing
at all.
Meanwhile the whole industry has been flung into chaos by a row between Mr
Pierre Berge, YSL's chairman, and the Chambre Syndicale. YSL last month
broke away from the Chambre Syndicale, which organises the Paris shows,
after Mr Berge was ousted as head of the ready-to-wear section.
Mr Berge is now trying to persuade other designers to join YSL in staging
their own shops under a new organisation.
If he succeeds, retail buyers and journalists would have to choose between
two separate sets of fashion shows possibly held on different dates, thereby
weakening Paris' position as the centre of international fashion.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930313

