FT934-11684

FT  30 OCT 93 / EC revives spirit of unity: Site chosen for central bank as
summit settles wrangle over institutions


   By LIONEL BARBER and DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


EC LEADERS yesterday restored a semblance of unity to the European Community
with a decision to base the future European Central Bank in Frankurt as part
of a wide-ranging agreement on the location of EC institutions.
But the deal struck at a special European summit in Brussels followed an
acriminious battle over the division of Euro-spoils which included veto
threats by the UK and Spain.
The summit chaired by the Belgian presidency of the EC was called to revive
Europe's faltering progress toward greater political and monetary
integration after the near failure to ratify the Maastricht treaty.
The choice of Frankfurt as the location for the European Monetary Institute
 -the forerunner of the European Central Bank - was seen as a minimum step
towards rebuilding credibility in European Monetary Union after the August 2
currency crisis which led to the suspension of the ERM.
Germany, which stands to surrender the D-Mark under the Maastricht treaty at
the end of the century, fought tenaciously for the EMI. Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's argument that the choice of Frankfurt was necessary to reassure
Germans about the loss of their symbol of post-war stability carried the day
over reservations from France and the UK.
The Bank of England said last night the decision was 'a pity, not for the
City but for the EMI.'
The EMI, whose president will be Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy of Belgium, is the
institutional anchor for the second stage of EMU due to begin on January 1,
1994 under the Maastricht treaty.
With the treaty set to enter force on Monday, EC leaders used the one-day
summit to pledge closer co-operation in foreign policy and the fight against
organised crime, as well as a broad endorsement of the goal of a European
monetary union by the end of the decade.
EC leaders steered clear of any new initiatives to tackle mass unemployment
in Europe, preferring to wait for the European Commission's White Paper on
competitiveness, employment and growth which will presented at the next
summit in December.
They also avoided a damaging row over the Uruguay Round world trade talks in
which France is holding out for more concessions on farm trade.
Despite relief that the log-jam over the location of more than 10 new
institutions had been broken, there was also an air of contrition among EC
leaders and a general admission that mistakes had been made before and after
the agreement on the Maastricht.
Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European commission, said: 'In future,
all the EC's insititutions must be careful to be more transparent. This is a
pre-condition for the progress of Europe.'
During protracted lunchtime haggling yesterday, both the UK and Spain
threatened to veto the sites package unless they got the European Agency for
the Evaluation of Medicinal Products.
After several hours, the prize went to the UK which immediately praised the
deal as creating several hundred jobs and confirming Britain as a world
leader in the pharmaceutical industry. Spain was given two sites as the
consolation prize - the EC trade-mark office and a new institution
responsible for monitoring health and safety.
Page 3
Treaty celebrations give way to sober talks
European Bank a boost for Frankfurt
Man in the News, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931030

