FT932-3319

FT  15 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Manifesto pledges enter grey area


   By ALISON SMITH


IT WAS no accident that the Conservative manifesto for last April's general
election found space for a hedgerow incentive scheme, but not for
commitments on value added tax or prescription charges.
The distinction made last week by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, between
what was said in the manifesto and 'stray speeches given on a wet Wednesday
evening in Dudley' during the campaign has focused attention anew on
promises in the 50-page election document.
There are no cast-iron pledges.
Even before the worst option of simply having to argue that times have
become harder since April 1992, the Tories can give just about any phrase
the desired meaning. In the last parliament they argued that the commitment
to pay child benefit 'as now' was not incompatible with freezing it.
In practice, however, Mr John Major's insistence that the spirit as well as
the letter of the manifesto will be honoured means that finding a tortuous
way through the words is much less likely than making changes where there is
a deafening silence.
The most straightforward commitment on taxation is that the government will
'make further progress towards a basic income tax rate of 20p'. There is
also a pledge to 'maintain mortgage tax relief'.
There is no commitment about uprating personal allowances, the higher rate
of tax, or about raising the VAT rate or extending its base.
The manifesto is silent also on National Insurance contributions, leaving
scope for changes beyond the 1 per cent increase announced in March.
The most specific pledges on spending are on the universal benefits.
Targeted benefits such as income support, family credit and housing benefit
are not referred to by name.
The value of child benefit, the promise runs, will increase each year in
line with prices. It 'will continue to be paid to all families, normally to
the mother, and in respect of all children'.
As for the basic state retirement pension, that will 'remain the foundation
for retirement. We will continue to protect its value against price rises'.
The spirit of the commitment rules out restricting the pension's
availability, though this is not specifically mentioned, and may also
exclude failing to pay the pensioners' Christmas bonus.
But nothing in the manifesto would prevent the government shifting
responsibility for employment-related payments such as industrial injury or
sickness benefit to employers.
On health, the basic promise is that 'need and not the ability to pay is,
and will remain, the basis on which care is offered to all by the NHS. We
will, year by year, increase the level of real resources committed to the
NHS'.
This does not preclude raising money by extending charges, provided that the
poorest are exempted, but at least the pledge contains the phrase 'year by
year', missing from other promises.
The politics of tax and spending have moved on sharply from just over a year
ago, and the focus of the debate has shifted. Some Tories now wish the
manifesto had left rather more room for manoeuvre on mortgage tax relief and
child benefit, and rather less on VAT.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930615

