FT932-3291

FT  15 JUN 93 / Arts: Freddie Hubbard - Jazz


   By GARRY BOOTH


Jazz trumpet players can be a surly lot, full of brooding bravado, often
unpredictable on the stand and sometimes leading colourful lives off it.
Think of Miles Davis, back to the audience, hunched over his horn for a few
precious notes before abruptly leaving; Lee Morgan, the great attacking
trumpet of hard bop shot dead onstage by a jealous lover. Last time I saw
mainstreamer Ruby Braff he was inciting a usually mild mannered Brecon crowd
to riot by the simple device of continuously telling them to shut up.
So it is with American Freddie Hubbard, currently and grumpily touring his
talented acoustic quintet across Europe. Last week, in the New Morning, a
grotty but friendly club by the Boulevard St Michel, I sat through one and a
half hours of slow hand claps until the gangsterish Hubbard sauntered
through the front door rubbing his belly. In Paris, the wait was hardly
worth the four hard bop standards Hubbard dispatched before complaining of a
bust lip: in retrospect, the time might better have been spent listening to
the quartet of promising young tenorist Javon Jackson, pianist Ron Mathews,
and a cracking rhythm section of Louis Hayes on drums and young bassist Jeff
Chambers.
But it was easier to forgive him the (over 90 minutes) wait in London - at
least we had two sets. And once he had grown accustomed to the reverberating
acoustics of the Union Chapel, Hubbard did at last stretch out on the
fluegelhorn. Grappling with the echo chamber effect and faulty equipment in
Islington Hubbard flew through 'Straight No Chaser' brassy and bright,
following up with a sparky rhumba, 'Bolivia', the leader pacing nervously,
trilling occasionally. A tough and boppy 'One of A Kind' provided Hayes with
his third driving solo of the evening and Jackson an opportunity to
construct a measured and gentle passage without his leader's interruption -
he had disappeared backstage.
By the second set, Hubbard gave up his unequal struggle with equipment and
imprecise acoustics and standing away from his microphone turned in a
flaring ballad, 'God Bless The Child', the burnished tone of the fluegelhorn
pitched beautifully into the high ceiling. Absorbed in his playing at last,
the full warm sound centred in a good tune, Hubbard showed how he maintains
a place at the top of the trumpet league. By finishing the set on 'Ease It',
however, which featured Chambers' bass while Hubbard again left for
backstage, he demonstrated his weakness as a leader and how precarious that
ranking is. Worth the wait, but only just.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930615

