FT932-6788

FT  27 MAY 93 / China frees dissident as EC team probes human rights


   By TONY WALKER and KIERAN COOKE


   BEIJING, SINGAPORE


AN UNREPENTANT Mr Xu Wenli, one of China's longest serving dissidents, was
freed from jail yesterday three years before his 15-year sentence expired.
His early release, apparently aimed at calming criticism in the West of
human rights violations, came as China faced censure over an EC mission to
Tibet.
Appearing gaunt and with several of his teeth missing, Mr Xu denied any
wrongdoing on his release, saying his political activities had been 'for my
country and my people'.
Mr Xu, 49, one of China's best-known dissidents, was arrested in 1981 and
sentenced the following year. He had been publisher of an underground
magazine, April 5 Forum, during the Democracy Wall protest period of the
late 1970s and is the sixth political prisoner to be given early release
this year. The Chinese gesture coincides with Washington's decision, due by
next week, on renewal of China's Most Favored Nation trading status. It also
appears to be aimed at improving its chances of securing endorsement for the
right to stage the 2000 Olympiad.
Mr Xu's release came as EC representatives met in Beijing to complete a
report of their recent mission to Tibet. The mission ended in recrimination
at the weekend with envoys protesting over detention of two Tibetans who had
been planning to make contact.
The streets of Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, were reported calm yesterday
after disturbances on Sunday and Monday in which large crowds of protesters
were dispersed by tear gas. Foreign travellers reported hearing automatic
gunfire.
Kieran Cooke adds from Singapore: China says it will not use force to pursue
its claim to the Spratlys, the disputed group of islands in the South China
Sea.
Mr Chi Haotian, the Chinese defence minister, who is visiting Malaysia, said
China still insists on its 'historical right' to the Spratly islands. But Mr
Chi said China also accepted the 'differing opinions' of other claimants -
Malaysia, the Philippines, Vietnam, Taiwan and Brunei.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930527

