FT932-6950

FT  26 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Move that signals end of a takeover chapter


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


THE DEPARTURE of Mr Brian McGowan as chief executive of Williams Holdings,
the once acquisitive conglomerate, will cast nothing but gloom over any
merger and acquisition department still hoping for a return of the 1980s
mega-bid.
If an acknowledged takeover expert hangs up his slide rule and goes fishing,
M and A may be entering a deeper depression than those who live off it had
suspected.
Mr McGowan's departure - consistent though it was with his expressed wish to
retire early to farm and fish - may be the full stop at the end of this
particular takeover chapter, bankers and industrialists said yesterday.
'These things go in phases,' Mr McGowan said. 'The glory days ended in 1973
and did not start again for 10 years. The market is up with the game and I
do not see much that is undervalued.'
Not only are companies better managed now, at the end of a recession, but
much of the fat that developed in companies at the end of the 1980s bull-run
has already been cut out.
Doubts about valuation are shared by Mr Greg Hutchings, chief executive of
Tomkins, which until it bought Ranks Hovis McDougall last year had not made
a UK acquisition since 1986.
'I have been saying prices are outrageously expensive since 1987,' Mr
Hutchings said. 'We have done only four deals in six years and we have
looked at thousands.'
Tomkins paid 14 times earnings for RHM - a price Mr Hutchings has yet to
convince the market was not too high. What is clear, however, is that the
price of other companies considered as potential takeover targets - notably
Hillsdown and Glynwed - are even more highly rated now, having risen by over
50 per cent in the last six months.
Acquisitive companies also have to contend with the looming changes in the
accounting environment which will reduce the scope for taking provisions
against the balance sheet. 'The reality of the short term effect of
acquisitions will be very much more obvious in the profit and loss account,'
says Mr Richard Rae, analyst at Hoare Govett.
Price and the Accounting Standards Board's changes may already have pushed
some conglomerates towards asset purchases.
Nevertheless, there is no shortage of companies known to be seeking the big
acquisition. Chartered Consolidated has made no secret it is looking to
spend the sale proceeds from its stake in Johnson Matthey. And MB Caradon,
though not strictly a conglomerate, is equally well armed after the sale of
its stake in CMB.
Life may be easier for acquisitive companies fishing in smaller ponds,
though they will not avoid the ASB's new rules. Wassall, the up and coming
conglomerate rated on a prospective multiple of 22, is one group with a high
rating and shareholder backing for a move.
Some merchant and investment banks have already anticipated a lull in
takeover activity. But whether arranging bolt-on acquisitions, vendor
placings, IPOs, rights issues and the odd restructuring is going to fill the
gap left by takeovers remains to be seen.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930526

