FT934-10046

FT  08 NOV 93 / Fear of Budget 'eroding confidence'


   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent


BUSINESS confidence has declined sharply ahead of the Budget, the Institute
of Directors reported yesterday.
Its latest survey of business opinion shows that the number of directors
polled who are more optimistic than six months ago about UK economic
prospects fell from 63 per cent in August to 42 per cent in last month. The
survey also shows declining levels of confidence among directors over the
outlook for their own companies.
Mr Peter Morgan, IoD director-general, said the latest survey reflected deep
uncertainty about the business climate and concern about the impact on
business of the November 30 Budget.
Despite industry's improved performance in profits, turnover and orders,
company directors have become much less certain about the business outlook
and are looking to Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, to help restore
weakening business confidence.
'Company performance is continuing to improve, but we are afraid that
increases could halt that progress in its tracks', Mr Morgan added.
'The chancellor needs to reassure business that his first priority is to
sustain the recovery and translate it into long-term non-inflationary
growth.
This means that he should resist quick-fix tax increases to reduce the
budget deficit and set cost-reduction targets for government, as most
businesses have to do in order to survive.'
Asked to nominate their most likely business concerns over the next six
months, respondents cited cashflow as the biggest problem followed by
continuing weak demand. Even so, nearly 80 per cent of directors in the
manufacturing sector feel their company is performing well. Optimism about
general economic recovery is higher in the north, with Midlands-based
companies now significantly less optimistic than they were earlier in the
year.
Employment prospects have recovered, however, after a sharp fall at the time
of the last survey in the number of directors expecting to increase
payrolls. More than 30 per cent of directors now expect employment levels in
their companies to rise in the next six months, up from 27 per cent in
August.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931108

