FT934-11237

FT  02 NOV 93 / TGWU warns it may cut MP funding


   By DAVID GOODHART


MR BILL MORRIS, the general secretary of the TGWU general union, has given
his starkest warning yet to the Labour party that as his union seeks to
improve its efficiency it will be examining all political payments to see if
they provide value for money.
Although the TGWU has just endorsed its sponsorship of all its 38 Labour
MPs, including leading Labour modernisers such as Mr Tony Blair who was
under threat from the left, Mr Morris has questioned the union's policy.
'Would it make any difference to us if we sponsored 10 Labour MPs instead of
38?' he said in an interview with the Financial Times. Mr Morris's comments
suggest that the level of sponsorship will not prevail indefinitely.
Mr Morris, who tomorrow opens a TGWU computer centre in Newcastle upon Tyne,
claimed that since he took over the reins from Mr Ron Todd at the end of
1991 'we have changed the culture'. He said that at the political level the
old 21-17 left-right split on the executive had been broken down, and that
in terms of organisation his main ambition was to leave behind a 'highly
professional outfit, but one which has not abandoned its culture and
values'.
Mr Morris said the organisation had been too hesitant about adopting modern
business methods, for example in the way that people pay for membership. 'It
is absurd that I can buy almost anything I want from my armchair except for
membership of the TGWU,' he said.
The computer centre will cost Pounds 1m but is meant to save the union
Pounds 500,000 a year in running costs. Mr Morris says it establishes a
'state of the art' network linking the union's self-standing personal
computers to a central computer.
The network, being masterminded by Mr Peter Regnier, the TGWU's new chief
executive, will help to give the union a much clearer profile of its 1m
members.
Mr Morris said that Mr Regnier had already made a big difference to the
union's bargaining power with its banks and suppliers. He added that the
union had decided to break with the company which had been doing all its
property business since 1972. The company has since closed as the TGWU was
its only customer.
After a record Pounds 12m deficit in 1991, following smaller deficits in
1989 and 1990, the union had to start eating into its assets which fell from
Pounds 76m in 1988 to Pounds 53m in 1991.
Last year the union made a small surplus, having increased its subscriptions
by 11 per cent and having cut expenditure from Pounds 67m to Pounds 60m.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931102

