FT932-277

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (17): Actions speak louder - Keith Johnson hails
recent moves by ECGD, but says government should do more / UK Exporter's
view


   By KEITH JOHNSON


'IN comparison with what we have coming to us, you are in heaven', said the
head of Siemens' Munich-based export finance division as we drove out of
London's Docklands, the home of the 'new' UK Export Credits Guarantee
Department, which gives long-term guarantees following the sale of its
short-term division in 1991.
My German colleague was ruminating over the positive discussions he had just
had with the apparently reinvigorated ECGD backed by trade minister Richard
Needham, as compared with the rigid export credit scheme run for German
exporters by the Hamburg-based Hermes.
For my part, I was remembering the recent pursuit of the 'zero option' by
sections of the UK Treasury to close the remainder of ECGD after the
sell-off of its short-term division.
As deputy chairman of the British Exporters Association I had been involved
in lobbying for change at ECGD. The extension of the breadth and depth of
cover, allied with some cuts in premiums over previous months, had therefore
provided relief and satisfaction. These moves represented a new commitment
by government to providing medium term guarantees. Not quite heaven perhaps
but a world away from the dark days of the 'zero option'.
Of course, the ECGD and the panoply of government support for UK exporters
still has its limitations:
Will the government become more active in backing exports to emerging
nations? Kazakhstan, for example, with its wealth of natural and human
resources will become a major influence in Central Asia in the years ahead.
When can we expect significant support for exporters pitching for business
emanating from attempts to reconstruct the Lebanon?
Opportunities abound in Vietnam, but UK exporters stand little chance unless
ECGD provides aggressive assistance.
Why cannot the UK government offer flexible political re-insurance capacity
to a registered number of credit insurance companies in the UK to overcome
the lack of political re-insurance capacity available in the market,
particularly at the short-term end of the market?
The government has responded sympathetically, but British exporters remain
concerned at the lack of re-insurance capacity.
This was recently demonstrated by a lack of cover in China, arguably the
most important emerging market. After a successful campaign in China by
minister Richard Needham, UK exporters were frustrated by not being able to
take contracts on to their books for lack of suitable reinsurance capacity
accessible by NCM or other insurers. This is despite the fact that ECGD has
significant capacity for project business in China, which has been
designated a key market.
The requirements of exporters, the potential financial implications of more
adventurous political risk underwriting and political imperatives or
priorities will never sit comfortably together. However, the exporter and
his government sponsor - ultimately the trade and industry secretary, Mr.
Michael Heseltine - deserve as much of a hearing at the Cabinet table as the
Treasury and the Foreign and Commonwelath Office.
Keith Johnson is export finance manager at UK-based Siemens Plessey
Electronic Systems

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

930629

