FT934-10092

FT  08 NOV 93 / Clinton steps up campaign for backing over Nafta: President
accuses unions of 'roughshod' tactics on free trade agreement


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton turned up the political heat yesterday on opponents
of the North American Free Trade Agreement by accusing US organised labour
of using 'roughshod, muscle-bound' tactics to defeat the agreement in
Congress.
His attack on the labour movement, a traditional bastion of his own
Democratic party, underlined the importance he is attaching to the Nafta
vote in the House of Representatives on November 17.
The vote is widely seen as crucial not just to ratification of the accord
between the US, Canada and Mexico but also to US trade policy in general and
to the success of the Uruguay Round of world trade negotiations, due to be
completed by December 15.
Mr Clinton, whose comments came in a morning television interview, left the
impression that he was more concerned about pressure being exerted on
members of Congress by the trade unions - by threatening to withhold
financial support and to run candidates against Nafta supporters - than he
was by the publicity campaign waged against Nafta by Mr Ross Perot, the
Texas billionaire and last year's independent presidential candidate.
The president also criticised US business for not doing enough to support
Nafta, at least compared with labour's grassroots campaign against the
agreement. But he was confident that Vice-President Al Gore would acquit
himself well in his televised debate with Mr Perot, scheduled for prime time
tomorrow night, because of his 'command of the facts'.
Mr Perot, warming up for the TV encounter, yesterday afternoon addressed
supporters in Tampa, Florida, and claimed there was evidence that he was to
be the target of an assassination attempt by a pro-Nafta group either at
Tampa or at the debate with Mr Gore.
Mr Clinton, in his interview, said Mr Perot was adept at 'keeping things
stirred up'. He denied he was boosting Mr Perot's apparently declining
popularity by agreeing to the debate, noting that 'he has enough money to
elevate himself'. The president remained confident that Nafta would have the
votes by November 17, even though they did not exist today. In particular,
he emphasised the safeguard clauses in Nafta's 'side agreements' protecting
against surges in imports from Mexico.
Only if these proved inadequate and there was overwhelming evidence that the
US was losing jobs would he contemplate renegotiating Nafta.
But Congressman David Bonior of Michigan, chief Nafta opponent in the House,
claimed yesterday to be 'on the brink' of winning the 217 votes needed to
vote the agreement down.
Mr Clinton stressed the serious international consequences of rejecting the
agreement. It would, he said, send the wrong message to Asian leaders he was
to meet in Seattle the day after the House vote - a view echoed yesterday by
the Senate Republican leader, Mr Robert Dole.
Passage, on the other hand, would constitute 'a clear statement' that the US
was intent on 'competing and winning' in international markets and was
committed to global free trade. It would put additional pressure on Asia and
Europe to complete the Uruguay Round of trade talks by the mid-December
deadline.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931108

