FT933-12658

FT  23 JUL 93 / World Trade News: Russians in Dollars 1bn telecom deal


   By ARIANE GENILLARD


   BONN


DEUTSCHE Telekom, the German state-owned telecoms monopoly, and
Intertelekom, the Russian state-owned long distance telephone operator,
yesterday signed a memorandum of understanding to co-operate on a Dollars
1bn (Pounds 660m) project to modernise Russia's telecommunications
infrastructure.
The project involves a consortium of western telecoms groups which will
invest up to Dollars 600m to install a digital overlay network connecting
Russian cities with western Europe. The Russian side is expected to invest
Dollars 400m in the project.
German officials said Deutsche Telekom was the first foreign company to sign
a memorandum of understanding for the network; the final project would
probably be granted to a consortium involving three of four western telecoms
groups.
The memorandum was signed during a visit by Mr Wolfgang Botsch, German post
and telecoms minister, to Moscow. Mr Vladimir Bulgak, his Russian
counterpart, said the project would start next year.
The project, called '50 times 50', plans to build 50,000km of glass fibre
cables above the normal telecoms infrastructure.
The cables will connect 50 Russian cities with 50 connecting points in the
west.
Deutsche Telekom said it would use its experience in eastern Germany to
modernise the Russian telecoms infrastructure. The German monopoly installed
an initial 3,000km long digital overlay network in eastern Germany in 1991.
The network, which initially connected eastern and western cities within
Germany, is now replacing the original analogue network in eastern Germany.
Deutsche Telekom also installed a radio system connecting telephone
operators to the digital network until proper cable links are in place.
The German company is also participating in a joint venture to establish
satellite links connecting the former Soviet republics and other eastern
European countries with western partners.
Participants in the joint venture, called Romantis, include Bosch, the
German engineering company, and Dornier, the German aerospace group.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930723

