FT932-13404

FT  23 APR 93 / Letter: Top pay awards reflect a system in need of change -
and a rising workload (1)


   From Mr DONALD B BUTCHER


Sir, Your leader, Over-the-top pay' (April 20) is right to pin most of the
blame on non-executive directors for over-the-top pay awards to directors.
Despite many of your leaders on the same theme over the past few years and
criticism from the prime minister, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
governor of the Bank of England, the director-general of the Institute of
Directors, the Cadbury Report and now the Institute of Management, the gravy
train continues.
Unfortunately, Lucy Kellaway ('Facts show fat cats are fatter', April 20)
perpetuates the myth that questions from shareholders will cause
'embarrassment' to such as the directors of Premier Consolidated Oilfields
who have just managed a 50 per cent hike. It won't. If the recipients of the
questions were thin-skinned enough to suffer embarrassment, they shouldn't
be doing the jobs in any case.
You suggest the Cadbury Committee was right in arguing that the chief
discipline must be openness. That is not working now and is unlikely to work
in the foreseeable future.
Answers at AGMs by the chairmen of remuneration committees will not change
things either. Shareholders receive one standard answer to their questions -
'we have to pay the international market price for our directors'. Which is
mostly nonsense because most of them have worked for their companies for
years and just do not have an meaningful international market price.
Change could come when, and only when, directors' remuneration is made
subject to resolutions at AGMs. If shareholders then vote for the pay award,
everyone can stop complaining.
It is even possible that responsible directors might actually welcome a
change which would add legitimacy to their pay awards via explicit
shareholder approval. Cadbury considered this but turned it down because his
committee couldn't work out what would happen if shareholders were so bold
as to vote down such a resolution]
Donald B Butcher,
United Kingdom Shareholders' Association,
12 Burgh Heath Road,
Epsom, Surrey KT17 4LJ

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930423

