FT932-244

FT  30 JUN 93 / France threatens waste import ban: EC engulfed by row over
flood of German packaging for recycling


   By DAVID GARDNER


   LUXEMBOURG


FRANCE yesterday threatened to curb imports of German packaging waste
flooding into the country for recycling, as a result of Germany's ambitious
recycling legislation.
The warning came as European Community environment ministers discussed the
Commission's stalled packaging directive, which nearly all want to see
passed into law quickly to avoid the market distortions states like Germany
are creating by going it alone.
France, Britain, Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, Ireland and Luxembourg all
complain that their own infant recycling industries for plastics, paper and
board are being stifled under the weight of German waste exports, which are
often subsidised.
Germany does not have the capacity to process the amounts of packaging its
laws require to be recycled.
Mr Michel Barnier, the French environment minister, said an EC-wide solution
to waste flows was urgently needed. But if, within 'a few weeks', Bonn could
not reach a bilateral solution with Paris, the situation 'could require
import authorisations for these products'.
Officials from several member states expressed anger yesterday at the slow
progress of the EC packaging directive, to which the outgoing Danish
presidency has devoted only a half-day's working group in the last six
months. The acrimony over waste was compounded by the continuing row over
the proposed EC energy tax, aimed at cutting greenhouse gas emissions.
On Monday night the UK accused the Danish presidency of 'a cack-handed
ambush' intended to isolate Britain by getting its 11 partners to agree that
the tax is a precondition for the EC to ratify the Rio climate change
convention, due by December.
At German and Dutch insistence, agreement on ratification - originally due
to go through on the nod - was taken off yesterday's agenda. Ms Magda de
Galan, environment minister of Belgium which takes over the EC presidency
tomorrow, said she would insist on maintaining the link between the tax and
ratification of Rio.
These three countries, along with Italy, Denmark and Luxembourg, in effect
signed up to the energy tax in March by declaring that the EC's Rio
commitments - to stabilise carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by 2000 -
were not possible without it. The other six, led by the UK and France,
deplored what could now be a long delay in ratification.
Ministers nevertheless managed to agree:
to ratify the Rio convention on preserving biological diversity;
a directive cutting emissions such as sulphur dioxide through cleaner
burning of industrial waste, requiring the upgrading of incineration
facilities, over three years probably starting in 1996;
the Commission also launched the eco-label agreed by the 12 in 1991,
starting with dishwashers and washing machines, which can win this
environment-friendly certificate if they conform to a tight
'cradle-to-grave' assessment of energy and water consumption, air and water
emissions, solid waste and disposability.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930630

