FT934-8698

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (16):
The best brochures come clean - Arnie Wilson takes a tongue-in-cheek look at
travel operators' seasonal offerings


   By ARNIE WILSON


LIKE NEWSPAPERS, big tour operators often come out with more than one
edition of their brochures - as well as an 'early booking' version - as a
way of reacting to the opposition and changing currency values.
Powder Byrne (071-223 0601) even printed two brochures at the same time: one
for regular clients ('As you have skied with us before, you already know
what to expect' etc) and one for prospective clients ('We know that you have
not been skiing with us before and we would like to change that,' and so
on.)
Most brochures suggest that every resort they feature is virtually perfect.
But Made To Measure (0243-533333) bravely lists both pros and cons. While it
says lots of nice things about the French resorts (best in Europe for the
keen skier, lift systems without equal, food 'always a pleasure,' excellent
kindergarten facilities) its 'warts-and-all' guide aims to 'represent each
resort and hotel objectively.'
The brochure adds: 'After all, you're going to discover the truth
eventually. The French can be arrogant, unhelpful and apparently unfriendly.
Two minutes later they can be humorous, and charming. Try to bear in mind
that they treat Parisians in just the same way. Don't expect the French to
volunteer to speak English even if they speak it.'
An honesty award also for Ski Esprit (0252-616789) which, among the
accolades on the back of its brochure (best skiing holiday since 1969, best
chalet food I have eaten, etc) include comments that damn it slightly with
faint praise: 'We would have personally preferred less food but better
wine,' for example. Or: 'I was not happy with the creche being in the main
sitting area. I did not ski every day but was unable to sit in the lounge
area because it was being used by children.'
Airtours' bright brochure debut (0706-260000) has an intriguing outbreak of
'nestling'. Almost all its Austrian villages nestle. Kolsaas Weer is
'nestled in the Inn Valley.' Hochgurgl is 'nestled even higher' than
Obergurgl. The Hotel Hochsolden is 'nestled in the hamlet of Hochsolden.'
Nestling is also the undoing of Inghams (081-785 7777) - but not until Page
160 of an otherwise slick and professional brochure. Then it contrives to
have Jackson Hole 'nestling astride the magnificent Grand Tetons.' Other
inappropriate expressions include a suggestion that Snow King, a resort at
'Jackson Hole Town' (the town is called Jackson - Jackson Hole is the ski
resort) is 'for beginners.' It may be small, but Snow King is far too steep
for that description.
The Swiss Travel Service (0920-463971) brochure writer's favourite word is
'superb.' Apart from 'superb child reductions' on every page (I cannot
recall meeting a superb child on a skiing trip) Murren has a 'superb run'
from the Schilthorn and the Grand Hotel Victoria-Jungfrau at Interlaken and
the Hotel Carlton in St Moritz have 'superb views.' The Grandhotel Tschuggen
at Arosa has 'superb gala dinners,' Lenzerheide has 'superb open slopes' and
Saas Fee has a 'superb indoor complex.'
Ski Enterprise (061-745 7000) also appears to cater for gifted children  -
and adults. It has 'Amazing Child' and 'Brilliant Group' discounts.
Ski Thomson's brochure (081-200 8733) contains 'An Important Note About
Children.' It boils down to the fact that normally children under 16 are
banned from chalets. Thomson adds, however that: 'If you book the whole
chalet, your party can consist of as many children as you wish (subject to
the total number of people that your chalet will sleep)'.
Under 'useful information' about its Snow Train, Thomson announces: 'Six
people share each couchette.' Difficult - even if you tried it with six
children. Thomson also points out that since train compartments are mixed,
'loose clothing rather than nightwear is advised.' Is this to encourage or
discourage nocturnal liaisons?
And what of Touralp's (071-602 1952) 'Snooze 'n Schuss' offer? Is this a
reference to dreaming about skiing? Or sleeping on the chairlift? It turns
out to be a ski-pass/bed package which is usually cheaper than buying them
separately.
Was Sally Line (0732-780499) snoozing when it was producing its brochure?
Does it matter that the Matterhorn, partly in Switzerland and partly in
Italy, suddenly turns up in France at Val Thorens? Or that the Vallee
Blanche is the Valley Blanche and Alpe d'Huez suddenly doubles up to become
Alpes d'Huez? Probably not.
Interski (0623-551024), a minnow based in Sutton-in-Ashfield,
Nottinghamshire which offers Courmayeur and La Thuile - produces an
excellent 41-page Holiday Guide to its skiing activities. Illustrated with
cartoons, the booklet deals with every aspect of a skiing holiday.
Ski The American Dream (081-552 1201) wants you to imagine 'the largest
country in the world covered with deep light powder snow.' This might be
something of a shock for Texas, Louisiana and Florida, but it would
certainly give The American Dream some interesting new resorts to sell.
Ski brochures are a great way to get yourself in the picture. Ian Prevett,
who designed this year's brochure for the Courchevel 1650 chalet specialists
Le Ski (0484-548996) made sure he starred in his own production by putting
himself on the front cover. And Colin Mathews, managing director of Meriski
(081-682 3883), based in nearby Meribel, has put himself on pages two and
three - and a back view on page 16 - of his brochure.
Andrew Dunn, whose Ski Scott Dunn brochure (081-767 0202) is again perhaps
the best of the crop this year, has been more subtle: he has splashed his
bride-to-be Jane over the front of his brochure. But it is an anonymous rear
view of her golden locks.
FlexiSki (071-352 0044) prides itself on offering ski holidays spanning
virtually any number of days from two to 22 or more in Courchevel and
Verbier. James Armitage of Simply Ski (081-742 2541) modestly claims that
its new luxury Chalet L'Ancolies in Courchevel 1850 'leaves all our rivals
standing.'
One of those rivals, the Ski Company (071-730 9600) prides itself on all the
extras (including drinks) it throws in free. Indeed, Steve Cox, a
restaurateur in Richmond, south west London, takes a party of up to 10 to
one of its luxury French chalets every year because he thinks the company's
prices - though by no means cheap - are good value: 'Our drinks bill at a
hotel would be enormous,' he says.
'Only one family ever exploited our drinks-on-the-house policy,' says the
Ski Company's David Kemp. 'A group from Finland could hardly believe that
alcohol - so expensive back home - was available for nothing. They were
pouring out tumblers of vodka. But they were such good clients we didn't
mind.'
On the other hand La France des Villages (0449-737664) promises 'very
sensible prices' for its first venture into the ski market at
Champagny-en-Vanoise. 'By not adding extras you may not require,' says
Nicholas Brimblecombe, 'we believe you will find our prices give unequalled
value for money.'
Oliver Ensor operates a home-from-home at the Chalet Savoy (010 33 50
545706) where, he writes in his brochure 'it's as though Mont Blanc were in
the garden]' Obviously this did the trick for one client - 'The skiing
terrain was exactly what I was looking for,' is the testimonial from 'Brian,
Alaska.'
Chamonix provides a plethora of British tour operators using high-mountain
guides for off-piste adventures: Roland Stieger, the fearless and funny
Frenchman, features in Ski Weekend's brochure (0367-252213). The fact that
Colleen Gerrand of Collineige (0276-24262) is married to Jean-Marie Olianti,
the guide Collineige uses in its 'First Tracks' off-piste skiing programme
in Chamonix, does not give her exclusive use of his skills. He is much in
demand both in the Alps and other parts.
First Tracks should not be confused with Fresh Tracks (081-875 9818) which
also specialises in off-piste skiing in Chamonix, Flaine, Verbier and the
now legendary La Grave. YSE (081-871 5117) which specialises in chalets in
Val d'Isere, has a particularly mouth-watering brochure and one of the most
original front covers: an old photograph of a pipe-smoking, presumably
French skier in plus-fours and a tie executing a Monsieur Hulot-style
snowplough.
Snowtime (071-433 3336) another operator based in a single resort (Meribel)
where it has prospered for 16 years, reassuringly states that: 'We tend to
preclude beginners from ski guiding.' I think I know what Snowtime is
actually getting at. The brochure adds: 'If you're able to handle a red run
without too many spills this is a rough guide to whether you should join a
ski guide.' Well, sooner a rough guide than a beginner]
The travel industry throws away about 40 per cent of the 120m holiday
brochures printed each year, many of them dumped unopened. AITO, the
Association of Independent Tour Operators, with 37 skiing members, is
funding an investigation by Green Flag International, an environmental
organisation, into ways of reducing this wastage. Good idea. With fewer
brochures to wade through, I might have more time to ski.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931113

