FT933-12638

FT  23 JUL 93 / The Maastricht Vote: Opposition parties exploit government's
discomfort


   By IVOR OWEN


THE opposition subjected the prime minister to a barrage of taunts and
insults in the Commons last night after the government's failure to vote
down the social chapter of the Maastricht treaty.
Mr John Major's decision to resort to a confidence motion today to try to
rescue the government from its crisis was scornfully derided by Mr John
Smith, Labour leader.
To cheers from packed Labour benches Mr Smith scoffed that the prime
minister had been driven to use the confidence factor because 'he cannot win
a vote on anything else'. He announced that Labour would table an amendment
to the motion to give the House the opportunity to 'vote positively' for the
social chapter.
Further cheers rang across the opposition benches when Sir Russell Johnston,
for the Liberal Democrats, attacked the government for doing a deal with the
Ulster Unionists to avoid defeat on the Labour amendment backing the
chapter.
He said ministers had been willing to 'strengthen sectarian politics in
Northern Ireland' to deny workers their rights throughout the UK.
Mr Tony Benn (Lab Chesterfield) urged Miss Betty Boothroyd, the Speaker, to
consider whether,in light of the government's failure to secure a majority,
it would be acting contrary to the Bill of Rights if it were to use the
royal prerogative to ratify the Maastricht treaty.
He claimed that there was no provision in the European Communities
(Amendment) Act - the official title of the Maastricht bill - enabling the
House to reverse an earlier decision.
Earlier, Mr Smith had warned Mr Major that if he sought to defy the will of
the house over Maastricht he would have 'exceeded the power of his office'.
Calling on MPs to support the social provisions of the treaty, Mr Smith
claimed that the debate was more about the 'tattered reputation of a
discredited prime minister' than the national interest.
This theme was taken up by Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, who
told Mr Major that if the vote went against the government 'we expect him to
obey it'.
To Labour cheers Mr Smith insisted that Britain had no future as the
'sweatshop of Europe', and forecast accelerating economic decline if the
policies of social devaluation which lay behind the attempt to opt out from
the social chapter continued. Mr Smith said Britain was alone among the 12
member states of the European Community in opposing a modest extension of
its competence to such matters as the protection of health and safety of
people at work.
He accused the prime minister of increasingly inhabiting a 'Walter Mitty
world' in which he alone suffered from the delusion that getting Britain
excluded from a decision-making process of considerable consequence
constituted a triumph.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930723

