FT932-3192

FT  15 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Reform changes the face of
Albania's farming sector - Meat and dairy production has risen at the
expense of cereals


   By KERIN HOPE


COMPARED WITH what happened in other parts of Albania, Mr Abdyl Shehi thinks
the privatisation of Peza collective farm went well.
'Some people who weren't satisfied with the share-out vandalised the
irrigation equipment, and now they try to move in and cultivate other
people's land. But we're lucky because there hasn't been any violence,' he
says.
Mr Shehi and his family own a one-hectare (2.47-acre) holding, considerably
less than the Albanian average of just under two hectares. But he has better
access to a market than other farmers: there is a daily bus to Tirana where
his wife sells their produce - potatoes, onions and spinach - in the bazaar.
More than 90 per cent of agricultural land and livestock has been shared out
among workers on collective farms in the two years since Albania officially
abandoned Stalinist self-sufficiency.
Land distribution, however, is still under dispute in the mountainous north
of the country, where most land is of poor quality. Although pre-communist
titles were considered void under the privatisation law, some villagers have
tried to claim back their old holdings by attacking the new owners.
Privatisation has brought a 30 per cent increase in milk and meat production
since 1991 as farmers built up flocks of sheep and goats, a form of
husbandry neglected in the communist period. Cows owned by the collectives
were handed over to individual farmers. But a shortage of feed and high
rates of disease have reduced their numbers, according to the agriculture
ministry.
The switch to subsistence farming, together with the breakdown of the state
distribution network for seeds and fertiliser, meant, however, that
production of cereals dropped by almost 60 per cent in 1991-92.
Albania has relied on food aid, mostly provided by the European Community,
for two successive winters. While wheat production this year is forecast to
rise 20 per cent to about 320,000 tonnes, another 300,000 tonnes will still
have to be imported.
Large-scale production of cereals is unlikely to resume until the land law
is reformed, allowing villagers to sell their holdings and create larger
farms. Meanwhile, efforts are being made to help improve output by
introducing market mechanisms to Albanian agriculture.
The US Agency for International Development has backed a project to develop
a market in fertiliser. A total of 30,000 tonnes of fertiliser, provided by
the International Fertiliser Development Centre, was sold through auction to
more than 150 would-be dealers.
More than half the bidders were unemployed agronomists who lost their jobs
when the collective farms were privatised. Much of the fertiliser, urea and
phosphate for winter wheat and summer crops, was sold direct to farmers with
a profit margin for the dealers of more than 100 per cent.
'We've made businessmen of many of the staff from the collective farms. The
fertiliser dealers will be well placed to market other inputs like seeds,
pesticides and machinery,' says Mr Ray Diamond, who headed the IFDC project.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930615

