FT934-8394

FT  16 NOV 93 / Business and the Law: Refusal to answer not always a right -
European Court


   By BRICK COURT CHAMBERS


   BRUSSELS


A fundamental principle of European Union law, that an individual may refuse
to answer questions in competition proceedings if to do so would incriminate
them, does not apply to civil cases brought in national courts, the European
Court of Justice ruled last week.
The court's ruling was made in a case involving the Arrondissementsrechtbank
in Amsterdam. A customer had brought an action in the Dutch courts to have
increases in bank charges declared unlawful under EU competition law.
As part of his case the plaintiff wanted to call bank employees to show the
increases were not based on any objective justification but were the result
of an inter-bank agreement.
Under Dutch law witnesses called to give evidence are generally obliged to
do so, except in criminal cases. The bank argued that Dutch law in this
respect was incompatible with Union law because it breached its right
against self-incrimination. The Dutch court referred the question to the
ECJ.
The court said the right against self-incrimination did not exist as a
fundamental principle of EU law where it was relied on by companies in
relation to infringements - particularly of competition law - in the
economic sphere.
But the rights of defence that are also part of the fundamental principles
of EU law do not allow the European Commission in the course of competition
proceedings to compel a company to answer questions that might involve
admission of an infringement.
The question the court had to answer was whether the same principle could be
extended to cover civil proceedings in national courts relating to the
application of EU competition rules.
The court said it was for the national law in conformity with EU law to
define the appropriate procedural rules necessary to guarantee the rights of
defence for interested parties.
It was not necessary for procedural guarantees at national level to be the
same as those at Union level. The guarantees needed to respect the rights of
companies in a competition case brought by the Commission differed from
those needed to respect parties' rights in national civil proceedings.
In particular, in a case such as the present, in which the proceedings only
concerned private dealings between individuals which could not directly or
indirectly result in the imposition of a sanction by a public authority, an
individual concerned could not take advantage of the right against
self-incrimination as a matter of EU law.
The right that existed under EU law was specifically designed to protect the
individual from measures taken by a public authority to cause that
individual to admit the existence of certain types of behaviour, thereby
exposing that person to penal and administrative sanctions.
The bank had also argued that the effect of such a ruling would be to
deprive individuals of their rights under Union law with regard to
self-incrimination, as the commission could simply obtain through national
proceedings what it could not obtain through its own procedures.
The Court rejected that argument. The Commission, or any national authority,
could not use information thus obtained to prove a breach of competition law
in the framework of proceedings which could result in the imposition of
sanctions, or even as a reason for justifying the opening of a preliminary
inquiry.
C-60/92: Otto BV v Postbank NV, ECJ FC, 10 November 1993.
Compatibility of service station agreements of indeterminate length with EU
law.
A pre-accession service station agreement would be compatible with the
exclusive purchasing block exemption even though the agreement was of
indeterminate length, because the general rules relating to the duration of
agreements had been amended for pre-accession agreements. Thus, as long as
the agreement met the other requirements of the block exemption, it would be
valid.
C-39/92: Petroleos de Portugal - Petrogal SA v Correia and others, ECJ 1CH,
10 November 1993.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

931116

