FT933-10128

FT  05 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Confusion over CVRD sale


   By BILL HINCHBERGER


   SAO PAULO


INVESTORS APPEAR nonplussed by the most recent volley in what is becoming a
Ping-Pong game of official comments on the possible privatisation of
Brazilian mining conglomerate Companhia Vale do Rio Doce, the world's
biggest iron ore exporter.
'There have been lots of rumours about Vale's privatisation, but none of
them have been confirmed,' said one analyst.
A high ranking official in Brazil's finance ministry stated last week that
CVRD, which is 51 per cent government-owned, would be sold before President
Itamar Franco's term is completed at the end of 1994.
CVRD preferential shares were among the biggest losers on the Sao Paulo
Stock Exchange last week, falling by 2.2 per cent - 5.3 per cent in relation
to the exchange's Ibovespa index.
The government owns 51 per cent of CVRD's total equity and 66 per cent of
its ordinary shares. This allows much greater participation in the
management decisions and oversight.
Despite an apparently unequivocal statement by Mr Clovis Barros Carvalho,
executive secretary of the finance ministry, another ministry official said:
'The official position should come out at the end of September. The rest is
just talk.' Other high ranking Brazilian officials have made statements in
favour and against CVRD's privatisation in recent weeks. In the meantime the
company remains off the formal list of state companies for sale.
Mr Francisco Gros, former Central Bank president, said: 'I'm not very
encouraged by statements that we're going to sell Vale do Rio Doce. That's
for external consumption. We are going to have lots of statements in favour
of privatisation that are going to be contradicted by the facts.'
The only clear signal on the government's position was made by former
finance minister Mr Eliseu Resende, who included CVRD in his personal
privatisation plans before being replaced by Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso in
May.
Since March, with speculation of an impending sell off, CVRD shares have
gained 30 per cent in dollar terms. Foreign interest, symbolised in a
bullish recent report by London's Latinvest, appears strong despite
constitutional restrictions on majority foreign ownership in Brazilian
mining operations.
Mr Anastacio Ubaldino Fernandes Filho, CVRD director-vice president, said
company executives had set up an internal commission to look at possible
privatisation. 'We are just being prepared. Nothing is formalised,' he
stressed.
Mr Juarez Fontana dos Santos, director of development for Paulo Abib
Engenharia, a mining consultancy, said opposition to a sell-off was strong
in President Franco's mineral rich home state of Minas Gerais.
Mr dos Santos, who favours privatisation, said an outcry was expected from
many who question why the majority shareholder should sell a profitable
company.
He said the privatisation debate might lead to the dismantling of the
company, despite non-mining operations like rail transport and shipping
being increasingly important for CVRD's revenues.
'Vale do Rio Doce is competitive precisely because of its synergies,' he
said. Piecemeal sales of subsidiaries 'would cripple the company'.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930805

