FT934-11157

FT  02 NOV 93 / Banking system feels a chill wind: Muramoto Construction's
fall


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


Yesterday's collapse of Muramoto Construction, Japan's largest since the
second world war, sends a chill through the banking industry at the worst
possible time.
The big question hanging over the Japanese banking system yesterday was
whether the damage from Muramoto would be localised, or whether the harm to
its 50 bank lenders would trigger more collapses among construction industry
suppliers. Bank of Japan and finance ministry officials last night played it
down, predicting the collapse was unlikely to destabilise Japan's financial
system.
'The total is so large that adverse effects to creditor banks will be
inevitable. But overall, I think they can absorb the loss in their financial
strength,' said a senior central bank official. The Bank of Japan would
monitor the effects on lending banks and on the general economy, but did not
expect 'any significant adverse impact', he said.
Muramoto struggled on after other over-extended property groups collapsed
two years ago, only to hit the banking system at a moment when banks are
already cautious about lending, in the middle of the worst recession since
the 1973 oil crisis.
A mark of the seriousness of the construction industry's recession came
yesterday with the announcement of the steepest decline in construction
orders among the top companies for 19 years - down 22.3 per cent in the six
months to September, according to the Japan federation of construction
contractors.
Yesterday's failure can hardly encourage banks. It was unclear yesterday
exactly what triggered Muramoto's banks to withdraw their support, in
contrast to other shaky construction and property companies kept afloat by
banks.
Muramoto began work on a debt restructuring last April, with its two main
creditors Daiwa Bank and Nanto Bank, the main regional bank in Nara
prefecture where the company is based. The main bank creditors put their own
management into Muramoto, in line with Japanese banking practice, and
proposed to change the company's president and liquidate its assets.
However, other lenders opposed the restructuring, and Muramoto found itself
unable to honour its bills.
Teikoku Databank, a private credit research agency, believes the discovery
of large off-balance sheet loans by Muramoto to its own contractors prompted
banks to withdraw support. Failures of property companies in joint
developments with Muramoto contributed to a sharp rise in bad debts, said
Teikoku.
Muramoto would not comment and Nanto Bank simply said it judged that further
support would not improve Muramoto's fortunes. If Teikoku's theory is true,
then the Muramoto collapse could be localised, rather than be read as a more
worrying sign that banks were unable to afford the continuing risk.
Until yesterday, Muramoto was an obscure unquoted family controlled company,
Japan's 24th largest construction group, and largely unknown outside Nara
prefecture, where it is a pillar of the industrial establishment. Founded in
1908, it has 2,200 employees and recorded sales of Y291.5bn in the year to
last June, on which it made a Y2.8bn loss.
Muramoto lawyers were yesterday quoted as saying it would take 10 to 15
years to restructure the construction group.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

931102

