FT932-3280

FT  15 JUN 93 / Letter: Proper recognition still to be given to unemployment
problem


   From Prof RONALD DORE


Sir, That unemployment will not yield all that much to 'active macroeconomic
policies' we've known for some time. Now, Edward Balls tells us ('A tide
that's not for turning', June 9) that the active labour market policies
Richard Layard was advocating in his Personal View (June 8), don't work
either, except as political tokenism designed to show the problem is being
taken seriously.
So what's left? 'Less generous unemployment benefits'? Yes, indeed, push the
welfare minimum down to America levels and you will force more people into
jobs - at the poverty-level wages which now characterise so much work in
America. Is that really what we want?
Surely we need to recognise that the unemployment problem is a result of the
new 'labour market scissors'. On one hand are the decent instincts which
have made a welfare floor of 40 per cent of average income pretty well
universal in European societies. On the other are those changes in society
and technology which have changed the job structure; more and more jobs are
beyond the learning capacity of people who did not do very well in school,
and fewer and fewer jobs are of the sort almost anybody can learn to do. The
exception are serving and caring jobs that are only slowly becoming
acceptable for able-bodied males.
And both of those factors are progressive factors. Don't we need to think
again about the nature of 'work' and how far doing it ought to be a
precondition for citizen dignity? The notion of a basic citizen income which
effectively cuts that link and makes extra-money-earning work as much a
voluntary activity for the lucky as amateur athletics, has been around for a
long time. Shouldn't the prospect that the unemployment problem will force
us into some such solution by 2020 start concentrating our minds on how to
get from here to there?
At present the only people thinking about this are the members of the
Citizens Income Study Centre and we are considered slightly dotty by our
academic colleagues. Isn't it time to take, if not us, at least the problem
more seriously, and for those who have a different perspective on the year
2020 to come clean and tell us what it is?
Ronald Dore,
London School of Economics,
Centre for Economic Performance,
Houghton Street,
Lonson WC2A 2AE

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930615

