FT933-12463

FT  23 JUL 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Anglo reduces gold hedging


   By PHILIP GAWITH


   JOHANNESBURG


ANGLO AMERICAN Corporation, the world's largest gold producer, yesterday
disclosed for the first time detailed information about the extent of its
hedging operations.
Mr Clem Sunter, chairman of Anglo's gold and uranium division said there
were two reasons for this change of stance: the group had achieved its
hedging targets, and it was no longer heavily involved in the market, and
had not been since April. As a result, he said, shareholders' interests
would no longer be prejudiced by the release of such information.
Mr Sunter's announcement follows a similar declaration earlier this week by
JCI, which has not previously disclosed details of their hedging operations,
and greater disclosure from Gengold. Both Gengold and JCI said they were
responding to heightened shareholder interest in the extent of a mine's
forwards sales following the recent surge in the gold price.
Figures released by Anglo - which produces about 270 tonnes of gold a year -
show that its producers have, in the year to June 1994, sold forward 24-39
per cent of their production, at average prices ranging from R37,800 to
R40,800 a kilogram. The gold price is now just under R42,000 a kilogram.
Slightly lower portions of production have been sold forward in the year to
June 1995, generally in the R40,000-45,000 a kilogram bracket. Smaller
portions again have been sold in the year to June 1996.
Mr Sunter highlighted two main achievements of the hedging programme to
date. First, it had kept marginal areas going at full production. He said
this accounted for about 50 tonnes of gold annually. Second, it had helped
keep all the group's major capital expenditure projects on track by ensuring
that they had suitable tax shields. This accounted for about 60 tonnes of
annual production. Hedging had thus served as an insurance policy to keep
110 tonnes a year of production in place, protecting 70,000 jobs in the
process. Mr Sunter said that even if the gold price rose, he felt very happy
to have secured 110 tonnes of production, worth about R4.4bn at current
prices.
Looking ahead, he said that now that the group had moved from the 'low to
the middle playing field', it would be securing forward positions on a lower
percentage of its production. Previously Anglo has said that it would never
have more than 50 per cent of production hedged at any one time. Mr Sunter
added, however, that the group had no intention of buying back its
outstanding positions.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930723

