FT933-12587

FT  23 JUL 93 / Hospitals may merge to form flagship trust


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


PROPOSALS to amalgamate London's recently opened flagship Chelsea and
Westminster Hospital into a single trust with St Mary's, Paddington, are
under consideration.
The move could eventually include the Royal Brompton specialist heart
hospital. It illustrates the extent to which a struggle for survival among
London's leading hospitals is provoking changes far beyond those envisaged
in the government's Tomlinson report into health care in the capital.
The development also shows that the National Health Service reforms are
forcing individual hospital managements to act in a competitive style
unknown before 1991.
An amalgamation between the two hospitals would create a trust to rival the
combined Guy's-St Thomas' Trust, currently the largest in the NHS.
Managers at St Mary's, who have proposed the move, fear that economies of
scale will enable Guy's-St Thomas' to win contracts to treat patients from
large areas of inner London.
They estimate that rationalisation of services through a similar
amalgamation would enable St Mary's-Chelsea and Westminster to fight back by
reducing contract prices by an average of 6 per cent.
The 665-bed Chelsea and Westminster, the largest single hospital development
in the NHS, opened this year amid controversy over whether it should have
been built at all.
Critics say it has unbalanced the NHS market in west London. The merger plan
is being considered by the Chelsea and Westminster management, as well as
the Department of Health.
Many of the capital's teaching hospitals have proved unviable in the
National Health Service market.
The government will spend an estimated Pounds 100m on subsidies this
financial year while it tries to achieve the rationalisation recommended in
the Tomlinson report.
St Mary's is a rare example of financial stability - it yesterday reported a
balanced budget for the second year running.
But a government-commissioned review of specialist services published last
month recommended removal of renal transplantation and cardiac services from
the hospital.
This would deprive St Mary's of 10 per cent of its income, and is adding
pressure to the amalgamation bid.
Lord Glenarthur, chairman of the St Mary's Trust, said in his annual report
yesterday that removal of the two services would 'undermine the hospital's
financial soundness'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930723

