FT932-7065

FT  26 MAY 93 / Department store sales fall in Japan


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


JAPANESE department store sales fell 6.5 per cent last month, in an
indication of the continuing weakness in consumer spending that is dragging
down the country's economy.
Car makers, who hoped their market had turned the corner in March, when new
registrations rose 3.4 per cent, reported yesterday that passenger vehicle
output was down 9.9 per cent last month and sales were 9.5 per cent lower
than a year earlier.
Officials at the Economic Planning Agency are concerned that consumers'
reluctance to spend could slow economic recovery, in spite of two emergency
economic packages, which were aimed at stimulating the public sector rather
than private consumption.
The EPA is also worried because sluggish domestic demand has led to a
slowing of imports and a rapid expansion of the trade surplus over the past
year, intensifying the friction between Japan and the US. Export industries
also have an incentive to increase overseas sales to make use of excess
capacity on domestic production lines.
Consumer spending has fallen in tandem with overtime hours and coincides
with a growing sense of job insecurity created by companies' promises to
reduce staff and cut costs in the quest for improved profitability. Many
Japanese companies have just released their annual results, showing a third
year of falling profits and the likelihood of another fall this year.
The Japan Department Stores' Association said sales in April were lower in
all areas, including a 13.1 per cent drop in household goods and 6.6 per
cent in clothing. In larger Japanese cities, sales slipped 7.9 per cent,
while in other areas, they were down 4.4 per cent.
Demand for commercial vehicles is particularly weak, with truck output
falling 13.2 per cent last month, the Japan Automobile Manufacturers'
Association said. Most Japanese companies are cutting capital spending, and
postponing or cancelling new vehicle purchases.
In the first four months of this year, passenger car production slipped 4.8
per cent, following a 3.8 per cent decline last year and a 2 per cent fall
in 1991, putting extreme pressure on most of the country's car makers.
Meanwhile, the Finance Ministry said Japan's net foreign assets rose 34 per
cent last year to Dollars 513.62bn (Pounds 333.5bn), mostly because of a
surge in the current account surplus. The ministry said private debt fell by
15 per cent, which reflected the willingness of Japanese financial
institutions to withdraw from foreign projects to bolster their domestic
operations.
Private direct investment rose 7 per cent last year to Dollars 248bn and
investment in securities rose 3.6 per cent to Dollars 655bn, though both
areas would have registered falls if the yen had not appreciated. Direct
investment in Japan was 26 per cent higher at Dollars 15.5bn, while
non-residents' investment in Japanese securities expanded 2.8 per cent to
Dollars 431.4bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930526

