FT932-7003

FT  26 MAY 93 / Arts: This beast is not for taming - Television


   By IAN HARGREAVES


From the moment that Mrs Thatcher instigated the process that culminated in
the 1990 Broadcasting Act, Britain's television current affairs community
sensed conspiracy and crisis. The argument ran as follows: irritated by
programmes such as Thames's Death on the Rock in 1988, the Thatcher
government set out to 'tame' the BBC by installing new management and to
distract ITV with a sweeping deregulation designed to force it to target
ratings and profits rather than politicians.
Even though the final version of the Broadcasting bill preserved much of the
ITV regulatory system, fears remained high. Now, it was said, the unequal
outcomes of the ITV franchise round would so impoverish the network that
difficult, unpopular current affairs would give way to gameshows, soap
operas and movies.
Alongside this debate ran another, fuelled by the clash between John Birt,
now director general of the BBC, and his opponents. Birt, through his work
in the 1970s on Weekend World, a current affairs show made by London Weekend
Television, and a couple of essays, argued that television should strive to
analyse the world, rather than being fixated by arresting images of
conflict, violence and emotion. This was Birt's 'mission to explain.'
Birt's opponents replied that this approach would lead to dull, cerebral
over-schematic television which few would want to watch. More subtle critics
pointed to the place of film-makers' logic in current affairs documentaries;
the way that a shot or visual reference can lead to another, communicating
more effectively than Weekend World type reasoning. Birt's view, some said,
was essentially 'anti-televison.' His most passionate enemies said he wanted
to kill off a rival tradition of narrative investigations. Birt has
therefore been accused of providing cover, both in a managerial and
programme philosophy sense, for those who wanted to tame the BBC.
As I sat through several hours of videotape at the weekend, I asked myself:
has this apocalyptic future revealed itself? Has the combination of Mr Birt
and the Broadcasting Act put TV current affairs on its deathbed?
In terms of quantity, the answer is decisively No. Since 1988, the BBC has
become a current affairs factory, adding to the long-established Panorama,
Question Time, Newsnight and the Money Programme programmes like Assignment
(foreign subjects, authored documentary style), and Public Eye (domestic
subjects, shorter documentary approach). On Sundays, it now even schedules
political interview programmes against itself, as Breakfast with Frost
precedes On the Record. What with Walden perorating away on ITV as well,
there are hardly enough politicians to go round.
Channel 4, which is irritating everyone in ITV by grabbing too much
advertising, persists with its successful mix of continuity and raw
experiment. Channel 4 News remains consistently first-rate. Dispatches, a
current affairs series of independent-produced documentaries, is solid and
sometimes better than that.
On ITV's channel 3, the franchise round swept away Thames and with it This
Week. An important casualty, it has been replaced by a prime-time mix of 3D
and Storyline, which are themselves to be succeeded this autumn by the
ambitiously named The Big Story.
Granada's World in Action, which has won a reputation over three decades for
inquiring, trouble-stirring journalism, is still there. Its audience is up
from less than 6 million five years ago to an impressive 8m to 9m this year.
It has just been booked for another prime time run in the autumn. At the
BBC, current affairs ratings since the Broadcasting Act are also more or
less stable. For the general current affairs programmes, old truths hold
good: programmes on foreign subjects are less popular than domestic themes.
Nor does this represent a complete account of current affairs. It does not
include new offerings like Street Legal, Channel 4's law programme, or the
chaotic but watchable LWT Sunday Supplement, where Edwina Curry fails to
control exchanges between a studio audience and a Sunday newspaper editor.
Nor does it weigh in the balance such ambitious projects as last week's
Crime and Punishment on the criminal justice system or Gimme Shelter on
housing. If this is the death of current affairs, then I'm Joan Collins.
But, ah, say the worriers, there may not be a problem (yet) of quantity or
ratings, but what about the quality? There is space to cite only a few
examples.
David Leigh's Storyline, debunking the evidence that MI5 bugged the royals,
was well-reported and argued with, dare one say, a Birtian clarity.
Panorama's report on pressures in Britain's Asian community - Underclass in
Purdah - swept away a stereotype as only the best television can. I had not
seen or read anywhere else what World in Action told me about Combat 18, a
British far-right band of thugs with links to the Ku-Klux-Klan and the
Ulster Defence Association. Public Eye told me things I did not know about
the US groups involved in privatising British prisons. In recent months
current affairs has tackled the monarchy, school tests, truancy, the old,
prisons, Tory aid for the Bush campaign, tuberculosis, drugs, homelessness,
bank charges, coal, oil spills, crime, arms dealing and the ambulance
service, to mention only a few.
Television has also ignored ratings and stuck ruggedly to reporting events
in Bosnia: both Dispatches and Panorama have made gripping contributions in
recent weeks. Martin Bell's Panorama was particularly telling because Bell
is no Birtian theorist, but was able by the sheer authority of his reporting
to communicate in his characteristically terse style exactly what he thought
we ought to think about the story he has reported with such distinction. For
Assignment, William Shawcross contributed a fine film on Cambodia. Those who
have followed On the Record this year will have emerged with insight into
most of the big, running political dramas. The Money Programme needs a
face-lift and has a less sure touch about identifying the biggest stories,
but remains commendably purposeful. I particularly enjoyed a recent film
about the battle for control of Clark's, the shoe company.
This is not to say that everything is wonderful. I was irritated by the
one-dimensional argument of last week's Panorama on working conditions; a
40-minute programme ought to have delved deeper than this caricature of
wicked employer versus exploited worker and supportive trade union in
explaining the important changes taking place in the UK labour market.
Public Eye's programme on alternative medicine was too close to the 'let's
blame the authorities for everything' school of TV journalism. Surely
consumers should be expected to take some responsibility for their choices?
The same programme's enjoyable film on dog dirt could have done with more
supporting facts about the scale of the medical problems and the reliability
of the evidence.
It is also true that there are plenty of dull editions of all these current
affairs programmes and that hum-dinging, government-shattering scoops are
elusive; the truth is, they always were. Perhaps a government as hobbled as
Mr Major's is beyond the target range of TV current affairs: by the time you
have commissioned the film crew, the policy you were out to expose has been
reversed.
It may also be that recent institutional changes in television will
eventually weaken its journalism. Although the BBC seems to have won its
case for a comfortable status quo on funding, the full effects of the new
ITV regime have yet to work through; a wave of mergers seems likely to be
the next big shift. Another fear is that independent production houses will
provide an insufficiently safe haven for adventurous journalism, although
this ignores Channel 4's experience and the fact that many adventurous
journalists continue to choose to work for independents. Nor should it
follow that a more competitive and diversely-owned commercial TV industry
will yield less or even less good current affairs. Apart from anything else,
factual programmes are cheap, compared with, say, drama.
Good journalism, especially work which involves months of digging, does
benefit from an institutional framework which is free from undue political
influence, strongly managed, reasonably settled and decently funded. But it
also needs vigorous competition and change, because without it journalists
become pompous and self-satisfied. I cannot see the evidence that the pace
of change just now is too rapid.
Christopher Dunkley is on holiday. Ian Hargreaves is the FT's deputy editor.
From 1987-90 he worked for the BBC, becoming director of news and current
affairs.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930526

