FT934-11542

FT  30 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: All downhill from this Crest - Diary
of a Private Investor


   By KEVIN GOLDSTEIN-JACKSON


CREST is a well-known brand of toothpaste. The same name has been chosen by
the Task Force on Securities Settlement for the proposed new share
settlement system which is expected to begin operations in 1996. Rather than
give people a gleaming smile, the task force's Crest is likely to make many
private investors foam at the mouth.
In preparation for Crest, the London Stock Exchange recently announced that
a 10-day rolling settlement for UK equities would be introduced on July 18
1994. The task force has recommended that the settlement period be reduced
still further: to five days at the start of 1995.
The time taken to post and clear cheques will then make it impossible for
private investors to deal unless they leave money on deposit with their
brokers and, probably, make use of a broker's nominee service. The brokers
will either charge for this 'service' and/or make a 'turn' on the money held
on deposit, offering a lower interest rate than an investor could gain
elsewhere.
With a nominee service, all dividend cheques go to the broker, not direct to
the investor, and it is highly likely that the brokers will earn interest
for themselves on dividends for several days (or longer) before crediting
the dividends to their clients' accounts.
While I am in favour of brokers' receiving a fair return for their work, the
nominee system can cause all sorts of problems. Under a nominee system, all
company reports, takeover and other documents are sent to the nominee, not
to the shareholder. Depending on the efficiency of the nominee (many of whom
leave a lot to be desired), these documents may then be forwarded to the
private investor.
Some nominees insert their client's name after the nominee name so that,
when documents arrive, it is easier for them to discover to whom the
documents should be forwarded. Other nominees do not do this and sometimes
get in rather a muddle. In any event, delays are caused. Yet, prompt action
on receiving documents can save an investor a small fortune.
Many small companies receive little press attention and are not followed by
analysts. The private investor, therefore, has to rely on the company itself
for information. If there is some 'horror' concealed in the notes to the
accounts, then, by the time an investor receives his report via a nominee,
other people may have bailed out of the company at a far better price than
the poor nominee-dependent private investor will be able to achieve.
The supporters of the nominee system claim it is possible for investors to
get reports direct from the companies concerned. I have tried this: it does
not always work. Writing to a company secretary asking to be placed on the
company's mailing list for reports will result in a report being despatched
in the first year but, quite often, reminders have to be sent in subsequent
years. Writing to company registrars dealing with millions of shareholders
in hundreds of companies is also not always effective, either.
Getting a nominee to exercise voting rights on your behalf at an annual
general meeting can also be fraught with problems, as well as incredibly
time-consuming and costly. And as to getting 'shareholder perks,' such as
discounts on purchases from a company's stores, most companies and nominees
find this impossible to arrange.
Using a nominee means everything has to to be double-checked by the investor
 -even more time-consuming than checking bank statements for errors. At
least with cheques, you have a fairly good idea of the amounts going into
and out of a bank account; with nominee share services, there are additional
problems. For example, I once sold what I (and the nominee) thought was my
entire shareholding in a particular company only to find, almost a year
later, that I still held shares in the company as a result of an earlier
share bonus issue of which I had had no knowledge and which the nominee had
not noticed.
The scope for fraud and tax avoidance by nominees is enormous. We have all
read of companies that have gone bust and where auditors are being sued for
alleged negligence - are nominees likely to be any better? Holding shares in
my own name, I know the shares are mine: I have a share certificate in my
name, not that of a nominee. At any one time, my brokers are not holding
large amounts on my behalf: I am, therefore, well protected by the
compensation scheme.
But if everyone is forced to move to nominee services, then many people will
find the terms of that scheme inadequate because their brokers will be
holding large sums on their behalf. It is worth remembering that, under the
scheme, a claimant only receives the first Pounds 30,000 of his claim in
full and 90 per cent of the next Pounds 20,000. The maximum anyone can
receive is Pounds 48,000.
Will this mean that more private shareholders will move to large, well-known
firms of brokers in the hope that size will bring greater security? If so,
will the numbers of independent broking firms decline and thus reduce
competition, to the detriment of investors?
Even if a broking firm is financially secure, if its systems foul up or its
record-keeping is poor, then it could be costly and time-consuming to sort
out who exactly owns what within its nominee service - and so clients might
have to wait some time before being able to sell their shares or receive the
amounts that are due to them.
I have never liked nominees. Indeed, 23 years ago, when I was just investing
small sums as a student, the FT published a letter from me in which I
stated: 'Far too many sharp deals and crooked practices can be carried out
behind nominees.' How much capital gains tax is the Inland Revenue deprived
of because the unofficial owners of shares have their identities concealed
behind nominee names? If it is proposed to have identity cards to reduce the
number of social security benefit cheats, why is it legal for people to hide
behind nominee names when the scope for cheating on tax is considerable?
It surprises me that a government which spends millions of our tax on
promoting democracy in other countries should connive with the Bank of
England (leader of the Crest task force) to remove democratic rights from
private investors. The Bank of England is a supporter of the Cadbury Code of
Corporate Governance: yet, where is the proper governance when private
shareholders find unwanted, costly obstacles placed in their path designed
to make it difficult for them to attend AGMs and vote on various proposals,
including takeover bids?
It is the private investor, more than the professional investment analyst,
who is likely to notice mistakes in the annual report. Indeed, there are a
number of instances at AGMs where private investors have correctly pointed
out simple errors in arithmetic in reports which analysts have failed to
spot. It is private investors who are likely to have more courage and ask
pointed questions designed to elicit information of benefit to all
shareholders.
Like many other private investors, I like receiving direct communications
from companies and having a direct involvement with them. After all, as a
shareholder, I am one of the owners of the company.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

931030

