FT934-8688

FT  13 NOV 93 / Books: At last Lenin is dead - Tragedy or farce? Arkady
Ostrovsky on Russia's recent past


   By ARKADY OSTROVSKY


LENIN'S TOMB: THE LAST DAYS OF THE SOVIET EMPIRE
by David Remnick
Viking Pounds 19.99, 576 pages
THERE IS a certain irony in the fact that David Remnick's book Lenin's Tomb:
The Last Days of the Soviet Empire has come out now. It is only a few weeks
since communists and fascists had gathered together under red flags with the
intention of restoring the Soviet regime. The building of the White House
which two years ago symbolised the victory of democracy over communism had
now become the communist's last shelter.
Only a few weeks ago the 1991 coup, brilliantly described by Remnick, seemed
like the final agony of the old regime. After the events of October 1993 it
now seems like the prelude to a bloody tragedy. The fourth part of Remnick's
book, 'First as Tragedy, Then as Farce', perfectly describes the mixture of
heroism and absurdity in Moscow during the August 1991. However, after the
Bolshevik's putsch in October 1993, this famous aphorism could more
appropriately be reversed: 'First as Farce, Then as Tragedy'
When Remnick's book was first published in the US earlier this year it must
have read like a documentary novel, with almost no gap between the events
described in the book and the present day. Today it reads not only as a book
which deals with the past, but which belongs to the past. This is not
Remnick's fault, it just proves that Russian history is changing with
'unhistorical' speed.
In the end though, Lenin's Tomb is not a historical survey, but an excellent
journalist's novel. A reporter for The Washington Post for 10 years and now
a staff writer for The New Yorker, Remnick spent four years in Moscow from
1988 till 1992. Most American journalists sent to Moscow manage to come up
with a book about their personal experiences in an exotic country. However,
Remnick is one of the few to have written one combining an excellent
knowledge of Russia's most recent history with high literary qualities.
Although the book contains mostly well-known facts, its main value is in its
sense of personal involvement with Russian life. Yet Lenin's Tomb is not an
adventure novel describing the life of an American journalist and his family
in Russia; it is rather a careful and respectful observation of the country
and its people. It is more than likely that in 30 years time historians will
consider Lenin's Tomb historically incorrect. But this does not matter,
because the book gives a better sense of life in Russia then any history
textbook.
Remnick's book reads like a thriller. It is not hard to imagine how Lenin's
Tomb could be turned into a film script. However, the semi-fictional
character of the book at times works to its disadvantage and makes you
forget that people in the book are not characters, but real people. Russian
history is treated sometimes like a detective story where the 'bad guys',
the communists, are caught and punished at the end.
'The Trial of the Old Regime', the last part of Lenin's Tomb, about the
trial of the communist party, makes it seem that the whole history of
Bolshevism ends with the last sentence of Remnick's book. 'The era that had
begun in 1917 with the Bolshevik coup had now ended - in a court of law.'
Writing an effective finale, like this one, is dangerous, especially when
you deal with Russian history.
Lenin's Tomb does not require any special knowledge of Russia or Russian
history. It illustrates the Platonic idea that we recognise rather then
learn. The names and phrases mentioned in the book are all familiar
'Russian' topics: Solzhenitsyn, dissidents, Stalin, anti-semitism, KGB. The
word KGB in particular can be found almost on every page. Sometimes it gives
the impression that Russian social, political and cultural life consisted
only of two parts - Russian dissidents and the KGB, as if there were nothing
in between these two states, as if it was impossible to live an honest life
in Russia without being a dissident. However, in reading Lenin's Tomb the
KGB is an abbreviation not only for the organisation itself but for all the
evil in the former Soviet Union.
The book starts with a shocking scene. Russian and Polish soldiers searching
for evidence of Stalin's crimes are digging out the mass graves of 15,000
polish officers and soldiers slaughtered by Stalin, when the news of the
August coup arrives. By digging out mass graves, Russia was trying to dig
out mass memory. This powerful image sets the pattern for the whole book;
almost every story from the present day evokes a flashback to the past. From
Remnick's point of view 'The Return of History', as the Russians discover
the true nature of their past, is one of the most important conditions of
Perestroika and the new political system.
After several years of digging up the past there is now a new tendency in
society: to let the past rest. As I am writing this review the Moscow
government is discussing how to remove Lenin from the mausoleum and bury
him. Most Russians are hoping that nobody will have to dig him out again.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931113

