FT932-10

FT  30 JUN 93 / Contractors tied to bribery


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


THE JAPANESE government was shaken yesterday by fresh allegations of
bribe-taking by a regional mayor and by the arrest of executives at four
general contractors, which public prosecutors say provided the politician
with Y100m (Pounds 630,000) in expectation of public works contracts.
Mr Toru Ishii, the mayor of Sendai, in northern Japan, and the former head
of a national mayors' association, was arrested by prosecutors, who also
raided the offices of the contractors - Hazama, Nishimatsu Construction,
Mitsui Construction, and Shimizu, the country's leading construction
company.
The case could provide further evidence for the US government, which has
claimed that bid-rigging and political deals are common in the Japanese
construction market, limiting opportunities for foreign companies competing
for public works contracts.
Mr Ishii's arrest was a shock for the ruling Liberal Democratic party, which
has been generally pleased by its returns at a weekend election for the
Tokyo metropolitan government, and is increasingly confident that the party
will not perform as poorly as expected at a general election on July 18.
Prosecutors alleged that Mr Ishii, 67, sponsored by the LDP and some
opposition parties at a mayoral election last year, met construction company
executives at a Tokyo restaurant in April last year. They further allege
that the companies gave him Y100m, three providing Y30m and Mitsui
Construction giving Y10m.
The construction companies denied the funds were bribes, but prosecutors
yesterday arrested the chairman, president, and managing director of Hazama,
said to have arranged the restaurant meeting, and a vice-president at each
of the other three contractors.
After the arrests, the Construction Ministry immediately placed an
indefinite ban on the companies' participation in bidding for public works
contracts under its jurisdiction. The ministry said the allegations are
'regrettable' and 'come when the public is losing confidence in the
construction industry'.
The case follows prosecutors' raids on 18 contractors' offices, inspired by
the investigation into Mr Shin Kanemaru, the LDP's former godfather and fund
manager, who is awaiting trial for tax evasion. The trial is due to begin
four days after the general election.
LDP leaders, forced to call an election after losing a parliamentary
no-confidence vote, fear that the arrest of Mr Ishii, one of the country's
most venerable mayors, will again stir public demands for the reform a
scandal-prone political system and provoke a voter backlash against the
party.
Mr Ishii, a former official at the Home Affairs Ministry, oversaw rapid
development in Sendai, the largest city in the north of Honshu, the main
island.
He was re-elected for a third four-year term in November, promising to
redevelop the area around Sendai station and the local harbour, projects
which would be lucrative for general contractors.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930630

