FT934-11669

FT  30 OCT 93 / Meat import ruling throws Rabin coalition into disarray:
Secular and religious parties are at loggerheads over non-kosher meat


   By JULIAN OZANNE


IN no country other than Israel could the importation of pork chops and
bacon provoke such a storm of controversy, threaten the government's fragile
coalition, put at risk an historic peace process and challenge the
government's economic reform programme.
For the past week Israeli politicians have been obsessed by the matter,
which goes to the heart of Israel's confusion about whether it is a secular
or a religious state and which has exposed the continuing power of the small
ultra-orthodox religious parties to determine the political agenda.
Throughout it all Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, has appeared
philosophical. 'Cabinet crises in the past have occurred because of real
issues, but more often due to religious issues. What a strange people we
are. What strange political institutions we have,' he said this week.
A week ago Israel's high court ruled that the government must allow private
importers to bring in meat even if it was non-kosher. Ruling in favour of
Meatreal Ltd, a private meat processing and marketing company, the High
Court said private importation of meat was legal under the government's
privatisation policy and under the Basic Law of Israel which grants freedom
of choice. (Before the High Court's ruling all meat was imported by the
government, which only brought in non-kosher meat. Despite its privatisation
policy the government had suspended private meat imports.)
'Israel is not a theocracy,' said one of the High Court judges in his
ruling.
The decision immediately sparked a storm of protest among Israel's religious
parties and Jewish fundamentalists who claimed the policy would make kosher
meat more expensive and drive Jews to eat non-Kosher meat.
More importantly the ultra-orthodox Shas party, which has six members of
parliament, said they would not continue supporting the government unless
the decision was reversed. Shas quit the coalition recently after its two
senior politicians were charged with fraud, breach of public trust and
misallocation of public resources. Without Shas, Mr Rabin's coalition
commands only 56 seats in the 120 member Knesset and must rely on support
from two Arab parties with five seats. Mr Rabin has been stressing the
importance of getting Shas back into the coalition to support the peace
process.
After the High Court's ruling Shas threatened to join the opposition and
vote against the State Budget, which was essentially a vote of confidence in
the government. If the opposition had gained a majority the government could
have fallen.
Mr Rabin responded immediately to defuse the crisis promising Shas he would
introduce new legislation to ban the importation of non-kosher meat.
But Mr Rabin immediately ran into problems with his main coalition partner,
the left-wing Meretz bloc which has 12 members of the Knesset and which
represents secular interest groups. Several Meretz parliamentarians charged
that Mr Rabin had violated the coalition agreement which requires prior
agreement of all coalition partners for laws on basic religious matters.
Some Meretz MPs warned that they would consider quitting the coalition. On
Thursday Mr Eli Dayan, a Labour MK and chief whip of the coalition, said the
threat could end the peace process.
Also furious about Mr Rabin's decision were private meat companies which had
already made orders for several tonnes of non-kosher meat. Mr Eyal Erlich,
owner and managing director of Meatreal, said: 'I hope Rabin will not take
part in making Israel a country like Iran. Freedom of choice and freedom of
occupation are a democratic country's ABCs.'
Mr Rabin is left sandwiched between the religious extremists and the
secularists. He told Meretz that it must be prepared for sacrifice in order
to bring Shas back into the coalition and secure the peace accord.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931030

