FT934-11190

FT  02 NOV 93 / Arts: Andsnes's Grieg - Concert


   By JOHN ALLISON


Sunday afternoon's piano recital by Leif Ove Andsnes formed a coda to the
Barbican's weekend celebration of the Grieg 150th anniversary. The
23-year-old Norwegian had launched this on Friday, playing the original
version of Grieg's Piano Concerto, and here the composer was represented as
centrepiece of the programme.
Grieg was above all a master of small-scale forms, and Andsnes offered a
string of miniatures - the fourth Albumblatte and six of the Lyric Pieces.
One had to admire him for playing pieces some might regard as too
insubstantial for a major recital. Simple only on the surface, they require
fluent technique to be brought off as enchantingly as they were here.
Andsnes's selection proved very satisfying, like a series of delicate
water-colours. He proved sensitive to their varying moods and vivid
characterisation, capturing his country's folklore in the Hardanger fiddlers
of the Albumblatte, and the humour in the 'March of the Trolls'. Other
highlights were a glistening 'Butterfly', the impressionistic
'Bell-ringing', and the touching simplicity of 'At Home'. Where other
pianists might have turned heavy-handed, he maintained an easy dexterity,
investing quieter dynamics with colours of extraordinary subtlety.
To leave the audience in no doubt of his virtuoso credentials, Andsnes
framed his Grieg with Liszt and Chopin. He opened with a bravura account of
the former's second Ballade, cogently argued, but Andsnes showed his serious
intent best of all in an elegant performance of the Chopin Third Sonata -
the Largo radiant, the outer movements majestic yet measured with an inward
calm which spoke of the interpreter's astonishing maturity.
Although the Grieg remained longest in the memory, this was a well-balanced
recital. An all-Grieg programme would have been too obvious, and this
versatile young Norwegian is right to avoid being typecast so early in his
career.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931102

