FT934-11520

FT  30 OCT 93 / Gardening: The idiocy of planting for ethnic correctness


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


MANY OF you may be looking forward to planting trees during the next few
months. You are interested not only in the 'best tree for a small garden,'
that elusive entity which obsesses books on gardening. You also want trees
for a field, an acreage of set-aside, or an eventual barrier in the
landscape.
If you want inspiration, look around you this weekend or visit a local
arboretum. The autumn colour is still holding up well, from Westonbirt to
Leonardslee. You have your last chance to weigh-up your options while the
leaves are looking their best.
Our choices are muddled with incoherent rhetoric which seems to be gaining
ground. It comes home to me whenever I look through the two main windows of
my life. One, the home window, is evidence of mistakes made 25 years ago by
somebody else; the other, the working window, reveals the options which
ought to have been followed.
The home window looks out across my garden into a tall boundary fence of
sycamores, the rock-bottom trees of British landscaping. Whatever you decide
after reading this, I do beg you not to plant them. By late summer, the
leaves are already dull and dirty; in autumn, they turn a soulless
grey-brown and are slow to rot when they drop.
The main reason they crop up so often in former owners' gardens is that they
seed themselves frantically and some of the seedlings turn into trees.
Nobody in their right mind would allow these seeding menaces anywhere near
their flower beds. But free-seeding trees appeal to ecological gardeners:
they can be introduced 'naturally' and, after years of seeding, they have
become so firmly established that they satisfy hedgers and foresters who
want to go 'native.'
Going native has become extraordinarily acceptable. County councils have
special grants for amenity tree-planters, who are so slow to claim them that
even a casual inquiry encourages a deluge of correspondence and offers of a
consultative visit. The grants have two conditions: the trees must be open
to public viewing, a reasonable condition as they are planted on public
money, but they must also be 'native broad-leaves.'
This second condition is ridiculous. Nobody will give me a grant if I plant
a glorious grove of ginkgos or an avenue of tulip trees which are
beautifully foreign. If I propose sycamores, I would qualify for a
broad-leaved handout. It seems batty to me. The council would probably be
asked to prosecute me for discrimination if I banned immigrants in any other
area of life; why does it give grants only to planters who conform to ethnic
correctness?
The notion is ultimately bogus, anyway. When does a tree become a native,
not an import: what about wild cherries or walnuts, both of which are
approved native broad-leaves but which historians have sometimes proposed as
foreign imports, brought to Britain by the Romans?
Why should we want a tree just because it is indigenous? Large areas of
'indigenous' British life are pretty second-rate. I would ban subsidies for
sycamores and point out to inquirers that there are far lovelier trees for
Britain than the service tree, hawthorn, common crab and elder which make up
a municipally-correct idea of a 'native hedging mix.'
Avoid sycamores, therefore, and do not fall for the mindless 'native'
rhetoric. Turn instead to the view from my life's other window, out beyond
the shoulders of pupils reading essays on classical slavery to a wonderful
harmony of winter-flowering cherry, non-copper beech, extraordinarily
foreign mulberry, and Oriental wistarias which are still retaining their
green leaves before going yellow in a blaze.
Here, natives mercifully are swamped by immigrants. While sycamores were
being planted in the sight-line of one of my windows, a connoisseur was
planting these un-English trees in front of the other. I wish I could risk
felling the boundary hedge and replace it with trees from the tutorial
vista, jazzed up by the best aliens which I could foist on the West
Oxfordshire council.
Like our restaurants, our hedges need to be rescued from 'native' staples.
We also need to break down the categories. When we think of the landscape,
we are still too ready to divide trees into 'specimen' or 'hedgerow'
varieties and to mark off some of them as 'ornamentals.' Fields and
set-aside, we seem to be saying, do not need ornamentals: huge, sweet
chestnuts, white-flowering winter cherry, Chinese sorbus, brilliant
parrotias or the best birches. No, they need the unspeakably British service
tree and the miserable blackthorn.
Even when we do dare to be ornamental, we run in ruts. Outside the garden,
birches still amount to the pock-marked trunks of a common silver birch, not
the stunningly white Betula jacquemontii. In fields, limes are large-leaved
limes, not the silver or weeping silver varieties.
I am not claiming that cities have broader horizons. From New York to Seoul,
streets are about to glow with the autumn duty of yellowing ginkgo trees:
why did British town councils miss out on this lovely possibility, planting
those awful yellow-edged acers on a main route into Leicester or splodges of
pink cherry when the A23 pauses for a tree?
We used to be told that street trees had to be chosen so as to be
vandal-proof: I never understood why a dreary mountain ash was any more
proofed than one of its Oriental relations. In fields and on farms, we were
also told that native trees were the right choice because they were better
at fighting for themselves.
Chemicals and machinery have reduced the force of these arguments. Our new
age of weed-killers, based on glyphosate, allow us to keep grass and coarse
weeds away from a newly-planted tree on a headland as easily as in a garden:
two or three sprays during the year will keep it clear without much
difficulty. As a result, we can risk so-called ornamentals in places where
once they might have succumbed to weeds.
We can also risk more of them at a greater height. The books still tell us
to transplant some of the better varieties as pot-grown specimens, about 2
ft high, because they will then take root. But better techniques of root
preparation and better machinery for lifting has made this advice outdated
in most cases.
You can now buy most of these trees at a height where you will not lose them
in the first year among your patch of weeds, set aside and subsidised by the
EC.
I buy my trees from the fairly-priced list of Landford Trees, Landford,
Salisbury, Wiltshire. Its ginkgos are Pounds 11.50 each (plus VAT) per 10 at
six to seven feet high, while Sweet Chestnuts are Pounds 9.25 at 8-10 ft and
tulip trees are Pounds 14.25 at a similar height.
Early in the 18th century, the great landscape architect, William Kent, was
said 'to have first jumped the fence and seen all nature was a garden.'
Nowadays, I merely suggest that we remember the full width of nature,
outside the British Isles, and then proceed accordingly.
Of course, we do not want anything too fancy or too variegated or too purple
and gold in the setting of farmland. But there is no fixed rule that woods
in Britain have to be beeches and copses have to major on hazels. Open out,
survey the world and enhance the view from your windows of the future.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

931030

