FT932-3123

FT  16 JUN 93 / Cambodian secessionist leader seeks refuge


   By VICTOR MALLET


   PHNOM PENH


PRINCE Norodom Chakrapong, leader of a five-day-old Cambodian secessionist
movement, took refuge in Vietnam yesterday in a move which apparently
heralds the end of his 'autonomous zone' in the east of the country, United
Nations officials said.
A UN military observer saw the prince and his followers drive over the
border in Svay Rieng province in a convoy of 20 vehicles and hand their
weapons to Vietnamese border guards. Prince Chakrapong, a deputy prime
minister in the communist government installed by Vietnam in 1979, had
announced the secession in protest at the outcome of the UN-organised
election last month.
The ruling Cambodian People's party won only 51 of the 120 seats in a new
constituent assembly, compared with 58 taken by the royalist opposition
party Funcinpec led by Prince Ranariddh, Prince Chakrapong's estranged
half-brother. The CPP said it was the victim of 'massive irregularities' in
the polling, but UN and international observers certified the election as
free and fair.
Prince Chakrapong's attempt to defy the UN and fragment the country further
(the Khmer Rouge runs its own zone on the Thai border) was undermined by the
evident lack of public support.
UN officials, foreign diplomats and Cambodians yesterday welcomed the
retreat of Prince Chakrapong, who has long been regarded as one of the most
unsavoury members of the corrupt communist administration.
Their optimism was tempered, however, by the knowledge that the CPP
leadership in Phnom Penh initially winked at Prince Chakrapong's stance and
is still challenging the results of the election. Hundreds of terrorised
Funcinpec party workers are reported to have fled to Phnom Penh from the
east.
Members of the new assembly, convened on Monday, are supposed to write a
constitution and form a new government within three months.
Mr Hun Sen, the prime minister, is now dissociating himself from the
secessionists and was credited on Monday with persuading his brother Mr Hun
Neng, governor of the populous province of Kompong Cham, to bring it back
under central government control.
Mr Uch Kiman, a government spokesman, said yesterday that four of the seven
provinces in the 'autonomous zone' were not even aware that they had been
included.
Prince Ranariddh portrayed the issue as a political dispute rather than an
argument between princes.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930616

