FT933-9879

FT  06 AUG 93 / Russian private bank to get Dollars 15m loan from IFC


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


THE International Finance Corporation, the World Bank's private investment
arm, yesterday granted a Dollars 15m loan to a private bank in the first
official attempt by the West to stimulate small and medium-sized business in
Russia.
The International Moscow Bank, a joint venture between Russian and Western
shareholders, will make medium- and long-term loans with the money, which is
to be repaid to the IFC by the year 2000.
The bank has lent less than Dollars 100m to finance projects within Russia
despite having Dollars 3bn on deposit - a striking indication of the
country's shortage of investment capital.
The bank says it cannot lend more than the equivalent of its shareholders'
funds because most of its funds are short-term deposits belonging to Russian
enterprises. The wider obstacles to medium- and long-term lending are lack
of confidence in Russia's investment climate and high inflation which makes
long-term rouble loans virtually impossible.
Mr Daniel Adams, the IFC's vice-president for capital markets, says the bank
will be a catalyst for loans by other institutions, even though external
lending could never compensate for the billions of dollars potentially
available inside the country.
Mr John Fitzgerald, a member of the IMB board, said there were a lot of
potentially lucrative projects in Russia despite a shortage of tools for
assessing projects.
The IMB recently lent Dollars 800,000 to help a small Russian company buy
equipment for the manufacture of caesin, a cheese-making ingredient with
export potential. The three-year loan was repaid within 15 months.
Projects eligible for the Dollars 15m fund must show a similar capacity to
generate foreign exchange.
The Russian government yesterday signed an Ecu145.3m (Dollars 161m) loan
with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to boost oil
production in western Siberia, according to Itar-Tass news agency.
The 15-year loan to the Purneftegas oil company, which will re-equip and
revive idle oil-wells and exploit new ones, carries a three-year grace
period and an interest rate of 4.5 per cent. Energy minister Yuri Shafranik,
said the loan would help build investor confidence. Mr Mario Sarcinelli,
EBRD vice-president, believes the project will be a model for other banks.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

930806

