FT933-5324

FT  03 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Farmers optimistic as cereal
yield falls


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


UK FARMERS could be reaping 5 per cent less cereal in this year's harvest
compared to last year but their optimism is undented after an improvement in
incomes for the first time in four years.
Returns to UK farmers are expected to be higher this year in spite of a
slightly worse harvest than expected, according to Dalgety Agriculture,
because the lower value of the pound has made crops more competitive
overseas.
Sterling's exit from the European exchange rate mechanism and the consequent
fall in the value of the pound meant an additional Pounds 135m in European
Community support payments for UK farmers in the final quarter of last year.
'There's a mood of general relief that we've bottomed out of the downward
spiral, said Mr Rad Thomas who has a 400-acre farm in Leicestershire.
'Before anyone starts saying farmers are seeing a big rise in income, you've
got to remember that we've come from the lowest base since the 1930s
depression and if we hadn't had this increase, a lot of farms would have
gone under.'
Mr David Naish, president of the National Farmers' Union, said the
devaluation of sterling had given farmers a short breathing space. 'Most
sectors have the opportunity to be profitable this year and these were in
deep trouble last year.'
But farmers are under pressure to cut costs and many are still giving up -
the NFU estimates that about 20 people leave the land each day.
Mr Adrian Peck, who employs two men on his 1,000-acre arable farm in
Cambridgeshire, does not look forward to cutting costs any further. 'If I
have to cut back on machinery and labour costs, I've just got to make my
fields bigger and that's a prospect that horrifies me. I'd become a
prairie-farmer because that's the only way to cut manpower costs.'
Nevertheless, Mr Peck is looking to buy a new tractor this year following
three years when he did not invest in any machinery. Many farmers are
planning equipment purchases with tractor sales up 20 per cent in the first
half of the year according to the Agricultural Engineers' Association.
Dalgety, which surveys 800 farms, suggests that in some parts of the country
wheat yields will be affected by heavy rainfall at the beginning of the
harvest season.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930903

