FT932-13264

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (32): Royalty on a
plate, is it a mug's game? - Not if your expectations are modest, for the
value of monarchic memorabilia depends largely on rarity in a field of mass
production / Alternative Investments


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


THE FORTUNES of the royal family, both literal and philosophical, may be on
the wane at the moment but this should not affect its appeal to collectors
of royal memorabilia. Indeed, since scarcity is the best friend of value, it
could make this an even more desirable area for modest investment.
For example, the second wedding of the Princess Royal, in December, was a
quick and quiet affair, an almost invisible event compared with her first
trip to the altar, which had taken place at Westminster Abbey amid media
glare.
As a result, the companies involved in the Pounds 10m business of royal
memorabilia had little time to get their act together. Only one mug, priced
at Pounds 19.99, or Pounds 39.95 in a grand edition of 1,000, was readily
available to celebrate the occasion.
But in 100 years' time this mug, especially in its limited edition, will be
more valuable than the mass of objects produced to mark her earlier,
grander, wedding. For the price of royal commemorative ware is determined
partly by the popularity of the person honoured, but above all by rarity.
Objects made in vast numbers acquire little value, and since mid-Victorian
times transfer-printing, plus speedy transportation, have ensured that
events like the jubilees of Queen Victoria, and the births, weddings,
coronations and deaths of her heirs, have been commemorated by the
manufacture of millions upon millions of items of celebratory memorabilia by
all the leading potteries of the day. Much of it has been treasured and
preserved, further reducing its rarity.
This makes it a popular collecting field, with prices well within the range
of virtually everyone, but anathema to the speculative investor. Prices have
risen steadily, if unspectacularly, in the past 20 years, stimulated by
increasing media coverage of the doings of the royal family; but a
Staffordshire cup and saucer, marketed to celebrate Queen Victoria's
jubilee, can usually be acquired for less than Pounds 50, and a coronation
mug of King George V1 and Queen Elizabeth for less than Pounds 30.
A popular misconception is that items celebrating the coronation of King
Edward VIII are rare, because he was never actually crowned. But the
potteries were on-stream for months before the event, and the Commemorative
Collectors Society has estimated that there are more than 400 separate
designs for his coronation souvenirs. A simple mug goes for about Pounds 50,
depending on its condition. Even with the slogan 'Abdicated' printed across
it, the value is only marginally greater. More valuable would be a mug
commemorating his birth in 1894: a rare example might make Pounds 500.
This is still a market dominated by enthusiastic amateurs. Unfortunately, if
you are mercenary enough to regard commemorative wares as an investment, the
best tip is to collect limited-numbered editions by the most respectable
potteries, like Royal Doulton and Wedgwood, and hide them away for a
generation inside their original packaging.
But beware: there are many ceramics manufacturers churning out mugs or
plates, claiming that they are an edition limited to 100 days of firing at a
pottery - yet within that time, many millions of items can be produced. The
limited editions promoted through advertisements provide a collecting,
rather than an investment, opportunity - except for the potter: items
selling for Pounds 60 can cost less than Pounds 1 to manufacture.
Most items of royal memorabilia sell for less than Pounds 200. But this is a
vast field and there are related pieces which can sell for many thousands of
pounds. At the extreme, a late 17th century Delftware plate, with portraits
of King Charles II and his Queen, would be valued at over Pounds 10,000,
depending on its condition. This is perhaps a different market, appealing to
the (mainly) American collectors of early English pottery. The mid-18th
century Jacobite wine glasses, with a prayer on the rim preserving the
health of Bonnie Prince Charlie, could be much more, up to Pounds 30,000.
Indeed, some of the most sought-after items of royal memorabilia could be
construed as anti-royalist. With echoes of modern times, there was a
dreadful row at the coronation of King George IV. His estranged wife
Caroline attempted to be crowned, too, and attracted much public sympathy
and a mass of commemorative ware. A three-inch-high jug which carries a
personal thought, 'Protect my mother', along with a portrait of the Queen
and 'God save Queen Caroline', could sell for over Pounds 400.
It was the long reign of Queen Victoria which brought commemorative ware
into every home in the country. Most collectors concentrate on a particular
subject, pottery, or personality, and Victoria appeals to all three groups.
The quality of the pieces marketed is extremely variable, but the more
primitive often have the most charm. A mug produced in Swansea in 1838 to
mark her accession shows her looking very young, with ringlets and a daring
decolletage. It is rare and sells for over Pounds 1,000 when it appears on
the market.
At the other extreme, Victoria's diamond jubilee was greeted with the
release of millions of mugs, which were often given to school children,
sometimes with the uplifting slogan, 'The Queen's earliest resolve - I will
be good'. These go for nearer Pounds 30.
Memorabilia about Prince Albert is rare, because the Queen's grief at his
early death was respected and little was released. This improves the value
of anything available. There are collectors of death mugs and plates. A
plate marking the passing of Princess Charlotte, daughter of George IV,
might make up to Pounds 500; a mug tolling the death of William IV would be
Pounds 250.
There are collectors of everything. Of ceramics celebrating royal births, or
royal visits, whether to Canada or to Cardiff. Of biscuits tins, cigarette
boxes, lead models, tiles, tea-towels featuring the royal family. Among the
most valuable items are gifts specially created by the leading 19th century
potters for presentation to members of the royal family at special events,
like the opening of a town hall or railway station. One or two copies were
always made as stand-bys, and when these appear at auction they go for well
over Pounds 1000.
Collecting royal commemorative items is like travelling down a vast and
crowded highway, but one with many interesting side roads. And it is a
market that is constantly expanding. It takes about five years for the few
interesting items to appreciate in value, and it is often hard to predict
what collectors will fight over.
Most recently, a mug of the Prince of Wales, with a massive ear for a
handle, caught the fancy, and now sells for up to Pounds 20. But most
collectors are keen buyers, rather than speculative sellers. It is a big,
happy market for everyone.

The Financial Times


London Page XXXI

930423

