FT933-12636

FT  23 JUL 93 / The Maastricht Vote: Election threatened if confidence vote
is lost


   By ALISON SMITH and MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


TODAY'S Commons debate offers a second day of almost unprecedented drama at
Westminster.
The voting pattern will follow that of yesterday with an opposition
amendment being taken first and a vote on a government motion taken
afterwards. But this time it really matters.
Mr John Major cannot expect to remain as prime minister if he loses, and
probably the Conservative party would find it exceedingly difficult to
remain in government.
At Westminster ministers and backbenchers were clear that a defeat for the
government today would mean a general election.
Even so, Tory MPs reckoned that there would still be a couple of Euro-rebels
who would vote against the motion expressing confidence in the government
and its policy on the social chapter.
'They would have to be seriously mad,' one minister commented, before going
on to list one or two who might come into that category.
A cabinet minister put the question starkly: 'People have got to make their
minds up. Anyone who votes against the government on a question of
confidence loses the party whip and would be unable to stand as an official
candidate.'
Ministers emphasised that if there were a general election as a result of
the government having lost the vote, then the rebels could have to face up
to having allowed in a Labour or Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition
government which would ratify Maastricht with the social chapter.
One said: 'The only possible choice for the rebels now is whether they want
the Maastricht treaty with the social chapter, or without it. That is the
only choice.'
The events yesterday already set new patterns. The use of the casting vote
by the Speaker - which was basically in favour of the government - will be
debated for years to come. In announcing her vote, Miss Betty Boothroyd said
that she was acting in accordance with precedent, since it was not the task
of the Speaker to create a majority in the Commons on a policy issue.
Others might argue, however, about whether she was constitutionally correct.
She could have decided that the government had lost control and therefore
given her support to the opposition forces. In the case of another tie
today, she could choose to go the other way.
As it was, the Tory rebels came to the fore in refusing to support the
government's own motion. They are unlikely to do so in such numbers today,
though some remain defiant. Even with pressure mounting, one rebel said:
'I'll have to sleep on it.'
A few rebels also insist that since the motion refers to the social chapter
it is not a pure confidence motion.
Though Labour now assumes that the prime minister cannot survive, ministers
fiercely rejected the idea that this was about Mr Major himself. They argued
that it was a question of confidence in the government as a whole and in its
policy.
'The idea that we change the prime minister and the Conservative party stays
in office is strictly for the birds,' said one senior minister.
Ministers said that the issue now had to be an issue of confidence in order
to prevent repeated blocking of ratification on the technicality of coming
to a Commons resolution. 'It's the classic way of handling a defeat on a
serious issue,' said one.
And if there was an election? 'Anyone with a majority of 10,000 would not be
back,' was the verdict of one seasoned MP with a majority comfortably above
that.
It was also a vote where abstentions spoke as loudly as votes. The aggregate
vote on the opposition amendment yesterday was 634. On the government motion
it was 640.
The very fact that the vote is taking place on a Friday, within hours of the
upsets, is a sign of the seriousness of the circumstances.
Post-war British governments have been in deep trouble before: Harold
Macmillan's administration over Suez and Sir Edward Heath's over the miners,
but never was there a suggestion that either would fall. The last government
to lose a confidence motion was that of James Callaghan in 1979: it happened
because deals with minority parties failed to work on the night.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930723

