FT933-5160

FT  04 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: Newton reaps the PEP benefits - Unit
trusts


   By PHILIP COGGAN


ROBERT SHELTON says he manages the Newton Income trust in a very
conservative fashion. But that has not stopped the fund from being one of
the best performing Personal Equity Plans on the market.
About half the fund's near Pounds 180m under management has come from Pep
investors, and during the past year the trust's popularity with private
investors has enabled it to treble in size.
The long term record of Newton Income is certainly impressive. The trust is
top of the UK equity income sector over both the five and seven years to
August 1 with growth of 105.4 per cent and 273.1 per cent respectively
(offer-to-bid with income reinvested, source Hardwick Stafford Wright).
Over the three year period, it is 5th out of 106 funds and over two years,
it is 7th out of 107.
In October 1992, this kind of consistent performance earned Newton Income a
top AAA rating from Fund Research, the independent group which monitors unit
and investment trusts.
Ironically, in view of the praise and the new money that has flowed into the
trust, during the past year Newton Income has slipped down the relative
rankings.
The trust is placed 65th out of 111 equity income funds over the year to
August 1, although investors have still enjoyed growth of 27.1 per cent.
Shelton, who has run the fund since March 1986 (apart from a one year
secondment to Newton's finance department), says that the trust was caught
out by Black Wednesday, when sterling departed from the European Exchange
Rate Mechanism.
'Over one 24 hour period' he says 'we lost eight percentage points relative
to the market.' The Income fund, following its conservative precepts, was
not invested in the highly cyclical stocks that benefited most from the post
Black Wednesday rally.
The fund has remained cautious over the past year with a high weighting in
bonds (which have performed very well over the last year, as inflation and
interest rates have fallen).
Shelton says that the fund will generally outperform a static or falling
market, but that it will tend to underperform a rapidly rising market.
The objective is to outperform the All-Share over a rolling three year
period.
Newton follows a highly structured investment management style, with a
strategy committee chaired by founder Stewart Newton, deciding on the
important themes that the group will try to exploit.
Added to this 'top down' view are the 'bottom up' stock selections of the
company's 20 or so in-house analysts.
These views are condensed into three model portfolios, which are designed
for Newton's pension fund clients.
Robert Shelton then selects from the portfolios those stocks which most
closely meet the income fund's requirements.
However, he also buys other stocks which can exploit the 'themes'
highlighted by Newton's strategy committee; given the rapidly rising size of
the fund, the portfolio now holds 100-120 stocks.
The Newton investment 'themes' can be very general. The group has been
concentrating on monitoring corporate cashflow during the recession, which
has helped it avoid many of the problem stocks that have damaged the
performance of other income funds.
A high weighting in utilities has also provided a boost to performance.
'We have been heavily invested in water and electricity stocks, although we
have moved out of water in recent months' says Shelton. The fund has also
taken advantage of its ability to hold a portion of its assets overseas and
has, for example, a stake in the Italian telephone companies SIP/STET.
The 10 largest holdings in the portfolio at the moment are: gilts and bonds;
Nat West; East Midlands Electricity; Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank; BAT;
Unilever; TSB; Shell; BT; and British Gas.
Although the fund is in the equity income sector, Shelton says that yield is
not the over-riding consideration when picking stocks.
'At no time will we sacrifice capital for income' he says, stressing that
the ultimate aim is total return.
Another of Newton's investment themes is 'communications' and Shelton
accordingly owns a low-yielding stock such as Vodafone in the fund.
'We can balance the low yields on some of our stocks against the high yields
we get on bonds' he explains.
The fund's distribution, which is paid quarterly, was cut in 1991, but this
was due to the effect of the management charge being taken out of income,
rather than capital. The current yield on the trust, after charges, is only
3.5 per cent. That is below the yield on the All-Share, although equity
income funds are required to produce a yield which is 110 per cent of the
index.
That has been a common problem with income funds since equity yields fell
substantially and managements have taken their charges out of income. In
theory, Newton Income would need to be reclassified unless its yield
increases but the sector definition may yet be changed, given the widespread
nature of the problem.
The Newton income is not really designed for those who want a high running
yield. But most of its Pep investors currently reinvest their income and
should, in theory, not worry whether their return comes in the form of
income or capital gain, since both are tax-free.
They certainly ought to be satisfied with its long term growth so far.
Charges. The initial charge is 6 per cent (at the higher end of the unit
trust charging scale); the annual charge is 1.25 per cent.
The current bid-offer spread is 6 per cent. The minimum investment is Pounds
1,000 or Pounds 100 per month via the savings scheme.
For the Personal Equity Plan, a monthly investor must put in a lump sum of
Pounds 1,000 as well as the Pounds 100 per month.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930904

