FT933-12760

FT  22 JUL 93 / International Company News: Compaq earnings triple as sales
record run continues


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


COMPAQ Computer's earnings more than tripled in the second quarter as the
company gained ground in the personal computer market.
The group also reported record sales for the fourth consecutive quarter of
Dollars 1.63bn, a 97 per cent increase over the Dollars 827m for the same
period last year.
Net income rose to Dollars 102m, or Dollars 1.21 a share, at the high end of
analysts' estimates. In the same period last year net income was Dollars
29m, or 35 cents.
'With this record-breaking performance we are continuing to move Compaq
toward our goal of becoming the number one PC manufacturer in the world,'
said Mr Eckhard Pfeiffer, president and chief executive. Compaq ranks number
three behind IBM and Apple Computer.
The group said its share of the world market increased significantly. Unit
shipments were up about 150 per cent over the second quarter of 1992 while
worldwide PC market unit shipments rose about 25 per cent.
European revenues were up 58 per cent, Compaq said, making it the slowest
growth market for the company.
Operating expenses increased substantially, with costs of sales jumping to
Dollars 1.2bn from Dollars 577m in the second quarter of last year,
reflecting the increased sales volume. Compaq said it had increased spending
on expanding its distribution channels, research and development and
advertising, compared with the first quarter. 'These increased expenditures
represent a strategic investment, to reach a greater number of customers
with a broader range of products,' the company said.
In late 1991, Compaq abandoned its traditional 'premium pricing' and
initiated an aggressive pricing strategy to win market share. Since then it
has launched a broad range of low-priced PCs, sparking an industry-wide
price war.
'Compaq will continue to aggressively pursue market share with a significant
range of competitively priced leadership products,' Mr Pfeiffer said.
Later this year, the company will introduce a new line of powerful 'servers'
for use in PC networks, as well as a new line of PCs designed and built by
Compaq aimed specifically at customers in the small office and consumer
market segments, he added.
For the first half, Compaq reported net income of Dollars 204.6m, or Dollars
2.44, compared with Dollars 74.3m, or 88 cents, in the first half of 1992.
Revenues jumped to Dollars 3.2bn from Dollars 1.6bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930722

