FT934-11797

FT  29 OCT 93 / High hurdles if you're not fit: The special EC summit is
forced to take a realistic view of the pace of integration


   By LIONEL BARBER


The special European summit in Brussels today is supposed to celebrate
ratification of the Maastricht treaty, but it looks more a stage-set for the
walking wounded.
The co-architects of the treaty are diminished figures: Chancellor Helmut
Kohl grumbles that Germans are not sufficiently grateful for German
reunification; President Francois Mitterrand is a virtual recluse; Mr
Jacques Delors, Commission president, laments the passing of an age when
Europe could think and act on a grand scale.
Not even this week's Franco-German initiative to inject fresh momentum into
European foreign policy could revive spirits. In Brussels, senior EC
officials described the joint paper as little more than an exposition of the
treaty, which paled beside past demarches.
Maastricht has claimed several casualties, but it has led to more realistic
views about the pace of political and economic integration in Europe. After
two Danish referendums, dozens of House of Commons votes, a wafer-thin Oui
in France, and this month's qualified approval in the German constitutional
court, EC leaders know there is nothing preordained about progress toward an
'ever closer European union'.
If the mood is modest, so is today's agenda. EC leaders will avoid the twin
minefields of the Gatt trade talks, and discussion about streamlining
decision-making once the EC completes the next round of enlargement
negotiations. The summit will not hear new prescriptions for the ailing
European exchange rate mechanism; and 'Big Bang' solutions to mass
unemployment - such as President Mitterrand's plan for an Ecu100bn loan to
fund public works - are likely to be given short shrift.
Instead, EC leaders will talk about the economy, primarily the need to
reform labour markets and improve Europe's declining competitiveness in
relation to Asia and the US. But no decisions are expected, because nobody
wishes to pre-empt Mr Delors' own White Book on employment and growth, to be
presented at the regular EC summit in December.
So what is the purpose of holding a meeting of 12 heads of government for a
few hours in Brussels, under the chairmanship of the Belgian presidency of
the EC, just three days before Maastricht enters into force on Monday
November 1?
The first order of business is horsetrading. At stake are the locations of
nearly a dozen EC institutions. These include the European plant breeders'
rights agency, the European environment agency, and the real prize: the
European Monetary Institute, forerunner of the European central bank, which
will supervise a putative single European currency.
Brussels officials are convinced that the original decision to hold a summit
was the result of German pressure to force a decision on the EMI. Mr
Jean-Luc Dehaene, Belgium's prime minister, was unhappy about staging a
special summit, not least because of the cost and the disruption to what has
so far been a meticulously planned and executed EC presidency.
But last summer Mr Kohl was adamant. He was impatient with the delay in
Maastricht ratification in the UK; and he was determined to bring home the
EMI in the hope that it would counter German opposition to giving up the
D-Mark and a fall in public approval for the Community.
The hardening of attitudes in Germany explains why the French appear willing
to drop their opposition to locating the central bank in Frankfurt. 'People
will say it's a German Europe,' says one official in Paris, 'but if Emu can
only be achieved with the price of Frankfurt, tant pis.'
The promise of gaining an influence over German monetary policy through a
future European central bank remains a driving force behind French policy on
Europe. The price, however, is steep: a high interest rate policy to
maintain the franc-D-Mark parity which is exacerbating the recession.
Some senior European Commission officials wonder privately how long the
French can hang on; theybelieve the Balladur government should have ordered
a reduction in interest rates immediately after the August 2 currency crisis
which led to the de facto suspension of the ERM. But none of these officials
is ready to call for an interest rate cut because they fear it would kill
the last vestiges of credibility in the Emu process.
If there is a deal struck today on the location of the EMI, EC leaders will
insist that Emu remains on track. But the test will be how member states
choose to interpret the so-called Stage Two process - which provides for
closer monetary and economic co-operation - due to begin on January 1 1994.
Under Article 103 of the treaty the European Council must draw up
macroeconomic guidelines in December on the basis of qualified majority
voting, in recognition that the national economies of the 12 members are
'matters of common concern'.
So far, EC finance ministers - led by France, Germany and the UK - have
brushed aside suggestions that the Commission might put forward specific
performance targets. Mr Delors himself remains dubious about Stage Two,
unless member states are willing to 'enrich' the process by giving more
leeway to the EMI to co-ordinate monetary policy.
The same question of political will applies to Maastricht's provisions for
greater co-operation on a common security and foreign policy, also to be
discussed today. EC leaders will identify possible 'joint actions'. This
Brussels code-word means a little more than reactive diplomacy, but a lot
less than sending combat troops to trouble-spots.
The UK's pet project is to send diplomatic observers to monitor the
parliamentary elections in Russia in December, and possibly the multi-racial
elections in South Africa next spring.
France is pushing the Balladur plan for central and eastern Europe; but one
objection is that the proposed stability pact's implied willingness to
examine all border disputes is an invitation to ethnic rivalry. Another
target is the Middle East, where the EC has drawn up plans to send Ecu500m
in aid to the occupied territories.
More complicated is former Yugoslavia, where the Community remains scarred
by its failure to secure a peace settlement but also by the divisions caused
by the successful German push for early EC recognition of Croatia and
Slovenia.
New provisions in Maastricht covering drugs and immigration and crime are
more promising. In Germany, where Mr Kohl frets about Mafia-type gangs
exploiting a frontier-free Europe, officials speak with genuine enthusiasm
about closer intergovernmental co-operation. Crackdowns on crime also sell
well in the UK, even when sold under the Brussels brand-name.
What is striking is the consensus inside Brussels and among member states
that it is time to call a truce in the quasi-religious war over Maastricht.
'No more permanent revolution,' says one EC official, 'there's plenty of
meat in the treaty and we have to make it work.'
UK officials agree. They detect that the tide is running in favour of looser
forms of co-operation between governments rather than centralised direction
from Brussels.
Thus, the cliche image of Brussels bureaucrats churning out directives on
standardised Euro-coffins and Euro-condoms is passe now that the Single
Market legislation is virtually complete. The Commission put out 162
directives in 1990 and 145 in 1991; barely 50 have been completed this year.
The Commission's role is evolving more as a regulator than as an initiator
of EC laws. EC officials say it was always meant to be so. Maastricht was,
after all, a good deal less ambitious than the Single European Act of 1986
which introduced a significant change in decision-making through qualified
voting.
The slogan of the day is subsidiarity - powers to be devolved to the lowest
appropriate level. It is a powerful tool, and EC officials worry that it
could be extended to scrapping established directives, particularly social
legislation such as the 48-hour working week. In recent months, Germany's
preoccupation with national problems has made it more enthusiastic about
subsidiarity.
In the short term, however, the challenge for the EC is to stop the forces
of fragmentation which have been in the ascendancy since the Danes rejected
Maastricht in June 1992. The second, Yes vote, did little to alleviate them.
Three tests beckon: the first is enlargement. The Community has set a target
date of January 1 1995 for the entry of Finland, Norway, Sweden and Austria.
Even if one or two applicants fail in referendums, it is a tough date to
meet.
Second, the 1994 European Parliament elections will offer a real test of
European public opinion about the EC. Two-thirds abstention rates will be a
bad omen.
Third, and most important, is whether the EC can reach a Gatt agreement by
the agreed deadline of December 15. One senior Brussels official warns that
failure would 'split the Community to the bone'.
A senior German official agrees: 'A Gatt agreement must be done with France.
But without France, it will be the beginning of the end of the Franco-German
alliance.'
EC leaders believe there is nothing to be gained by forcing the Gatt issue
at today's summit because it would risk isolating France and creating a
public spectacle of disunity. Their goal is to postpone a showdown in the
hope of persuading France to come back into the Community fold. It is a
traditional, but high-risk, strategy.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
THE RACE TO INTEGRATION
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
December 1991       Maastricht treaty agreed at EC summit
February 1992       Heads of state and government sign treaty
June 1992           Danes reject treaty in referendum
September 1992      Black Wednesday sends sterling and lira out of
                    exchange rate mechanism (ERM)
September 1992      French approve treaty, but narrow result emphasises
                    fragility of pro-European sentiment
December 1992       Edinburgh summit reaches seven-year EC budget deal
                    and new accord on Danish question
May 1993            Danes, in second referendum, approve treaty
July 1993           UK parliament gives approval for treaty ratification
August 1993         Collapse of ERM
October 1993        German constitutional court rules in favour of
                    treaty ratification
November 1 1993     Treaty goes into force
1999                European Monetary Union
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931029

