FT931-3888

FT  13 MAR 93 / Operation Cheetah will continue its hunt: Merseyside
investigation to carry on after Hatton's acquittal


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


YESTERDAY's acquittal of Mr Derek Hatton and his three co-defendants on
fraud charges comes nearly 10 years after he led a group of councillors from
the far left of the Labour party to take control of Liverpool City Council.
The prosecution at Mold Crown Court in Wales was part of Operation Cheetah,
a Merseyside police fraud squad investigation, which in three years involved
23 arrests and threw a cloud of suspicion over Liverpool City Council.
Even now, the police have said that the operation will continue.
At one stage, more than 30 officers were involved. Police went to the US,
Spain and Ireland - at home, they raided the offices and homes of senior
executives and directors of leading companies.
Only one executive was charged - Mr Roy Stewart, managing director of
Rogersons Developments, a building company. Mr Stewart was discharged on the
judge's direction last week at the end of the prosecution case.
Mr Hatton was alleged to have improperly used his influence with two former
councillors - Ms Hannah Folan and Mr John Nelson - to help ensure sites for
carparks were leased to Mr John Monk, Mr Hatton's tailor.
Mr Nelson, who formerly chaired the council's planning committee, was one of
47 Labour councillors disqualified from office in March 1987 for alleged
financial mismanagement along with Mr Hatton. Ms Folan was one of the Labour
replacements elected the following May. She chaired the estates
sub-committee, which deals with lettings, but left the council in 1991.
Mr Hatton, always dapper and well-dressed, was a prominent customer of Mr
Monk, whose tailoring business was near the offices of Settleside, Mr
Hatton's PR company.
All the defendants exercised their right not to give evidence at the end of
the prosecution case, which revealed that deals to sell or lease Liverpool's
assets were often negotiated and not always advertised.
Since the prosecution was alleging Liverpool had been defrauded because it
might have got more by leasing the carpark land to someone other than Mr
Monk, lack of certainty about prices and methods of deciding them was
crucial. Not surprisingly, the jury - after 7 1/2 hours of deliberation -
refused to convict on the evidence.
In Mr Hatton's heyday, Liverpool City Council was notionally led by Mr John
Hamilton, a Labour moderate and headteacher who thought he could control the
far left. But he soon found that real power lay with Liverpool's district
Labour party, which often told the caucus of Labour councillors what to do.
The real leader was Mr Hatton, Mr Hamilton's deputy. Mr Hatton, a natural
orator and showman was a social worker employed by the neighbouring borough
of Knowsley. He admitted that he supported the ideas of the Militant, a
weekly publication describing itself as 'the Marxist newspaper for Labour
and youth'.
The council borrowed from foreign banks to fund its policy of economic
regeneration through building council houses. In 1985, with little money
left to pay wages, the leadership tried to make more than 30,000 employees
redundant.
In one of his strongest speeches, Mr Neil Kinnock, then Labour leader,
denounced the Liverpool leaders' behaviour as 'grotesque'. Mr Kinnock then
set about removing what had become an electoral liability. The district
Labour party was suspended and a purge began.
The government also acted. In 1987, 47 Labour councillors were disqualified
from public office for five years and surcharged for alleged financial
mismanagement. The surcharges - which with legal costs eventually exceeded
Pounds 700,000 - were paid after several years of fund-raising in the Labour
and union movements.
Out of office, Mr Hatton continued to make a living as a media personality,
star of TV commercials and public relations consultant.
His company, Settleside, offered lobbying services founded on an intimate
knowledge of local government. It went into liquidation after Operation
Cheetah began and publicity drove its corporate clients away.
Its legacy for Mr Hatton is understood to be a well-financed pension fund
that liquidators cannot touch and which will ensure an affluent retirement.
But Mr Hatton still has a bill likely to run into thousands of pounds to
settle first - the judge yesterday refused him costs.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930313

