FT931-4199

FT  12 MAR 93 / G7's move to back Yeltsin gathers pace


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER and GEORGE GRAHAM


   TOKYO, WASHINGTON


OFFICIALS of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations will gather in
Hong Kong at the weekend, paving the way for a possible early G7 ministerial
meeting to assess the mounting political and economic crisis in Russia.
The Hong Kong meeting will be attended by Mr Boris Fyodorov, Russia's deputy
prime minister. It is expected to explore the convening of a special meeting
of G7 foreign and finance ministers in Washington next month, and comes as a
response to Tuesday's call from President Bill Clinton for an early
consideration of the Russian situation. Japan last month rejected a call
from the EC to bring forward the date of the G7 summit scheduled to be held
in Tokyo in July. The moves will be widely seen as an attempt by the G7
nations to provide moral support for President Boris Yeltsin, who is engaged
in a fierce political battle with opponents over the course of economic
reform.
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the French prime minister, told his weekly news
conference in Paris yesterday: 'Russia needs economic help . . . It is
necessary for Japan and the US to help more,' adding that 'a meeting of G7
heads of state should take place as soon as possible. It remains to fix the
date.'
In Washington, officials said no decisions had yet been taken on the time,
place or level of a formal G7 meeting.
'There does seem to be interest among various parties for an earlier meeting
of the G7 to discuss Russia. I don't know if you could call it a stampede,'
said Ms Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary.
Other officials indicated that there would probably be no decision until
after Mr Clinton and President Yeltsin meet in Vancouver on April 3-4.
Mr Yohei Kono, the Japanese cabinet secretary, said the Hong Kong meeting
would be an opportunity to hear about developments in the Russian economy.
Deputy finance ministers will also meet in Hong Kong to plan the April
meeting which is expected to draw up plans for further assistance to Russia.
The Russian issue is likely to prove increasingly difficult for the Japanese
government in the run-up to the July summit. Its anxiety that the summit
should run smoothly is balanced by its unwillingness to consider further
economic aid to Russia.
The formal reason is that Japan has still not settled its territorial
dispute over the sovereignty of four islands off the northern tip of Japan.
However, Japanese relations with Russia have markedly worsened in the wake
of Mr Yeltsin's sudden cancellation of his planned visit to Tokyo last
September. Since then Japanese opposition to further aid to Russia has
hardened. In addition, officials in Japan's finance and trade ministries
believe that further aid would be, in the words of one, 'like pouring money
down a sieve'. The US, Germany, France and the UK, on the other hand, are
expressing growing concern about Mr Yeltsin's precarious hold on power.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930312

