FT933-9903

FT  06 AUG 93 / Government Bonds: Drop in gold price sparks demand for
long-dated Treasuries


   By PATRICK HARVERSON and SARA WEBB


   NEW YORK, LONDON


SHARP declines in gold prices sparked heavy buying at the long end of the US
bond market yesterday.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  1/4 at 107
25/32 , yielding 6.525 per cent, close to its all-time low. At the short end
of the market, the two-year note was up  3/32 at 100 1/4 , to yield 4.101
per cent.
Although still nervous about the possibility that President Bill Clinton's
first budget package will fail to pass through Congress, Treasury investors
were encouraged yesterday by big declines in gold prices. Earlier this year
gold prices had risen on revived fears of inflation, but recent inflation
data have calmed those fears, leading to some selling of gold.
Yesterday, the Comex gold price dropped more than Dollars 20 to under
Dollars 400, and the sharp decline spurred immediate buying of longer-dated
government securities, and helped offset the unexpectedly large 60,000
decline in weekly jobless claims, a figure that normally would have
unsettled the bond market.
Later in the day, the market received an extra boost from Mr David Mullins,
the Federal Reserve vice-chairman, who said that the president's budget
would slow economic growth, in spite of low interest rates.
UK government bonds gained almost half a point at the long end on strong
investor demand. Both overseas and domestic investors have been snapping up
gilts and Eurosterling paper, attracted by the relatively high yields and
the low inflation background.
Index-linked gilts continued to perform well, gaining over half a point
yesterday. Short-dated conventional gilts held up well although dealers
noted some disappointment at the lack of a base rate cut. The September gilt
futures contract on Liffe traded at 110.23 by late afternoon, up 11/32 from
Wednesday's close, on volume of 41,086 contracts.
EUROPEAN government bond markets wilted or showed only modest gains
yesterday as the interest rate cuts which many had hoped would sweep across
the continent in the wake of the ERM's weekend revamp proved rather more
elusive.
Ecu bonds rallied, and dealers said the actual yield spread over the
theoretical yield continued to narrow from around 25 basis points at the
start of the week to around zero yesterday.
SWEDEN'S central bank snipped 25 basis points off its marginal lending rate
to 8.25 per cent, boosting the treasury bill sector but leaving longer-dated
issues uninspired.
'The market had been discounting a bigger cut - while it was disappointed by
the size, it was pleasantly surprised by the timing,' said one dealer.
Two-year notes ended unchanged with a yield of 6.82/6.79 per cent.
Elsewhere in Scandinavia, the Danish government bond market plummeted,
losing nearly a point at the long end as the central bank held its repo rate
at 11 per cent. 'Short rates are ridiculously high, and it's making the bond
market very illiquid,' complained one dealer.
SHORT-DATED French government bonds weakened on disappointment that the
central bank left its key interest rates unchanged again.
However, Ms Marie Owens Thomsen, international economist at Midland Global
Markets, said she expected interest rates to fall at Monday's repo,
predicting that the 10 per cent, 24-hour rate would be replaced by the
five-to-10-day rate of 7.75 per cent.
There was some good news in the form of a well-received FFr19.1bn auction of
10-year and 30-year bonds. The average yield on 10-year OATs at auction fell
to 6.46 per cent from 6.72 per cent a month ago, while the average yield on
the 30-year bond fell to 7.19 per cent from 7.61 per cent at the previous
auction.
GERMANY saw lively trade with the bund futures contract ending the day
firmer. The Liffe contract opened at 96.89 and reached a high of 97.08
before ending at around 97.00.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930806

