FT932-6802

FT  27 MAY 93 / Karadzic spurns UN plan for war crimes tribunal


   By KERIN HOPE, MICHAEL LITTLEJOHNS AT THE UN and ROBERT MAUTHNER


   BELGRADE, NEW YORK, LONDON


MR Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, yesterday said he would refuse
to co-operate with an international tribunal being set up by the United
Nations to investigate war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.
'We would not deliver anyone accused of war crimes to this form of justice,'
he said. 'This is an attempt to choose sides and to proclaim one side
guilty.'
Early yesterday the UN Security Council agreed unanimously to establish an
international tribunal to hear charges of war crimes, including ethnic
cleansing, murder, rape and torture in former Yugoslavia.
It will be the first such body since the Nuremburg and Tokyo courts were set
up at the end of the second world war. But unlike those tribunals, the
11-member UN court will not be empowered to impose death sentences.
While it will sit in The Hague, home of the international court of justice,
the tribunal is expected to hear cases in countries closer to former
Yugoslavia.
Bringing the accused to justice may not be easy and it is likely to be some
time before the first case is heard. A commission set up by the Security
Council is collecting evidence of atrocities. Serbs, Bosnians and Croats
have all been accused of violations of international humanitarian law.
Meanwhile, in Sarajevo yesterday Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, international
mediator on Bosnia, held talks in an attempt to persuade the Moslem-led
Bosnian government to accept the Washington accord to contain the fighting.
.
Mr Alija Izetbegovic, Moslem president of Bosnia, rejected the accord,
saying it would allow Bosnian Serbs to keep territory they seized.
In London, Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, yesterday said the
Vance-Owen plan for Bosnia was not 'immutable' and that it could probably
not be brought about 'in one giant step'.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930527

