FT934-11541

FT  30 OCT 93 / Briefcase, Q&A: Benefit turns sour


DURING 1991/92, I started a new job. This included a company car, with
petrol provided for business mileage only.
In my tax return for the year, I declared the appropriate scale charge,
reduced proportionately for the number of months for which the vehicle was
at my disposal, and this was accepted.
During the following year, the benefit was improved to include fuel consumed
for private mileage. I assumed I would be taxed only from when the benefit
started.
But the Revenue has now told me that 'fuel is an all or nothing charge. If
you make good the cost of all the fuel provided for private use, the car
fuel scale charge is nil. If you fail to make good the cost of all the fuel
provided for private use, the full amount of the car fuel scale charge is
chargeable.'
Is the Revenue correct that there can be no proportionate reduction in the
annual scale charge for the period before the benefit was provided? If so,
could I now reimburse my employer for private fuel costs from the date the
benefit was provided to the end of that tax year, and thereby eliminate the
tax liability?
The answer to your first question is yes, by virtue of section 158 of the
Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 as amended for 1992-93.
The answer to your second question is no, because sub-section 6 of section
158 says that 'the cash equivalent is nil' only 'if in the relevant year . .
. the employee is required to make good to the person providing the fuel the
whole of the expense incurred by him in or in connection with the provision
of fuel for his private use and he does so . . .'
Ask your tax office for the free explanatory booklet 480 (Guide to expenses
payments and benefits for directors and certain employees). This will give
you an idea of the arbitrary nature of the rules laid down by parliament:
they do not purport to be equitable or logical.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All enquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

931030

