FT932-6974

FT  26 MAY 93 / Steinkuhler quits IG Metall over share dealing allegations


   By QUENTIN PEEL and DAVID WALLER


   BONN, FRANKFURT


MR Franz Steinkuhler, Germany's most powerful union leader, yesterday
resigned as head of more than 3m engineering workers over allegations of
insider share-dealing.
His decision was greeted with relief by Germany's financial establishment,
fearful of the international reaction to evidence of unrestricted insider
trading on German stock exchanges, but with regret in the trade union
movement.
The resignation was an-nounced in a brief statement read out by an official
at the Frankfurt headquarters of IG Metall, Germany's largest trade union.
'I am going, but IG Metall will remain,' Mr Steinkuhler declared,
acknowledging his 'infinite sorrow' at quitting when times were already
difficult for the union, and likely to get even more difficult 'because of
my own mistakes'.
Insider dealing is not legally restricted in Germany, but Mr Theo Waigel,
the finance minister, has promised to draft legislation by the summer which
will include both fines and jail terms for offenders.
The move represented a sudden change of heart from Monday, when the
engineers' leader, a popular and charismatic figure throughout the labour
movement, offered his resignation - but also appealed for support from his
colleagues to stay on.
Mr Klaus Zwickel, his deputy and probable successor, insisted that the union
executive did not call for his resignation, and Mr Steinkuhler said his
decision was taken 'against the advice and pleas of many colleagues'.
Earlier, the union leader had admitted speculating in the shares of
companies connected to Daimler-Benz, Germany's largest industrial group, on
whose supervisory board he sits. He admitted buying shares in Fokker, the
Dutch aircraft manufacturer, shortly before its takeover by Daimler's
Deutsche Aerospace subsidiary was confirmed.
He also confirmed that he had bought almost DM1m (Pounds 390,000) worth of
shares in Mercedes AG Holding, the Daimler holding company, on the eve of a
decision to swap its shares for those of Daimler, causing a sharp jump in
the share price.
'His resignation is a logical consequence of what he has done,' said Mr
Rudiger von Rosen, chief executive of Deutsche Borse, the German stock
exchange. 'This does not mean he was guilty of insider trading. But it is
clearly wrong for people in this position to speculate in the shares of
companies with which they are associated as members of supervisory boards.'
Mr Steinkuhler had already announced his intention to suspend his membership
of the Daimler supervisory board until the outcome of an inquiry by the
insider commission of the Frankfurt stock exchange, which he has asked to
investigate his own case in particular.
Left in disarray, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930526

