FT934-8449

FT  16 NOV 93 / Keating plea over Aborigine rights


   By NIKKI TAIT


   SYDNEY


MR Paul Keating, Australian prime minister, yesterday called on the nation
to use high court recognition of Aborigines' land rights as 'an opportunity
to transcend the history of dispossession' for Australia's indigenous
people.
In a rare televised address to the country, Mr Keating - who has taken a
large personal role in negotiations between the government and Aborigine
leaders over the highly-contentious native title issue - said that
Australians could not ignore the matter, either 'legally or morally'.
However, he provided no advance details of the government's bill on
Aboriginal land rights, which is due to be introduced into parliament later
this week, possibly today.
The proposed legislation follows a High Court ruling last year, which did
away with the notion that Australia was uninhabited before European
settlement and said native title could exist where there had been 'close and
continuing' association with the land.
Despite Mr Keating's claims that there needed to be a national standard for
land rights determination, the recalcitrant Western Australian government
maintained its opposition to the federal package yesterday. Western
Australia is the area most likely to be affected by the land rights
legislation. In theory, about 40 per cent of the state could be subject to
native title claims.
Mr Richard Court, the Western Australia's premier, threatened to speed the
passage of his own state's rival land rights legislation if the commonwealth
denied full public and parliamentary debate on the federal legislation.
The Western Australia government has already published a bill which would
extinguish native title, but recognise in law the rights to 'traditional
usage' of the land by Aboriginal people. Mr Court has been emphatic that the
states should retain control of land management, and should not be
constrained by any commonwealth measures.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931116

