FT934-8867

FT  13 NOV 93 / Libyan oil industry slow to feel sanctions impact


   By ROBERT CORZINE


IT will take at least six months before the latest United Nations sanctions
imposed on Libya begin to seriously hamper the country's oil industry,
according to western experts.
Libya yesterday denounced the sanctions, which were imposed by the Security
Council on Thursday because of Tripoli's refusal to surrender two suspects
in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am airliner over Scotland.
The ban on new equipment as well as parts and spares for the country's oil
transport, processing and export facilities is designed gradually to erode
Libya's export capacity. One western oil company executive familiar with the
Libyan industry said the sanctions 'were unlikely to be the straw that
breaks the camel's back.' But they will close loopholes left over from
earlier trade restrictions, he said.
The main impact could be felt first in Libya's refineries, where fires and
machinery breakdowns are relatively common especially in older facilities.
The refinery boilers, furnaces, fractionation columns, pumps, catalytic
reactors, and prepared catalysts which are covered by the ban can easily be
bought on international markets, although the Libyans 'might have to pay two
or three times the going rate' for the items, according to the executive.
The ban on air transport to Libya means any urgently-needed spare parts that
are acquired will have to be shipped or moved overland from neighbouring
countries.
The sanctions on equipment such as loading buoys and single point moorings
for crude export terminals and flexible and floating loading hoses will
reduce Libya's ability to repair any damage to maritime export facilities
which commonly during the winter storm season in the Mediterranean.
Oil industry analysts do not expect any sudden fall-off in Libya exports,
which last month amounted to 1.37m barrels a day. The latest sanctions leave
untouched the country's hydrocarbon export revenues, which amounted to
Dollars 9.5bn last year - some 95 per cent of its hard currency earnings.
And there is little evidence that European countries such as Italy, Spain
and Germany which buy the high-quality, light crude oil from Libya would
agree to a full oil embargo.
The sanctions are also unlikely to have any short-term impact on over a
dozen international oil companies with production or exploration operations
in Libya.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931113

