FT934-11415

FT  01 NOV 93 / Peace initiative on Northern Ireland


   By TIM COONE


IN THE initiative launched by Mr Major and Mr Reynolds, Dublin has accepted
that an overall settlement would involve an end to its territorial claim on
the north and recognition of the unionist veto on change in the province,
Tim Coone writes.
The UK accepted an increase in cross-border co-operation and the possibility
of Sinn Fein entering talks if the IRA laid down its arms.
The six-point plan set out last week by Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign
minister, paved the way for the initiative. The six points were:
People in Ireland, north and south, without coercion and without violence,
should be free to determine their own future.
New structures should be developed for governing the province, for
north-south relationships and for UK-Irish relations.
No agreement can be reached on any change in the status of Northern Ireland
without the freely expressed consent of the majority of the people of
Northern Ireland.
Unionist consent will be required for any constitutional change in the
north.
The Irish constitution will be amended 'at the right time and in the right
circumstances' to reflect any agreed changes.
There will be a place at the negotiating table for the 'men of violence' if
they cease their violence.
The SDLP and Sinn Fein are concerned by Mr Spring's apparent acceptance of a
unionist veto - as opposed to a majority veto - over constitutional change
in Northern Ireland. On Irish radio yesterday, Mr Reynolds referred only to
majority consent.
The statement from the UK and the republic was unequivocal that there could
be 'no question of adopting or endorsing' the Hume-Adams initiative, which
envisages a simultaneous referendum north and south of the border on any
future changes to Northern Ireland's status, but recognises the principle of
majority consent in the north.
The last series of talks between the four main Ulster constitutional parties
broke up last November without agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931101

