FT932-13458

FT  23 APR 93 / Rail union seeks new strike vote


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


THE executive of RMT, the main rail union, is to ballot its 60,000 members
employed by British Rail on the BR proposals to end the present dispute. No
further action will be taken before the result is announced on May 14.
The union executive is recommending members to reject BR's final proposals,
which were presented to the union earlier this week.
Mr Paul Watkinson, BR's personnel director, said he was 'very disappointed'
at the executive's decision. 'This is a sad day,' he said. 'The cloud of
uncertainty which is damaging confidence in the industry is still hanging
over us.'
He denounced the executive for seeking to 'prejudge the issue for their
members by recommending rejection of BR's position'.
'The least they could have done is to put the issues fairly to their
members,' he added. 'They were elected to take decisions on behalf of their
members. Instead, they have abdicated their responsibility.'
Mr Watkinson said BR had 'moved heaven and earth in nearly 40 hours of
negotiation to address the union's concerns and gave them assurances'.
The union had received written assurances that BR 'does not foresee the need
for compulsory redundancies in the next couple of years' for general staff
and no compulsory redundancies 'in the next 12 months' for workshop staff.
BR had also promised the union that it would carry out no 'major extension
in the use of contract work on rail and signal maintenance during the next
couple of years'.
The union has been seeking a guarantee of no compulsory redundancies and a
moratorium on the extension of contract work. The dispute has involved two
one-day strikes this month costing BR at least Pounds 20m gross in lost
revenue.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, RMT's general secretary, said yesterday that the union
leadership could call further stoppages if it thought it necessary as a
result of its previous membership ballot held in March.
The RMT executive's decision to ballot members followed its embarrassing
deadlock on Wednesday night after nine hours of argument. A majority of the
executive rejected BR's final offer but the requisite two-thirds majority
was not prepared to back a proposal to call a further one-day strike for
next Friday.
Mr Knapp conceded last night that BR had moved some way to meet the union's
concerns over the threat of compulsory redundancies in the countdown to
privatisation. But he added: 'The assurances we are seeking on compulsory
redundancy and use of contractors have still not been made with the
conviction we want.'
BR is convinced that once the rank and file see the concessions that have
been made to remove the feelings of uncertainty over the future of the
railway industry, the call to reject BR's proposals and by implication agree
to further strike action will be defeated.
The ballot will be held on May 6 and 7.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930423

