FT934-11509

FT  30 OCT 93 / Arts: From 'good morning' to 'hello matey' - Clement Crisp
finds the new chit-chat approach of Radio 3 a real turn-off


   By CLEMENT CRISP


I HAVE a very low resistance to chatter in the morning. An exquisite lyric
about breakfast-time sums it all up: 'Good morning, George. Good morning,
Percy. Good morning, Colonel. Christ, have mercy]'
I suppose that, like many another, I get up to the sound of music on the
radio as I embark on the via dolorosa of ablutions and breakfast. Decent
music helps, which has meant Radio 3 since it began. Brief news bulletins
(albeit no help to the day's travails), discreet voices, minimal words, and
music.
There are moments when lunacy strikes, and a voice promises a concerto for
Jew's Harp by Albrechtsberger (the world's dullest composer). Then you shout
'Oh no you don't]' and switch off. But all in all, until a couple of years
ago, the music, plus agreeable and cultivated voices (Donald Macleod and
Tony Scotland as ideals. And ah, Patricia Hughes, of blessed memory) were
part of the process of greeting the day with something less than a snarl.
Then came Classic FM, and change. I do not think there is any conceivable
rivalry between the two music stations, despite foolish efforts to detect
some battle for audience figures. Classic FM is unashamedly populist,
unabashedly commercial, and tremendously well-intentioned. There is no
snobism about it, no pretentions. Radio 3 remains essentially what it always
has been: our most influential advocate of serious music, of encouragement
for new work, of devotion in promoting an art.
The idea that it is an enclave of intellectual dyspepsia and arcane
performance can only be held by those who do not listen to it, or consider
its schedules and responsibilities. (And, be it said, there are listeners
whose musical tastes are for highest art, and who merit their share of
air-time).
Yet Classic FM's cheery manner has apparently made BBC policy-makers
anxious. How else to account for Radio 3's barrage of chit-chat aimed at us
in the early morning, and in that late-afternoon slot which was once a
helpful way of easing oneself into the matter of the evening - be it
preparing dinner, travelling home, or getting ready to go out.
Adieu the brief announcements and the unemphatic voices. Babble is all.
There is a too-bright young man in the morning who cannot stop telling us
his name: it is like having an uneasy guest at the breakfast-table. (He also
cannot pronounce 'one', preferring 'wan'). There are interviews, oh so matey
and first-namey, with assorted worthies. (One female announcer, her voiced
pitched to tones of direst chumminess, promoted a detestable American
choreographer during the Edinburgh Festival. If the BBC is prepared to do
such commercial sponsorship, then there are many better candidates for
puffery).
Classic FM is frank in its willingness to let people know about music on the
most undemanding terms. Standards are variable: a Beethoven concerto once
consisted only of the opening orchestral tutti, and the belief that the
Yellow River Concerto, a piece of Maoist committee work, is even remotely
music, is open to question. But it plays a wide range of good music, and we
accept the nonsense of the commercial breaks (though I swear I will never
buy one of those sofas) for the sake of the station and its aims. It knows
exactly what it is, and why it is doing it.
So, I trust, does BBC Radio 3. Yet if it cannot be true to its own past
integrity, to its uncompromised standards, even in so slight a thing as
morning and afternoon broadcasts, then trouble looms. The path down-market
is slippery. Cut the cackle, and get back to the musical 'osses.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931030

