FT933-5131

FT  04 SEP 93 / Gardening: Erratic but worthwhile favours from Madonna -
Robin Lane Fox considers the lilies and how they grow and urges you to fix
your attention on a marvel of midsummer


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


RECENT evenings have been perfect for garden watchers; the ground is too
hard to allow weeds to be pulled out and, instead, we can all trowel in the
coolness, enjoying the late phases of a wonderful gardening year. Thus, I
hate to disturb your peace; but, during the next week, there are
opportunities for up-grading which might slip your notice.
The most obvious, of course, is the ordering of next year's bulbs. Be warned
that it becomes ever harder to plant the early varieties in rough ground
because the autumns are now dry and the earth is baked firmly.
As I try to ram a bulb-planter into rough grass and fit a daffodil
underneath, I am reminded of those Israelites in Egypt making bricks with
useless materials. If you want an exodus, or way out, choose bulbs which you
can plant in the softer surface of flower beds.
My Top Six start with the wonderfully blue little iris, Histrioides Major,
which will resist the worst weather, and narcissus February Gold, which
seldom flowers in February and is not gold, either, but a bearable yellow at
a manageable height of 1ft. I prefer the small-flowered crocusses, of which
chrysanthus Blue Pearl and Cream Beauty are simply the best and will last
for ages.
Among the smaller tulips, I prefer Batalinii Bronze Charm because its colour
is unique and its stamina exceptional at a height of about 6in. Of the later
bedding tulips, I pick Sweet Harmony, in a lily-shaped yellow, and Queen of
Bartigons, in a tolerable pink, which I owe to the sharp eye of the late
Lanning Roper. Anemone blanda, either in mixed or single colours, runs off
the list at ground level wherever the soil is light and sunny so that the
flowers open fully.
The Top Six does not mean that there is not another Top 50, but a short-list
helps to concentrate disagreement. I have found that none of these bulbs
does the usual tulip trick of disappearing after one good year. I also find
that a few bulbs, spaced out in clumps, make much more of an impression than
those great sweeps by the hundred which are the neurotic reaction of those
who believe they can buy gardening, rather than think it through.
Bulb ordering directs our minds to spring, but the less obvious jobs direct
us to winter and mid-summer. Just now, you have a rare chance to bag some
winter irises. These are the forms with rushy leaves and exquisitely blue
flowers which are at home in Algeria and are sold in the UK at varying
prices as Unguicuilaris.
Most of the experts believe these plants will transplant or divide most
happily in September: in my long experience, they seem to be right. If you
can find an owner of an established clump, you are in with an excellent
chance.
At present, these winter irises look scruffy after a dry spell, and anyone
could be persuaded that they would be improved by gentle division. Claim a
piece for yourself, confident that you are doing no harm: my favourite, if
you can find it, is the darker blue form called Mary Barnard.
These irises are heaven-sent from early February onwards, perhaps even
earlier. Their natural companions are the Lenten roses or forms of
helleborus Orientalis.
The basic commandment of hellebore fanciers is that they fancy somebody
else's variety. Now is the time to strike here, too: during the next week,
you can still divide old groups of these plants into pieces of a single stem
and pot-up the divisions without harm.
I learnt this late tip from a great grower, the late EB Anderson. By the
time I knew him, he already had six gardens and 60 years' experience behind
him, and I have found that his advice is usually the best.
Further into the future, fix your mind on Madonna lilies, those white
marvels of mid-June which might seem thoroughly out of the news this month.
Not at all: now is the moment for ordering and planting them, a chance which
is often missed because they need earlier attention than other lilies in the
trade.
Madonna lilies are unpredictable in their favours: either they like your
garden or they do not, and surveys suggest there is no connection between
their favour and virginal habits of their owners. The important thing is to
plant them this month, a few inches deep and preferably in soil which is
full of lime and quite stony. If you are wondering which lily is a Madonna,
it is the one which has confronted you on Tuscan holidays in Italian
paintings of the Annunciation.
For a nativity at Christmas, a Madonna lily has always struck me as a
pre-natal anachronism: how could Gabriel have found one in full flower in
March, assuming that the unusual pregnancy was of the usual duration?
Angels, no doubt, do not place bulb orders; still, this painterly muddle of
the seasons at least reminds us to act when we might otherwise forget and
order and plant this superb lily now.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

930904

