FT934-11583

FT  30 OCT 93 / London Stock Exchange: Equity market rallies as account ends


   By STEVE THOMPSON


UK SHARE prices continued to edge forward yesterday, responding to a modest
end-account rally, and still helped by the recent upsurge in overseas
markets which has seen Wall Street reaching new all-time records and
European markets staging a useful recovery.
Gilt-edged stocks, however, came under moderate downside pressure, with
long-dated stocks settling around four ticks lower and index-linked stocks
making minor progress in subdued trading.
The FT-SE 100 index, which has see-sawed all week, influenced in turn by
bouts of profit-taking by UK and then European and US institutions, moved up
8.0 yesterday to close at 3,171.0. Over the week the 100 index has retreated
28 points, or 0.9 per cent, from its all-time closing high of 3,199, as UK
funds began to lock in profits from the record strong performance of the
market.
Then overseas institutions turned aggressive sellers, reacting to a rather
gloomy message from the latest survey published by the Confederation of
British Industry which highlighted a distinct slowing in the pace of
recovery in the UK and calling for a reduction in interest rates in the
November 30 Budget. And dealers noted early signs that some of the big
Continental funds had begun to reduce their weightings in the UK market back
into Germany, following the recent interest rate cut.
Wall Street's overnight performance was viewed as slightly disappointing to
London dealers who had seen the Dow Jones Average power above the 3,700
level during London trading late on Thursday. Consequently, there was a
degree of certainty at the outset of trading yesterday when the FT-SE 100
moved up cautiously during the morning session, reached a session high of
3,172.3, before slipping back in the afternoon and then picking up again at
the close.
There was genuine surprise among institutional traders yesterday at the
exceptionally high level of turnover in equities. Just over 800m shares
changed hands, the highest single-day's business for many weeks. It was
pointed out, however, that almost 18 per cent of that total, around 140m
shares was accounted for by activity in just three stocks. Ferranti, which
has attracted a 1p-a-share bid from GEC, Invergordon Distillers, where
Kleinwort Benson bid for stock on behalf of Whyte & Mackay, and Asda, the
food retailer. The value of customer business on Thursday was Pounds 1.84bn,
the highest for two weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931030

