FT931-4231

FT  11 MAR 93 / Technology: Keeping good time on the slopes - Ian Rodger
discovers a novel method of gaining access to ski lifts which may pave the
way for other security devices


   By IAN RODGER


Alpine skiers may not yet realise it, but they may have contributed to the
improvement of our quality of life, our security and perhaps even our
health.
This hitherto unsung and unknown achievement arises from the familiar
phenomenon of a restless inventor noticing a problem and trying to find a
solution for it.
The problem - one which every alpine skier will recognise - is gaining
access to ski lifts. Traditionally, ski resorts issue lift passes which
skiers keep in their pockets.
On approaching lift turnstiles, they have to drop their ski sticks, take off
their gloves, fish about in their pockets for the cards, pick up their
sticks and gloves and slide towards the turnstile holding the cards up for
the attendants to check or to slide into a validation slot.
This procedure is awkward and time consuming and various inventors have
tried to improve it.
Perhaps the simplest and most popular solution is a small locket with a
spring-loaded cord. One end is attached to the skier's jacket and the other
to the lift pass. Thus, the card is always available and can be pulled out
quickly and easily to a validation slot.
Its only disadvantages are that the card flaps distractingly on the piste
and, even though the cards are made of tough laminates, there is the danger
that they can be wrenched off and lost in a bad fall. For a one or two-week
pass, the cost of replacement is painfully high.
In the past couple of years, more ambitious radio-electronic systems have
appeared. The most popular of these, now installed at some 150 resorts
around the world, was developed by the Skidata subsidiary of Austria's
Constantia, the diversified industrial group. It is based on a wrist watch,
the so-called Key Watch, which, in addition to being a digital watch, can
store data in various forms and can transmit a signal that opens a turnstile
or lock.
The idea is that the skier buys the Key Watch for roughly Dollars 80 (Pounds
56). Each time he or she goes to a resort that has the system, the watch can
be programmed by the resort operator to provide access to lifts for whatever
length of time the skier intends to stay at the resort.
As the watch is expensive, the Skidata system continues to allow customers
to buy and use the conventional access cards and this remains the norm for
day-trippers. But skiers are obviously impressed by the watch's convenience.
Since introducing the system in the 1990-91 season, Skidata has sold more
than 80,000.
While that has been gratifying for Constantia, the group also quickly saw
that the system could have many applications other than at ski resorts. As a
result, it has smothered the Key Watch with patents and installed automatic
destruction devices in them to prevent snooping by would-be copiers.
The technologies used to link the watch and the turnstile or lock provide it
with a number of interesting characteristics. It can be made owner-secure,
with the addition of a personal identification number that can only be seen
by an authorised reader. It is also reprogrammable. Thus, it could be used
to identify employees in a laboratory or factory or delegates at a
high-security conference.
It is already used in a few commercial parking garages in much the same way
as at ski resorts. It is also used in some hotels instead of bedroom and
function room keys. Other possibilities include authorisation of fund
transfers.
'Our aim is to increase the uses of the watch so that it becomes more
worthwhile for people to buy it,' says Ernst Strohmeier, Skidata's executive
vice-president of finance. Some Constantia officials are excited about the
potential, conjuring up thoughts of it being used to deliver data on body
functions to doctors at remote locations and similar futuristic ideas.
But Strohmeier is more cautious. 'If you talk to 10 people, you can get 20
new ideas. The important thing is to find applications that are not just
interesting, but that really improve a function and which can be
profitable.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930311

