FT932-6642

FT  27 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Ex-Guinness chief's payment defended


   By PAUL TAYLOR


SIR DAVID Plastow, chairman of the non-executive committee of Guinness,
mounted a spirited defence yesterday of the controversial pay and pension
arrangements made for Sir Anthony Tennant, former chairman of the UK drinks
group.
The Guinness accounts, published earlier this month, revealed that in his
last year Sir Anthony received a 24 per cent rise taking his salary to
Pounds 777,000, a Pounds 204,000 annual top-up payment to take his pension
to about Pounds 500,000, and a Pounds 50,000 consultancy fee, to be paid for
two years.
Yesterday Sir David, whose committee of non-executive directors sets
executive pay levels at Guinness, told shareholders at the annual meeting
that there had been 'a number of inaccurate comments' on the subject of
executive remuneration, and 'misunderstandings' on the issue.
However, when asked by one shareholder to reveal Sir Anthony's total pension
package he said the detailed arrangements were a private matter.
'Is Pounds 500,000 correct?' pressed the shareholder. 'I am not prepared to
be specific,' said Sir David, but he acknowledged that 'the order of
magnitude is about right.' He stressed that Sir Anthony's pension reflected
'his full 40-year working career,' not just his 5-year period at Guinness,
and that the agreement to provide a two-thirds pension was in his service
contract, which had been 'available for inspection.'
Sir David said the increase in Sir Anthony's final salary was made when the
Guinness share price was at an all-time high and immediately after the
company announced record operating profits.
'His earnings were very much in line with top executive remuneration in this
country,' said Sir David, who added that the average paid to the chairmen of
the top 10 companies in the UK was 'comfortably more than Sir Anthony's
remuneration for the final year.'
The consultancy fee after his retirement was justified by Sir Anthony's
'wide experience and many contacts.'
One shareholder, who identified himself as 'poor and ordinary,' was
concerned because Sir Anthony had become a director of two other companies
after leaving Guinness. Sir David replied that what Sir Anthony did after he
left the company was a matter for him, rather than Guinness.
Most of the other questions at the packed Guinness meeting related to the
absence of shareholder perks and why the company was serving afternoon tea
instead of something a little stronger.
They seemed pacified, however, to leave with a can of Guinness and a fifth
of a litre of Johnnie Walker Black Label Scotch in a black velvet pouch -
Pure Genius?

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930527

