FT934-8749

FT  13 NOV 93 / Markets: Oil profits continue to flow - The Bottom Line


   By ROBERT CORZINE


INVESTORS in the big integrated oil companies have cheered in recent weeks
as a steady stream of third quarter results showing strong profits growth
pushed share prices upwards. 'Higher downstream margins and successful
cost-cutting' have been the recurrent and common theme from the companies.
But a curious investor only has to visit the forecourt of their local petrol
station to see the main reason why share prices of companies such as British
Petroleum and Shell Transport and Trading have been surging.
Falling crude oil prices may have transfixed the worldwide oil industry, but
motorists searching for a sign of their effect at the pump have found little
solace.
In earlier periods of falling oil prices, vocal consumer complaints
considerably shortened the time in which oil companies were able to enjoy
widening marketing margins.
But there has been a curious absence of such clamour in recent months as
crude oil prices, as measured by the benchmark Brent Blend, declined sharply
from an average of Dollars 20 a barrel in the third quarter of 1992 to
Dollars 16.50 a barrel in the same period this year.
Shell Transport and Trading, the main Shell investment vehicle for UK
investors, and BP have both benefited from the boost in retail trading.
On Thursday Shell reported oil product sales up five per cent, helping it to
an 8 per cent rise in profits to Pounds 861m. A week earlier BP nearly
doubled replacement cost profits - which leaves out swings in inventory
values - to Pounds 332m, with refining and marketing accounting for Pounds
269, a rise of Pounds 177 against the third quarter of 1992.
The shares of both companies have performed strongly this year. BP
outperformed the FT All-Share Index by 21 per cent in the year to early
November, while Shell was up 7 per cent in relative terms during the same
period. But the figures do not tell the full story.
The markets greeted BP's results as confirmation that the company had
finally turned the corner after a rocky 18 months. During that period many
UK institutions have been decidedly stand-offish toward the company,
although their US cousins were less reticent, snapping up about 27 per cent
of BP shares.
For the first time since 1991 the company saw a cash inflow from operations
excluding disposals. The sale of non-core assets was ahead of schedule, and
debt was down by Dollars 1bn to Dollars 13.1bn. Successful cost cutting, the
current buzzword in the industry and one of the criteria investors should
look at when assessing oil shares, was writ large throughout the results.
Shell, on the other hand, displayed little impact of cost cutting, although
analysts were divided as to the reasons. Some noted that a well-run company
simply has less scope for savings. Other, such as Fergus MacLeod at Natwest
Securities in Edinburgh, says another Shell virtue - gearing of just over 10
per cent - make it harder for efficiency gains to show up in profit
improvements.
Yet another Shell virtue, according to Jeremy Hudson of Lehman Brothers
Securities in London, lies in its higher yield, more than 1 per cent above
BP. BP, however, is reluctant to increase dividends until debt is down to
the desired level and the full effects of its restructuring programme show
can be felt.
As for the future, almost all analysts suggest that investors keep a careful
eye on the oil price. BP looks set to squeeze more value out of its
businesses through cost cutting. And it will also continue to chip away at
its debt with asset sales.
But persistently low oil prices over the next few quarters combined with
sluggish economic conditions in Europe could take its toll, whereas Shell's
bigger size and greater exposure to the faster growing economies in Asia
could enable it to weather such a storm.
But if crude oil prices do fall further investors' should perhaps also keep
an eye on their fellow motorists. Shell and BP will surely be doing so, as
well as hoping that they stay sleepy and not notice if prices take a tumble.

The Financial Times


London Page II

931113

