FT932-13543

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (3): Slouching in the direction of reform -
Progress is slow in restructuring the economy as required


   By MARK NICHOLSON


SLOUCHING towards economic restructuring Egypt may be, but it continues to
slouch in the right direction for the chief mentors of its reforms, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank.
The two Washington-based institutions recently gave belated approval to the
first phases of Egypt's planned reforms. In February the Bank unfroze a
suspended Dollars 150m loan in approval of Egypt's accelerated privatisation
programme. The IMF then stamped a delayed imprimatur on Egypt's first
agreement since dealings with the agency resumed in 1991.
But it is the pace of Egypt's structural reforms which is likely to test the
patience of the men from the IMF - who returned to Cairo in March to open
talks on a second agreement.
While Mr Atef Obeid, minister for cabinet affairs and a prime interlocutor
in the talks, is characteristically sanguine that a deal can be swiftly
struck - 'We can achieve this in a matter of weeks, I'm always optimistic,'
he says - all signs point to some tough, probably fraught, bargaining.
After sealing some impressive achievements on the financial front under the
last deal the IMF, in closer co-ordination than is usual elsewhere with the
Bank, will address itself mainly to structural reforms to the real economy.
Here, in pushing harder for more thoroughgoing privatisation, for further
cuts in tariffs protecting swathes of uncompetitive industry and for
improvements in investment regulations, the reformers' drive will come up
harder than ever against entrenched vested interests and the government's
determination to permit economic reform only at a pace it feels it can
politically afford.
Progress under the first agreement has been substantial. A previously leaden
budget deficit of 18 per cent of GDP is on target to reach just 3.5 per cent
this year. Inflation of 20 per cent has been trimmed (by official tallies)
to 12 per cent. Interest rates at just over 15 per cent are still high, but
at least are now positive rates. The Egyptian pound holds tenaciously at
about EPounds 3.32 to the dollar. Reserves are a whopping Dollars 14bn. The
balance of payments has edged into modest surplus for the first time in
years.
Shoring up these advances was Egypt's considerable good fortune after the
Gulf war, which led to a surge in remittances and the write-off of Dollars
7bn of US military debt and Dollars 6bn of debt to Gulf countries. Egypt's
strategic importance in the anti-Iraq coalition also smoothed the way to a
particularly favourable 1991 IMF deal, which brought with it an immediate
write-off of 15 per cent of Egypt's Dollars 20bn Paris Club debt. A further
15 per cent was forgiven on completion of that agreement last month; 20 per
cent more will be written off on accomplishing the second, which is slated
for 1994. But the hard part lies ahead. On the financial side, the task is
largely one of consolidation.
Western economists believe, for instance, that Egypt can cut its budget
deficit further, perhaps even in line with Mr Obeid's optimistic forecast of
a level of 2 per cent of GDP in two years and 1.5 per cent in three. Much
will depend on continued success in improving the machinery of tax
collection and expanding the new 2 per cent sales tax, measures which added
EPounds 6.5bn to state coffers last year alone.
The bigger hurdle, though, will be the task of dismantling the heavy and
inefficient edifice of state control of the economy, much of which has lain
crumbling but intact since the days of Nasser. In this, progress has been
more modest.
Privatisation, the vanguard of these reforms, has finally begun in earnest.
Bids are already being gathered for the sale of the first batch of 20 state
assets and companies, among them a clutch of hotels and Nile cruisers and
industrial enterprises including Suez Cement Company and the El Nasr
Bottling Company. The government has promised to sell off a total of 85 of
the country's nearly 300 public sector companies by 1997.
But the programme is already falling behind a delayed schedule. And Mr Obeid
says he will not prepared to commit himself to naming more companies for
privatisation until the government sees how sales of the first batches fare.
'It can't be done quickly,' says a western economist. 'The whole programme
could take at least 20 years.' On tariff reduction there has also been a
gentle start. In March the government cut the standard maximum rate to 80
per cent from 100 per cent for a range of goods, excluding some luxury
items. But the IMF is pressing for more cuts - at first not much deeper.
New banking and capital markets laws have also been passed. But delight in
the private sector that such moves have finally been made is severely
tempered both by concern that haggling continues over the executive
regulations of these laws and that they may be too intrusive to achieve
their intended job of liberalising Egypt's underdeveloped financial system -
a prerequisite for a successful privatisation programme.
All these structural reforms are likely to entail some short-term pain,
largely in the form of forced unemployment, and thus run headlong into the
government's deep concern not to squeeze too hard a poor and fast growing
population which has already had to bear fairly substantial subsidy cuts
(notably on fuel) in the past two years. The shock of serious rioting after
food price rises in 1977 is never far from government minds.
The pace of reform is perhaps equally hampered by the government's
technical, and to some extend ideological limitations. 'The only ones making
policy in Egypt are the IMF and the World Bank,' says one sceptical banker.
'The others are only civil servants, working within constraints, including
their own mental constraints.'
The government is also acutely short of the expertise required to implement
an increasingly complex set of reforms, not least because of the public
sector's dismal salaries. As one economist puts it: 'The government is
trying to implement sophisticated reforms without having more than a couple
of sophisticated economists.'
A measure of Egypt's technocratic poverty is shown by estimates suggesting
that the country can only properly absorb 30-40 per cent of the billions of
dollars of aid it receives each year.
But whatever the constraints, Egypt has overwhelming imperatives to
accomplish reforms which, under the outline programmes of the IMF and World
Bank, are seeking to achieve growth rates of 4 per cent per annum over the
next decade. Present economic growth rates - likely to be 1 per cent this
year - are inadequate for a population growing by 2.3 per cent a year.
This growth rate, and the accordingly youthful profile of Egypt's
population, brings an estimated 400,000-500,000 new workers on to an
impoverished job market every year. Count in under-employment, endemic in
the public sector, and some independent economists reckon the economy needs
to provide at least twice that number of jobs yearly.
Embracing these youngsters, and simply keeping up basic health, schooling
and other services for Egypt's 58m people is an absolute priority for a
government which, for all the finger-pointing at Iran as the cause of recent
Islamic extremism, is well aware of the tinder for militancy provided by
poverty and joblessness.
But the broad improvement to Egypt's financial health has yet to translate
into substantive benefits for the mass of Egyptians. 'Private sector
investment has not yet provided the impetus for real economic take-off,'
says a western economist.
The imminence of that take-off depends on the pace of the next stage of
reforms, and thus on the outcome of the next game of push-me-pull-you
between the government and international agencies.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930422

