FT934-8349

FT  16 NOV 93 / BAA may manage Rome airport


   By PAUL BETTS and ROBERT GRAHAM


   LONDON, ROME


BAA, the privatised British Airports Authority, is in talks with IRI, the
Italian state holding company, over acquiring a stake in Rome's Fiumicino
airport and a management contract.
BAA has been seeking to market its expertise in airport management as part
of its efforts to expand internationally.
It is today expected to unveil an 8-10 per cent increase in interim pre-tax
profits to about Pounds 235m.
The negotiations over Rome airport follow BAA's management contract to
develop retailing at Pittsburgh airport in the US and talks in China to help
modernise and develop Chinese airports through joint ventures.
Although the eventual privatisation of Rome's Fiumicino airport remains a
highly complex issue, BAA is understood to consider an equity investment and
management of the airport as an attractive long-term opportunity.
Rome airport handles about 19m passengers a year of which 60 per cent
involve international flights. BAA sees considerable potential at Rome for
retail development, which has become one of the main sources of income at
its UK airports.
IRI, which controls the Rome airports authority, insisted yesterday that any
deal would depend on the passing of new legislation, since existing law
stipulates ownership must be held by a public body.
IRI controls the Rome airports authority through a 56 per cent stake held by
Alitalia, the Italian national carrier, and a further 43 per cent held by
Iritecna, the state holding company's construction arm. The pressure for the
airport sell-off comes from the financial plight of Alitalia and Iritecna,
which are both losing money.
The airports authority is also the type of activity that Professor Romano
Prodi, the head of IRI, is anxious to privatise. Rome airport is undergoing
costly redevelopment and the authority needs financial assistance.
The Rome airports authority, already under fire from Italy's anti-trust
monitors, has traditionally been regarded as an important source of
political patronage. One problem in any privatisation will be the fate of
the 6,693 staff. BAA employs directly only 4,000 at London Heathrow airport,
which handles twice as many passengers as Rome.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931116

