FT934-10064

FT  08 NOV 93 / Immigration route to labour market flexibility


   By EDWARD BALLS


MR JACQUES Delors should, by now, be putting the finishing touches to his
review of employment and competitiveness in Europe. The Commission
President's brief is to explain why US employment grew by an average 2.1 per
cent a year over the period 1982-90 while EC employment rose by just 0.9 per
cent a year. But it is in Europe, not America, where the more radical labour
market changes are now afoot. The flood of immigrant labour from eastern to
western Europe since the end of the Cold War may already be delivering a
solution to Mr Delors' problem.
In the early 1970s, the average number of asylum seekers arriving in western
Europe was 30,000 per year. By the late 1980s, the annual figure had
surpassed 400,000. But, as UN High Commissioner for refugees Sadako Ogata
points out, the end of the Cold War and the collapse of Yugoslavia increased
that number to 690,000 last year. Germany, the country to which the UN
estimates the bulk of Yugoslav refugees have gone, has seen its number of
asylum-seekers increase from 121,000 in 1989 to 439,000 in 1992.*
These political refugees, coupled with new economic migrants from the east
and south, are adding to a rising trend. By 1990, the OECD estimated that
the percentage of non-nationals in western Europe had doubled in a decade.
In fact, almost all of these immigrants come from other European countries -
the percentage of non-EC citizens living in EC countries in 1991 was just
2.8 per cent, compared to nearer 10 per cent in the US. But, when figures
for the early 1990s are finally released, the convulsions to the east will
have boosted that figure significantly.
This influx of new workers looks, at first sight, to be bad news for
European countries who are already trying to cope with high unemployment
rates. Yet the US had faster employment growth in the 1980s despite facing
an influx of migrants which was even more dramatic: counting illegal
immigrants, the immigrant share of the US labour force rose from 6.9 per
cent in 1980 to 9.3 per cent in 1988.
In fact, immigration into the US appears to be an important part of the
explanation for America's impressive job creation record in the 1980s.
Employment in the US rose rapidly in the 1980s because US workers were much
more willing to accept service sector jobs at increasingly low wages: US
real average wages barely rose over the decade while the wages of the
poorest 10 per cent fell by almost a third.
Research conducted by George Borjas, Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz for
the US National Bureau of Economic Research confirm that the entry of
substantial numbers of relatively unskilled migrants, combined with
increased trade penetration, was an important for this fall in unskilled
wages. A disproportionate number were poorly educated: 36 per cent of
immigrant were recorded as high school drop-outs in 1988 compared to 15.3
per cent of native men. This inflow of new immigrants, willing to take jobs
at low wages, also helps explain why the US was able to combine job creation
with rising joblessness among ex-manufacturing workers.
Yet this source of labour market flexibility - encouraging east and south
European immigrants to beat down west European wages - will have rather
unpleasant consequences for unskilled workers in the west. Not surprisingly,
survey evidence does not suggest that Europe's population is too happy about
this new immigration.
Survey evidence also shows that it is the fear of unemployment at home,
rather than higher wages abroad, which drives economic migrants. So freeing
up trade with eastern Europe may be the best way to control the flow of
migrants, at the expense of slower employment growth in the west. But free
trade will not do much for Bosnian refugees. Like it or not, immigration is
one element of the US labour market model which western European is going to
embrace.
* 'Towards a European Immigration Policy.' Philip Morris Institute, 6 Rue
des Patriotes, B-1040 Brussels, Belgium.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931108

