FT934-8450

FT  16 NOV 93 / Cocom: a brute turned super sleuth - Plans to abandon a web
of controls


   By DAVID DODWELL


COCOM'S historic role of economic attrition against the Soviet Union and its
allies, and of blocking their access to military technology, will be
formally swept aside this week.
In The Hague today, the 17 members of the Co-ordinating Committee on
Multilateral Export Controls are expected to unveil their plans for a more
flexible successor institution.
Former targets of the Cocom regime, notably Russia and China, are likely to
be invited to join the new body, with its focus now turning to countries
such as North Korea, Cuba, Iran, Iraq and Libya.
The dramatic emergence of Iraq as a global security threat with a potential
nuclear capability, during and after the Gulf war, was as important in
forcing change as the dismantling of the Berlin Wall.
As one UK-based academic noted, this brought into sharp focus the fact that
Cocom and its sister bodies dealing with nuclear proliferation, chemical
weapons, and missile technology had - in their obsessive concern with the
Soviet block - allowed a number of militarily threatening third world
countries to slip through the net.
They were shaken by the use of chemical weapons by Iraq in its war with
Iran, and by the scale on which they threw ballistic missiles at each other:
over 1,000 were fired during the Iran-Iraq war.
They were also shocked to learn - on the defection of an Iraqi engineer
after the apparently successful Operation Desert Storm - of the extent of
Iraq's nuclear weapons programme, and the capacity which remained intact at
the end of the war.
Such discoveries have led to calls for new ways of identifying threatening
activity, and of detecting potential mis-use of dual-technology goods.
In prospect is a lighter set of nationally-enforced arrangements which will
lift regulation from a large number of products on the existing Cocom lists
of restricted exports. They will reduce the paper work and delay in
obtaining licences where they remain necessary. But they will improve
information-sharing arrangements, alerting governments more quickly to the
emergence of suspicious buying activity.
At the heart of the new regime against proliferation will be demands for
comprehensive export control arrangements, and effective enforcement.
'In France, Germany, Japan, the UK and the US, revelations about illegal or
indiscreet exports to threatening states brought public debate that led to a
reconsideration and tightening of export controls,' said Mr Gary Bertsch and
Mr Richard Cupitt from the University of Georgia in a wide-ranging paper on
non-proliferation in the Washington Quarterly.
They call for a 'new typology' to deal with the more-fluid post-Cold war
alliances. This would distinguish between co-ordinating states,
collaborating states, sensitive states, threatening states and peripheral
states.
They note that while Russia is currently a collaborating state, 'one can
easily imagine developments that might move it into the category of
sensitive or threatening states'. New arrangements will need to cope with
this 'extreme flux'.
One of the greatest challenges of the new regime will be to marshal
proliferation through former Soviet republics such as Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Georgia, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Ukraine and
Uzbekistan.
'Most of these states are racked by internal and external conflict, and are
not in a position to put export controls in place even if they intend to,'
the Georgia academics note. Given the pressure on them to earn hard currency
by exporting arms, and their 'porous' borders with Russia, preventing
leakage of sensitive technologies through this region presents the new Cocom
with formidable challenges.
'Export controls are only likely to delay the acquisition of critical
dual-use technologies if a state is determined to acquire them,' the
academics note. 'Unless the US and its co-ordinating allies address the
demand for weapons of mass destruction and dual-use technologies, and
pressures to supply those demands, non-proliferation policy will be
incomplete.'
Cocom officials are pressing for improved channels of information to
identify at least four facts: the end use of any exported commodity; the
location of the end user; possible sensitive applications; and possible
re-exports.
'We will be looking for a matrix of suspicious information,' one
London-based official said. In place of Cocom, 'a brutal thing that brutally
succeeded', she predicted that 'the new regime will be more gentle - an
education process, pooling information and trying to discern patterns and
trends to detect an emergent threat'.
For those exporters who for decades have been frustrated by cumbersome and
time-consuming Cocom licencing rules, such changes should be welcome. 'We
will be controlling hardly anything anymore,' said the Cocom official,
predicting that licences will in future be needed on just 5 per cent of
those products currently on the Cocom list.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931116

