FT933-12663

FT  23 JUL 93 / World Trade News: Patents plans 'sow seeds of destruction' -
Warnings of the consequences of copyright draft


   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA


THOUSANDS of farmers gathered this week at Navalgund, a hamlet in Karnataka,
11 hours from Bangalore, to launch a seed satyagraha, or non-violent
protest, against multinational companies in the seeds business.
They are members of a powerful association of small farmers in the lush
southern Indian state who attacked the administrative blocks of the Cargill
Seeds factory in Siravara near Bellary last week.
Despite the farmers having razed the buildings, Mr M D Nanjundaswamy,
president of the farmers' union, insists that he is a follower of Mahatma
Gandhi, and says they had 'rightly and rightfully' attacked the US
multinational's premises, the second action against the company in less than
a year.
Cargill was targeted first, because 'they are one of the biggest seeds
producers in the world, who use their clout to impoverish third world
farmers,' says the 57-year-old law professor-turned farmers' messiah.
'Cargill and other multinationals have a philosophy that threatens the very
sovereignty of the nation. And we will continue to attack them.'
The average Indian farmer knows little about the Uruguay Round of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade which seeks to tighten patent laws in
developing countries. But Mr Nanjundaswamy has taken it upon himself to
interpret the implications to India of the Dunkel draft proposals on
trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights (TRIPS).
'The installation of a patents regime in genes, plants and all farm inputs,
where none exists, is to gain control of a nation covertly,' he says.
Cargill and other companies that have set up joint ventures in Karnataka
deny that they are draining Indian genetic resources. They claim that all
hybrid seeds sold by the company are derived from imported germ plasm, and
that yields have improved considerably since they started marketing their
seeds to farmers at competitive prices.
The Karnataka farmers fear that transnational and multinational
corporations, with their patent-protected seeds, chemicals, money and clout,
will push them off the land.
Ms Usha Menon, scientist at the National Institute for Science, Technology
and Development and a member of the national working group on patent laws,
says that if India accepts the suggestions made by Mr Arthur Dunkel, former
director-general of Gatt, the massive informal farmer-to-farmer seed
exchange that thousands of Indian farmers depend upon will no longer be
possible.
'Farmers have been getting foundation seeds from the agricultural
universities and multiplying them for their own use and selling them to
other farmers,' she says.
'This sharing of seeds was the lifeline of the Indian green revolution and
would be threatened if we accept the Dunkel proposals.' It would then be
obligatory for India to introduce plant breeder's rights, which would
prevent both informal sales and the freedom of multiplication.
Mr P Sainath, a Bombay-based journalist whose booklet, Patent Folly,
attempts to simplify intellectual property rights, says that the world's
genetic wealth owes much to small farmers in developing countries.
'Multinational corporations are appropriating seeds and plant varieties that
have traditionally belonged to developing nations, making some
modifications, and patenting them to sell them back to the poorer country at
much higher prices than farmers would have to pay,' he says.
Critics of plant breeders' rights have argued that the world's vast
bio-diversity should not be exploited for the commercial gain of a few
powerful companies at little or no benefit to the country from whose
resources a product is derived.
For instance, Vincristine, a cancer drug, was developed from a source grown
in Madagascar, but critics say the country derives no benefit from the
drug's million-dollar market.
In another case, a gene for insect resistance in soyabean and maize crops
was isolated from a cowpea seed from Nigeria. Two American companies have
patented the seed.
Dr R B Singh of the UN's Food and Agricultural Organisation says that
developing nations could be excluded from certain technologies which should
rightly be theirs.
For instance, a hybrid rice technology developed by the Chinese and patented
by two American firms is too expensive for many farmers in China to afford.
In Malaysia, oil palm research suffered when multinationals patented the
wild germ plasm and were not willing to share it with researchers in the
Malaysian government.
The Indian commerce ministry is still to decide whether the government
should accept the Dunkel draft's final act. 'We are not just going to sign
on any dotted line,' said Mr Tejinder Khanna, the new commerce secretary.
'Other contracting parties in Gatt should positively appreciate India's
concerns, since one-sixth of the world's population lives here.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930723

