FT934-8735

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: BES gets a medical slant -
Scheherazade Daneshkhu finds pathology and dentistry among the ventures
seeking money for expansion


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


THE BUSINESS expansion scheme has been used to raise money for anything from
goat breeding to distilling whisky, but the latest trading ventures have a
medical flavour. HarleyScreen is a pathology laboratory which specialises in
walk-in HIV testing and vasectomies. Last year, it raised Pounds 741,000
through a BES issue and spent part buying a virology laboratory.
It is now seeking to raise a further Pounds 750,000 for two more labs to
expand the business. Shares will be issued at 120p for those who apply
before November 29 and at 125p for others. The issue is sponsored by Matrix
Securities and the minimum investment is Pounds 1,000.
Golden Hands is a dental payments scheme launched as a BES. According to the
prospectus, the aim is to help dentists gain new business while offering
discounts to patients. There would be a registration fee of Pounds 25 and an
annual Pounds 10 fee to the public in return for members receiving discounts
from participating dentists.
Nick Percival, of BESt Investment, highlights one of the risk factors
mentioned in the prospectus which states that the scheme 'is innovative and
has not yet been available to the public or the dental profession;
accordingly, its future cannot be accurately assessed.' Percival says:
'Investors should be wary of innovative companies which provide little
financial information, have not done market research, and where the
directors are part-time and therefore do not need the company to survive.'
Several new assured-tenancy schemes have also been issued, and BESt
Investment reminds PAYE investors of the importance of timing of tax relief.
They are unlikely to have enough time to obtain a tax coding change if they
receive their BES-3 certificates much beyond mid-February, and this reduces
the projected return.
BESt Investment calculates that if investors have to wait until agreeing
their 1993/94 tax return with the Inland Revenue, the exit price will be
reduced by one percentage point. 'An exit price of 117p and early tax
certificates can easily offer better value than 120p and some doubt about a
tax coding change,' it says.
Sponsor Hodgson Martin, which raised Pounds 11m in September for Magdalen
College, Oxford, is launching a second scheme for the college to raise
Pounds 7m to build accommodation. The exit price is 123p, which equates to
14.5 per cent a year for a top-rate taxpayer, but there is no cash backing.
Minimum investment is Pounds 2,000.
Accumulus Hallam II is a contracted-exit scheme sponsored by Terrace Hill
Capital for Sheffield Hallam University. It offers a fixed-exit price of
125p, equating to a return of up to 15 per cent a year after five years for
every 100p invested. Cash backing covers only half the university's
obligations. Minimum investment is Pounds 1,000.
Cavendish Gleeson Cash-Backed, sponsored by Smith & Williamson, will buy
residential properties from MJ Gleeson Group, a quoted company, to let on an
assured-tenancy basis. Gleeson is to buy back shares from investors at 120p
after five years. The issue is backed by cash deposits at Lloyds bank and
the minimum investment is Pounds 1,000.
At least three housing association BES are being launched. BESSA Springboard
aims to raise money for new and refurbished property to be used by
Springboard Housing Association for homeless people. Investors can choose a
fixed-exit price of 120p (equating to 14.1 per cent to a higher-rate
taxpayer) or a return linked to interest rates, measured by three-month
Libor.
The variable return will comprise a fixed return of 80p plus 1p for every 1
per cent rise in interest rates above 5.75 per cent each quarter. Although
three-month Libor is at its lowest for 15 years, this option will be
attractive only to those who think the government will not maintain
inflation within its target range of 1-4 per cent. Minimum investment is
Pounds 2,000.
Matrix Securities is sponsor to Homes for South Wight, Isle of Wight and
North Cheshire, three housing associations which will use up to Pounds 9.5m
to provide accommodation at low rents to people in housing need. The
associations say they will provide a fixed return of 125p, equating to 14.5
per cent a year for a higher-rate taxpayer, but there is no cash backing.
Aegis VI, also sponsored by Matrix, aims to raise up to Pounds 10m for
English Churches Housing Association and offers a fixed, cash-backed exit
price of 121p. The minimum investment in both Matrix schemes is Pounds
1,000. BESt Investment describes the issue as a 'good-quality product from
Matrix with a high exit price' but believes PAYE investors would do better
to invest in a scheme with earlier tax relief than the timetable of
mid-April 1994.
First Residential Properties, which has issued a number of BES companies,
aims to raise more money to buy properties in London to let on an
assured-tenancy basis. Minimum investment is Pounds 3,000.
Ridings III, sponsored by Capital for Companies with house-builder
Persimmon, aims to buy residential properties for letting on assured
tenancies. Persimmon intends to buy back the properties from investors at a
minimum of 120p after five years (equating to 13.7 per cent for higher rate
taxpayers) and its obligations are backed by an unconditional Bank of
Scotland guarantee.
BESt Investment says that 'given the quality of the initial portfolio, there
must be a chance of some upside potential and this makes the issue
relatively attractive.' Minimum investment is Pounds 2,000.
For further details, call BESt Investment (071-936 2037) and Best BES Advice
(071-409 1111).

The Financial Times


London Page V

931113

