FT932-13401

FT  23 APR 93 / Clinton calls the shots


   By JOE ROGALY


President Bill Clinton is ducking and weaving, but today or tomorrow or
early next week he should make a decision on Bosnia. By Monday the Russian
referendum will be out of the way. The west can then stop holding its breath
and walking on tip-toe. Next Friday will be Mr Clinton's 100th day in
office. The anticipation in London is that the president will have declared
himself by then.
That is the timetable to which the foreign secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, is
working. I gather from Washington that, yes, there is a discernible sense of
urgency over there, but it is partly TV-driven. A few more days of relative
calm in Srebrenica may lead some in the US administration to believe that
they can postpone the dreadful day on which the president must make a
choice. Let us wait, they may say, to see the full effect of the
strengthened UN sanctions, which start on Monday. Further horror pictures on
prime-time news would speed the decision-making process.
Either way, Mr Clinton must eventually point the way. When he does
politicians on this side of the water may squeak and squeal and shake their
heads, but they will go along with what he proposes.
If you listened carefully this week you could hear the British government
preparing itself for an accommodation with the White House, even if, as it
expects and fears, Mr Clinton proposes a high-risk strategy to contain the
Serbs. The evidence was there in the foreign secretary's words in the House
of Commons on Monday. What he seemed to be saying was that the government
was against bombing Serbian supply lines and opposed to arming the Bosnian
Moslems. What he was actually telling us was that if the Americans insisted
on arming or bombing, or both, Britain would acquiesce.
Look at the small print. 'We cannot rule out anything as the situation
develops,' said Mr Hurd, referring to air strikes but including 'other
options' in his remarks. Reminded by Mr Jim Marshall, the Labour member for
Leicester South, that the arms embargo plays into the hands of the Serbs,
the foreign secretary replied: 'The logic of what the honourable gentleman
says obviously has a very wide appeal, particularly in the US. We may have
to consider this, and I am not ruling it out in certain forms.'
It so happens that the British secretary for defence, Mr Malcolm Rifkind,
has been in Washington this week, partly to attend the ceremonial opening of
the holocaust memorial museum, and partly to lobby the US defence secretary,
Mr Les Aspin. The coincidence of the two purposes of his visit is, in
present circumstances, thought-provoking. Mr Rifkind has doubtless been
rehearsing Mr Hurd's arguments against any military escalation of the
conflict. He will have had a sympathetic audience from Mr Aspin, who is of
the generation that was permanently scarred by the Vietnam war. All the
accounts reaching London suggest that the Pentagon is deeply reluctant to
support any course, even high-tech bombing, that might lead to an increasing
involvement of American forces in the unpromising terrain of Bosnia.
Against that Mr Aspin served 11 consecutive terms in the House of
Representatives, becoming chairman of the armed services committee in 1985.
He is credited with the most sensitive political antennae of all the
administration's officials concerned with defence and foreign policy. If,
therefore, Mr Clinton, the untried young ex-governor of Arkansas, finds it
difficult to persuade his generals of the logic of air strikes, then he will
be advised by Mr Aspin as to how to handle Congress.
As the British government sees it, that points one way: to the removal of
the arms embargo. You will realise how the foreign office arrives at this
view if you cross off the remaining possibilities. The first, sticking
resolutely to humanitarian aid while tightening sanctions against Serbia, is
the preferred choice in London. But it is thought here that this will be
insufficient to deflect congressional and media pressure to 'do something'.
This is understandable. Contrary to popular mythology, sanctions can work,
as they did, along with other forces, against apartheid. The process is,
however, extremely slow.
Well then, say some, send Nato troops to keep the peace in the hills. Mr
Paddy Ashdown, the leader of Britain's Liberal Democrats, substitutes 'UN'
for 'Nato', but the strategy is the same. It is a perfectly logical response
to Serbian expansionism. It has one overriding flaw. It appears to have been
ruled out by the British, French and US governments. It is therefore not an
immediate proposition.
We are ineluctably back to lifting the embargo. The way British ministers
see it, this would be the worst choice of all, more damaging than selective
air strikes. But are the two proposals mutually exclusive? The diplomatic
professionals believe that a proposal to sell arms to the Bosnian Moslems
alone would be vetoed by Russia, even after a Yeltsin victory. The entire
embargo would have to go.
The consequences would be dramatic. The remnants of the Vance-Owen peace
plan would be swept away. The UN humanitarian forces would have to be
withdrawn. An arms bazaar would open up in the Balkans. At the same time, it
is being argued in the US, the Serbs would wish to launch an all-out assault
on Moslem towns during the interval between the proposal of an
embargo-lifting resolution in the Security Council and the actual arrival of
weaponry in Bosnia. The only way to stop them from doing that would be to
accompany the arms sales resolution with a threat of air strikes against any
Serbian forces that moved.
It is hardly surprising that the conventional wisdom in Washington is that
there are 'no good options'. That is a given. It is, however, the task of
our political leaders to base their decisions upon some foundation of
principle. Let us take the easiest one to sell: self-interest. It is surely
in the self-interest of both Europe and the US that the Serbs be prevented
from establishing a precedent. If they can redraw boundaries and remove
whole peoples, why should the Hungarians not pursue their dreams of a
greater Hungary? Why should Russia accept the rule of ethnic Russians by the
non-Russians who govern its many neighbouring states? Letting the Serbs
rampage over Bosnia is the least good of all the options.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930423

