FT934-10148

FT  06 NOV 93 / Minding Your Own Business: A taxing question - David Carter
asks which packages will keep the Revenue happy / Computing


   By DAVID CARTER


A READER writes: 'My wife has three small businesses (a sole trader, a
partnership, and a limited company) all requiring book-keeping and annual
accounts. I have taken early retirement and would like to do most of the
work myself.
'What programme should I use? I have narrowed down the search to TAS Books
or Quicken for DOS. I understand that Quicken does not do 'proper' accounts
but I hope it will provide all the necessary information, correctly broken
down, for me to complete the quarterly VAT return and for our accountant to
produce year-end accounts.'
The last few months have seen a sharp rise in the sales of packages such as
Microsoft's Money and Quicken from Intuit. They are cheaply priced at around
Pounds 50 or Pounds 60 and are sold as 'personal finance managers', which
are also capable of managing the accounts of a small business.
Should small business users try Quicken or stick to a traditional accounts
package such as TAS Books?
The first point to clarify is how a 'personal finance manager' differs from
a 'traditional accounts package'. Most business transactions are conducted
on credit. So, on November 20, 1993 I might issue a sales invoice to a
customer for Pounds 1,000 plus Pounds 175 VAT. Finally, on February 2, 1994
the customer sends me a cheque for Pounds 1,175 in payment. In accounting
terms, therefore, each sale has two elements: when it is invoiced to the
customer, and when it is paid.
A traditional (or 'accrual-based') accounts package such as TAS Books will
record both elements of the sale. A 'Cashbook' accounting package such as
Quicken records only the second element - the February payment.
With a traditional package you would credit your sales and VAT accounts when
you entered the invoice - in November 1993. With a cashbook accounting
system you would credit sales and VAT at time of payment - in February 1994.
With the one method the sales go into your 1993 accounts, with the other
into 1994's. So, if your year-end is December 31, 1993, could you switch to
running your accounts on Quicken and defer paying tax on the Pounds 1,000
for 12 months? Unfortunately, no. As far as the Inland Revenue is concerned
your income is earned, and therefore taxable, when you invoice it, not when
it is paid.
Another tax authority is involved, Customs and Excise. Again, as far as it
is concerned, you become liable for VAT at the end of the quarter in which
the invoice is raised (hence the term 'tax-point date' on many invoices).
However the Excise offers a concession: if your turnover is less than Pounds
350,000 per annum, you can apply to account for VAT under the VAT cash
accounting scheme. This allows you to pay your VAT to the Excise when your
customer pays you, not when you raise the invoice. If you produce cash-based
VAT returns on Quicken in the normal way you must apply to the Excise for
permission.
So, if your sales invoices are substantially greater in value than your
purchase invoices, you should choose VAT cash accounting. If you have a
retail 'cash' business such as a shop, the cash accounting scheme would be
harmful. You would continue to pay your VAT on sales straight away, but
instead of being able to claim back the VAT on your purchase invoices as
soon as they arrived, you would have to wait until you paid them.
Whatever your final arrangement with the VAT authorities, there still
remains the Revenue, which will flatly refuse to accept that you made the
sale in February 1994.
With the exceptions of the bar, which can always use cash accounting and
members of other traditional professions who can adopt it after the first
three years, 'accrual-based' accounting is the only form acceptable to the
Revenue.
So, I am wary of 'cashbook' packages, and for a further reason. With a
traditional package the invoice goes on to the computer straight away and
you are right up-to-date on how much your customers owe you and how much you
owe your suppliers.
Users with bank overdrafts, for example, often want an accounting programme
to give them 'aged debtors' and 'aged creditors' reports. These are concise
summaries of all sales and purchase invoices outstanding for payment. With
the computer producing these, they have, for the first time, real control
over their bank account. With a conventional cashbook accounting system you
do not get this control because the invoice is not recorded until after it
has been paid.
Quicken can handle accrual accounting by using an asset account in which you
enter invoices as you issue them; if this is done it can record Vat in a
special account suitable for the tax authorities and generate an aged
debtors report, which it calls 'accounts receivable'. The VAT-paying
business user does not have the option of using Quicken the easy way and
must use this extra feature, described in the 'advanced business uses'
section of the manual. Tass, by contrast, allows you to use the traditional
system on which tax collection is based.
For this reason, TAS Books, at Pounds 99, would be my first choice of
accounts package for the business that has to account for VAT. In running
your personal finances, where simpler cash book accounting is a acceptable,
Quicken is ideal. However, for a VAT-paying business which must use its
advanced features, Quicken becomes more complicated than Tass Books.
David Carter is a consultant in computer systems for small businesses; tel
0727-812447.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

931106

