FT934-8432

FT  16 NOV 93 / World Trade News: Brittan warns Japan, US - Resist
Washington pressure for managed trade, Tokyo urged


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


SIR Leon Brittan, European Commission vice president, warned yesterday that
any agreement between Japan and the US that sought to increase market share
of foreign companies was likely to be at the expense of the EC and called on
the Japanese government to resist US pressure for such managed trade.
'We would be very concerned about any agreement that would guarantee
increases in market share because. . . that could only be at the expense of
the Community,' Sir Leon said.
The US has been pressing Japan to accept market access targets for US and
other foreign companies in specific markets in Japan. US proposals on
increasing market share in vehicle parts, in particular, call on Japan to
set specific targets for non-Japanese US parts makers.
Even where such targets may in principle be aimed at increasing market share
for all foreign companies, given the relationship between US and Japanese
industry, such agreements 'will arouse suspicion that it is intended to
benefit the US', Sir Leon said.
Sir Leon also renewed pressure on Japan to help bring the Uruguay Round
trade negotiations to a successful conclusion by accepting tarification of
its rice market and implementing in full a market access package agreed this
summer by the EC, Canada, Japan and the US.
In meetings with top Japanese officials, including Prime Minister Morihiro
Hosokawa in Tokyo, Sir Leon said it would be difficult for Japan to seek
exemption from tarification of its rice market.
Recently, however, speculation has been growing in Japan that the government
is preparing a compromise deal on opening up the rice market that would call
for a six-year moratorium after which Japan's rice market would be gradually
subjected to tarification.
Sir Leon himself was confident a compromise could be found on opening up
Japan's rice market which would satisfy the need for tarification while
taking into consideration special Japanese sensitivities regarding rice.
Although no such proposal was actually put to him by the Japanese
authorities, 'I do not believe that. . . is impossible to resolve,' he said.
With regard to progress on the Uruguay Round, Japan still needed to
implement cuts in peak tariffs on goods including leather, textiles and
processed foods which were agreed in Tokyo in July by the US, the EC, Canada
and Japan, in a market access deal aimed at pushing the stalled trade talks
forward.
Nevertheless, Sir Leon was 'satisfied that Japan does have a genuine sense
of urgency' and recognised the need to make a big effort in bringing the
Uruguay Round to a successful conclusion, he said.
Sir Leon also called on Japan to play a role in a regular dialogue between
the EC and members of Apec, which Europe is very keen to have.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931116

