FT932-3356

FT  15 JUN 93 / Reform faction may quit LDP


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


LEADERS of Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic party yesterday conceded that
they cannot reach agreement on reform of the scandal-tainted political
system, prompting one faction boss to call for a new reform coalition which
would group LDP and opposition politicians.
Mr Tsutomu Hata, head of the LDP's Hata faction, said the apparent failure
of the reform push had forced him to gather a group of pro-reformers from
the government and opposition, which he suggested could ultimately become
the base for a new political party.
If Mr Hata is successful in convincing members of other LDP factions to
defect on this issue, the government could be defeated in an
opposition-sponsored no-confidence motion in parliament and be forced to
extend the present sitting beyond this week or even to call an election.
'Over the next day or two, I will be gathering people from different LDP
factions who have the same desire for reform,' Mr Hata said. 'There is a
possibility in the longer-term that it could be a new party, but we will
have to see what develops.'
Mr Hata's move came as Mr Seiroku Kajiyama, the LDP's secretary general,
said he had been unable to get agreement from LDP parliamentarians on
political reforms including a redrawing of electoral boundaries and tougher
controls on political funding.
Many LDP members are opposed to reforms, which would replace the present
system of multi-seat constituencies with a single-seat system or
proportional representation or a mix of both. The new format would threaten
the LDP's traditional system of factional patronage, as, in tandem with
funding laws, the cost of politics would be cut.
But the problem for Mr Hata and other self-proclaimed reformers is that the
Social Democratic party of Japan, the largest opposition party, has also yet
to agree on the details of political reform, which is likely to be opposed
by members who benefit from the present system.
'We will have to see which politicians are really in favour of reform, and
those who are just saying nice things,' Mr Hata said. 'Reform will help to
nurture real political parties, and it will help Japan to develop a more
independent foreign policy and to take diplomatic initiatives.'
Japanese MPs yesterday declared their personal assets, which were an average
Y132.2m (Pounds 796,300) for members of the LDP, and a more modest Y43.5m
for opposition MPs - the average total for Japanese is Y21.1m.
The totals made public were probably far below the actual figures, as
property and stock prices were calculated at book value, not market value,
and the total does not include the assets of other family members. Many
politicians are believed to have transferred assets to their spouse or
children to avoid declaring an embarrassingly large total.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930615

