FT934-8559

FT  15 NOV 93 / Arts: Relative Values - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


Noel Coward's Relative Values was first performed in Newcastle upon Tyne in
October 1951, then moved to the Savoy Theatre in London where it had a run
of 477 performances. Gladys Cooper and Angela Baddeley were among the stars.
The play suggested that Coward could still shine in the postwar world,
though in retrospect it was his last great piece.
The date seems slightly odd, for the programme note for the revival, also at
the Savoy, states that the action takes place at Marshwood House in Kent in
July 1952. Never mind the apparent discrepancy. The Savoy has changed as
well. Having being severely damaged by fire in 1990, it has been
reconstructed in the hope of restoring old splendours.
The theatre remains confusingly subterranean, and at first sight seems cold
and metallic, at least when the houselights are up. When the houselights are
down, however, such reservations diminish. The Savoy has a wonderfully
capacious stage and now has the most comfortable seats in London.
It takes a good 20 minutes to realise what a good Coward play Relative
Values is. It has a slow start in any case and Susan Hampshire in the star
role of Felicity, Countess of Marshwood seems to need time to warm up. By
half way through she looks a natural for one of the best female parts that
Coward ever wrote. She is imperious, she is charming, she knows her place
(and everyone else's) in society.
The piece is a joyous, sentimental fling at socialism. It's a social
experiment, says the man-servant Crestwell, to show that not only is
everyone equal in the eyes of God, we are all equally equal in the eyes of
our fellow creatures. Coward the playwright comes in, too: 'Comedies of
manners,' somebody says, 'soon became obsolete when there were no longer any
manners.'
Here is the old classless society where the lady of the manor gets on very
well with the servants, and they with each other, provided there aren't too
many intruders. There is an excellent plot which shows what can happen when
people get above their station, and some lovely contrasting of the style of
Hollywood movies and London's West End. But there is no bitterness: the
admiration for Hollywood at its best is unconcealed, from the Countess of
Marshwood down to the humblest servant.
There is also some interesting social comment. 'How did you vote in the last
general election?' someone asks. It must have been the one that returned the
Tories to power without, in Evelyn Waugh's phrase, putting the clock back by
even five minutes. The old British Railways seems to have been at least as
erratic in its timetabling as its successor today. And even in the early
1950s trouble was brewing in the Church of England.
Ms Hampshire is not the only star. Almost no West End production of Coward
nowadays is complete without young Sara Crowe. She appears here as the
Hollywood star concealing her modest birth in Sidcup by claiming that she
was brought up in even direr circumstances in Brixton. Ever since she
emerged alongside Joan Collins in Private Lives, she has had to compete with
older women. It is good to see the old guard still giving as good as it
gets. Ms Crowe's performance is at least matched by Alison Fiske as her
elder sister who has stayed at home in Kent. And there is a splendid
bit-part played by Margaret Courtenay as the plumpish, elderly Lady Hayling.
Direction is by Tim Luscombe, with an attractive set designed by Rob Howell:
note its depth, and the colours.
Meanwhile. for late night theatre addicts, there are two more performances
of Franz Kafka's A Report to an Academy at the Royal Court at 10.30 pm next
Friday and Saturday. The stage version is adapted and played by Henry
Goodman as the ape who gives the report. None of the lucid, bitter quality
of the writing is lost, and you will be amazed by how ape-like as well as
professorial Goodman is.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931115

