FT933-10066

FT  06 AUG 93 / World Trade News: Mexico-US environment fund proposed -
Clinton administration seeks special facility to raise Dollars 20bn for
border projects


   By NANCY DUNNE


THE CLINTON administration has suggested to Mexico that the countries set up
a finance facility, only loosely linked with the InterAmerican Development
Bank, to raise up to Dollars 20bn (Pounds 13.4bn) for environmental projects
at the border.
The proposal is part of negotiations on the North American Free Trade
Agreement now under way in Washington. The trade ministers of the US, Canada
and Mexico met again yesterday to take up where their subordinates left off
in talks throughout the week.
The official word was that progress was being made but reports filtering out
of the negotiations indicated otherwise - only partly due to the US desire
to hold the Nafta grand finale after Congress has approved a new budget. The
US is still insisting on the use of trade sanctions to enforce environment
and labour aspects of the agreement; Canada and Mexico are, to different
degrees, still resisting.
Although the administration is proposing a stand-alone financing facility
for the environment for the first time, the idea is stirring little
excitement in Congress, where several Democrats are still hoping for the
creation of a North American Development Bank.
The Clinton plan is for a border institution, established through
presidential agreement between the US and Mexico. It would co-ordinate a
regional plan on the environment, review project designs for dealing with
waste water and industrial pollution, assess the technical and financial
feasibility of proposed projects, and oversee construction and operation.
It would also mobilise private sector finance, direct government supports
(loans, guarantees, equity finance) and provide money through the finance
facility.
The latter would be separately chartered and capitalised by the US, which
would provide 85 per cent of the Dollars 525m in paid-in capital, and
Mexico, which would provide the rest. It would be capitalised initially at
Dollars 5.025bn, a sum expected to yield up to Dollars 20bn for lending. The
IADB would be associated with it in some form of advisory capacity.
The scheme has been criticised as inadequate by Mr Albert Jacquez, chief of
staff to Congressman Esteban Torres, who has introduced legislation to
create a North American Development Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930806

