FT934-8355

FT  16 NOV 93 / EU told to act on jobs or risk social unrest


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


THE European Union risks social unrest and the end of its dreams of a single
currency unless it tackles unemployment immediately and restores economic
competitiveness, according to a confidential draft by the European
Commission.
In a blunt assessment, it says the present and short-term economic outlook
in the 12 member states is 'dismal'. The number of people out of work, now
nearly 18m, is likely to remain at 'alarming' levels for the next three to
four years.
The Commission document is intended as a macroeconomic blueprint for the
European Union to the end of the century. It will be submitted to heads of
government for approval at the Brussels summit next month, as required by
the Maastricht treaty.
Among the paper's chief recommendations are:
A reduction of short-term interest rates of between 2 and 3 percentage
points in the EU average. Interest rates could fall 'substantially' in
Germany, but only if wage rises are curbed and the public deficit reduced.
Real wage increases to be increased by 1 percentage point less than
productivity growth, as 'an acceptable rule of thumb'.
A progressive increase in national savings, in particular through lower
public deficits. The paper also calls for stronger public investment and an
inflation target of between 2 and 3 per cent.
More flexible labour markets and a broadening of the tax base. That would
make it cheaper to hire labour, improve women's chances of finding work and
increase employment in small to medium-sized businesses.
The Commission paper confirms earlier reports that Brussels has set itself a
goal of creating at least 15m new jobs, halving the present rate of
unemployment by 2000. The Commission paper warns that the goal implies very
high rates of job creation to be maintained 'over many years'. At present,
the European economy can only manage growth rates of little more than 2 per
cent without inflationary overheating.
Failure to act, the paper says, may trigger a political crisis that would
postpone the goal of Emu indefinitely. 'The Community would be plunged into
the deep divergent conditions that prevailed 20 years ago, after the first
oil price shock, but with a much worse social situation,' it adds.
The paper, Restoring Growth and Employment - Strengthening Convergence, has
assumed added significance as a guide to macroeconomic policy after the
collapse of the European exchange rate mechanism.
Confidence may do the trick, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931116

