FT934-11082

FT  02 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Oil wavers in run-up to output
and demand news


   By ROBERT CORZINE and REUTER


   LONDON


OIL MARKETS are likely to remain unsettled in the run-up to the release
later this week of demand forecasts for consuming countries and publication
of official figures on October production levels by members of the
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries, analysts said yesterday.
Prices for Brent Blend for December rose to Dollars 16.10 in late London
trading yesterday after falling below the psychologically important Dollars
16 a barrel level last Friday.
The weak prices prompted Mr Gholamreza Aqazadeh, the Iranian oil minister,
to suggest at the weekend that Opec, which meets in Vienna later this month,
might have to re-examine its production ceiling of 24.52m barrels a day in
order to stabilise prices.
But Mr Peter Bogin, of Cambridge Energy Research Associates in Paris, said
yesterday that 'it would be very difficult for Opec to go below' the current
ceiling, which was set in September and which is due to run until the end of
March next year.
'Everybody is surprised at how weak prices are, but we just have to assume
that there is too much supply for present demand,' he said.
International Energy Agency figures on likely oil demand in the main
consuming countries are due out at the end of the week.
'If the IEA cuts its demand forecast again then it will reinforce the
bearish market,' said Mr Bogin.
Other factors behind the recent price weakness include reduced demand from
Asia, especially Japan. Asian buyers are normally the first to take
advantage of low crude oil prices, but they are 'not leading the way'
because of the economic slowdown in important economies, said Mr Vahan
Zanoyan, a director of the Washington DC-based Petroleum Finance Company.
He also pointed to an overhang of crude oil stocks, sharply increased
production from the North Sea, the possibility of Iraq's reaching an
agreement with the United Nations which would allow it to resume oil exports
and some 'minimal' Opec output in excess of the production ceiling as
additional factors depressing the markets.
Some unofficial estimates have placed OPEC's October output at more than
24.9m b/d. The Middle East Economic Survey yesterday described such
estimates as high, but said they had 'severely undermined' market
confidence.
Mr Zanoyan said Opec may simply have to hope for an early cold spell in the
northern hemisphere to prop up prices. 'A few weeks of temperatures several
degrees below normal in November or early December can have a
disproportionate impact on prices.'
The flow of crude oil through the Brent pipeline system in the North Sea has
been cut to 60 per cent of capacity due to maintenance on a pump Reuters
reports from London.
A Shell/Expro spokesman said the pump on the Cormorant Alpha platform was
taken out of service over the weekend.
'Production levels are being maintained using available platform storage,'
he said.
Cormorant Alpha is the hub of the Brent pipeline system through which crude
oil from nine other fields passes on its way to the Sullom Voe terminal in
the Shetland Islands, where Brent Blend crude is mixed.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

931102

