FT932-13333

FT  23 APR 93 / International Company News: Caterpillar shares soar as
earnings beat forecast


   By MARTIN DICKSON


   NEW YORK


SHARES in Caterpillar, the construction equipment group, soared yesterday
after it reported higher-than-expected first quarter earnings.
The company made Dollars 34m, or 34 cents a share, compared with a loss
before special accounting items of Dollars 132m, or Dollars 1.31 a share, in
the same period of last year when the business was hit by a combination of
US recession and a bitter employees' strike.
The strong performance was due mainly to a 44 per cent increase in group
sales in the US market as dealers built up inventory in expectations of
higher 1993 sales.
Caterpillar shares closed at a 52-week high of Dollars 67 5/8 , up Dollars 5
3/8 , on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company said other factors behind the improvement included im-proved
margins from better prices and lower cost levels.
Sales and revenues in the quarter totalled Dollars 2.7bn, up Dollars 514m,
or 24 per cent, from last year.
The company said physical sales volume of machinery and engines rose 19 per
cent in the quarter, particularly in the US, due to both the inventory
build-up and poor sales volume last year because of the strike and low
customer demand.
Sales outside the US totalled Dollars 1.24bn, 8 per cent higher than the
same period of last year, despite the recession in continental Europe and
Japan. Caterpillar said that economic recovery had begun in the UK and its
sales there were now above the levels of a year ago.
The company said it had revised upward its 1993 economic forecast for the
US, but the outlook for Europe had deteriorated, with virtually no real
growth expected.
It forecast that worldwide company sales would improve moderately in 1993,
with a higher percentage of US sales than previously expect-ed.
Caterpillar said its results would be highly dependent on the strength of
growth in the US, the severity of recession in Europe and economic and
political conditions in Brazil where it has large operations.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930423

