FT931-3977

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (3): Slowdown inflicts severe
damage - It is widely believed that 1993 will be one of the worst years but
the longer-term outlook may not be as bleak as the mood of the industry
might suggest / France


   By VANESSA HOULDER


THE Paris property market is enduring one of the steepest downturns of any
European market.
The slowdown in the economy, the rise in vacancy rates and the evaporation
of investment demand has forced a 20-30 per cent fall in office rents and an
estimated 40 per cent fall in capital values.
The severity of this decline has inflicted severe damage on property
companies and banks. Banks are slowly facing up to heavy provisions on their
FFr400bn portfolios, which could eventually average 15 per cent in the view
of Banque Paribas. Jones Lang Wootton, a firm of property advisers, goes
further. It expects the banks' total bill to exceed FFr100bn.
This predicament can, to a large part, be blamed on the banks' ambitious
lending policies at the end of the 1980s. After several years of impressive
returns from property, the French banks became increasingly competitive in
their desire to make property loans. This created steep inflation of asset
values, which was further stoked by a handful of large, highly-valued deals
by Japanese investors.
In addition, the banks financed a surge in construction of offices,
encouraged by the generally poor quality of the existing office stock.
Construction activity will peak this year at a level that many agents
believe will bring the amount of vacant office space in Paris to 4m sq m,
equivalent to a vacancy rate of about 10 per cent. Some experts, however,
believe this projection is exaggerated because some new developments are
being mothballed.
But even using more restrained projections of vacancy rates, it is clear
that there will be a glut of offices in Paris for several years. Past
experience suggests that it takes a year to fill 1m sq m of office space, if
the service sector grows at an annual rate of 4 per cent.
The recovery of the investment market will also be a slow process. While
agents believe that the institutions would be interested in buying good
quality property if the price was sufficiently low, there is no interest in
new, unlet developments or poor quality assets, which constitute a large
part of the banks' security.
Banks are reluctant to allow large property investors to go to the wall,
because of the fear that a series of forced sales would depress the market.
'The banks will do all they can to secure their long term investment,' says
Mr David Robinson of Richard Ellis, an agent.
The result is that banks are grappling with scores of complex
restructurings, which often involve taking possession of property assets. In
January, for example, Pierre Premier, a French property developer, was
forced to cede FFr3.2bn of its property holdings to its banks in order to
retain its independence.
Some banks, such as Paribas, say they will take several years before
disposing of these assets, perhaps through setting up a property company and
listing it on the stock market. In other cases, it seems likely that the
banks will attempt to dispose of the property as soon as they can, which
would provide an overhang of property that would continue to depress the
market.
Concern about the state of the property market prompted the government to
suggest some measures to alleviate the situation, after heavy lobbying from
banks and insurance companies. In late December, the government announced
plans to relax its agrement system which has tended to discourage occupiers
from taking up space in Paris, and some aspects of the property tax regime.
It was clear, however, that the government had no intention of bailing out
speculators and the measures were widely dismissed as cosmetic. 'The general
sentiment was 'Too little, too late'' says Mr Robert Lipscomb of Healey &
Baker.
But despite the banks' calls for government intervention, the property slump
is not perceived to be a threat to the banking system.
'Overall, even if the problems are important as far as the level of reserves
are concerned, the size of the real estate portfolios are limited. Real
estate loans to professionals account for 8-10 per cent of the banks' total
loan portfolios,' says Mr Arnaud de Menibus, an executive vice-president of
Paribas.
Indeed, some players in the Paris property market wonder if the mood of
despondency is exaggerated. '1993 will probably be worse than 1992, but then
we could start seeing signs of recovery,' says Mr Lipscomb.
The problems of the letting market in Paris are less severe than in central
London where the office vacancy rate approaches 20 per cent.
Moreover, the French economy remains one of the strongest in Europe, despite
the strains inflicted by high real interest rates.
Although it is widely believed that 1993 will be one of the worst years on
record for the French property industry, the longer-term outlook may not be
as bleak as the mood of the French property industry might suggest.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930312

