FT934-11302

FT  02 NOV 93 / Kurd rebellion spoils Turkey's 70th birthday


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ISTANBUL


THE worsening rebellion in Turkey's Kurdish-speaking region is putting
intense strain on the conservative-led coalition of Mrs Tansu Ciller. One
government minister has publicly conceded that the revolt has escalated into
a full-scale war - ironically, at a time when the country is celebrating its
70th year as a republic.
Last week hardliners from Mrs Ciller's True Path party were promoted to key
defence and interior ministries, apparently without the junior partner
Social Democratic Populists being informed.
Both parties are now setting sights on nationwide municipal elections next
March and questions are being asked about the coalition's survival as True
Path and the Social Democrats appeal to their traditional constituencies.
If the coalition breaks up, as Turkish newspapers were already predicting at
the weekend, western diplomats believe Mrs Ciller could win support for a
minority government. Should her party emerge strongly from the March polls,
Mrs Ciller might be tempted to call early general elections, probably in the
autumn.
Since they swept the municipalities in the last local elections in 1989, the
Social Democrats' standing has been hurt by a corruption scandal in the
municipality of Istanbul, which it runs, and the failure to unite with other
left-of-centre parties.
When the coalition was formed following the election in October 1991, there
was a popular expectation that the need to find common cause would force
both parties to moderate their traditional positions - with True Path forced
to take on a more reformist Kurdish policy, and the Social Democrats made to
adopt a more pro-business and economic stance.
But Mrs Ciller has paid only lip service to the need for a national policy
on the Kurds, while ceding more powers to the military in the conflict. With
the bloodshed escalating - more than 2,000 people have been killed this year
alone - last week's cabinet reshuffle reflected her party's concern that the
military might use the current crisis to impose martial law in the region.
Equally, Mrs Ciller's economic reforms have been hampered by what one senior
western diplomat called the 'bureaucratic inertia' of the Social Democrats.
Her efforts to legislate by decree have now been overruled by the
constitutional court.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931102

