FT934-11586

FT  30 OCT 93 / Foreign Exchange: Technical trading dominates


   By PETER JOHN


A STRONGER D-Mark exerted early pressure on several European currencies as
international investors adjusted their books on the last trading day of the
month, but most affected currencies recovered by the close, writes Peter
John.
Some encouraging economic data came out of France and the US yesterday,
while Belgium suffered political pressures. However, the foreign exchange
market tended to concentrate on technical factors.
The French franc was one of the more volatile currencies. It picked up in
early trade as Mr Edmond Alhpandery, the minister for the economy, said that
data from the French statistics office INSEE, showed the country was pulling
out of recession.
Then, the franc slipped back in the afternoon after it was announced that
unemployment in France had risen to 11.8 per cent from 11.7 per cent
previously, in line with the consensus forecasts.
The franc traded in a half centime range, between FFr3.5000 and FFr3.5050
against the D-Mark, for most of the day and closed unchanged at FFr3.4990.
The Belgian franc was down at BFr21.72 to the D-Mark earlier in the day as
the country's transport system was crippled by a strike but the currency
picked up in late trading and closed at BFr21.64 to the D-Mark, up from
BFr21.80 previously.
Mr Avinash Persaud, economist with JP Morgan, takes a gloomy view of the
Belgian and French economies. He argues that the Belgian franc will fall to
BFr23 to the D-Mark within the next three months while the French currency
will hit FFr3.60 and French unemployment will top 12 per cent by the end of
December.
The Spanish peseta, Italian lira and Danish krone were also weaker against
the D-Mark in early trade.
The dollar was lifted slightly by promising regional data ahead of figures
from the National Association of Purchasing Managers next week. It was taken
back from the highs by profit-taking but closed more than half a pfennig up
at DM1.6795 from DM1.6735 and better against the Japanese yen and sterling.
The pound recovered from early weakness against the D-Mark as some investors
took comments from Mr Eddie George the governor of the Bank of England as an
attempt to dampen recent speculation of a further cut in base rates.
Sterling closed unchanged at DM2.4975.
The Bulgarian lev opened steady against the dollar and slightly lower
against the D-Mark after the Bulgarian National Bank raised its key interest
rate to 47 per cent late on Thursday.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931030

