FT931-4148

FT  12 MAR 93 / Squashed tomato in cash squeeze: Comic Relief's drive to
avoid a further slide in donations


   By GARY MEAD


TODAY'S Red Nose Day is a testing time for the organisers of the Comic
Relief charity event.
The last Red Nose Day in 1991 raised Pounds 21m, Pounds 6m less than the
first in 1989. This year, anything less than Pounds 21m will raise questions
about whether the event is running out of steam.
In light of the recession, Comic Relief's organisers have this year adopted
a more systematic approach towards corporate sponsors. Thus, besides mass
appeals to individual donors, several household-name companies are
supporting Comic Relief via direct sponsorship and donations from sales.
Companies will pay a total of more than Pounds 500,000 in sponsorship for
what is in effect the use of Comic Relief's logo - a squashed tomato this
year. But the actual figure for contributions will be much higher through
the various forms of red nose being sold by the participating companies.
Woolworths, part of the Kingfisher group, has raised at least Pounds 1.4m by
selling more than 2m red noses for people to wear. DHL, the courier company,
has supplied large red noses to hang on the outside of buildings. Shell
petrol stations have been selling car and truck noses. The Sainsbury
supermarket chain has been selling red noses to hang on doors.
Kodak and Mars have also run promotions. Kodak is donating 50p for every
voucher sent in from a throwaway 35mm camera, and Mars is making a 3p
donation from every pack sold of red nose M&Ms confectionery.
Kellogg has been giving away red nose bicycle reflectors in special packs of
Rice Krispies, and clothing retailer C&A has been selling red nose T-shirts.
For the companies, there are spin-offs from being associated with such a
high-profile charity event as Comic Relief.
In 1991 Sainsbury's staff participated informally in Comic Relief events.
'When Comic Relief approached us this time it seemed a good idea to
formalise the relationship,' said Mr Tim Johns, Sainsbury's head of
corporate public relations. 'We felt it was good for our customers and good
for staff morale.'
Mr Andrew Lazenby, Shell petrol stations' promotions manager, estimates that
more than 500,000 car and truck noses have been sold, giving Comic Relief at
least a further Pounds 650,000.
'It's very difficult to quantify the commercial benefits to ourselves that
our association with Comic Relief, or any charitable event, brings,' said Mr
Lazenby.
'But Comic Relief is a particularly commercially aware charity; they are the
only people I've spoken to, be they companies or charities, who know exactly
what we need to drive people into our sites.'
The red nose for buildings is a relatively new development; in 1991 Comic
Relief persuaded 250 mostly media-related companies to pay about Pounds
1,000 each for the nose. This year Comic Relief looked for a
business-to-business service company with a large database of clients and
the infrastructure to support the event.
DHL has sold at least 850 building noses, which are Pounds 295 each, this
year. Mr Doug West, DHL's head of public relations and sponsorship, said
DHL's involvement with Comic Relief had a commercial as well as charitable
point: 'Commercially it gives us brand awareness and benefit by association
with a very high-profile event.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930312

