FT933-12542

FT  23 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Life choices


IT IS A measure of the lobbying power of Britain's life assurance industry
that it has taken so long to root out its opaque and anti-competitive sales
practices. Yesterday's intervention by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
looks like being the decisive blow in a battle that has lasted well over
five years.
The charge against the industry is twofold. First, many investors are sold
policies unsuitable to their circumstances, with around a third surrendering
policies in the first two years. This stems largely from the industry's
refusal to disclose clearly commissions paid, what each product costs and
the penalties for the early surrender of policies. So long as investors are
confused about the nature of what they are buying, they will not be in a
position to choose wisely.
Second, a large proportion of investors' premiums are swallowed up in high
charges, which reflect the lack of competitive pressure to cut costs.
Practices such as the use of standard industry charges to project investment
returns rather than individual companies' charges are to blame. So is the
lack of transparency. Competition can only flourish when investors have
enough information to shop around.
Reform is important not only because of the central role that life products
play in existing savings habits. More than two-thirds of British households
have at least one life policy, often linked to their pensions or mortgages.
Change is also necessary if the government is to press ahead with ideas to
encourage people to rely less on the welfare state and more on personal
saving for old age, sickness and unemployment. There would, for example, be
little point in privatising the state pension if people's savings were
frittered away by high charges.
The particular reforms mandated by Mr Clarke closely mirror recommendations
from the Office of Fair Trading earlier this year. Life companies will have
to give details of intended surrender values; tied agents and independent
advisers will have to reveal their commissions; agents for the same company
will be able to compete on price; and companies will be required to use
their own charges in providing illustrations of projected returns.
The overall effect will be more informed choice by savers and more vigorous
competition between providers.
The life industry will not like reform that disrupts the cosy world they
have lived in for so long. It is even possible that it will put pressure on
the Securities and Investments Board, the investment regulator which has
responsibility to implement Mr Clarke's orders, to dilute the reforms'
impact.
Foot-dragging, though, would be extremely unwise as it would only serve to
damage further the industry's image. Life companies should realise that the
game is up and that it is time to clean up their act.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930723

