FT932-6681

FT  27 MAY 93 / Arts: The Changeling - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


Here is one of the few Jacobean plays outside Shakespeare and Jonson that
has been repeatedly revived in the last few decades. It deserves to be so.
Written around 1622, The Changeling by Thomas Middleton and William Rowley
may have its deficiencies - a cumbersome subplot, for example - but it is
also compellingly and unusually dramatic. Few productions could be better
than that by Michael Attenborough, which has arrived at the RSC's Pit
Theatre in the Barbican from Stratford.
At the heart of it is an outstanding performance by Malcolm Storry as De
Flores, the man with a deformed face who is ready to kill in order to win
his equally evil love, Beatrice-Joanna. Before we give the praise to Storry
alone, however, we should recognise that there has been some fundamental
rethinking. This Changeling is presented as a warped love story, and becomes
in the end rather moving.
The technique is to make De Flores much less ugly than he usually his. True,
he has a scarred, burned face, though much less so on one side than the
other. But he also has charm, wit and intelligence. Played by Storry, he is
physically a huge figure, but not without grace in his movements. He
dominates the stage whenever he is there, and it is no surprise that Cheryl
Campbell's Beatrice begins to fall for him. Indeed the central thread of the
production is that you see this coming early on. Ms Campbell would surely
not demur if we say that this time it is De Flores rather than Beatrice who
is the star attraction.
Where the pair of them differ is that De Flores knows what he wants from the
start, and that is Beatrice at any price. She, on the other hand, thinks
that she can use him as the servant he is. When he has killed her betrothed
at her command, she remarks: 'Why, 'tis impossible thou canst be so wicked .
. . as to make his death the murderer of my honour]' But she learns fast.
There cannot be one law for the nobility and another for the lower orders.
They become partners in evil: she is no less infatuated than he is. As they
die together, they are in a way as striking as Antony and Cleopatra or Romeo
and Juliet. Only their world is different.
Nothing in the rest of the play quite stands up to this passionate affair,
though the entire production is well done and packs resources into the Pit's
limited space. The set, designed by Julian McGowan, is suitably sinister,
lizards on the bronze walls and a bronze of Christ on the cross. Do not
imagine that the dream sequence is a modern invention; it is there as a dumb
show in the original text. For all its macabre background, this could be a
modern psychological drama. You should see it before a great deal else in
London.
In Repertory, The Pit, (071) 638 8891

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930527

