FT934-8513

FT  15 NOV 93 / International Company News: Austria launches privatisations


   By PATRICK BLUM


   VIENNA


AUSTRIA has unveiled an ambitious privatisation programme under which a
number of industrial companies will be floated on the Vienna bourse and
other stock markets around the world.
The proposals allow for the break-up of the Austrian Industries state
holding company, from which Voest-Alpine Technologie and Voest-Alpine Stahl
will be formed.
Along with the rest of Austrian Industries' constituents, these two are to
be merged with OIAG, AI's parent, by the end of this year.
The share sales get under way this month with the offer of 25 per cent in VA
Eisenbahnsysteme, the railway controlling systems manufacturer. Some 49 per
cent of this company was privatised last year.
The next move - in the second half of 1994 - will be the flotation of 51 per
cent in Voest-Alpine Technologie. The government hopes to raise Sch5bn
(Dollars 420m) from the sale.
The shares will be sold in Vienna and internationally. SG Warburg will be
the lead manager.
The 30 per cent private sector shareholding in OMV, the oil and chemicals
group, will be raised to above 50 per cent next year, with full
privatisation planned for 1995.
The state's 74 per cent stake in SGP Verkehrstechnik, the railways rolling
stock manufacturer, will be offered to Siemens of Germany, which already
owns 26 per cent.
Stakes of up to 100 per cent will be offered in Austria Mikrosysteme, the
custom microchips maker, Vamed (hospital construction and maintainance), VA
Bergtechnik (tunnelling and mining machinery), VA Steinel (transport
machinery), Schoeller-Bleckmann (stainless steel tubes and drilling
equipment), and Austria Technologie & Systemtechnik (printed circuits).
The government has made it clear that Boehler-Udderholm (high quality steel)
will need a Sch2.5bn capital injection before it can be privatised.
The schedule here suggests a 1996 flotation. Austria Metall, the heavily
loss-making aluminium manufacturer, will be restructured in 1995 prior to a
privatisation issue.
In order to prepare the ground for the privatisation issues, OIAG will
receive Sch5bn (Dollars 418m) in interim financing as a loan from the
government. The financing will eventually be paid back from privatisation
revenues.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931115

