FT934-10207

FT  06 NOV 93 / International Company News: Likely Audi loss blamed on
former chiefs


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   MUNICH


MR Franz-Josef Kortum, new chairman of Audi, the Volkswagen quality car
subsidiary, has blamed the previous management's failings for the company's
expected slump into loss this year.
In an indirect attack on Mr Ferdinand Piech, former Audi chief and head of
the VW group since January, and Mr Werner Schmidt, now finance director, he
said Audi's distribution network lacked 'punching power'. 'This weakness is
an important reason why Audi is in a rather worse position than others.
Clear omissions in the past have to be made good,' he said.
Competitors in the quality car market like BMW and Mercedes-Benz had had 20
years to build their networks. 'It should be clear to everyone that Audi
cannot manage this in a few months,' he added.
Mr Kortum, a marketing expert appointed by Mr Piech, has repeatedly said
that Audi's quality was better than its image. His latest charges appear to
be a response to intense pressure from his aggressive patron to avoid losses
this year.
However, the subsidiary is not expected to return to profit until 1995,
after breaking even in 1994, according to company executives.
In a bid to rebuild the distribution system and improve Audi's market
portfolio, Mr Kortum will shortly seek permission from his supervisory board
 -chaired by Mr Piech - to invest a record DM1.5bn (Dollars 920m) or more
next year.
His main task is to extricate the brand from a joint dealership network,
built up by Mr Schmidt, former group distribution director, in which the
quality Audi marque has been routinely sold alongside mass market VW cars
and vans.
The company had suffered badly in the current sales slump, he said. Almost
all markets had deteriorated, and foreign currency restrictions imposed by
Beijing had stifled hopes of bolstering sales in China.
Audi deliveries to all markets had fallen 25 per cent in the first nine
months of this year, production had been slashed by 33 per cent, and
turnover had slid 26.5 per cent to DM9.2bn (Dollars 5.4bn), Mr Kortum said.
Warning of more job losses to come, he said the company had 11 per cent
fewer employees at the end of September than a year earlier. After stopping
production for 53 days this year, it had already arranged for more
short-time early in 1994.
Mr Kortum, who four months ago was still forecasting a break-even this year,
said only that the 1993 deficit would be more than DM100m. The company lost
DM198m in the first six months on sales down 30 per cent at DM6bn. Last year
it earned DM172 net - 53 per cent less than in 1991 - on sales of almost
DM17bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931106

