FT932-6682

FT  27 MAY 93 / Arts: South Bank looks North - Music in London


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


As if in response to the Barbican's lavish 'Tender is the North' festival of
last autumn the South Bank has come up with a modest Scandinavian
celebration of its own. Five concerts this week under the auspices of the
Philharmonia focus upon new music, and upon the work of Magnus Lindberg in
particular.
The presiding spirit is the Philharmonia's principal guest conductor
Esa-Pekka Salonen, and the first two concerts on Monday and Tuesday also
involved the Ensemble InterContemporain; in the final programme next
Saturday, which will include the British premiere of Lindberg's thrilling
and ambitious Kraft from 1984, Toimii, the experimental group founded by
Lindberg and Salonen, makes its London debut.
Born in 1958, Lindberg is now well established in the vanguard of European
music. The BBC has brought a number of his major scores to London - Kinetics
was heard at the 1991 Proms, and a commission, Corrente II, was included in
the Barbican festival last November; the London Sinfonietta premiered Marea
in 1990 and introduced the lucid and carefully wrought Joy a year later.
Such pieces have demonstrated Lindberg's harmonic assurance and his knack
for vivid invention, and the largest piece in the EIC's programme on Monday,
UR from 1986, is similarly charged with striking gestures and confidently
controlled long-range thinking. It was performed, though, without the
computer-controlled synthesiser material which the score suggests is an
integral part of the concept; the composer seems to have has resigned
himself to this acoustic version, though the work itself seems impoverished
as a consequence. But the potency of the exuberant Ablauf for clarinet and
percussion from 1988 and the concentrated solo-cello Stroke four years older
both seemed unimpaired in the forthright EIC performances.
The newest piece on display, Corrente, completed last year and included in
Tuesday's programme, suggests a new direction in Lindberg's music. In
turning away from the increasingly architectural harmonic structures of a
work like Joy towards a more fluidly dynamic process, Lindberg sets up
unbroken skeins of figuration which define and then revise their own
harmonic spaces. Ligeti seems the distant model, but though all the threads
are pulled convincingly together in the final pages there seemed something
disappointingly conventional about the working method, as though in looking
for a fresh impulse Lindberg has sacrificed something of his personality.
Both concerts also contained works by Lindberg's contemporaries. Salonen's
programme included his own Floof, a jokey and surreal piece of text-setting
vividly sung by Sarah Leonard, and more substantially the UK premiere of
Jouni Kaipainen's two-movement clarinet concerto Carpe Diem]. It is an
unremarkable piece, decking out a thoroughly traditional framework with
modish clarinet effects, but the performance was memorable for the solo
playing of Kari Kriikku, extraordinary in its seamless fluency, range of
colour and virtuoso elan. In some hands even the dreariest material can be
made compelling.
Purcell Room and Queen Elizabeth Hall. Further concerts tonight and Saturday

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930527

