FT932-13530

FT  22 APR 93 / Volvo chairman reveals SKr9.5m salary


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   GOTHENBURG


MR PEHR Gyllenhammar, the chairman of Volvo, yesterday bowed to pressure
from the Swedish vehicle maker's small shareholders and disclosed that his
annual salary is SKr9.5m (Dollars 1.3m), making him Sweden's highest paid
executive.
Addressing Volvo's annual general meeting, attended by more than 2,000
shareholders, Mr Gyllenhammar also gave details of his other benefits, the
salary package of Mr Soren Gyll, the chief executive, and the 'golden
parachutes' paid to two former top executives who left the company last
year. Mr Gyllenhammar announced that the Volvo board would set up an audit
committee and a committee for management development and remuneration for a
trial period of a year to counter accusations by Aktiespararna, the Swedish
shareholders' association, that he had presided over excessive pay deals for
himself and senior colleagues at a time when Volvo was tumbling into losses.
Mr Soren Gyll, chief executive, said conditions for Volvo in 1993 continued
to be 'extremely tough'. There were benefits from the SKr9bn cost-cutting
programme and signs of upturn in the US and UK markets, but he could give no
assurance that sales volumes would rise this year. Sales in Sweden, where
new car registrations are at 1940s levels, were flat and the European
outlook was bleak.
Volvo cut its dividend by 50 per cent last year and decided to close two of
its three Swedish car plants after incurring losses after financial items of
SKr4.75bn.
Mr Gyllenhammar announced that he had held renewed talks with Mr Carl Bildt,
the prime minister, over the future of Procordia, the partly state-owned
food and drugs group in which Volvo is the largest shareholder. The
government last year blocked a bid by Mr Gyllenhammar to merge the two
companies, prompting calls from Aktiespararna for clarification of Volvo's
intentions.
Mr Gyllenhammar believes he will be able to reach an agreement with Mr Bildt
that would give Procordia 'a stable ownership base'. Mr Lars-Erik Forsgardh,
head of Aktiespararna, said Mr Gyllenhammar had satisfied 90 per cent of his
association's questions. Mr Gyllenhammar said his salary was made up of a
basic remuneration of SKr7.1m, plus SKr2.2m and a 'handcuff' element of
SKr231,000.
Background, Page 18

The Financial Times


International Page 17

930422

