FT932-7155

FT  25 MAY 93 / International Bonds: Asian Development Bank prepares Dollars
500m 10-year issue


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE ASIAN Development Bank is preparing to launch a Dollars 500m 10-year
issue following a series of roadshows in European financial markets.
The deal, jointly arranged by JP Morgan and Lehman Brothers, is expected to
emerge this week if market conditions prove favourable. Traders are
expecting the deal to be priced at a yield spread of 20 to 25 basis points
over the comparable Treasury yield.
The reception of an offering yesterday by the Nordic Investment Bank in the
nascent Dragon bond market suggested that there is still strong demand for
dollar bonds in south-east Asia, despite the recent weakening of the US
Treasury market .
NIB's Dollars 250m five-year issue, arranged by Goldman Sachs, was priced to
yield 20 basis points above the five-year US Treasury. Dealers said the
issue was several basis points too tight for European investors, but had
sold into south-east Asia.
Growing interest from south-east Asian investors in global bond offerings
lies at the root of the development of the locally-traded Dragon bond
market, pioneered by the Asian Development Bank. Dragon bonds are
essentially the same in structure as Eurobonds, except that they are listed
in Hong-Kong and Singapore and distributed and traded in the region. Because
investors in the area prefer to buy bonds which will be traded locally, they
are prepared to pay a tighter spread than for Eurobonds.
'Since NIB is active in lending to Asia, issuing in the Asian bond markets
is a logical step in expanding our relationships in the region,' said Mr
Thorsteinn Thorsteinsson, head of borrowing at the supranational bank.
Meanwhile, the European Investment Bank is currently considering launching a
Dollars 300 to Dollars 500m Dragon bond in the next few weeks. However, the
Dragon bond market is one of several options, an EIB official said.
Elsewhere, Inter-American Development Bank launched a FF1.2bn seven-year
issue via BNP Capital Markets, its first in the sector for 20-years. The
deal was swapped into fixed-rate yen.
In the Swiss franc market, Eurofima launched a Sfr400m 10-year issue via
Swiss Bank Corporation.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930525

