FT933-5290

FT  04 SEP 93 / Halifax plans insurance arm to take on life groups


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


HALIFAX, Britain's largest building society, is to set up its own insurance
company which will sell exclusively to its customers.
The move poses a challenge to the traditional life industry as well as banks
and building societies which have entered this increasingly competitive
market.
Starting in late 1994, the Halifax will sever its existing ties with
Standard Life, the UK's largest mutually owned life insurance company, for
whom it acts as exclusive sales agent. The decision represents a blow to
Standard Life, which sold 18 per cent of all its new UK business through
Halifax offices in 1992.
It is not clear whether Halifax customers will be able to buy insurance and
investment products more cheaply than they do now or whether they will earn
better investment returns.
Standard Life said yesterday that it had been paying higher commission to
Halifax agents than to any other sales agent but policies sold this way
benefited from other savings.
Industry analysts said that the process of selling policies through banks
and building societies, known as bancassurers, could offer advantages to
customers once new rules requiring sellers to disclose charges and penalties
on policies take effect next year. This is because their lower cost base
will allow them to compete on price without impairing profit margins.
Traditional insurance companies have come under attack for failing to reveal
to customers cost details and charges. The Treasury has just ruled that,
from next year, more information must be given.
'I am sure that Halifax Life will be a successful operation,' said Mr Tom
King, general manager of marketing at Standard Life.
'But I would have said there are already too many companies in the
marketplace and I don't think the marketplace is big enough to support all
the companies which are out there.'
Industry observers said the trend is likely to hasten the shakeout of small
to mid-sized insurance companies, particularly mutuals which are owned by
their policyholders and have no ready access to fresh capital for expansion.
'These retailers think they can displace existing, less efficient providers.
It's not really a matter of adding capacity,' said Mr Michael Wadsworth,
partner in the insurance practice at consulting actuaries R Watson and Co.
Mr King said the Halifax had made it clear earlier this year that it wanted
a life insurance venture of its own and the two companies discussed a joint
venture. 'But we thought it was best to use our resources to expand our
product range,' he said.
Mr Michael Blackburn, chief executive of the Halifax, said: 'We want the
flexibility that control gives you over time.'
Standard Life's battle, Page 4
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930904

