FT931-4234

FT  11 MAR 93 / Rail interests' merger derailed


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


THE GERMAN cartel office has derailed a plan for two of Germany's biggest
engineering groups to merge their railway businesses in a joint venture.
Siemens and AEG, the Daimler-Benz subsidiary, will now discuss 'partial
collaboration' and make new proposals aimed at overcoming the competition
authorities' objections, Siemens Verkehrstechnik said yesterday.
The would-be partners had not been surprised by the decision, the company
added. It was too soon to be specific, but one fruitful area could be closer
co-operation in manufacturing high-speed train rolling stock.
The Berlin-based cartel office rejected the merger plan on the grounds that
the new company would dominate the domestic market.
The companies first asked the office if it had any basic objections to
co-operation in late November, and followed up a month later with its
joint-venture proposal.
AEG sells around DM1.6bn (Pounds 670m) of locomotives and rolling stock a
year. The Siemens business, which also includes stakes in the rail divisions
of Krupp and Krauss Maffei, has around DM2.7bn annual turnover.
Both businesses are profitable and are expected to benefit greatly from the
long-term project to merge west and east German railway networks while at
the same time upgrading the whole of the former GDR system.
At present the federal railway authorities buy almost exclusively from
domestic suppliers. However, the German rail engineering industry leaders
were keen to form a single company, the better to compete in international
markets with groups such as GEC-Alsthom and ABB.
Siemens, which pulled together its rail interests into a new rail technology
division only three years ago, already has several international
co-operation agreements, including one with Ansaldo in Italy.
Bosch-Siemens, the kitchen appliances company, has taken over the small
appliances division of Gorenje, the Slovenian white goods maker.
Small appliances account for around 10 per cent of the German group's DM7bn
annual sales, and for 7 per cent of Gorenje's DM1bn turnover.
The price was not disclosed, although Bosch-Siemens said it planned to
invest DM35m in its new acquisition over the next few years.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930311

