FT934-10271

FT  06 NOV 93 / United EC stance in trade talks urged


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


THE European Commission wants resounding backing from the 12 EC member
states to force a better offer on market access from the US and Japan within
the Uruguay Round world trade talks.
EC foreign ministers, meeting in Brussels on Monday, will receive a toughly
worded document drawn up by Sir Leon Brittan, the commissioner leading the
negotiations, which describes US and Japanese failure to match what the
Community is offering on market access as 'the great disappointment' coming
into the final stretch of the talks.
A version in French of the written report Sir Leon has prepared for the
ministers warns that the EC has 'neither the capacity nor the intention' to
cut tariffs for goods and services unless its main trading partners make
similarly concrete offers. The EC has lodged an 'illustrative offer' with
Gatt in Geneva, aiming to halve high tariffs, in line with the agreement at
the Group of Seven summit of industrialised nations in Tokyo last July.
Sir Leon is likely to face strenuous efforts by France and its allies on
Monday to keep the Commission on a tight negotiating leash. French officials
say Paris may push for a new 'jumbo' council of the 12's foreign, trade and
agriculture ministers this month.
A tense 'jumbo' council on September 20 acceded to French demands to seek
additional concessions - described as 'amplifications and clarifications' -
from the US on the subsidised farm trade agreement the two sides reached a
year ago. 'It took us a while to re-establish credibility as speaking with
one voice after September 20,' a Commission official said yesterday,
underlining that Brussels would resist any new meeting which risked more
internecine warfare over Gatt.
Sir Leon's document for Monday says optimistically: 'The unanimous
conclusions of the joint Council of September 20 have exorcised the spectre
of the internal Community quarrels which had long blocked the negotiations.'
Sir Leon's tactics, Commission officials say, are to demonstrate that only a
robust and united stance towards the US, and a free hand for the Commission
to negotiate, are likely to get an acceptable result by the Uruguay Round
deadline of December 15.
He warns the 12 in the document that the EC has most to gain, but also the
most to lose from a Gatt failure, and that it may have to 'redefine its
objectives to concentrate on the indispensable'.
But the document also notes that the EC's offer on market access has had 'a
catalytic effect' on Gatt signatories other than the US and Japan, and
stresses that this should be exploited to bring pressure on Washington and
Tokyo. 'Third countries have deduced that the Community is really determined
to conclude' the round, the document says.
Sector by sector, the Commission account of the state of the negotiations
reports some progress with the US on the controversy over trade in cinema,
broadcasting and audiovisual products, and on demands for greater access to
the EC's food and cereals markets. These claims are already perplexing
French officials.
Elsewhere, the document underlines EC disappointment with Japan and the US
on opening up their financial services markets, and with the US on textiles,
maritime transport, and aerospace. In the aviation sector, the US last year
reached a bilateral agreement with the EC on subsidies. Now it wants within
Gatt a tougher code on direct subsidies for the EC's Airbus consortium, and
a loosening of constraints on its own practice of indirect subsidies through
military spending to the US aeronautics industry, the Commission says.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931106

