FT932-6815

FT  27 MAY 93 / Bank of England faces losses of Pounds 115m


   By ROBERT PESTON, Banking Editor


THE BANK of England faces losses of Pounds 115m on loans it made in the past
two years to prop up a few financially troubled small banks.
The Bank made the unprecedented disclosure that it had made Pounds 115m
provisions against possible loan losses in its 1993 annual report, published
yesterday.
The report adds that Mr Robin Leigh Pemberton, the Bank's retiring governor,
was awarded remuneration of Pounds 227,000 last year, 15 per cent more than
in the previous year. In both years, Mr Leigh Pemberton has waived his
entitlement to Pounds 34,135 of that.
Mr Leigh Pemberton's pay rise is likely to attract controversy, since the
Bank's performance, especially its supervision of Bank of Credit and
Commerce International, the corrupt international bank, has been much
criticised.
The Bank said yesterday that in the summer of 1991 it organised a rescue of
a handful of small and medium-size banks. Those banks were facing a cash
crisis because financial institutions were withdrawing deposits from them.
After consulting the Treasury, the Bank decided to provide indemnities to
clearing banks that made loans to those small banks. Over the following
year, several hundred million pounds of Bank-guaranteed loans were made to a
few banks, which are believed to have included National Home Loans, the
mortgage bank, and City Merchant Banks, part of fund management group
Invesco MIM.
In total, the Bank kept a close watch on 40 banks that it believed were
vulnerable. It felt that banks with significant exposure to the property
sector were most at risk.
The Bank was concerned that if a series of small banks collapsed, that might
shake confidence in the UK financial system and might prompt big financial
institutions to withdraw deposits from the clearing banks - which might lead
to a banking crisis.
Last autumn, when sterling withdrew from the European exchange rate
mechanism and began to fall, the Bank became convinced that the risk of a
crisis had receded.
However, a number of banks in receipt of Bank-guaranteed loans have run into
serious financial difficulties. As a result, the Bank's accounts for the
year to February 28 contain a Pounds 90m provision to cover possible losses
on the indemnities. In the previous year, it made a hitherto undisclosed
provision of Pounds 25m.
Sir Adrian Cadbury, who chairs the Bank's remuneration committee, said Mr
Leigh Pemberton's pay rise was the culmination of a three-year process to
make Bank salaries more com-petitive with the private sector.
He said executive directors' pay in 1993 had been frozen at last year's
level. Mr Eddie George, who will shortly succeed Mr Leigh Pemberton, is
freezing his pay for five years at Pounds 227,000.
The stock exchange was criticised earlier this week when it was disclosed
that remuneration received by Mr Peter Rawlins, who resigned in March as its
chief executive, rose 28 per cent last year.
Lifeboat launched amid liquidity storm, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930527

