FT932-13263

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (33): The risk now
is of living too long - And the rising cost of old age means the family home
is ceasing to be an inheritance / Long-Term Care


   By JOHN AUTHERS


PEOPLE USED to need insurance against the financial consequences of dying
too soon. Now, the danger of living too long looks greater. Illnesses which
half a century ago would probably have killed people now succeed only in
incapacitating them.
The result, according to the Office of Population and Census, is that the
number of pensioners will increase by 50 per cent in the first 30 years of
the next century, when there will be 79 dependants for every 100 people of
working age. In 1991 there were 63.
So people can now expect to have a much longer retirement. That ought to be
good news for everyone. However, the chances are much greater that the last
years will be spent in expensive long-term care.
The price of long-term care is rising much more quickly than most other
prices, and this is costing the country a lot of money - around Pounds 6.5bn
in 1991, according to Commercial Union.
Average weekly prices for private residential homes rose to Pounds 209 in
1991 from Pounds 190 in 1990, according to Laing's Review of Private Health
Care. However, this conceals regional variations - in Greater London the
figure increased from Pounds 255 to Pounds 282, while in Wales it increased
from Pounds 176 to Pounds 192. Social security to pay for long-term care is
means-tested, and is limited to those with savings (including the value of
their home) of Pounds 8,000 or less.
In most cases, the costs are being addressed by selling off an asset whose
value is falling - the house. According to an estimate prepared for PPP
Lifetime by Chris Hamnett, of Nuffield College, Oxford, property worth
around Pounds 2.5bn is sold to finance long-term care each year.
This does nothing to improve the spirits of the nation's heirs, and so the
search is on for a less painful way of financing long-term care. More
long-term saving and less spending for today looks, regrettably, as though
it could be essential.
Not surprisingly, the insurance industry has spotted the opportunity, and is
now busily looking for products which will work. It is also trying, so far
without success, to persuade the government to help out with some tax
reliefs.
None of the long-term care packages launched so far is identical to any
other. However, they fall into three classes:
Insurance
Insurers are always nervous about taking on risks as potentially vast as
this, particularly when there is little or no claims experience to go on.
However, Commercial Union, followed by Aetna, MGI Prime and PPP have all
done so, while BUPA, another massive player in the health market, has made
clear its intention to follow suit in some form.
The policies all work by defining a set number of Activities of Daily Living
(ADLs). Once the policyholder is unable to perform a pre-defined number of
ADLs (and they include such tasks as being able to walk, eat, or use the
toilet unaided), then the policy will start paying for care.
Some plans take a much more direct interest in the provision of care, and
make payments to the nursing home (this is the approach taken by PPP, for
example), while others make a payment direct to the patient. MGI Prime
provides a larger list of ADLs than the others, while Aetna's contract is a
unit-linked life policy, which allows an investment element - an attractive
option for those who are nervous that they may never need to claim.
These policies are expensive, and should be viewed, according to Sandy
Johnstone, of CU, as insurance against a risk. They form a part of a
financial planning package, he says, but are no substitute for other
long-term savings: they are an addition.
PPP Lifetime's premiums give an idea of the sums involved, and the need to
start sooner rather than later. A 30 year-old man can cover weekly nursing
home fees of Pounds 323 with a monthly premium of Pounds 30, and this figure
does not increase by the age of 40. At 50, cover for weekly fees of Pounds
300 will cost just under Pounds 32 per week, while those starting at 60 will
need to pay Pounds 44.78 (for men) and Pounds 45.07 (for women).
Pensions
One product on the market allows you to sacrifice some of your income in the
early years of retirement in return for sharply increased payments, should
you become incapacitated and require long-term care. Cannon Lincoln offers
the Oasis Plus annuity, where your initial income on retirement is reduced
by 10 per cent, compared with a normal annuity. If you reach 85, or when you
become unable to look after yourself (defined by using ADLs), the pension
will escalate by at least 50 per cent. If you choose a level annuity, and
retire at 50, this increase could be 300 per cent for men and 250 per cent
for women. However, Cannon Lincoln does not usually offer one of the highest
annuity rates.
Ease-of-payment packages
These are purely financial options, making no attempt to manage the care at
the point where it is provided. If a relative is about to go into a home,
careful financial planning techniques can convert a lump of capital,
possibly taken from the sale of a house, into a higher income.
Two special packages on the market come from Pearl and Clerical Medical.
Both buy an annuity, back-to-back with an investment which aims to grow
sufficiently to replace the capital spent on the annuity. Pearl offers a
with-profits bond, while Clerical Medical backs the annuity with unit
trusts. Both of these plans make sense, although there is nothing to stop
you shopping around for the best annuity, while trying to pick your
favourite investment for growth.
While government and industry try to wrestle with the problem, two messages
become coldly clear.
First, whatever products emerge in the coming years, long-term saving is
important and should be started as soon as possible. This means
tax-efficient collective vehicles, such as unit and investment trust Peps,
as well as pensions.
Second, the notion that the family house can be relied on as an inheritance
has to be abandoned. It cannot. The money people earn during their career
may now only just be enough to last them for the rest of their lives.

The Financial Times


London Page XXXII

930423

