FT932-3366

FT  15 JUN 93 / BIS Annual Report: Economic recovery 'held back by a lack of
co-ordination'  - A look at the annual report of the Bank for International
Settlements


   By PETER MARSH


ECONOMIC recovery in the industrial world may be held back by a lack of
international co-ordination of economic policy and a reluctance to use
fiscal measures to boost demand because of worries about growing public
deficits, the Bank for International Settlements warned yesterday.
In its annual report, the bank also says inflation targeting may not succeed
in providing stable economic policies in those countries such as the UK
which have stopped linking their exchange rates to the D-Mark.
The BIS puts much of the blame for last year's crisis in the European
exchange rate mechanism on the lack of willingness by governments to
consider 'preventative parity adjustments' in exchange rates prior to the
emergence of severe market strains.
It concludes that 'adjustments ultimately had to be made in conditions of
crisis, precipitately, triggering speculative attacks even in cases (of
specific currencies) where the fundamentals were sound'.
With special reference to Britain which, having left the ERM, has introduced
a target of keeping underlying inflation to less than 4 per cent, the report
says 'it is questionable' whether such targets can succeed in helping to
bring about stable economic policy.
'Given the lags with which monetary policy has an impact on inflation, the
effectiveness of policy in meeting inflation objectives can be judged only
after a long delay.'
It warns that the credibility of such targets may 'take time to establish in
countries which have changed the framework of policy several times in recent
years and adopted inflation targets only after a substantial depreciation of
their currencies'.
In generally gloomy comments about the outlook, the BIS - owned by 32
central banks from the developed world and former communist countries in
eastern Europe - says easing in monetary policy in several countries has so
far had little effect in stimulating economic activity.
While a return to growth seems likely in the US and the UK, prospects for
continental Europe look poor 'with industrial production declining, gross
domestic product at best stagnating and unemployment and budget deficits
rising'.
Also lack of progress in international trade talks means 'the potential for
conflict is enormous' in the area of protectionist measures.
However, more hopeful news comes from relatively good growth in some
developing countries, especially in south-east Asia, the general absence of
marked inflationary pressures in much of the developed world, and good
productivity growth in some countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930615

