FT932-3168

FT  15 JUN 93 / Strike-hit Timex president resigns


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent and DAVID GOODHART


   ZURICH


MR PETER HALL, president of Timex Electronics, the Dundee company embroiled
in a bitter industrial dispute, resigned yesterday. His departure was widely
seen as making a settlement slightly easier to reach but union officials
said they were not expecting an early solution.
Last night Mr Mohamed Saleh, Timex Electronics' head of human resources in
the US, was due to meet AEEU engineering union officials and leaders of the
sacked Timex workforce in Dundee. It was the first time since February that
Timex had met local union leaders, though the company has had long
negotiations with the union's national officials.
Mr Hall was said by the company to have resigned for personal reasons and
left the plant. The printed circuit board assembly factory is being managed
by Mr John Dryfe, a Scot who is chairman of Timex Electronics in the US and
was once manager of the Dundee facility.
The Timex dispute is in its fifth month. The Dundee plant had 340 hourly
paid workers, 80 per of them women, until the entire workforce was sacked in
February. Since then the company has been bussing in replacements.
Earlier this month the strikers contemptuously rejected peace terms
negotiated by the union, which said the terms represented a 27 per cent cut
in pay and benefits.
Mr Hall had become a hate figure for the sacked workforce. His departure is
seen as a victory by the strikers and could make it easier for them to
accept terms from Timex management.
But there was no sign last night that Timex was prepared to change its
position, while leaders of the sacked workforce said their position was
unchanged. Mr John Stewart, a member of the strike committee, said: 'We
don't believe there will be an early settlement.'
The strikers want to win back their jobs on conditions similar to those
under which they were working before they were sacked.
They believe pressure is mounting on Timex - partly because of the damage
the company's image is suffering - and they accept that the closure of the
plant is a possibility. Mr Stewart said: 'Timex's attempt to maintain
production with the replacement workforce has been a dismal failure.'
Timex has insisted that production is being maintained and that it needs to
increase its workforce to meet new orders.
David Goodhart in Zurich writes: Mr Bill Jordan, president of the AEEU,
welcomed the news that Mr Hall had left Timex and said it was a 'necessary
but not sufficient condition for finding a resolution' to the dispute.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930615

