FT933-12799

FT  22 JUL 93 / EBRD confirms dropping of claims against Attali: Italy
nominates former PM Amato as new bank chief


   By GILLIAN TETT and ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


THE European Bank for Reconstruction and Development yesterday confirmed it
is to drop claims against its former president, Mr Jacques Attali, over his
alleged financial mismanagement.
The announcement came as Mr Guiliano Amato, former socialist Italian prime
minister, became the latest nominee in the vote for the bank's new
president, which had been due to start today.
According to the terms of his resignation agreement, Mr Attali has waived
his rights to a termination fee, worth more than Pounds 147,000, in exchange
for a 'full and final settlement' over any claims the bank might have in
connection with the critical audit report submitted by Coopers & Lybrand
last week. The bank's board is due to meet in London today to discuss the
further implications of the audit report.
Mr Attali's official resignation came as the final deadline was due for
nominations for his successor. As intense behind-the-scenes negotiations
continued, the bank announced the deadline for nominations had been extended
by a week 'to allow the governors more time for consultation'.
The bank yesterday confirmed that at least three candidates have been put
forward. These include Mr Amato and Mr Leszek Balcerowicz, former Polish
finance minister. Sources within the bank have also suggested Mr Henning
Christopherson, currently EC economics commissioner, Mr Jaques de Larosiere,
governor of the Bank of France, and an unnamed Russian candidate are
possible candidates. Mr de Larosiere is judged the strongest candidate and
is supported by the Germans and British. Although the new president will be
elected for a four-year term, there is speculation that he might serve only
the remaining two years of Mr Attali's tenure, opening the way for a
compromise candidate.
'There is a strong feeling here that the French have a moral right to
succeed Mr Attali,' a source at the bank yesterday said. 'This will not be a
vote in the normal sense. It will be all about negotiations and pressure.'
Italy decided to nominate Mr Amato at the last minute, after high-level
consultation with its partners.
However, as Italy already has a deputy-chairmanship through Mr Mario
Sarcinelli, a former senior treasury official, election of Mr Amato as
president would require a reshuffle of the board.
The move suggests Mr Amato's sudden candidature is a compromise move by
Italy to produce a prestigious figure who might appeal to Anglo-Saxons, the
French and Germans as well as eastern Europeans.
The Germans are believed not to have put forward their own candidate in case
this would undermine their campaign to have the European central bank
located in Frankfurt.
Similarly, the British are believed to be supporting the French candidacy in
return for a previous agreement to locate the bank in London. However, some
east European countries have argued that they have a moral right to see an
east European in the post.
Once nominations have close, the list of candidates will be put to the 56
board members, representing 54 countries. The votes will be weighted
according to the number of shares each country holds.
The vote, which will be conducted by post, is expected to take about 21
days.
Editorial Comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930722

