FT933-10179

FT  05 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Glynwed improves 19% to Pounds 18.3m


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, Midlands Correspondent


GLYNWED International, the metals and plastics processing group, achieved a
sharp improvement in first half profits but warned that 'it could well be
the final quarter of the year, at the earliest, before the group sees any
significant benefit from recovery.'
Pre-tax profits for the six months to end-June rose by some 19 per cent to
Pounds 18.3m (Pounds 15.4m), the fourth consecutive half of improved results
since the group reached the bottom of its own economic cycle in 1991.
However, Mr Gareth Davies, chairman, noted that the profits increase came
not from any increase in economic activity but from cost reductions and the
winning of larger market shares.
'We've developed our own recovery irrespective of the depressed conditions
around,' he said.
Earnings per share rose from a restated 3.84p to 5.73p.
The interim dividend is maintained at 4.15p but, unlike the last interim,
this distribution is covered.
Total payments for 1992 amounted to 11.65p.
Mr Davies said Glynwed's markets were unsettled, raising 'the prospect, once
again, of delay in achieving the considerable potential improvement in
profitability which any increase in activity would generate from the yet
lower cost base of the group.'
Turnover in the first half rose from Pounds 460.4m to Pounds 476.1m but the
division of operating profits was uneven.
Those of the consumer products division improved, helped by increasing
demand for Aga and Rayburn stoves.
Operating profits improved in the steels and engineering division as a
greater concentration on exports paid off.
However, in other divisions the position was less favourable.
Foundry products continued to be hurt by lack of demand from the depressed
construction industry, metal services suffered from weak aluminium prices
while plastics had problems with lower demand from gas and water utilities.
Plastics remains the focal point of Glynwed's investment programme. About
half of this year's planned capital expenditure of Pounds 25m will be
concentrated on this division.
COMMENT
Glynwed has taken all the orthodox steps to increase productivity - turnover
per employee is at levels last seen in 1989 when there were 2,600 more
people on the payroll than the current workforce of 11,100. The stock market
once deemed its 65 per cent sales dependence on the UK market as a weakness.
But not any longer; it is now a recovery stock. The trouble is that Glynwed
does not yet see the recovery that some believe is under way. It only sees
that things are not as bad as they were. That holds back profit growth.
Still, there remains the prospect of 1993 pre-tax profits at Pounds 45m,
producing earnings per share of over 14p. That puts the shares, at
yesterday's close of 305p, on a prospective p/e of 21.2, suggesting that
buyers looking for recovery stocks have already made their purchase.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930805

