FT934-8585

FT  15 NOV 93 / The Week Ahead: Results due


SHARES IN British Steel have more than doubled this year, reflecting relief
that the group has been able to make price increases stick in the slowly
recovering UK market. Analysts expect pre-tax profits today of about Pounds
10m in the six months to October, compared with a loss of Pounds 51m last
time, and resumption of an interim dividend of 0.5p.
Most interest will focus on the progress of restructuring the European steel
industry, with the company anxious to maintain maximum pressure on the UK
government to seek the closure through the European Commission of less
efficient capacity.
The City will be looking for confirmation from British Airways today that
the airline is riding out the recession better than its main competitors.
Pre-tax profits for the second quarter should be close to Pounds 170m,
compared with Pounds 136m last year.
Almost as important will be the figures that show how much money each
passenger is paying for a seat and the airline's costs per kilometre
travelled by that passenger.
They will point to the effectiveness in beating off competition brought by
the company's expensive refit of its business and first class cabins.
Interim results tomorrow from BAA, which operates the UK's biggest airports,
should see pre-tax profits rise beyond Pounds 240m, compared with Pounds
220m last time, with the dividend rising to almost 7p from 6.25p.
Analysts will be keen to see how the company's retailing interests are
faring. That part of its business is taking on an increasingly important
role as parking and landing fees aid by airlines are tightly controlled by
regulatory rules.
Commercial Union and General Accident are both expected to report
substantial increases in profits when they post their results for the first
nine months of 1993 this week.
Analysts expect GA to record pre-tax profits tomorrow of between Pounds 195m
and Pounds 230m compared to a loss of Pounds 37m at the same stage last
year.
CU on Wednesday is expected to register an increase to between Pounds 128m
and Pounds 151m, compared to Pounds 6m last year. Increases in premium
rates, especially in the UK and improved claims experience are the main
reasons.
Cable & Wireless interim pre-tax profits forecasts are in the range Pounds
490m to Pounds 520m. At Pounds 500m, C&W would be 32 per cent ahead of last
year (Pounds 378m), with earnings per share up to 10.9p from 9p (adjusted).
But most of the increased profit is attributable to currency gains on its
business in Hong Kong and the Caribbean.
Land Securities, the UK's biggest property company, is expected to report
flat interim figures tomorrow. Analysts are looking for pre-tax profits of
around Pounds 117m - half the Pounds 234m for the year ended March. A small
rise in the dividend for the full-year is expected, but there might not be
an increase in the interim, which was 6.3p last time.
De La Rue, the security printer and cash-handling machine group, is expected
to report tomorrow that half-year profits have increased from Pounds 46m to
between Pounds 48m - Pounds 55m. The City will be interested in any
acquisition plans or whether - like Reuters - the group might consider
handing back some cash to shareholders.
Storehouse, the clothing retail group comprising BHS, Mothercare and Blazer,
is expected to report a more than a four-fold increase in interim profits on
Thursday to about Pounds 14m. That compares with Pounds 3.1m last year,
before exceptional costs of about Pounds 30m relating to the sale of
businesses. The interim dividend is expected to be raised from 2.5p to
2.75p.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931115

