FT933-5152

FT  04 SEP 93 / Computing: When figures count - Some better ways to monitor
price movements


   By JEAN MILES


EVERY Saturday morning, I spend 10 or 15 minutes typing between 50 and 60
share prices and Financial Times indices into the computer program which
monitors our stock market portfolio. On quiet Saturdays, another five or 10
minutes are then devoted to looking at graphs and charts and ordering the
portfolio in various ways. It is time spent pleasantly and, I think,
usefully. I regard it as the investor's equivalent of talking to one's
plants.
Undoubtedly, though, I am under-using the power of both the computer and the
program. If I wanted to keep a daily record of price movements, or to
monitor a greater number of shares, or to subject the graphs to the process
known as technical analysis, typing the data would be too slow. There are
other ways of doing the job.
Getting prices in to a portfolio program other than by typing is a two-stage
process. First, you must get the prices from the outside world into your
computer. After that, you must spoon them into your portfolio program.
If you know your way around computers, you might be able to do the spooning
yourself. If, on the other hand, you would rather try translating Plato into
Chinese without loss of nuance than write batch files or configuring data,
you must use the links provided by your own particular portfolio management
program.
The necessary software to connect the program to the data source could prove
to be an extra expense in what is going to be a fairly pricey business,
anyway. And not all portfolio programs can accept automatic price updates.
So, if you have not yet put your portfolio on computer, and you think you
might want to go automatic one day, ask sharp questions before you buy a
program.
This whole subject, in fact, is one that calls for sharp questions. If
things are going to go wrong in computing, the frontiers where information
is passed from machine to machine, or from program to program, are the most
likely trouble spots. Be sure you know exactly what you are signing up for,
and what the supplier will do if things do not work as you expect.
For automatic price updates there are, essentially, three roads you might go
down, each with advantages and disadvantages. You could connect your
computer to the telephone lines via a modem and dial up the prices you want.
Or you could instal a card enabling your computer to receive teletext. Or
you could subscribe to a data service which will send you a disk, weekly or
less often.
The professionals use a telephone connection. The cost is usually high, as
much as several hundred pounds a quarter, but the information is
correspondingly good. The high cost is not due entirely to the rapacity of
the suppliers of price data: the stock exchange holds the copyright on share
prices and levies charges on anyone who distributes them.
To use the telephone lines, you need first to equip your computer with a
modem. In a few years, every personal computer will come with a
facsimile/modem. For now, it is an optional extra.
A modem might take the form either of a card to be inserted in the entrails
of your computer, or a small box which sits beside it. In either case, it
plugs into a telephone socket.
Once you have a modem, you will need to pay a subscription to the company
which provides your share price data and, of course, pay for the use of the
telephone line just as if you had made a voice call or sent a fax.
The Rolls-Royce solution is a subscription to British Telecom's CitiService
(BT claims that the majority of subscribers are private investors). I saw
this service demonstrated and it is wonderful. It opens the door to the full
Stock Exchange Automated Quotation system (SEAQ) for equities, gilts, and
London-listed overseas securities; and to Extel Financial, for unit trusts
and insurance funds. You can also have futures and options, exchange rates
and financial news.
You can sit there and watch your screen while it all happens, just like the
movies. You can use the Portfolio Manager feature to have your own portfolio
updated continuously, showing percentage gains or losses for everything in
it. You can even deal directly from your computer, via ShareLink. (And you
might be reassured to know that the first thing the ShareLink computer does
when it receives your order is to print it out on good, old-fashioned
paper).
The great advantage of a CitiService subscription is that it covers the
entire stock exchange. If you do not pile on the optional extras and can
restrict your use of the system to three or four minutes a day, the cost
could be less than Pounds 200 a quarter. If I were a college bursar or
trustee of a wealthy charity, I would insist on nothing less.
As another option, there are several companies, including CitiService again
and the FT's own Finstat, which allow users to make one brief daily call via
a modem to down-load (as we say) information. These services are cheaper,
but they are still out of the reach of many private investors.
I list several suppliers at the end of this article: if you are interested,
compare prices carefully. The deciding factor could prove to be the shares
which constitute the 'package' you are offered.
The other possibilities for automatic price updates, teletext and data
disks, are cheaper still and, on the whole, simpler. They are popular with
many investors. I will return to the subject in another article.
CitiService: Network House, Brindley Way, Hemel Hempstead, Herts HP3 9RR.
Tel. 0442-237 000.
Finstat: 3rd Floor, Number One Southwark Bridge, London SE1 9HL. Tel.
071-873 4613; fax 071-873 4610.
Investment Data Services Ltd: Telephone. 061-474 0080' fax 061-429 0279.
Market Origin: Tel. 0734-572 636; fax 0734-568 778.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

930904

