FT934-8695

FT  13 NOV 93 / Snug in Courmayeur: Arnie Wilson on an enjoyable return to
Italy - Skiing


   By ARNIE WILSON


THIS IS the winter of Italy's great content. At least it will be if the snow
is as fulsome as the bookings. With the lira as weak as the pound, Italy has
rarely seemed such an attractive option. It was due for a renaissance.
When I am asked by those who have never skied there to recommend a resort
for an all-round winter holiday with reasonable skiing and atmosphere, I
usually take the easy option and plump for Courmayeur, the little resort
with a big heart and an even bigger cable-car.
'You are pleased you have chosen Courmayeur, aren't you, smarty?' asks the
smug tourist office literature. Although it failed by several whiskers to
get into my Thomas Cook International guide to Top 50 Ski Resorts four years
ago, I have such a soft spot for Courmayeur that I might think differently
now.
Charming, old back streets remind one of a set for an Italian opera: you
half expect Don Giovanni to appear from an upstairs window. It is one of
those rare Italian resorts that seems to have some of the best qualities of
alpine villages; superb scenery, rustic streets and buildings, gemutlichkeit
and terrific food.
When I first skied Courmayeur 18 years ago it seemed perfect for a
32-year-old near-beginner with much more strength than technique. Although I
took my first thrilling but faltering turns in powder there, I later began
to find the runs a little limited. It was, I decided, a pleasant, bijou
resort without sufficient skiing to entertain the more advanced skier, which
I was convinced I had become.
For a while Courmayeur drifted into a remote backwater of my brain,
remembered with affection but not much inspiration. Then I discovered two
assets that had gone un-noticed in my formative skiing years: food and Mont
Blanc (in that order.)
At 32, I had been so drunk on the joys of skiing that I used to skip lunch
regularly in the interests of plunging down the Internazionale or
Competizione and getting a good suntan (encouraged rather than frowned on in
those days.) Lunch, I knew, could drive a massive hole in your day's skiing,
starting, as it often did, at 12.30 and lingering until 2.30 or 3 pm.
As I got older, less gung-ho and slightly wiser, it dawned on me that lunch
on the mountains in Courmayeur could be a many-splendoured thing: the
mountain restaurants are delightful and the food simple but splendid. Then I
finally twigged that the Mont Blanc massif, far from being just an
awe-inspiring but untouchable part of Courmayeur's scenery, was actually
accessible. The Mont Blanc experience could be 'bolted-on' to the local
skiing. Suddenly Courmayeur seemed to have moved from a powder-puff second
division resort to serious premiership material.
There is an Italian version of Chamonix's famous Vallee Blanche, for
example, reached from nearby Entreves. Three consecutive cable cars bring
you to the spectacular Punta Helbronner (11,254 feet). From here the descent
to the start of the Vallee Blanche is steeper than the French side but at
least there is no unnerving ridge to negotiate. From the same starting
point, you can ski the Toula Glacier, a much more testing descent.
This was one of the reasons why Carol Thatcher, journalist daughter of the
former premier and a gutsy skiing companion, came down to breakfast in
Courmayeur last spring and joked that she was sending a note 'home to ma' to
tell her where her savings were in case she fell down a crevasse.
She asked if someone would ski with her rucksack for the day because it was
heavy with the entire group's salami sandwiches, adding: 'Do be careful
because it's got all my notes in it.' To which one wag retorted: 'Carol,
you'd better send another note home to ma saying: 'if whoever skies with
your rucksack falls down a crevasse, please rescue notes]''
The approach to Tula is only marginally less nerve-racking than the ridge on
the Chamonix side. After skiing down a short but very steep cliff above a
small bowl (there is a rope option that you may prefer) you must negotiate a
long flight of wooden steps. Once down, there are a number of alternative
routes. Your guide will endeavour to choose the descent with the best snow
conditions. Tula provides just the right amount of challenging skiing and
wild, desolate scenery to interest a reasonable off-piste skier, complete
with narrowish gullys and gloriously wide-open terrain. In addition,
heliskiing is available.
We enjoyed some particularly exhilarating heli-skiing on the glacier de la
Lex Blanche, which is not often skied and only made available to us because
the normal heliskiing areas at Tete de Bernard, Col Malatra and Col d'Arp
were not experiencing such good snow conditions as usual.
Our guides - who had not skied the area themselves for some time - tempered
bravado with sufficient caution to keep our nerves taut as we gingerly
negotiated our way down.
Although we could not see them, crevasses were strewn out beneath us,
concealed by the snow. Our guides were certainly earning every lira of their
wage packet that day: it would never have done to lose Lady Thatcher's
daughter or even Paul Chase-Gardner, managing director of Bladon Lines, in
an icy tomb. As it was, both he and Carol's rucksack, complete with
sandwiches, survived the day, as did Thatcher and her notes.
Arnie Wilson's visit to Courmayeur was organised by Bladon Lines, 56/58
Putney High Street, London SW15 1SF. Tel: 081-785-2200.
See Section III for Pink Snow, the FT's guide to skiing.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931113

