FT934-8455

FT  16 NOV 93 / Russian candidates line up for poll


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


MORE THAN 1,500 candidates have claimed the right to stand in the elections
for the 225 seats in the Russian parliament's lower house which are to be
elected from single-member constituencies.
The list for the elections on December 12 includes leading figures from both
government and opposition.
The lists were closed as Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, re-opened
the possibility of his standing as president in elections next June before
his term of office expires. He told the daily Izvestiya in an interview that
the decree on holding a presidential election had not been cancelled, and
that he wanted to hear the new parliament's opinion on the issue.
He said, however, that his 'heart was not in pre-term elections' - since it
would be yet another referendum in trust in the president. He said the
decision to call the election had been made when he was seeking a compromise
with the former parliament - a situation which no longer applied.
The candidates for the lower house, or State Duma, will be elected both by
party lists - chosen from 13 groups cleared to stand - and from
first-past-the-post constituencies. Conservative figures such as Mr Yuri
Voronin and Mr Valentin Agafonov, former senior officials of the dissolved
parliament, are seeking seats - as is Mr Sergei Baburin, a former leader of
the hardline Russian National Unity group.
Two of the ringleaders of the parliamentary rebellion, Mr Ruslan
Khasbulatov, former speaker, and Mr Ilya Konstantinov, a leader of the
National Salvation Front, both in Lefortovo prison awaiting trial, were said
by news agencies to have collected enough signatures to allow them to stand.
However, Mr Andrei Byeloborodov told Reuters that Mr Konstantinov - and
presumably also Mr Khasbulatov - would be barred from standing.
Opinion polls from throughout the country show much confusion and a huge
proportion of people undecided as to how to vote - though Russia's Choice
usually comes out well.
However, the Communist party also polls relatively highly, as does the
pro-Communist Agrarian party.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931116

