FT932-3428

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (8): Agriculture is reborn - A quiet
revolution under way in the country


   By FRANCIS GHILES


A QUIET revolution is afoot in the Tunisian countryside. Production of a
wide range of foodstuffs - cereals, olive oil, fruit, vegetables, meat and
dairy products - is increasing. The variety and quality of produce on offer
in local markets and for export is growing.
Four consecutive years of good rainfall have played their part. But so have
government policies, which in recent years have lent greater support to
farming than at any time in the past 30 years.
Several factors lie behind what amounts to a rebirth.
Long-standing efforts to improve farming techniques have borne fruit.
Considerable efforts have been made to mobilise water resources.
Life on the land is less harsh than before, thanks to improved roads,
electricity and better access to education and health in remote areas.
The state is divesting itself of some of the land it has held since French
farms were 'nationalised' in 1964. These 500,000 hectares of state land are
among the richest in Tunisia.
Wheatfields in Tunisia no longer sprout poppies, which made them attractive
to visitors in the spring but suggested low yields and poor use of
fertilisers. The growing use of the latter has proved a key factor in
improving yields and overall quality. Farmers are also mastering irrigation
techniques, at a time when the amount of land under irrigation is growing
fast. Improving their mastery of water is essential in a country whose
resources are scarce and which suffers drought at regular intervals.
The state has given strong backing to efforts to build dams. In recent
years, however, small earthenware dams have been promoted, which are cheaper
and easier to build and play an important role in arresting soil erosion.
Erosion remains a serious problem that is being addressed in a number of
ways, notably the planting of fruit trees in northern and central Tunisia
and the renewal of the vast olive groves - the olive tree remains the best
instrument to stop the advance of the desert in central Tunisia.
Life in the countryside is also improving for those who till the land. For
more than two decades after independence life in the towns, with access to
good facilities in education and health and subsidised food, was more
attractive than tilling the land. As Tunisia liberalises its economy,
allowing the price of foodstuffs to rise and gives farmers a better income,
that balance is slowly shifting.
The leasing over the past three or four years of 100,000 hectares of some of
the best land in the country, for up to 25 years to private investors, is
introducing more capital intensive and modern crops to the land. These
leases are renewable and joint ventures with foreign companies are being
actively promoted. During the socialist experiment in the 1960s, these state
domains were badly mismanaged. Then, and for the following ten years, the
prices producers could charge were frozen, basic foodstuffs increasingly
subsidised. The domains being leased can be large, such as a 1,000 hectare
domain at M'Raissa, where Shell, in partnership with private Tunisians, is
growing seedless grapes for export. Other domains have been split into
smaller units with leases often granted to agricultural engineers who are
growing crops new for Tunisia - winter strawberries and melons, asparagus
and mushrooms. Some are raising rabbits, an unheard of activity here until
recently, which find ready markets in the many hotels along the coast.
The current improvement can be traced back to the reforms aimed at
liberalising the management of the country's economy introduced in 1986.
Prices paid to producers have, since then, improved 40 per cent on average.
The cost of inputs has also shot up; fertilisers by 60 per cent, seeds a
more modest 25 per cent and water 9 per cent annually. As subsidies on basic
foodstuffs are reined in, the result is that resources are being reallocated
towards a key sector of the economy in more rational fashion. The results
are visible.
In 1991-1992 Tunisia enjoyed a positive food balance for the first time in
two decades. Barley and hard wheat are in surplus, though a deficit remains
in soft wheat. The amount of rainfall still dictates the size of the cereal
crop, which can vary from 300,000 tonnes to 2.4 million tonnes. In a good
year, foodstuffs account for 10 per cent of all imports, a figure that rises
sharply in years of drought.
Some sectors have not followed the progress of others. Vineyards have
suffered until very recently from under investment. A few years ago Tunisia
nearly ran short of wine during the summer season - a Moslem country
importing wine would have been a real embarrassment for the authorities. Had
joint ventures with foreigners been encouraged earlier, Tunisia today could
be exporting high quality wines.
Olive oil presents a unique difficulty, as the European Community imposes
quotas. Italy is not shy when it comes to mixing Tunisian olive oil with its
own and selling it as Italian oil. The production of olive oil is the main
source of income for 100,000 families and helps provide income for 1 million
people overall. It also helps the environment - olive trees are the best way
of preventing erosion.
Two constraints, however, hamper the further development of farming. First
is the ever-growing fragmentation of ownership, with 80 per cent of all
farms boasting 20 hectares or less. The result is often poorly capitalised
farms and a major brake on progress. The other constraint is age - the
average Tunisian farmer is over 50. This weakness can to some degree be
remedied if farming in the newly leased state domains is made more
attractive.
As Tunisia is ever more self-sufficient in many products and seeks to export
more food it is confronted with new difficulties. EC quotas are one, but
also the lack of regular high quality control, the backwardness of packaging
and marketing methods. The next battle will be fought on these fronts.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930614

