FT934-11219

FT  02 NOV 93 / Management (The Growing Business): A challenge to the
chancellor / A look at proposals for a private-sector, long-term credit
institution in the UK


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


Medium-sized UK companies have long yearned for the sort of secure,
long-term finance available to Germany's Mittelstand. If proposals presented
by the Small Business Bureau to Cabinet ministers ahead of this month's
Budget are accepted, they may soon get it.
The idea is for the creation of an independent, private-sector funded,
long-term credit institution similar to Germany's Kreditanstalt fur
Wiederaufbau (KFW), which would disburse fixed-rate, seven-year loans.
This so-called Enterprise Fund, its supporters claim, would provide funds
for expansion on substantially easier terms than anything currently
available to UK small and medium-sized manufacturing firms.
Even if the proposal does not make it to Kenneth Clarke's dispatch box - and
most pre-Budget ideas floated by the small business lobby do not - the idea
is being studied as part of the review of business financing being
undertaken by Anthony Nelson, the Treasury economic secretary.
The Enterprise Fund is the creation of Peter Hanratty and Mark Gheerbrant*,
bankers at Industrial Bank of Japan International, and is one of five
proposals** which will be announced by the Small Business Bureau this week.
The new institution would issue 10-year eurobonds guaranteed by the UK
government. The authors envisage an initial Pounds 2bn being raised over
five years, a figure which seems less ambitious set beside the Pounds 7bn
lent by the KFW in Germany in 1991.
The fund would lend to companies introduced by UK commercial lending
institutions, which would jointly administer the scheme. The draft proposal
suggests banks would start by taking 25 per cent of the credit risk; the
fund, and ultimately the government at the time the bonds were repaid, would
bear the remaining 75 per cent.
The authors say banks would be encouraged to approach the fund because
clients would be pressing for access to seven-year, fixed-rate money
(probably at an all-in cost of about 10 per cent after a 330-basis point
profit for the bank).
Established businesses with sales of at least Pounds 3m and up to Pounds 50m
would be the target, effectively positioning the Enterprise Fund above the
cut-off level for the government's Loan Guarantee Scheme.
Because the fund is a private-sector institution, the authors believe the
government's guarantee would not affect the size of the PSBR, a concern that
torpedoed proposals for a long-term credit institution two years ago. It is
far from clear, though, that this hurdle has been overcome.
The key attraction of the proposed plan is that it would reduce one
important area of risk in the expansion of a business - the risk of
commercial banks withdrawing credit. Barry Baldwin, head of the Small
Business Bureau policy unit, says many businessmen decide not to invest for
expansion because bank covenants are too extensive.
They do not allow for quite normal deterioration in financial ratios at
times when either the trade or economic cycle has turned down.
Enterprise Fund money would be structured, the authors say, with the minimum
of onerous covenants. Only in exceptional circumstances would loans become
repayable before maturity.
Academics have welcomed the initiative. They argue the UK has suffered from
the absence of a KFW or Japan's three long-term credit institutions, which
played a big role in post-war economic reconstruction.
But there could be considerable resistance from the commercial banks,
without whose co-operation the fund would get nowhere. Crucially, they would
need to be convinced the new institution could work alongside them and would
not compete for business.
Given the chequered history of the Loan Guarantee Scheme, where default
rates have been relatively high, the government would also need to be
persuaded it is not being asked to guarantee what are effectively unbankable
propositions.
* Mark Gheerbrant - 071 489 6843.
** Road to Recovery - Small Business Bureau, 071 976 7262.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931102

