FT931-4216

FT  11 MAR 93 / Fresh steel talks offer some hope for other sectors


   By JUDY DEMPSEY and REUTER


   BERLIN, DUSSELDORF


IG Metall, Germany's big engineering union, and Arbeitgeberverband Stahl,
the steel employers association, will tomorrow start a fourth round of
arbitration talks for east Germany's steel sector. The outcome will be
watched closely by the union's members in the metal and electrical sectors.
The talks follow a decision by IG Metall's national advisory council to
proceed with strikes in the metal and electrical sectors in eastern Germany
after Gesamtmetall, the employers association, broke a contract which would
have led to parity between east and west German wages by 1994.
Under the terms of that agreement, signed in March 1991, east Germany's
metal and electrical sector would have received a 26 per cent pay increase
on April 1. That would have brought their incomes up to 82 per cent of
levels in the west.
Even though the steel arbitration talks concern largely the same demands, Mr
Michael Bohm, IG Metall's spokesman in Berlin, said the outcome of the
discussions could allow a way out for both the employers and the union's
metal and electrical sectors.
IG Metall is demanding a 20 per cent rise for east German steel workers, an
increase which would bring incomes in the sector up to 80 per cent of
western levels, even though productivity is at least 70 per cent lower in
the east.
'We are not asking for a shorter week, or longer holidays. We are asking for
a 20 per cent increase in wages. We are still talking. That is the important
thing,' Mr Bohm said.
Another union official said an offer at the steel talks of an investment
package might prompt fresh negotiations between Gesamtmetall and the metal
and electrical employees. Mr Dieter Kirchner, Gesamtmetall's chairman, was
in Berlin earlier this week where he raised the possibility of discussions
to break the deadlock with IG Metall.
Both employers associations want a 9 per cent pay increase in east Germany.
In a recent poll, Gesamtmetall claimed, three quarters of canvassed workers
said they would accept this increase if it meant the survival of their
enterprises.
Steelworkers marched on North Rhine-Westphalia's state legislature yesterday
to protest against the planned closure of a Krupp steel mill in the heart of
Germany's Ruhr industrial region, Reuter reports from Dusseldorf.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930311

