FT934-11540

FT  30 OCT 93 / As They Say In Europe: France insists on playing the fool


   By JAMES MORGAN


THE FRENCH Fifth Republic is founded on two principles: it must stand up to
its friends and cave in to its enemies. President de Gaulle laid the
groundwork when he turned on those who put him in power in 1958. He later
ditched Nato and tried to cosy up to the Russians.
Then, 20 years ago, France thought its interests lay with the oil producers
when OPEC jacked up the price: it rejected membership of the west's
International Energy Agency and went over to the other side. This resulted
in huge contracts in Iraq, for which it never got paid. More recently,
France tried to preserve East Germany, although it did not go along with
more extreme British plans in this area.
This week saw the government failing to end a strike at Air France, even
though it abandoned an essential plan to re-structure this giant loss-maker.
Nearly two-thirds of the population approved of this retreat, according to
one poll. President Mitterrand said the strikers often talked sense and gave
the kind of backing to his prime minister, Edouard Balladur, that Lady
Thatcher reserves for John Major.
On trade questions, France remains united around the neanderthal remnants of
a once-numerous peasant class. But any success achieved in protecting them
will damage the country's long-term interests and, more importantly, those
of its closest allies.
It could be that things are now getting out of hand. The president of the
European Commission has diagnosed the problem. Jacques Delors often keeps
his more valuable apercus to himself but on television nearly two weeks ago,
he revealed that the French had finally gone mad. What he said was that
France was going through a 'collective trauma which leads to bad solutions,
prejudicial to its interests'. He was talking about Gatt - the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
These four letters often arouse a certain madness - catatonia, hysterical
boredom, and even a complaint known as Gatt-rejection syndrome. German
newspapers can scarcely bring themselves to mention it. In Russia, the very
words 'Uruguayski Raund' generate disbelief and scorn.
For the French, though, international trade policy plays the same role as
vampires in Transylvanian folklore. The day after Delors' warning, there
were 27 editorials in the French press. The day after, 18. 'We are not
barmy,' was the theme.
The issue these days is not only French farming: agricultural protection is
now joined by cultural protection, otherwise known as subsidising French
films and keeping American rubbish off the small screen. In a country where
you can rely on seeing an old episode of Hawaii Five-O whenever you like,
there is clearly much to be done.
In its five-point rebuttal of everything, Nice-Matin accepted the worst the
world could throw at France: 'Must we be resigned to see ourselves
stigmatised as timid, irrelevant, limited, narrow-minded, inconsequential,
chauvinist, archaic, demagogic, and so it goes on, for the simple reason
that we care for the interests of France? One hopes this will not be so and
there still remains an opportunity for our lesson in reason to be heard.'
Most French leader writers think they are Francois Mauriac.
Another paper wrote of Balladur's 'Gaullist accents' and talked of a France
ready to 'join the Resistance' if the US persisted in its dangerous game -
'a France which will accept neither injustice, nor inequality nor
humiliation'. Le Figaro linked the Gatt struggle with the solidarity of the
Francophone group, which held a summit at about the same time. France could
escape from its encirclement by shovelling out free surplus food to its old
colonies.
Liberation, almost alone, maintains a sceptical attitude towards the
pro-peasant frenzy of the rest of the media. Referring to a prospective
piece of legislation which will make it obligatory to translate the words
'Jurassic Park' into French, it wrote: 'Drugged by a kind of plebiscite,
Edouard Balladur will be able to confront, with renewed muscle, the
yankosaurs who menace our country.'
It is the coincidence of farms and films that makes the present French stand
so interesting. The two are indeed symbols of all that it means to be
French. The only trouble is that they do not go well together: the peasant
provides a stock character of the French cinema, but a laughing stock
character. From The Sheep has Five Legs to Jean de Florette, this figure -
depicted as a timid, narrow-minded, archaic, malign, half-witted drunk -
deploys enough cunning to destroy his friends while, comically or
tragically, assuring his own demise.
Farmer France - the Movie provides a less-than-satisfactory motor for a new
Europe. Which is a pity - for France, when not playing the fool and fighting
its friends, is the country which can make this Europe something worth
joining.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

931030

