FT931-4204

FT  12 MAR 93 / Russia's problems set to afflict Ukraine


   By CHRYSTIA FREELAND


   KIEV


THE political disputes which have paralysed Russia are also threatening to
envelop Ukraine, where President Leonid Kravchuk yesterday appeared to be
heading for a confrontation with the reformist government of the prime
minister, Mr Leonid Kuchma.
Mr Kravchuk's acerbic criticism of the government's draft budget left the
country uncertain as to whether he supports the tough market reforms
launched earlier this year by the prime minister. On Wednesday, Mr Kravchuk
took the unusual step of appearing at a cabinet meeting, where he fiercely
rejected the draft budget under review.
Ironically, Mr Kravchuk's criticism of the budget may offer a boost to
Ukraine's nascent economic reforms. Although the draft budget proposed to
cut the deficit from last year's high of 36 per cent of GNP to 7 per cent of
GNP it was described as inadequate by market-minded economists and western
financial organisations.
'I think that the budget was genuinely incomplete,' said Mr Oleksandr
Savchenko, an advocate of radical economic reforms who helped write the
government's economic reform programme. However, the manner in which Mr
Kravchuk attacked the draft budget suggests he may be mounting an open
political offensive against the prime minister, whose reforms have begun to
erode the power of the ex-communist elite which forms Mr Kravchuk's main
power base.
'The president's address had political motives,' a senior cabinet official
said yesterday. Mr Kravchuk, who had not appeared before cabinet in the past
six months, chose to address the meeting at the eleventh hour. Illness
prevented both Mr Kuchma and Mr Viktor Pynzenyk, the radical minister of the
economy, from attending.
Moreover, Mr Kravchuk - who criticised the draft budget both for containing
too few anti-inflationary measures and for not providing enough social
welfare protection - suggested the creation of an 'anti-crisis unit' to
oversee the work of the government.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930312

