FT933-5158

FT  04 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: Emerging markets


   By PHILIP COGGAN


SCHRODERS HAS become the latest unit trust company to launch an emerging
markets fund. The fund management group cites its worldwide network - it has
offices in eight of the emerging markets - as giving it an edge in this
increasingly fashionable area, writes Philip Coggan.
Emerging markets are found in Asia, Latin America and parts of Europe. They
are attracting investor interest as their economies are growing faster than
those of the developed world and they are starting to deregulate and to
welcome foreign investors.
Fund manager Giles Neville says that the fund will use a combination of a
'top down' and 'bottom up' investment approach.
'In newly emerging markets, it's picking the country that counts' he says
'but as the markets get more developed, stock picking becomes more
important.'
Schroders set up an offshore emerging markets fund in May 1992 and this was
19th (out of 167) funds in the international equity sector during the year
to August 1, according to Hardwick Stafford Wright.
The initial charge will be 5.25 per cent and the annual charge 1.5 per cent.
Investors who pre-register with Schroders will receive a 1 per cent
discount. The minimum investment will be Pounds 1,000.
The popularity of emerging markets funds was illustrated this week when
Mercury announced it had raised Pounds 40m in three weeks for its new unit
trust, compared with its target of Pounds 20m. A 2 per cent discount is
still on offer until September 17; the normal initial charge is 5.75 per
cent and the annual charge 1.5 per cent. The minimum investment is Pounds
1,000, or Pounds 50 per month.
Kleinwort has attached a savings scheme to its emerging markets investment
trust. The minimum investment will be Pounds 25 a month, Pounds 100 a
quarter, or Pounds 250 a year; the dealing charge will be 0.5 per cent. The
Kleinwort fund follows a strategy by which holdings in countries are reduced
after markets have enjoyed substantial rises; and increased if they have
suffered falls. Potential investors should note, however, that the trust
shares stand at a small premium to net assets.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930904

