FT932-13370

FT  23 APR 93 / UK Company News: Albert Fisher shows advance to Pounds 25m -
Continuing pressure on UK margins following devaluation of sterling


   By ANDREW BOLGER


MR STEPHEN Walls has become full-time executive chairman of Albert Fisher,
the food processing and distribution group.
The announcement accompanied the interim figures which disclosed a pre-tax
profit of Pounds 25m.
Mr Walls became non-executive chairman in July after the sudden departure of
Mr Tony Millar following a profits warning. Mr Millar built the company by
acquisition into one of the stock market stars of the eighties.
The profit covered the six months to February 28 and compared with a
restated Pounds 17m last time. The shares, which fell from 82p last May to a
low of 31p in August, yesterday dipped 2p to 69p.
Sales slipped from Pounds 608m to Pounds 599m. Mr Walls said: 'We have yet
to see any significant impact of an upturn in the UK economy on our markets,
with continuing pressure on margins following the devaluation of the pound.
'As we anticipated, the over supply of fresh produce has continued to
overhang the market in Europe which, when linked to the recession now
prevalent throughout Europe, continues to create very difficult marketing
conditions. However, the first signs of improvement in the North American
market are evident, particularly in our south-east region.'
The European fresh produce division suffered most, with operating profits
down from Pounds 7m to Pounds 942,000. German trading was hit by recession
and low banana prices. In the UK, an exceptional European apple crop
continued to overhang the market, while on the Continent the large Spanish
citrus crop and reduced demand led to severely depressed margins.
The apple glut also affected the European food processing division, which
saw operating profits fall from Pounds 13.7m to Pounds 9.72m. The juice and
concentrates business of Mondi Foods suffered from the apple surplus and
fruit supply problems from eastern Europe.
The European seafood business was the group's star performer. An improved
harvest of cockles and mussels helped increase operating profits from Pounds
5.41m to Pounds 9.44m.
The North American fresh produce operations saw operating profit fall from
Pounds 6.69m to Pounds 5.08m. Although market conditions remained depressed
at the beginning of the period, with margins still under pressure, there
were first signs of recovery early this year.
The group also announced that it has sold Grossman, a US distributor of
paper and plastic disposable products, to the US distribution arm of Bunzl,
the UK paper company, for about Dollars 10m (Pounds 6.4m).
Mr Walls said the group would continue to seek better synergy among its
activities, increase efficiency and strengthen its market position -
particularly in areas which offered higher margins than pure commodity
businesses.
Earnings per share increased from 1.19p to 2.66p. The interim dividend is
held at 1.85p.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930423

