FT934-11169

FT  02 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Russian land


PRESIDENT BORIS Yeltsin's decree last week, giving Russia's collective and
state farm workers the right to buy, sell, lease and pass on their share of
the land, is an unambiguously good move. It gives Russian peasants a
long-awaited right - and one long blocked by the now defunct Russian
parliament - to emancipate themselves from state-serfdom and to become
farmers, or to sell that right to others.
Privatisation of farmland is one of the most essential steps towards
building a market economy, but in Russia it has been particularly
problematic, thanks to the conservatism of farm directors and to the inertia
of the peasants themselves. Subsidies to inefficient state farms are a huge
burden on the state budget. Privatisation will push them into the free
market, which is already growing as the more enterprising make deals for
their produce with traders and middlemen.
But this is only the beginning. People long ago forced into a style of
agriculture that emphasised dependence on the state and which criminalised
initiative cannot suddenly become efficient producers of food. Like Soviet
industry, Soviet agriculture has been pounded into its present shape over
decades: that shape is visible in the vast acreage of most farms, in the
huge obsolescent tractors and combines and, most of all, in the inadequate
storage facilities and hopeless roads via which a quarter of all production
is lost.
The Nizhny Novgorod region, test bed for reform in association with the
International Finance Corporation, shows how much preparation is needed for
a successful transition. There, the owners are being guided towards auctions
in a week's time which should see the emergence of a group of medium-sized
farms run by farmworkers and bosses, with privatised machinery bases
providing them with services. This approach will no doubt serve as a model,
but will not be available in many parts of Russia.
The state must thus play an active role for some time to come - backing up
the right to buy and sell, ensuring that conservative directors do not
render it meaningless. Mr Yeltsin's decree creates a state inspection
service with this task: like the relatively successful state property
committees, this must gird itself for prolonged and potentially disruptive
conflict with vested interests, region by region.
Most contentious of all will be the sale of land to foreign companies -
though the decree clearly allows this, in association with Russian partners.
The taboo has to be broken if foreigners are to be encouraged to become part
of Russian reform. The first signs of confidence are returning to foreign
companies after the roller-coaster of the past two years. Provided it is
properly implemented, this measure could do more than any other to
strengthen it, and at last begin to raise the Russian economy from its
sickbed.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931102

