FT933-5135

FT  04 SEP 93 / A paean of praise to capitalism: Lord Lawson expands on his
personal view of the free market as an economic philosophy


   By Lord LAWSON


Free markets work well, but so does the law of the jungle. Therefore even
some Tories worry about the unacceptable face of capitalism. This week at
the British Association's annual conference, Lord Lawson, former
Conservative Chancellor and leading thinker of the Thatcher era, offered a
robust defence of capitalism, as not only the most efficient economic
system, but as one which may claim moral superiority. Here we print an
edited version of his talk
THROUGHOUT the western world, and notably since the coming into office of
the Thatcher government in the UK in 1979 and the Reagan Administration in
the US in 1981, capitalism has appeared to be in the ascendant and socialism
in retreat. During the 1980s much of the developing world, too, came
belatedly to recognise the benefits, and adopt the policies, of the market
economy.
In eastern Europe, the collapse of Communism and the command economy has
revealed a landscape of economic failure, poverty, and environmental
degradation on a scale that few had believed possible. The most passionate
supporters of the capitalist market economy today are to be found among the
ablest of the new leaders of these countries.
It is not surprising that people give of their best in a climate of freedom,
within a legal and institutional framework of order and justice. Nor is it
in any way surprising that the rational decisions needed to make a modern
economy even halfway efficient can be taken only by a multiplicity of
decision-makers armed with the knowledge provided by a myriad of market
prices.
Yet, while its practical success, and its demonstrable superiority over all
known alternative economic systems, is no longer open to question,
capitalism is still widely seen as morally suspect.
Why should this be so, given its unrivalled and proven ability to improve
living standards and eliminate large-scale poverty, and its unique harmony
with the political virtues of freedom and democracy? In part, the
explanation lies in sloppy thinking. There is a frequent tendency to
contrast, consciously or subconsciously, the market capitalism we know, with
all the faults and flaws we see around us, with some ideal economic order
which would, almost by definition, be free of these imperfections. But in an
imperfect world, the only valid comparison is with other systems which
actually exist.
Similarly there is a parochial predilection to blame the moral failings of
man on the nature of the politico-economic system in place where the critic
happens to reside.
But in the case of the alleged moral failings of capitalism, it has to be
conceded that there is rather more to it than that.
Morality, as most people see it, is a matter partly of motivation and partly
of outcomes. And market capitalism is widely seen as defective in both
respects So far as motivation is concerned, it is seen as a system based on
self interest, the very antithesis of morality. For what is the essence of a
moral code if it is not the curbing of selfishness and self-gratification?
As for the outcome, while the population as a whole might benefit from
capitalism, that benefit is shared to an unequal extent that many feel ipso
facto immoral.
It is these two characteristics, self-interest and inequality, that largely
explain the alleged moral deficiencies of capitalism. Let me take them each
in turn.
A regard for one's self-interest is a prominent feature in the make-up of
almost all mankind. It is not the only feature, but it is a uniquely
powerful one. Moreover, it is hard to see how, without it, a large-scale
free society could possibly be governable. A socialist or statist
government, besides its apparatus of restrictions and controls, creates,
through the tax system and grants of one kind and another, inducements
designed to encourage those forms of economic behaviour it believes to be
desirable. But unless people sought to advance their self-interest, these
inducements would clearly be ineffective.
The characteristic of market capitalism is not that it alone is based on the
idea of channelling self-interest for the greater good - not that there is
anything wrong with that. It is rather that it is a unique mechanism for
doing so directly, with the least interposition of government.
Why, then, is market capitalism alone thought to be based on the allegedly
morally disreputable concept of the pursuit of self-interest? Partly,
perhaps, because Adam Smith, more than 200 years ago, was so disarmingly
honest about it. Those who seek to commend a politico-economic system are
expected to be decently hypocritical, and to flatter their audience in
loftier tones.
But it is also partly because, whereas capitalism is customarily discussed
in terms of the motives of the governed, socialism is usually considered in
terms of the motives of those in government. Even that, however, is very
much a distinction without a difference.
There is little practical evidence that politicians and bureaucrats are
wholly altruistic beings, on a higher moral plane than vulgar businessmen -
as that admirable television documentary, 'Yes, Prime Minister', has well
illustrated.
It is true that in a country such as ours, where pecuniary corruption is
rare, there is the distinction that, whereas businessmen seek financial
reward, politicians seek votes.
But that is no basis for according moral superiority to a system in which
more decisions are taken by politicians and bureaucrats, and fewer by
businessmen and ordinary people.
Moreover, there are important positive moral arguments in favour of market
capitalism, quite apart from the freedom and liberty on which it is based,
and the beneficent results to which it has led.
In the first place, to the extent to which it gives greater freedom than
other systems - albeit still within strict limits, set by the rule of law
for the peaceful pursuit of self-interest - in practice that means the
natural desire of men and women to benefit not merely themselves but also
their family and their children.
To my mind this is a vitally important extension, not to be dismissed as
genetic selfishness. When parents neglect their children (or worse), as in
recent well-publicised 'home alone' cases and the like, we do not regard
this as a lack of genetic selfishness, but with horror as morally
unacceptable behaviour. Subordinating one's own personal interest to that of
one's family is not the beginning and end of altruism, to be sure; but it is
the beginning.
The family, which looms large in the scheme of market capitalism, is not
only the foundation of a stable society, but an important bulwark against
tyranny - as, of course, is the institution of private property, the more
widely spread the better. Hence the infallible rule that tyrannies always
seek to weaken if not destroy the family.
Another key feature of market capitalism is the private sector,
nonmonopolistic, firm. Capitalism is sometimes portrayed either as
monopolistic exploitation or an unattractive competitive jungle, where the
values of co-operation are lost in a free-for-all. What this overlooks is
that the private sector firm itself provides a model of effective
co-operation.
These two institutions, the family and the firm, come together, of course,
in that much-derided corporate entity, the family business.
While more important at earlier stages of development than later stages, and
in some cultures than in others, I suspect that the value of the family
business and the culture it represents has been insufficiently recognised.
But while the misguided moral critique of market capitalism as irredeemably
selfish has been allowed to acquire considerable resonance, an even more
powerful ground for moral disfavour has been the inequality to which it
leads.
Yet in these terms, the closer the charge is examined the less impressive it
appears. There is clearly no principle of equality that has any conceivable
merit. Equality in misery is of no value to anyone. Nor is it clear whether
equality should be considered within the context of the nation and society
in which we live or in the wider context of the world as a whole. Even in
the narrower context, it is doubtful if there can be more than a tiny
minority of eccentrics who wish to see a society in which absolute equality
is the rule. Yet once it is accepted that there must be inequality, the
principle of equality (if there ever was one) has been abandoned, and we are
left not with morality but with something that looks rather like an amalgam
of aesthetics and envy.
Not that absolute equality, or anything approaching it, is possible anyway
(which is one good reason why it has never existed anywhere, at any time).
For one thing, there is more than one dimension of equality: it is not
simply a matter of income and wealth. In particular, the closer to pecuniary
equality a government seeks to move, the greater the coercive powers needed
to achieve this, and the greater the inequality of power between government
and governed.
Moreover, absolute equality, even in the sense in which it is theoretically
attainable, must of necessity lead to misery. If there is to be no greater
reward for work or saving or effort of any kind than is meted out to those
who decline to work or save or make any effort, then remarkably little work,
saving or effort will be undertaken. This is not simply an elementary
economic proposition. It is also intimately connected with a more robust
moral sentiment: that associated with equity and desert. If two people are
working at the same job, with equal skill, and one chooses to work overtime
while the other does not, failure to pay the former more would be seen as
not merely self-defeating but grossly inequitable.
It is true that large disparities in rates of pay can give rise,
particularly when hyped up by the populist press, to storms of apparent
moral outrage. But this has nothing to do with attachment to any principle
of equality. People do not expect some third division nonentity to be paid
the same as Eric Cantona, nor me the same as Pavarotti, should I inflict my
singing on you.
For all these reasons, the egalitarian argument is usually couched in terms
of more equality. However, once the legitimacy of egalitarianism is
accepted, however much equality there is, the cry will always be for more of
it.
It is, moreover, the combination of the insatiability of egalitarianism with
the impossibility of achieving equality that causes the elevation of
equality into the touchstone of political morality to be a recipe for
maximising discontent. In a sense, indeed, it is positively immoral.
However, although market capitalism is the best system ever devised for the
avoidance of large-scale poverty and for enabling the poor to improve their
lot, it manifestly does not ensure the elimination of poverty altogether.
That is why voters rightly expect any government to operate a social
security system for the relief of poverty, and why all governments, however
wedded to market capitalism, in practice do so.
There are obviously a number of practical questions involved in this. It is
not merely a case of how poverty is to be defined, but also whether relief
should be targeted or part of some universal benefit (overwhelmingly the
former, I believe), whether other dimensions such as age should be taken
into account whether relief for the unemployed poor should be linked to some
form of workfare (I believe it should), and so on.
But the key point is this. So far from making a case against market
capitalism, the existence of an underclass is a challenge to find a means of
minimising its size and saving those in it from degradation without in any
way undermining market capitalism or detracting from the benefits that
system has proved itself to be uniquely capable of providing.
Just as the sensible successful businessman who seeks to help those less
fortunate will do so not by changing the way he runs his business but by
applying part of his personal wealth to philanthropy, so the wise government
will best help the poor not by interfering with the market but by creating a
well-designed social security safety net alongside it.
Throughout modern history, market capitalism has sought to rest its case on
its practical success - a relative success which, over the past five years,
events in central and eastern Europe have shown in a particularly telling
light. Socialism, by contrast, has been forced by practical failure onto the
high ground of morality.
Perhaps we could leave it there. Perhaps we should adapt the description of
the Roundheads and Cavaliers in 1066 And All That and accept that capitalism
is right but repulsive, whereas socialism is wrong but romantic. But I would
not feel comfortable in doing so. Success, which is inevitably incomplete
anyway, will sooner or later always be taken for granted, and then the moral
assault, if unanswered, will gain ground.
At the very least, if we are to live within a market capitalist system, it
is unsatisfactory that we should have doubts about its moral foundations.
One or two recent speeches even by some members of the present government
betray a worrying insecurity in this context.
In seeking to repudiate the moral critique of capitalism, and to suggest
that it should not be held responsible for the moral imperfection of man, I
do not need to win my case. For even a stand-off in the moral dimension is
enough to allow market capitalism's undoubted superiority in the world of
practical achievement to win the day.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

930904

