FT934-10002

FT  08 NOV 93 / Arts: Nice voice, shame about the personality - Whitney
Houston/Earls Court


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Whitney Houston certainly has an amazing voice; a resonant, thrilling,
secure, tingling, megaton voice. She also has one of the flattest, most
unconvincing, and charmless personalities in the history of soul, a musical
form not known for the humour or modesty of its practitioners.
So a Whitney Houston concert is an irritating experience, snatches of great
joy when the lady sings; long moments of tedium when she talks. And she
likes talking, mainly about herself, sometimes about Jesus, but then only in
terms of His relationship with Her. With some justification - 23m sales for
her latest album; staggering receipts for her latest movie The Bodyguard;
sold out signs for her latest tour - she thinks the audience is fascinated
by her weight, her marriage, her religion.
What takes this self-obsession a step too far is that Whitney has just had a
baby. From my eyrie in Earls Court I caught sight of a large man sitting in
the wings dangling an infant. It was Bobby Brown, formerly a macho rap
singer, now nursemaid to Bobbi Kristina Brown, who at eight months and one
day is employed as the perfect prop. Mother and child enjoyed some quality
time and though baby Bobbi refused to perform on cue she will doubtless soon
join the Houston business.
The problem is that Whitney Houston peddles love and intimacy, muttering
'love you all' like a mantra, while actually dealing in detached
artificiality. Most performers with a good song like 'Wanna dance with
somebody' would have used it to drag an ecstatic member of the audience on
to the stage for some barrier-breaking bonding. Not Whitney.
She prepares for 'I have nothing' with a protracted pause, gathering herself
up as if for an attack on the world high jump record. You feel you are
sharing in musical history; yet you know she goes through the same routine
every night. The patronising is most blatant when she demands more applause
for the band: 'We're working our guts out up here.' Yes, for a substantial
percentage of the audience's weekly income.
Yet all the posturing, the vocal gymnastics, the bullshit, is just about
bearable for the voice. Near the end she readies herself for 'I will always
love you'. It is one of those 'worth the price of a ticket' moments, the
transformation of a simple love song into a work of art. While she sings you
lose yourself in her genius. When she finishes you realise that Whitney
Houston has removed all meaning, all genuine sentiment from what should be
an artless and heartfelt expression of quiet devotion. Tina Turner should
take her for a long talk.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931108

