FT932-13254

FT  23 APR 93 / Help on way for industry in Argentina: Menem to unveil big
loans and tax package next month


   By JOHN BARHAM


   BUENOS AIRES


ARGENTINA is to introduce an ambitious support programme for its industry,
battered by heavy import competition and declining prices.
Details of the package are not clear yet, but President Carlos Menem is
expected to announce on May 1 measures including Dollars 4.5bn in loans for
industry and agriculture and elimination of several taxes, especially a 1
per cent tax on corporate assets.
The package will also include a 'modification' in trade policy. This could
include stricter enforcement of 'fair trade' regulations, such as
anti-dumping rules, as well as a new shift in import tariffs that were last
adjusted upwards last October.
The package coincides with alarm over Argentina's widening trade deficit.
Private economists now expect the deficit to rise to Dollars 3bn-Dollars 4bn
this year, after a Dollars 2.87bn trade gap in 1992. Originally, the
government had promised the deficit would fall by half this year.
An Economy Ministry official denied the measures implied a softening of
Argentina's free market policies. He said the Dollars 4.5bn loans 'are not
incentives or tax exemptions or anything like that. They are directed at
companies that have put their house in order.'
The government's main objective was to increase companies' international
competitiveness by reducing their operating costs and thus releasing
pressure on an already overvalued currency, he said. Companies would borrow
from the state-owned Banco de la Nacion Argentina at better terms than from
private banks. This would force the banking system to lend more to
capital-starved industry and less to consumers.
However, no firm figures are available on the cost of this package. Some
economists claim the government's budget surplus is under great pressure.
But officials say Argentina easily met IMF targets that called for a Dollars
950m budget surplus in the first quarter.

The Financial Times


International Page 5

930423

