FT932-6605

FT  27 MAY 93 / International Company News: Time to weed garden of
electronic delight - Toshiba's response to a three-year profit slide


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


MR Tsuyoshi Kawanishi, senior executive vice-president of Toshiba, becomes
animated as he outlines the challenges facing his company and all of Japan's
electronics industry.
'In the 21st century, the electronics industry will change,' he says.
'Toshiba will have to change, too, if it is to maintain its leading edge in
the new environment.'
From his office on the 38th floor of Toshiba's headquarters building in
Tokyo, Mr Kawanishi enjoys a panoramic view of the city harbour under
development and the densely-populated suburban landscape that stretches
towards Mt Fuji - reminders of Japan's hectic growth over the past decade.
But, just as the frenzied development that spread through Tokyo in the late
1980s has ground to a virtual halt, Toshiba has had to face a slump in its
markets in the past few years.
The second-largest of Japan's comprehensive electric machinery
manufacturers, with products ranging from nuclear power generators to laptop
computers, Toshiba has been hit by the downturn in corporate and consumer
spending that has afflicted many of Japan's key industries.
The slowdown in demand is not expected to be reversed soon. Nor is the
recovery, when it comes, likely to bring back the days when demand for
electronic goods seemed insatiable.
To cope, the company, which employs 168,000 worldwide, has undertaken a
wide-ranging restructuring of its operations. The need is pressing; when
Toshiba reports its results today, it is likely to unveil a plunge in
consolidated pre-tax profits for the third year running to Y85bn (Dollars
773m), with net profits falling to Y20bn, or less than one-sixth of their
level three years ago.
After the three-year slide in profits, Toshiba and other Japanese
electronics companies are concerned their business environment is undergoing
fundamental changes requiring a comprehensive review of how they do
business.
Mr Kawanishi sees Japanese electronics companies being forced to abandon
aspects of their traditional management practices, such as emphasising
market share over profits.
There is little likelihood, for instance, that they will be able to continue
to rely on growing markets to increase profits. Instead, they will have to
place a greater emphasis on return on investment.
The cost of funding has risen since it has become difficult to raise capital
on the Japanese equity market. This means companies have to be much more
selective in their investments than a few years ago when they competed to
invest in new equipment and businesses.
Additionally, the effects of international trade friction, the need to bring
new products to market speedily and spiralling costs mean that companies
must set up transnational alliances to improve co-ordination between their
core skills and realise their potential.
'To take advantage of those changes we need to restructure our
organisation,' Mr Kawanishi says.
Toshiba is putting together a five-year business plan. This follows a review
of its businesses aimed at weeding out those not making returns and at
determining which areas the company will remain committed to.
'There are businesses that never made a profit and those that once made
profits but no longer do,' Mr Kawanishi admits. One example is cathode ray
tubes, which have not been profitable for Toshiba but have been manufactured
because they contribute to its television business.
Although retrenchment is anathema to Japanese business, Toshiba has begun
offloading some of its less profitable businesses as opportunities arise.
Last month, it revealed it had sold its 69 per cent stake in Onkyo, a
specialised audio manufacturer, to a medium-sized auto-parts maker. In
March, it reduced its stake in Toshiba Steel Tube from 50 to 25 per cent
when its subsidiary was merged with a wholly-owned subsidiary of Nippon
Steel.
Meanwhile, it has concentrated investment in strategic product areas such as
flash memories, in which it has a tie-up with IBM.
A semiconductor memory chip plant in central Japan, which started producing
this month, will give Toshiba the capacity to double its 4-megabit D-Ram
output. As Mr Barry Dargan, analyst at S G Warburg Securities, points out,
it makes Toshiba the world's largest producer of memories just as the memory
chip market emerges from a prolonged slump and prices are rising strongly.
Mr Dargan says its strength in flash memory chips, which store information
even when the power is turned off and do so much faster than disk drives,
will pay off as the market for flash memories grows.
But prospects are still uncertain in many of Toshiba's business areas as
demand remains weak, particularly in Japan, while the yen's strength
continues to cast a cloud over its overseas income.
Toshiba also has a high level of net debt, at Y731bn, or almost 62 per cent
of equity. Yet it is still committed to maintaining its costly lifetime
employment system and will employ about as many graduates next year as it
always has.
As it pulls itself out of the slump and prepares for recovery, much depends
on how far Toshiba can change from the old ways to concentrate instead on
businesses which will earn the biggest returns.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930527

