FT932-13389

FT  23 APR 93 / Leading Article: Into Europe, backwards


MR JOHN MAJOR sounded more positive about Britain's role in Europe last
night than he has at any time since he became prime minister. If memory
serves, his speech to the Conservative Group for Europe had a more
'European' tone to it than any address by a Conservative party leader since
Mr Ted Heath left office in February 1974. It was better-written than his
previous speeches, and peppered with ringing phrases and potential
soundbites, such as 'outside Europe Britain can survive; inside we will
thrive', and 'the nations must be free standing - a colonnade, not a set of
bars'.
Mr Major's immediate purpose is to regain authority over his party, while
acknowledging that some of the anti-Maastricht rebels within it are
irreconcilable. The speech marks the end of the committee stage of the bill
to ratify the Maastricht treaty; there may be further parliamentary
rough-and-tumble, but the back of the rebellion has been broken. Thus
fortified, the prime minister spoke out against Europhobia more forcefully,
and more effectively, than he has yet dared to do. Opponents of 'Britain's
full participation in the EC', he said, are moved 'by frustration that we
are no longer a world power'. Pointedly he added: 'We cannot afford to
subject ourselves to the despotism of nostalgia.'
Optimists will read this as a serious attempt to lead opinion within the
country. The speech is not proof against close analysis, but then few such
orations are. Its most useful purpose could be to set the beginnings of a
new mood in which the everlasting domestic debate on European policy may be
conducted. To that end, it may be read as a promising first step, following
a long and bruising internecine struggle within the Tory party.
The test will come in the follow-up. Mr Major made no attempt to explain the
British strategy for the kind of Europe he seeks to establish. It may have
'12, soon 16 and eventually 20-plus' members, but if there is to be no
reformed central machinery, how are these many nations to act in unison,
particularly in the 'many areas where the Community countries do need to
work together'? Again, the prime minister made no mention of the exchange
rate mechanism, let alone monetary union.
The latter omission is practical politics: the Conservatives could not
endure a bid to rejoin the ERM before the next election, let alone a
protracted debate on the merits of a single currency. A British government
that aims to set the agenda for the 1996 intergovernmental conference on the
further development of the European Union cannot, however, ignore such
issues. They will be raised by France and Germany as soon as the Danes are
home from their referendum. Mr Major has done well to announce that 'Little
England steps out', but he needs more than a good speechwriter if he is to
convince Britain's partners that it is not marching backwards.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930423

