FT931-4175

FT  12 MAR 93 / Australia's jobless increase boosts opposition hopes


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


A RISE in the rate of unemployment yesterday boosted the conservative
opposition's hopes of victory in tomorrow's Australian federal election.
The independent government statistical service said seasonally adjusted
unemployment rose to 11.1 per cent in February, after falling from 11.3 per
cent to 11 per cent in January.
The conservative Liberal/National party coalition believes the unemployment
figures will prompt a last-minute drift of support away from the Labor
government, which has been in power for 10 years.
The opposition needs a uniform national swing of 0.9 per cent to capture the
five government seats it needs to take power in the 147-seat House of
Representatives.
The latest batch of opinion polls, taken before the release of the
unemployment figures, put the two parties virtually equal following a steady
rise in Labor support in the last week.
A boost for the government came when Labor was endorsed by the main
environmental groups.
Support from environmental organisations was crucial in the last election in
1990, when Labor won fewer first-choice votes than the coalition, but was
elected after the distribution of preferences, the system under which second
and subsequent preference votes are counted if no candidate wins more than
50 per cent of first choice votes.
However, the polls also showed significant variations around the country,
indicating that the outcome is likely to depend on the results in about 20
marginal seats.
Mr Paul Keating, prime minister, tried to blunt the impact of the latest
unemployment figures by painting an upbeat picture of the economy in his
last big speech of the campaign at the National Press Club in Canberra.
Mr Keating said unemployment was 'the one big negative fact of our national
life', but claimed recent encouraging figures for retail sales and exports
showed economic growth was accelerating.
Most of his speech was taken up with further attacks on the opposition's
proposal to implement a wide-ranging goods and services tax (GST).

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930312

