FT933-5136

FT  04 SEP 93 / Sport: Putting the fun back into racing


   By MARTIN JACQUES


ON Bank Holiday Monday, nearly 20,000 people crammed into Thruxton, a rather
basic and unassuming circuit near Andover in Hampshire, for the latest round
of the British Touring Car Championship.
This is about the same number of people that insiders claim attended the
European Grand Prix at Donington Park in April. It is a far cry from the few
hundred devotees that will attend the average Thruxton club meeting.
The success of the BTCC comes when motor racing is feeling the pinch after
the heady days of the 1980s. The most publicised case is Formula One, motor
racing's flagship, where crowds have been sharply down at many grand prix
and dull racing has provoked something of an existential crisis.
Move outside the exotic world of Formula One and motor racing is in a
parlous state.
The international sports car championship collapsed because of lack of
interest from manufacturers and the public. Formula 3000 and Formula 3, the
two major single-seater series which act as the breeding ground for Formula
One, attract pitiful attendances.
Against this depressing backdrop, the BTCC is regularly attracting crowds in
excess of 20,000 in this season's 17-race series, not only at the showcase
circuits like Silverstone and Brands Hatch, but also the more obscure ones.
Of course, saloon car racing has always had what might be described as a
certain basic appeal.
I remember as a little boy going to my first race meetings in the 1950s and
watching the big Jags wallowing like small boats through the corners, their
thin tyres screeching for grip.
But the present extraordinary popularity of touring car racing is a recent
phenomenon. The key moment was the decision in 1990 to confine the cars to a
single class of two litres followed, in 1991, by the ceding of control over
the series to the Touring Car Association (TOCA).
A new and coherent philosophy came to inform the series. The single class
promised close racing. The decision to ban gizmos like traction control and
ABS had a similar effect, while also helping to restrict costs.
The emphasis was entertainment rather than technology. The drivers are
paraded round the circuit before the race. Unlike in Formula One, where the
numbers on the cars are now so small that one is reduced to identifying the
drivers by the design of their crash helmets, the name of the driver is
clearly emblazoned on the side window.
There is a conscious effort to give motor racing a family appeal. Each race
is promoted on television and in the press. Races are shown on BBC
Grandstand. As Alan Gow, the managing director of TOCA, said: 'If we didn't
have television, BTCC wouldn't be where it is'.
The package has attracted manufacturers in droves. There are now eight works
teams - Vauxhall, Ford, BMW, Toyota, Nissan, Renault, Mazda and Peugeot -
with several, including Mercedes, Audi and Alfa Romeo, reputedly waiting in
the wings.
Manufacturer involvement in Formula One looks puny in comparison.
The attraction is obvious. The costs are reasonable: in the region of Pounds
1.2m per season for a two-car team. The promotional value is considerable.
And, with the racing close and unpredictable, there are many winners and few
losers over the course of a season. The BTCC has hit upon a successful
formula, with crowds, TV, sponsors and manufacturers seemingly forming a
virtuous circle.
The message of BTCC coincides with that of Nicola Foulston, proprietor of
Brands Hatch, who threatens to become the enfant terrible of the motor
racing establishment - a status owing not a little to the fact that she is a
26-year- old woman operating in a man's world.
Foulston is critical of 'the old blazers and cravats' who have long
dominated the domestic scene and she is not afraid to make some pungent and
apposite remarks about Fisa, the governing body of motor sport.
She asks many of the right questions: how can motor racing reach out to a
new public; what should it do for the spectator (who is taken for granted in
a manner which has led to much soul-searching in other sports such as
soccer); how can it create new and successful formulae (not least in view of
Fisa's failure in this area), and how can it compete in the entertainment
industry?
Toca's Alan Gow has a similar refrain: 'Motor racing has to broaden its
appeal from the enthusiast to the casual spectator. It is competing for
their disposable income. The Oulton Park circuit is in the same market as
Alton Towers.'
The immediate inspiration for the BTCC series comes from the German touring
car championship, which is attracting crowds of more than 70,000, rather
larger than most grand prix. But Gow's eyes are set west. He believes the
American experience is the most instructive.
There is growing recognition that Indycar racing has much to teach Formula
One, with the latter grudgingly admitting as much this season by enrolling
in a crash course to try and learn the lessons.
But Indycar is by no means the most successful American series. That honour
belongs to NASCAR, the American oval saloon car race series. Gow is
emphatic: 'We take our lead from NASCAR and drag racing'.
The success of the BTCC could be a straw in the wind for a sport which is
crying out for new thinking. It looks outwards in contrast to the old club
mentality which set its sights firmly inwards. It believes in the spectator,
where Formula One has only had eyes for the television cameras.
Finally, perhaps the BTCC is telling us something else. Could we be moving
into an era in which touring car racing replaces single-seaters as motor
racing's biggest draw?

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

930904

