FT932-13496

FT  23 APR 93 / Russian Referendum: Barnstorming campaigner seems to be
losing will to win - The fire has faded since his experiences at this
month's Congress


   By JOHN LLOYD and GILLIAN TETT


   Moscow, Izhevsk


HAS President Boris Yeltsin the will to win? It has not seemed like it, so
far, in this 'campaign'. The barnstormer of presidential elections two years
ago has become a wooden figure, walking through engagements and stumbling
through speeches, write John Lloyd from Moscow and Gillian Tett from
Izhevsk.
Yesterday he made a high-profile attempt to win the support of Russia's huge
military industrial complex with a visit to the Russian republic of Udmurtia
 -hitherto one of the most militarised and secretive regions in the country.
But his appearance in the capital, Izhevsk, was far removed from the
standards of western political campaigning. Although a small group of
supporters turned out in the muddy streets to cheer the presidential
cavalcade, Mr Yeltsin refused to give them more than a stiff wave, a weak
smile and a few words as he dashed between a series of closed-door meetings.
His visit to Izhevsk had been billed as the last leg of his pre-referendum
campaign, a campaign which has taken him across Russia's provinces.
But he told those assembled yesterday: 'I have come for a working visit, not
for political meetings or campaign speeches.'
At the Izhmash Weapons Enterprise, Mr Yeltsin briefly regained a flash of
his old campaigning style when he stopped to wave and speak to the crowd
gathered next to an old stature of Lenin. 'I have come to solve all your
problems,' he announced majestically before striding into the plant to
discuss with city leaders the problems of conversion of military plants.
But such glimpses of the old campaigner have been few and far between. Last
week he read out a prepared statement to journalists as though seeing it for
the first time, then answered questions in an offhand manner, coming alive
only when he said he would resign if the referendum was lost.
He was perfunctory in Novokuznetsk in Siberia 10 days ago, rushing through
meetings looking impatient and ungracious. In Vladimir last Sunday he walked
in the Easter procession but said little of note.
Vice-President Alexander Rutskoi, the only Russian politician who approaches
Mr Yeltsin's popularity, claimed before parliament last week that the ruling
power structure, and in particular the president's closest circle, was
corrupt and pursuing self-enrichment while Russia languishes in poverty.
In the face of this, Mr Yeltsin has not recovered the fighting spirit which
was his trademark and his boast. A month ago, addressing the nation on
television, he said: 'I am determined to act resolutely. . . if political
squabbling is not halted, if no resolute measures are taken to resolve the
political crisis, if no powerful momentum is given to the economic reforms,
the country will be pushed into anarchy.'
Yet the resolute action faded away during the Congress of Peoples' Deputies
this month, where at one stage, reeling on his feet, he begged for a
compromise with those with whom he had said no compromise was possible. The
experience of that Congress seems to have made him lose heart.
Mr Yeltsin was right in his speech: the country is indeed threatened, if not
with anarchy, certainly with a further descent. Mr Yevgeny Yasin, director
of the Expert Institute of the Russian Union of Industrialists and by no
means an opponent of Mr Yeltsin, said last week: 'The government is weak and
resorts to populist measures. . . this year will not become the turning
point in our struggle against the crisis, and we will meet the year 1994
with a weak state power and ineffective state regulation.'
Mr Boris Fyodorov, the deputy prime minister in charge of finances, put it
yet more starkly on April 7: 'By giving money to this or that sector we have
so far averted catastrophe but in six months hyperinflation will finally
exhaust the economy and the budget will collapse. The financial and credit
system will break down soon afterwards.'
All this would happen, said Mr Fyodorov, if the resolute action Mr Yeltsin
has promised is not taken. But first he must win the referendum, and
yesterday in Udmurtia he refused to predict the outcome of Sunday's
all-Russian vote.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930423

