FT932-13390

FT  23 APR 93 / Leading Article: Half a trade deal


THE PARTIAL agreement between the US and the European Community in their
trade dispute over public procurement brings several benefits. It opens up
important areas of public procurement; it limits the threatened US
sanctions; it shows that business can be done with the Clinton
administration; and it helps reopen the way for the Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations. Nevertheless, it is far too early for
euphoria. Further trouble is inevitable.
The deal has a number of attractive features. The EC has agreed to waive the
discriminatory aspects of its new public procurement rules in the market for
heavy electrical equipment, worth some Dollars 1bn a year; the US has agreed
to remove restrictions on purchases by federal electrical utilities; the
administration will seek withdrawal of 'Buy America' legislation from the
governors of all 50 states; both sides have agreed to remove restrictions on
bidding for supply of goods and services to central governments and they
have also both agreed to undertake a joint study of trade barriers in public
procurement.
More important, there is an agreement. It was beginning to look as though
the Clinton administration would prefer nothing at all to anything short of
unconditional EC surrender. Sir Leon Brittan, whose principal goal remains
completion of the Uruguay Round, is entitled to feel relieved. A process has
been started that might lead to this long-desired outcome.
Yet all is not sweetness. The EC has stated, for example, that
telecommunications is too important not to be dealt with multilaterally. Mr
Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, feels obliged to impose
sanctions in response. Provided they prove token, they should be ignored.
Should they be substantial, however, counter-retaliation would be probable,
perhaps desirable.
While the US is attacking Sir Leon's front, France is to his rear. In
yesterday's discussions between Mr Edouard Balladur and the German
chancellor, Mr Helmut Kohl, the French prime minister made this clear,
stressing how vital it was for Germany to appreciate the importance, for
France, of the Gatt in general and agriculture in particular.
Given these pressures, Sir Leon - like Mr Kantor - may have to prove he is
no push-over. If this is not to happen over telecommunications, it must at
least occur where the EC has a strong case. One reason for tough action
would be to show EC member states that he will defend what they perceive as
their vital interests. Another would be to show the US that sauce for the
goose is sauce for the gander. The great threat to the multilateral trading
system is the US attempt to micro-manage every market bilaterally. If the
Clinton administration proceeds ever further down this path, someone will
have to demonstrate the dangers by retaliating. Given the realities of
power, that someone will have to be the EC.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930423

