FT932-46

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (2): The old makes way for the new - After
the corruption scandals, Robert Graham looks at the new politicians at the
top


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


ITALY'S political class has been decapitated during the past year as a
result of the corruption scandals.
Foundering with the discredited politicians are the parties they have
represented. The long-ruling Christian Democrats have become a shadow of
their former self. The 100-year-old Socialist Party risks dismemberment,
while the other two government partners, the Social Democrats and Liberals,
are in danger of extinction. All four parties have changed their leaders
within the past nine months.
The only new force to have established solid roots is the populist Lombard
League, which is dominant throughout northern Italy. To a lesser extent The
Network (La Rete), the Sicily-based cleansed government movement, also
deserves credit for breaking the mould. The Network is a recycled version of
the left wing of the Christian Democrat Party. Such recycling is scarcely
surprising because a new political class in a democracy inevitably builds on
the old.
In this highly fluid situation Italy could either move towards two or three
large parties/alliances, or retain the large number of parties which would
coalesce on specific issues. In either event commentators agree that it will
take probably two more general elections for the political landscape to
settle.
At present there appears to be a move towards a greater concentration of
regional power, local politics taking precedence over national issues.
Certainly this is the superficial interpretation of the results of the June
municipal elections, which is the most recent gauge of electoral sentiment.
The vote went broadly on regional lines: the League took the north
consolidating its position as the largest single party by a factor of three
to one; the former communists, Party of the Democratic Left (PDS),
reaffirmed and increased its control of the Centre of Italy (the old 'red
belt' in Emilia Romana, Liguria, Le Marche, Tuscany, Umbria and parts of
Lazio) while the Christian Democrats remained strong in the south with the
neo-fascist MSI also doing well.
But this crude split ignores the way in which the PDS has also improved its
position in the south and clung on in the north to remain a significant
national force. The degree of future regionalism also depends on whether the
Christian Democrats can recover their national vote.
The three-way division of the country reflects in broad terms differing
political evolution. The rise of the League in northern Italy has been a
direct response to a feeling that the traditional parties in Rome ignored
the problems of the industrial north, using the region's wealth to fund
corrupt government in Rome and an inefficient welfare state in the south.
Rather than being separatist, or even autonomist, the League represented a
kind of northern nationalism, appealing across party lines.
The League has drawn its support as much from industrial workers anxious to
protect jobs, as from small businessmen and the professional classes. Within
the League, there are overtones of xenophobia both towards the south and
towards immigrants, and some of the language of Umberto Bossi, the leader,
is vulgar and inflammatory. But the base appears to vote with its feet
firmly on the ground, wanting to get value for money from taxes, and be able
to control their own regional affairs.
Having won the mayoralty in Milan and 15 other cities in the north, the
League has a chance to prove itself in local administration. But beyond
this, Mr Bossi must decide in the future whether the League is a regional
movement or a national one. At present it operates as a series of regional
federations and formally calls itself the Northern League.
Mr Bossi must also decide whether as a regional force, the League will win
more concessions in opposition or by joining the government. Mr Bossi is
classified by commentators as being on the right, and it is significant that
alone of the parties (save the neo-fascist MSI) the League chose to fight
the municipal elections without any alliance.
The League's continued success will determine the fate of the Christian
Democrats in the north since it has been mainly at their expense.
Significantly, in the north the first genuine attempts to revamp the
Christian Democrats are occurring, led by the formidable female politician
from the Veneto, Rosy Bindi. In the south, nothing has been done largely
because no alternative other than The Network in Sicily has appeared.
The Christian Democrats are profoundly demoralised and have yet to come to
terms with having lost their position controlling the levers of political
power. The old guard - the Andreottis, Gavas, Forlanis, Pomicinos and De
Mitas - who ran their factions and behaved like feudal barons, have been
damaged beyond repair by the corruption scandals. But they have also done a
considerable disservice by refusing to countenance a thorough cleansing of
the party.
The longer this cleansing is delayed, the more the Christian Democrats risk
being unable to halt their decline. The church appears no longer willing to
offer unconditional support to the party; yet it is precisely in Catholic
values that the Christian Democrats are seeking renewal. Mr Mario Segni, the
leader of the referendum movement, decided to leave the party in March. He
may yet realise he can achieve more as a reformer inside the party.
The Socialists have been the biggest losers from the corruption scandals -
even though they have a mere 39 deputies implicated against the Christian
Democrats' 48. This is because so much of the public odium has fallen on
Bettino Craxi, who resigned in February from the Socialist leadership. He
has come to symbolise the worst aspects of the 'partitiocracy' - the control
of the state apparatus by the ruling parties.
With such a personalised leadership for more than a decade, Mr Craxi's
departure amid a welter of recrimination has left a huge gap. Mr Craxi
cleverly spear-headed an anti-communist alliance with the Christian
Democrats; with the collapse of the Berlin wall the two partners exposed the
two parties' ideological bankruptcy.
The Socialists' future is further clouded by their disastrous financial
position. The party has accumulated debts of L214bn, a further L30bn in
debts of regional offices and a similar amount accrued by the daily, Avanti.
With public funding of political parties banned by the April referendum, the
Socialists are pruning staff and selling assets.
Illicit funding of the parties has been the central issue in the corruption
scandals. The drying up of this source of money, plus the ending of state
subsidies, will have a radical effect on the way parties behave. All
bureaucracies will have to be slimmer and the practice of running
loss-making daily papers could end.
The PDS was one of the first to make cuts in its organisation. This was
forced by the decision to drop the communist label and become social
democrats. (As of this year the PDS is part of the Socialist International).
The old party split, the bulk forming the PDS and the hardline rump,
Reconstituted Communism.
Between them their vote remains remarkably close to 26 per cent enjoyed
before their divorce. The PDS accounts for two thirds nationwide but in some
northern cities has been overtaken by Reconstituted Communism. The
faithfulness of the old communist party vote bears increasingly less
relation to ideology. The appeal is a mixture of a sentimental attachment
and a belief that this grouping represents an honest alternative.
The PDS suffers from serious internal divisions but Achille Occhetto's
leadership has been boosted by the municipal election results which saw PDS
and its allies win 73 of the 145 mayoralties. The PDS needs to move away
from its mind-set as a party of the opposition. The party's three ministers
lasted only 10 hours in the Ciampi cabinet before they were withdrawn in
what with hindsight looks like a frivolous protest.
Formally it was in protest at being associated with a government whose
partners appeared to back parliament in blocking attempts by the judiciary
to make Mr Craxi face corruption charges. However, the Ciampi government
itself had nothing to do with the Craxi affair and Mr Occhetto was merely
thankful to find an excuse to head off criticism for having let his men join
the cabinet.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

930630

