FT934-8472

FT  16 NOV 93 / Turmoil over Ulster peace offer: Sinn Fein claims 'contact'
with government as PM acts to break deadlock


   By KEVIN BROWN and DAVID OWEN


FRESH efforts by Mr John Major to inject momentum into the
Dublin-Westminster peace initiative for Northern Ireland were thrown into
confusion last night when Sinn Fein asserted it had already been in talks
with the British government.
Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, chose the night that the prime
minister made his first explicit offer to negotiate with the IRA's political
wing - in return for an end to violence - to claim that Sinn Fein had been
in 'protracted contact and dialogue' with the government.
Mr Adams said it was Mr Major who broke off the dialogue.
The claim, which followed reports in the province that such meetings had
taken place earlier this year, brought an immediate denial from Downing
Street, which said there had been no negotiations between the British
government and Sinn Fein. It said the only contacts made had been those
permitted at local and constituency level. It would not comment on a
separate claim from republicans in Belfast that documents had been
exchanged.
Earlier last night Mr Major told the Lord Mayor's banquet in the City that
'there may now be a better opportunity for peace in Northern Ireland than
for many years'.
In his speech, Mr Major ruled out any secret deals with terrorists, and
insisted that the government would 'never' talk to organisations which
declined to renounce violence.
His remarks brought a mixed response from unionist leaders. Mr Ken Maginnis,
security spokesmen for the Ulster Unionist party, said he had found 'nothing
new' in them.
The Reverend Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist party, said he
would never talk to Sinn Fein. He had 'some evidence' of secret meetings
between the Northern Ireland Office and Sinn Fein, he added.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish premier, welcomed Mr Major's comments, and
said he agreed that everyone would have to show courage and take risks to
try to secure peace.
Mr Major stressed that the government would insist on a permanent cessation
of violence before talking to Sinn Fein. 'But if the IRA end violence for
good, then, after a sufficient interval to ensure the permanence of their
intent, Sinn Fein can enter the political arena as a democratic party and
join the dialogue on the way ahead,' he said.
His speech confirmed that the government was prepared to press ahead without
the participation of the DUP.
The possibility that the British and Irish governments might be willing to
talk to Sinn Fein was first raised in a joint declaration in Brussels last
month by Mr Major and Mr Reynolds.
Downing Street said Mr Major's comments were intended as a clear
demonstration that the government was 'very serious' about the peace
process. However, Mr Adams responded that Mr Major's speech was 'little more
than an attempt to camouflage his rejection of peace'.
'This is not about a place for Sinn Fein at the conference table. We will be
there. Our electorate have decided that,' he said.
'Indeed, representatives of Sinn Fein have been in protracted contact and
dialogue with the British Government. It was John Major who broke off that
contact at the behest of his Unionist allies.
'Mr Major cannot dodge his responsibilities so easily. He must grasp the
opportunity for peace, not play politics with it,' Mr Adams said.
Major stresses link between traditional values and success Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931116

