FT934-11153

FT  02 NOV 93 / UK Company News: ASW shares fall 41p after profits warning -
Margins squeezed by rising scrap metal costs


   By ANDREW BAXTER


SHARES IN ASW Holdings plunged by 41p to 147p yesterday after the
Wales-based steel products group issued a profits warning because of rising
scrap prices and reduced selling prices in the recession-hit continental
European market.
Analysts had been predicting pre-tax profits ranging from Pounds 7.5m to
Pounds 15m or more, but yesterday one said he had 'pencilled in' a
downgraded forecast of Pounds 2m for 1993. Last year, the company suffered a
pre-tax loss of Pounds 10.8m.
ASW had warned at the interim stage in September that the price of scrap,
its main raw material, had risen sharply in June. Yesterday it said the
price had fallen in August but had since risen again.
The company said that as a result of this, together with weak selling prices
for ASW's principal products in continental Europe, margins had declined
significantly from those experienced in the second quarter, with weak
selling prices for principal products in Europe adding to pressure.
Provided that market conditions did not change substantially, the group's
steel activities would stay in profit during the second half, but profits
would be lower than the Pounds 5.7m achieved in the steel business in the
first six months, the company said.
ASW's steel businesses were the star performer in the first half, rebounding
from profits of just Pounds 900,000 a year earlier, and a loss of Pounds
4.4m for all 1992.
In contrast, ASW's much smaller construction systems business suffered a
Pounds 2.5m loss for the first half, but is expected to reduce its deficit
in the current half. Overall, ASW had a first-half pre-tax profit of Pounds
1.5m.
Mr Alan Cox, ASW's chief executive, said in September that he was 'more
confident than for a long time' about the company's main steel business. But
he was cautious about the outlook for steel margins.
Yesterday ASW said that, given the volatility of European margins, it was
too early to make any comments about 1994 - when some analysts were
expecting big rises in profits.
Mr Ian Lowe at Smith New Court has downgraded his 1993 profits forecast from
Pounds 11.7m to Pounds 1m, reflecting reduced losses in construction systems
as much as the problems in the steel business. 'These have some longevity
about them,' he said.
His 1994 prediction is reduced from Pounds 20m to Pounds 9m.
ASW said that, in the absence of unforeseen circumstances, it intended to
pay an unchanged final dividend of 3p a share, making a total of 6p, also
unchanged, for 1993.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

931102

