FT933-5319

FT  03 SEP 93 / World Stock Markets: Further hopes for Oslo after a recovery
in 1993 - Karen Fossli on prospects for Norwegian equities


   By KAREN FOSSLI


In spite of a recent market setback, several domestic and foreign analysts
believe that Oslo equities have some way to go before they become fully
priced.
They say that the fundamentals augur well for Oslo. Interest rates are low,
the economy is strong, oil prices and the dollar are relatively firm at high
levels and corporate earnings are growing.
Even the dark shadow cast over the market by Norway's six-year bank crisis
has been blown away by strong first-half results from the sector; there are
some signs that confidence in the banks is being restored.
Rebounding strongly from a dismal performance during 1991 and 1992, Oslo's
all-share index has surged ahead by 52 per cent this year to become one of
Europe's top performers; last year it was among the worst in the world, with
the all-share down 10 per cent.
The driving force has been the sharp decline in domestic interest rates,
which have plunged this year to their lowest level in more than a decade.
One-month money market rates are currently hovering around 6.5 per cent,
while the 12-month rate has been relatively stable at around 6.1 per cent.
Analysts believe that interest rates have yet to bottom out. They could fall
to between 5.5 to 5.7 per cent this year, and support a further rise in the
market of between 10 and 18 per cent before the turn of the year.
However, since attaining a year's high of 591.08 on August 13 in record
turnover of NKr1.44bn, the market has relinquished some 4 1/2 per cent.
Analysts say that the decline should be viewed as a short-term technical
correction, rather than as an indication of how Oslo may perform during the
remainder of the year. 'Oslo could go up by another 10 per cent,' forecasts
Mr Tage Haug, an analyst at Kleinwort Benson.
Mr Haug notes that there has been a distinct lack of share issues in 1993;
but he sees activity picking up during the second half, due to excess
liquidity in the market arising from low interest rates and helped by the
strong performance of share prices already this year.
According to Mr Kjell Skjevesland, director of the Oslo-based Norse
Securities, last week's retreat in Norwegian equities was due mainly to
disappointment over the Bundesbank's refusal to cut interest rates.
He believes that the market could advance by 15 per cent before next year
and estimates that foreign investors have been behind about 60 per cent of
Oslo's trading volume.
Other positive factors behind the bourse's upbeat performance include the
strong dollar - currently at a near four-year high of NKr7.30 - and stable
oil prices, hovering around Dollars 17 a barrel, which are nothing but good
news for Norway's oil-dependent economy.
The US-based investment house Merrill Lynch believes that the dollar will
rise by 13 per cent against European currencies over the next 12 months and
that oil prices will strengthen over the same period.
Good earnings momentum in corporate blue chips, together with the strength
of the Norwegian economy, is also expected to enhance market sentiment.
Merrill Lynch expects earnings growth of 130 per cent in 1993 and 180 per
cent in 1994 - after an 89 per cent drop last year from the 1989 peak.
Norway's annual rate of inflation, at 2.3 per cent, is currently among the
lowest in Europe, and the country's lowest in three decades. The Bank of
Norway expects the economy to expand by 1.2 per cent in 1993 and 2.3 per
cent in 1994. Again, this is among the strongest projected growth rates in
Europe.
In relation to European markets, Oslo will stand up quite well and will
continue to be one of the best performers. Most European markets have
reached earlier peaks but Oslo could go another 15 to 20 per cent,' believes
Mr Klas Andersson of Goldman Sachs.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

930903

