FT934-11286

FT  02 NOV 93 / Washington builds bridges to Beijing


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


A SENIOR US defence department official is in Beijing for talks which mark
the end of Washington's four-year ban on high-level military contacts and
are the latest sign of a revitalisation of its policy towards China.
The discussions being held by Mr Charles Freeman, assistant secretary of
defence for regional security affairs, with the People's Liberation Army
follow separate visits to Beijing in recent weeks by Mr Mike Espy, the
agriculture secretary, and senior State Department and trade officials.
Also indicating an improvement in relations, Mr Li Peng, China's premier,
said in remarks published yesterday that this month's meeting in Seattle
between President Bill Clinton and Mr Jiang Zemin, China's president, 'is a
good thing and is of great significance'.
Officials of both sides have, however, been careful not to raise hopes that
significant Sino-US agreements could be reached in Seattle.
The recent visits by US officials to Beijing represent an attempt by Mr
Clinton to broaden the relationship between the two countries, which has
been tense and restricted since the 1989 killings in Tiananmen Square.
Recently relations have been further clouded by heightened US pressure on
China over human rights and weapons sales.
The new US strategy is to maintain insistence on improvement in these areas
but at the same time to engage China in a much broader range of discussions
so that the issues in dispute cease to dominate the bilateral relationship.
'We are now embarked on a policy of re-engaging,' a US official said. 'We
are no longer denying ourselves the possibility of talking to the Chinese at
the level necessary.'
The hope is that a broader dialogue would make it easier for the US to
explain where it found Chinese policies to be objectionable and to ob-tain
changes acceptable to China.
However, US officials are in no doubt that Mr Clinton may revoke China's
most favoured nation (MFN) trading status next year if progress is not seen
on several fronts.
Mr Warren Christopher, secretary of state, told businessmen recently: 'I
don't believe we can sustain the position for MFN for beyond next June
unless we see some improvement in the human rights field by the Chinese, as
well as reform in connection with trade practices and progress in the
non-proliferation front.'
He made clear that Washington wanted changes soon rather than at the last
minute before Mr Clinton's decision next year.
China dismisses US linkage of human rights and trade as a relic of the Cold
War and has called for greater US-China contacts. It says MFN is normal
practice rather than a favour to be granted by the US.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931102

