FT933-12582

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (2): Dynamism
can emerge from the wreckage - The face of former communist eastern and
central Europe is being transformed


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


THE Soviet Union, which was built during a dozen five-year plans interrupted
only by war and post-war reconstruction, crumbled virtually as it was being
built. The mighty dams, steel plants and factories of the first five-year
plans were built with forced labour fresh from the countryside, using poor
quality steel and worse quality cement. Housing was neglected for three
decades, except for a handful of Gothic skyscrapers in Moscow and other
cities and the blocks built largely by German prisoners of war in the
immediate postwar period.
Then came the shoddy, barrack-like housing blocks with cheap, tar-paper
roofs, low ceilings and poky rooms built around the fast-growing cities by
Khrushchev in the late 1950s and 1960s. Finally, Russia was disfigured by
endless rows of uniform, factory-built housing blocks which made Soviet
cities virtually indistinguishable, whether in the freezing tundra or the
semi-deserts of central Asia.
All were built the same way from concrete panels assembled on site by giant
cranes during President Brezhnev's long, mediocre regime in the twilight
years of communism.
As a general rule, anything of architectural merit in the Soviet world was
either built before the revolution or in that brief post-revolutionary
moment when architects like Menshikov and the constructivists managed to put
up the odd house or trade union office in super-modernist style.
The low quality of most construction work, and the combined effects of poor
maintenance and a harsh climate, have left Russia and the post- Soviet
republics with an inadequate and decaying housing stock, over-sized
factories, dangerous nuclear power stations and rotting infrastructure -
from railways to highways which need replacing fast.
The collapse of the official economy, however, has led to cutbacks in mass
housing and other building works, but a boom in private dacha building
around Moscow and the big cities.
Longer term, the collapse of central authority and rapid, if chaotic,
privatisation is expected to lead to a spate of largely uncontrolled
building of low rise housing in the outer suburbs and a huge volume of
small-scale renovation work as owners of newly privatised shops and flats
make good decades of neglect.
The first indications of this are already apparent. But the clearest signs
of things to come can be seen in former communist east and central Europe
where the face of the cities and even villages has been transformed by such
developments over the last three years.
Eventually, the reformation of the economies of Russia and other former
Soviet republics, especially the energy and raw material rich ones, will
create demand for repairs, facelifts and new construction which will in
itself become a powerful engine of future growth.
This internally generated dynamic will be assisted by billions of dollars of
international aid money and foreign finance, initially from the World Bank
and other institutional lenders, which will find tangible expression in the
building of telecommunications networks, the rebuilding and expansion of
road and rail links, the modernisation of ports and airports, and a crop of
new warehouses, new offices and hotels, new factories and refineries across
the board.
At present, much of the former Soviet construction industry is in crisis; it
needs a massive infusion of new ideas, new equipment and new management. But
those who can look beyond the current and inevitable political turmoil and
confusion see an economically dynamic Russia emerging from the wreckage of
communism in the early part of the 21st century. It will be then on the way
to fulfilling the potential for growth and development which made Russia the
fastest-growing economy in the world in the decades before the first world
war.
The preconditions for such growth are higher output and efficiency of the
oil and gas industries, coupled with greater energy efficiency. This will
ensure a rising exportable surplus while privatisation of agriculture and
the agro-industrial and distribution sectors will end the hard currency
drain of food imports.
Western construction companies, energy and agro-businesses will play a vital
part in reconstructing the former Soviet economy, once Russia and other
resource-rich states such as Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan earn the hard
currency needed to buy services and attract investment from abroad. They
will come in after the current confusion over laws, ownership and political
competence is replaced, as it surely will be, by a clearer set of rules,
backed by law and a remodelled state.
What can be achieved is already visible in Poland, Hungary and the Czech
republic which are the main recipients of foreign investment but also the
most advanced in revamping their laws to European standards, stabilising
their currencies and establishing government according to parliamentary
rules.
Exbud, the privatised Polish construction company now quoted on the Warsaw
stock exchange, is one of many Polish construction companies which is not
only busy building western-style factories, hotels and office blocks in
Poland but is among many central European construction companies helping to
rebuild eastern Germany and win contracts in western Europe and further
afield.
At the same time western construction companies, architects and building
service companies, including British construction companies such as Bovis,
are actively seeking work in the region. In one notable development YRM, a
UK-based building design consultancy with several overseas hotel projects
behind it, has joined Higgs and Hill (Overseas) and the city council of
Prague district 6 in a consortium to design and build a world-class hotel
and office complex in the grounds of the Praha hotel. Built in 1981 for the
exclusive use of the Communist party central committee, this boasts a large
park, is close to the city and only 10 minutes from the airport.
Meanwhile, central European cement and glass companies have been high on the
list of foreign investors anxious to secure new, low-cost sources of
construction materials in anticipation of a long and sustained boom in
construction work over the next decades.
Similar thinking lies behind a raft of strategic investments by Asea Brown
Boveri, Siemens, General Electric, Westinghouse and other energy-related
engineering companies. All believe that big contracts will eventually come
their way as east and central Europe makes safe its Soviet-designed nuclear
power plants and tackles air and water pollution problems by installing new
anti-pollution equipment or replaces wasteful and polluting old plant.
In the meantime, their investment in modernising production facilities in
this region is already paying off by giving the parent companies new,
low-cost, sources of components and equipment which help to keep overall
costs low and improve competitiveness in western markets where wage costs of
skilled workers are often 10 times higher.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930723

