FT934-8590

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Harrogate (7): Wealth surprises outsiders - The
Golden Triangle


   By CHRIS TIGHE


A clue to northern England's Golden Triangle, the area bounded by Harrogate,
York and Wetherby, can be spotted in one of Harrogate's town centre car
parks. A cursory glance immediately reveals a Mercedes, a Jaguar, a Porsche,
various BMWs and a clutch of Range Rovers.
In the window display at Ogdens, the jewellers, a Pounds 12,600 ring
glitters alongside dozens of four-figure items, and further along James St,
a mannequin on the stairs of Hewlett's department store shows off the latest
Louis Feraud autumn look: Pounds 1,207 for the suit, coat and hat.
Yorkshire people may have the reputation of being hard to part from their
money. 'They do say a Yorkshireman is a Scotsman stripped of his
generosity,' chuckles stockbroker Stephen Jackson, but in Harrogate the
evidence points to a taste for the best that money can buy, and the money
with which it buy it.
'Until you come here you don't realise how much wealth there is. It's
extraordinarily wealthy,' says Mr Keith Weston, one of two founding partners
of the Harrogate office of accountants Saffery Champness. 'North Yorkshire
is wall-to- wall full of money,' says Mr Jackson, senior partner at Cawood,
Smithie & Co, Harrogate's biggest stockbrokers.
This may surprise outsiders but, say Mr Weston and Mr Jackson, Yorkshire
people tend not to talk about their wealth and they are careful about how
they spend it - even if some mothers taking their children to school do look
as if they had just stepped off a catwalk.
'Sometimes the trouble is trying to get them to spend. You'll get the lady
with a Pounds 500,000 portfolio saying 'I'm going to cancel a particular
subscription, it's gone up,'' says Mr Jackson.
The growth of business for Saffery Champness and Cawood, Smithie's offices
in the town is evidence of the private wealth which underpins the Harrogate
area.
Cawood, Smithie & Co, founded in Harrogate in 1975, now employs 40 people.
Two years ago, six new partners were appointed, bringing the total to 10.
Saffery Champness's office, opened in January 1992, had by April this year
already achieved the highest billings of all the firm's eight regional
offices. In its second year of operation, the office expects to record a 15
per cent to 20 per cent increase in billings over year one. That both firms
have prospered in Harrogate is all the more significant given the town's
proximity to the very large financial sector of Leeds.
Saffery Champness in Harrogate has pitched its activities at private
clients, especially high net worth individuals. Its ideal client would be
worth well in excess of Pounds 1m, and possibly much more.
Several clients are self-made business people. Although Harrogate has the
reputation as a residence for wealthy old ladies, the town and the
surrounding area are also home for well-off people who commute to work in
Leeds, Bradford and even Teesside.
A number of Saffery Champness clients own country estates, sometimes passed
down through their family for centuries. Two of the seminars the firm has
co-hosted in the past two years on the theme of protection of landed wealth
were held at Bramham Park, home of George Lane Fox, whose family's presence
in the West Riding dates back to Stuart times.
The key objective for such clients is wealth protection for the family.
'We're looking at the next generation, and the generation beyond that,' says
Mr Weston.
A similar philosophy underpins the work of Cawood, Smithie & Co. 'We aren't
in the business of taking risks for our clients; our purpose is risk
minimisation rather than profit maximisation', says Mr Jackson.
Both men note their client base's attachment to Yorkshire, and Yorkshire
companies. 'They're very proud of being Yorkshire,' says Mr Weston. This
allegiance, he acknowledges, helps sell the message that it is not necessary
to look to London to find good financial advice.
Down at Harrogate council's offices, where the ornate municipal silverware
is displayed in cases in the main entrance hall, Mr Stuart Quin, economic
development officer, acknowledges that the town and the surrounding
agricultural area have traditionally been very prosperous.
For some, this still holds true, he says. Some businesspeople living in
Nidderdale have applied successfully for planning permission for helicopter
pads. But, says Mr Quin, Harrogate is suffering a slow erosion of jobs,
including many white-collar posts, and this leaves no room for complacency.
Appropriately for a town with so many opportunities to spend money on
high-class goods, some of the companies Harrogate has attracted in the past
few years are finance-related. They include Coda Group, a financial
accounting software company with 20 offices worldwide, a NatWest switchcard
operations base and Link Interchange Network, which provides electronic
switching services to its members, mainly banks and building societies.
'Harrogate has the sort of quality feel we wanted,' says a spokesman for
Coda, which moved its headquarters from Leeds to Harrogate two years ago.
The Golden Triangle, according to estate agents Cluttons, lies between
Skipton, York and Leeds. The Triangle's diamond centre is bounded by
Harrogate, Ilkley, Wetherby and Leeds. The firm is unashamedly upmarket. It
does not generally deal in domestic property worth less than Pounds 250,000.
Cluttons has a clientele of potential buyers looking for classic country
houses in the Golden Triangle, at between Pounds 500,000 and Pounds 750,000.
Some property values in the area are higher than in parts of the home
counties, says residential partner Mr Tim Waring. 'If you took a Queen Anne
house in Oxfordshire and put it in the triangle it would sell for more.'
The Triangle concept, first mooted a couple of years ago, has even received
official recognition of a sort. It was mentioned recently in court during a
property-related case.
It would be foolish, says Cluttons partner Mr Tony Pardoe, to say Yorkshire
has been unaffected by the recession. He believes, however, it has proved in
better shape to withstand it than southern areas, because of the testing
time its industries had already gone through in the 1970s and 1980s.
The problems at Lloyds' of London, the insurance market have also meant some
properties coming on to the market, he says. 'But the wily old Yorkshireman
has not been as heavily involved with Lloyds as his counterpart in the
south.'
In 1992, the average price per residential transaction at Cluttons'
Harrogate office was Pounds 288,000, compared with Pounds 335,000 in 1991,
although the transaction level dropped by less than 4 per cent. By the end
of October this year, the 1992 sales total had already been surpassed.
In the last five years, says Mr Pardoe, the proportion of Golden Triangle
buyers has switched from being two-to-one outsiders to insiders, to a
two-to-one majority of Yorkshire people, looking to switch homes but stay in
the area.
In such a close community, personal recommendation is very important for
professional firms. 'Credibility has to be maintained. The only way to
maintain it is by providing a very good professional service,' says Mr
Jackson. He lives in Harrogate and sometimes walks to work. 'One morning
this summer I met three clients and picked up some business on the way.'
Mr Weston, who moved from Fulham to a barn conversion in Nidderdale when he
moved north for the opening of Saffery Champness's Harrogate office, says
the beauty of the town and its surrounding area comes as a shock to
first-time visitors.
This, he says, is England's best-kept secret. 'You find me a southerner who
has ever gone home.'

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931115

