FT932-6852

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(9): The clones feel the heat - Personal computers


   By PAUL TAYLOR


THE Dollars 50bn-a-year world personal computer market is in ferment. Prices
are falling again, new and more powerful microprocessors are arriving,
distribution channels are changing and the long predicted wave of
consolidation may have finally begun.
PC prices have been dropping sharply in most markets for the past two years.
Although the pace is likely to be slower this year, most analysts expect a
further decline of 10 to 15 per cent in Europe in 1993.
However, says Mr Chris Fell of Dataquest, 'The amount spent by customers is
falling much less quickly because people are trading up.' This is because
many customers are choosing higher specified machines - for example those
with faster microprocessors, bigger hard disks, larger screens and
accelerated graphics cards - rather than the budget entry level machines.
In addition, though some price-sensitive customers will continue to buy from
the 'ultra-clones' - small companies which build a PC from commodity-style
components, mostly manufactured in the south-east Asia and sold off the
pages of computer magazines - many business customers appear willing to pay
a small premium for an established name - providing they feel they are
getting value for money.
Over the past year IBM, Compaq, ICL and Olivetti have hit back at the
cut-price clone makers with low-price and highly competitive machines of
their own. Most established PC manufacturers now have two or more distinct
product lines aimed at different segments of the market.
'Apple, IBM and Compaq all now have competitive products,' says Mr Fell, who
believes many customers are now looking at other differences like bundled
software and after-sales service. 'We are back on the price-performance
curve,' he says.
But tumbling prices, slim margins, shortening product cycles and the
evaporation of customer loyalty are taking their toll, ensuring that only
the most nimble survive. Each month a steady stream of small, and some
not-so-small, clone manufacturers on both sides of the Atlantic fail or pull
out of the PC market.
Last year's price cuts left a number of clone markers including Everex,
Tandon and Zeos in financial difficulties. Tiko in the UK went bust. Even
some big manufacturers such as Olivetti in Europe admit they do not make
money on their PC business.
Mr Wyn Griffin, general manager for major accounts at Olivetti UK, says
corporate buyers 'just buy for the occasion, there are no long-term
contracts any more.' He adds that Olivetti, which also manufactures PCs for
sale by Digital Equipment in Europe, makes its money in the UK from
providing add-on services and applications to its customers.
Olivetti's agreement with Digital, with the latter taking up to a 10 per
cent equity stake in the Italian group, is one of a growing number of
strategic alliances which have become a feature of the global PC industry
and reinforce the view that the inevitable process of consolidation has
begun.
By the middle of the decade some in the industry like Mr Bruce Sinclair,
vice-president of Northern Europe for Dell Computer, predict that the world
PC market will be dominated by just a handful of players. Within five years
nine out of every 10 PCs could be supplied by just three companies and the
race to decide who will be the survivors has already begun.
Despite the risks, no company wishing to remain in the forefront of the
world computer industry can afford to ignore the PC sector. According to
Dataquest, the information technology consultancy, the PC accounted for 44.5
per cent of worldwide computer industry revenues last year - nearly as high
a percentage as mainframe and mini-computers combined.
IBM is still the world leader in terms of PC sales, with annual PC revenues
of Dollars 7-10bn and a worldwide market share of about 12.4 per cent. It is
followed by Apple (11.9 per cent), Compaq (6.6 per cent), NEC (5.1 per cent)
and Dell (3.5 per cent), according to Dataquest.
Overall, the PC market grew by a relatively modest 7.1 per cent in value
terms to Dollars 46.5bn in 1992, says Dataquest, but PC shipments in Europe
rose by 12 per cent to 9.4m units last year with much of this growth
occurring in the fourth quarter.
The falling price of basic PC hardware highlights the increasingly important
role played in the industry by other companies including Intel, the US
semiconductor manufacturer which makes the microprocessors used by most PCs
and by the software companies such as Microsoft with its MS/DOS operating
system, Windows 'environment' and wide range of business software packages,
and Novell, which sells the most popular networking software.
In the office, desktop PCs are increasingly linked by local area networks,
providing a huge market for the operating system and business software
companies.
Outside the office, the advent of lightweight notebook computers has
delivered fully functional computing power 'on the move'. About one in five
PC sales today are portables, and the proportion is increasing.
Portable computing has been made possible in part by advances in silicon
integration which have also fuelled the steady move towards more powerful
processors. Intel has cultivated this process as part of its marketing
strategy, developing a range of upgradeable 'clock-doubled' processors built
around its top-of-the-line 80486 microprocessor - soon to be displaced by
the new Pentium processor.
However, Intel no longer has the PC processor market to itself. New chips
from its rivals, AMD and Cyrix, have added to the recent proliferation of PC
processor types and Motorola, the second largest chip manufacturer, has
recently announced its entry into the field with its first Power PC
microprocessor, developed in conjunction with IBM and Apple Computer.
The old PC distribution channels have also come under increasing attack.
Direct mail order sales have helped some companies to challenge more
lethargic rivals. Dell, the Texas-based group, more than doubled its sales
last year to Dollars 2bn.
Most companies, including Compaq and IBM, now either sell their machines
directly through the pages of computer magazines or allow other
'off-the-page' resellers to conduct 'remote sales' on their behalf.
According to a new report on distribution by Dataquest, direct sales now
represent more than 20 per cent of total PC sales in all the major European
countries except Italy. However there are signs, particularly in the US,
that direct sales may have peaked. The fastest growing distribution channel
in the US today is the PC superstore.
By the end of 1995, predicts Mr Steve Brazier of Dataquest, superstores will
account for 20 per cent of all PC sales in the US. He believes Europe will
follow suit; in the UK the first PC superstores have already arrived.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930526

