FT933-5259

FT  04 SEP 93 / Standard Life's battle to maintain sales


   By NORMA COHEN


STANDARD LIFE must have seen the writing on the wall. Late last year it
unveiled a new logo designed to promote brand-name identity and has recently
ventured into image advertising on television.
It will need more than a stronger image to prosper in future, for like
increasing numbers of leading life insurers, Standard Life is about to find
itself frozen out of the high street.
Standard Life had the presence of mind in 1989 to 'tie' itself to the UK's
largest building society, the Halifax. That outlet provided 18 per cent of
all its new business in the UK last year.
Yesterday the Halifax said that from the end of 1994 it will sever the
arrangement under which it sold Standard Life insurance and pensions
products exclusively, and will only sell those of a new company it plans to
form itself.
Mr John Wriglesworth, building societies analyst at UBS Securities, said:
'To Joe Public who doesn't read the newspapers, Halifax Life is a better
brand than Standard Life. It has no public presence although its a cracking
good company.'
Mr Tom King, general manager (marketing) at Standard Life, said the company
would quickly recoup the lost business by selling more through the
independent financial advisers which account for 70 per cent of its sales,
and by expanding its direct salesforce.
But industry analysts are doubtful. Mr Mike Wadsworth, partner in the
insurance practice at consulting actuaries R Watson and Co, said: 'Clearly
in the area of mortgage-related business it is difficult to see how the
shortfall can be made up quickly.'
A number of the nation's largest banks and building societies have abandoned
ties with outside insurance com-panies in favour of self-owned operations.
Only two leading building societies, Nationwide with Guardian Royal
Exchange, and Alliance and Leicester with Scottish Amicable, remain firmly
tied to large insurance companies - and that may not last.
Nationwide said: 'Our tie doesn't come up for renewal until the end of 1994.
We are now looking at all our options.'
Five years ago the Financial Services Act determined that retailers of
financial services must either sell the products of one producer
exclusively, or must sell the best product of a broad range of producers.
Most banks and building societies saw exclusive arrangements as more
profitable. But inevitably, Mr Wadsworth said, frustrations set in. 'Its
hard for a major insurer to give the attention that the retailer thinks his
customer needs,' he explained.
In short, insurance companies do not tailor products for the building
society market.
Mr Michael Blackburn, Halifax chief executive, in explaining why the tie had
to be abandoned, said:
'It's to do with control over the manufacturing process. We are particularly
concerned that our competitors have more flexibility than we do.'
Until recently the Halifax had been privately urging the Securities and
Investments Board to consider allowing 'multi-tying', which would have
enabled it to have different exclusive arrangements for different products.
Mr Blackburn declined to speculate about whether the Halifax would have
preferred multi-tying to starting its own insurance company, saying there
was no prospect of rule changes in any event.
But Mr Wriglesworth said there was little doubt about the Halifax's
prefer-ence.
'I don't think this would have happened if they could have had ties with
several providers,' he said.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Insurance ties of the top 10 societies
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
 -Halifax: tied to Standard Life but, from late 1994 it will sell only
  products from its own subsidiary, Halifax Life
 -Nationwide: tied to Guardian Royal Exchange
 -Leeds Permanent (to be formed by merger between Leeds and National
  and Provincial): Leeds will sever its tie to Norwich Union next
  spring. The combined society will sell products of a wholly-owned
  insurance subsidiary
 -Woolwich: tied to own subsidiary, Woolwich Life
 -Alliance and Leicester: tied to Scottish Amicable
 -Cheltenham and Gloucester: tied to Legal and General but from November
  it will offer no retail financial services at all
 -Bradford and Bingley: has independent financial adviser
 -Britannia Life: tied to its own subsidiary, Brittania Life
 -Bristol and West: tied to Eagle Star
 -Northern Rock: tied to Legal and General but offers independent advice
  through a subsidiary
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930904

