FT932-3118

FT  16 JUN 93 / Slower US inflation eases fears on rates


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


US consumer prices rose 0.1 per cent last month and by 3.2 per cent in the
year to May, providing further evidence that inflationary pressures are
moderating, the Labour Department reported yesterday.
Following last week's report that wholesale prices were flat last month, the
figures all but eliminated residual fears on Wall Street that the Federal
Reserve might opt for an early increase in interest rates.
President Bill Clinton said the inflation figures were part of a broader
improvement in economic conditions. At a Washington press conference he said
employment had risen noticeably in recent months and mortgage rates were at
a 20-year low.
But he warned that the economy would not continue to do well unless Congress
soon passed his deficit-cutting economic plan.
'The continuation of this trend depends on our ability to pass a strong
economic programme through the Congress which reduces the deficit, increases
investment in our future and is fair,' he said.
In a separate report the Commerce Department said the US current account
deficit declined to Dollars 20.9bn (Pounds 13.5bn) in the first quarter
compared with Dollars 23.7bn in the final period of last year.
The improvement - which occurred in spite of a rise in the merchandise trade
deficit - mainly reflected an increased surplus on services and a rise in
net investment income.
Most analysts are predicting relatively subdued inflation figures throughout
the summer, reflecting an unwinding of distortions which pushed up the
indices earlier this year. A sharp cut in tobacco prices has yet to be
reflected in consumer prices.
If the figures remain encouraging, the Fed is unlikely to tighten monetary
policy before the autumn in spite of its reported shift to a bias towards
raising interest rates.
Compared with April's 0.4% increase the small overall rise in consumer
prices masked big sectoral differences. Prices of energy and clothing
dropped 1 per cent and 0.5 per cent respectively between April and May. But
prices of many services rose sharply, with medical prices up 0.8 per cent
following a 0.6 per cent gain in April.
The 'core' consumer price index, which excludes the volatile components of
food and energy, rose 0.2 per cent last month and by 3.4 per cent in the
year to May.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930616

