FT934-11539

FT  30 OCT 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Playing it cool in the fruit
field - The chilling techniques used to ripen produce


   By DAVID SPARK


HARD avocados, unloved and unwanted by supermarkets and shoppers, are what
gave Barry Cooper an opening into business.
The fruit can be imported hard and then ripened with heat and ethylene gas -
but it can get too ripe. Cooper, a self-employed refrigeration engineer, was
asked to design airspray equipment to cool the avocados and stop the
ripening process.
'The first airsprays leaked so they cost me a lot of money,' says Cooper.
However, once he overcame that problem, he had equipment enabling him to
send fruit and vegetables through the supermarkets' distribution chains in
good condition.
He joined with Ian White, then selling refrigeration equipment for a
Peterborough company, to form the Horticold company in 1989. 'I wanted to
expand the business. Ian had a good customer base and technical knowledge.
We just felt there was a huge market.'
Chilling fruit and vegetables in Britain used to be a hit and miss affair
and caused produce to dry out. It was put in a cold room or a refrigerated
lorry but a cold room simply chills the air and the cold takes a day or more
to reach the inside of the produce. Maintaining the quality of the fruit and
vegetables requires faster cooling.
But how fast? Peaches split if cooled too quickly; cucumbers go soft. There
was no research data, so Cooper and White have had to compile their own
using a mobile cold room equipped with airsprays enabling them to see how
fast the produce can safely be cooled.
White only went into refrigeration following an incident on the cricket
field. He was fielding at first slip when second slip suggested that he give
up car trading, which he had taken up after a background in engineering, and
apply for a job at a Hull refrigeration company. He got the job.
To launch Horticold, Cooper and White took out Pounds 100,000 in bank loans
against guarantees. They got their first big order quickly, a Pounds 300,000
contract to design and install equipment for a new distribution centre for
JO Sims, an importer, at Spalding, Lincolnshire.
Slowly they built up a reputation, advising and equipping other importers,
and installing small units at prices from Pounds 10,000 for farmers selling
strawberries. 'The only thing that sells an engineering product is
recommendations and track record,' says Cooper.
Then Horticold turned to the importers' suppliers in Spain, France, Greece,
Zambia and Kenya, offering to cool produce straight out of the fields, thus
allowing it to be picked ripe.
'People harvest produce unripe for a long shelf life,' says Cooper, 'but if
it ripens unnaturally the taste is not there. Peaches from Italy look
beautiful but can taste lousy. It used to take 24 hours to cool peaches. We
designed a machine that could do it in an hour.'
A staff of 12 assemble Horticold equipment at Langley, near Slough. They
also install it in Britain and overseas, and train local maintenance teams.
Turnover was Pounds 600,000 in the first year. Four years later it's Pounds
1.6m. Profit is between 3 and 5 per cent. 'We've had a few scary moments
with delayed payments and people finding excuses not to pay,' says Cooper.
'You have to run on your clients' integrity.'
Horticold is now tackling the task of promoting the sale of British fruit
and vegetables by extending the season beyond November. This means that
produce must be stored, possibly for months and then ripened.
As produce ripens it gives off carbon dioxide and sometimes ethylene, and
this mixture promotes further ripening. Cooper and White have devised a
computerised system for controlling the mixture and, through that, the
ripening process.
'We started with carrots,' says White. 'We have a project near Newark. We
have also shipped equipment to Italy for potatoes and carrots.'
They now have to wait to find out if they priced these projects correctly:
they will not know the costs until the first few are completed. They
believe, however, in doing things themselves. Cooper says: 'People want a
slice of the action. But these are our ideas. We developed them. There's no
charity when it comes to business.'
Their understanding of refrigeration and the market gives them an advantage
over less specialised companies in what they have found to be a specialised
field. 'The more cities and countries you visit, the greater depth of
understanding you acquire. And this, after all, is a technology that does
travel.'
Horticold, Unit 18, Wexham Road Business Village, Slough SL2 5HF. Tel:
0753-692891.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

931030

