FT934-10127

FT  06 NOV 93 / Property: What to do if it's all Greek to you


   By GERALD CADOGAN


LEARNING Greek is the top requisite for buying property in Greece. And, when
you are there, be natural: Greeks are quick to spot poseurs. Make friends,
go and drink in the kafenion, and try to get to know the local builders - as
many as you can - by their first names. Then, there is a good chance your
Greek home will be a dream come true.
Good personal relations ease every part of life, from paying the electricity
bill to working with the lawyer who buys the property for you. Friends can
put in a word for you with sticky officials and help with such sagas as
building permits or getting a telephone line, which could take years without
mesa (connections) - although, if you have a major problem, remember that
your friends' influence probably rises or falls with the government of the
day; the election victory last month of Andreas Papandreou's socialist party
put decisions on hold throughout the country.
Allow plenty of time to travel and look, and make sure you know the people
and place before you and your lawyer (or whoever is helping you) start
negotiations. This is especially important if you want to restore a derelict
house. Did you look in the next valley in case it has a better one?
Time spent in the kafenion, when you can catch people in the early evening
on their return from work in the fields, might give the lead to the house
you want. But never negotiate when others are about.
Go somewhere private, allow time for the preliminaries ('Where are you from?
How many children do you have?') and be in no hurry to name a price. Once
you have done that, there is no going back.
Water can be a problem. What is the supply: spring, well or mains? Does it
run all the year? Have there been restrictions? How did the village fare in
recent dry spells? And what does it cost?
Be prepared for bad news. Many places have water cuts, often, and some small
islands depend on tankers. Foreigners' notions of six showers a day, and
perhaps a swimming pool, vanish quickly when the water runs for only four
hours every other day, as happened in a village I know in Cyprus three years
ago. However good the supply, you are bound to have the other problem -
blockages. Drains are never big enough and a friendly plumber is crucial.
The extended family is another hazard. The house might be owned jointly by
many members of the family, some in the US or Australia. Yet, you need their
signatures.
Do not despair. If both sides really want the sale, a way will be found. But
watch out, also, in case a husband agrees to sell property that is not
really his but his wife's as part of her dowry. The transaction will not
succeed if she is unwilling to sell.
To guide you through such complications, you need good angels and lawyers -
and a Greek's elasticity about time. (When you want to be punctual, the
phrase is angliki ora - English time.) If you are tolerant, work as the
Greeks do - with their conventions and their ideas of good and bad form -
and do not cause anyone to lose face, a happy house in Hellas awaits.
Ever more local airports in Greece take charter flights where you travel
'seat only' from airports all over the UK. It is easy to reach your new
home. I flew to Heraklion in Crete from Gatwick for Pounds 132 return last
month, but I could as easily have gone from Bristol or Newcastle. These
charters have the bonus of not having to change at Athens airport (although,
if you do fly through the capital, take Olympic for the international sector
as well as the domestic: the change is much easier).
In choosing a house, I would look for plentiful water; terraces; some trees
(or, at least, a vine trellis) for shade; a view, meaning that it would be
on higher ground; near both a clean (and relatively unknown) beach as well
as mountains; and with good tavernas within walking distance so that I could
follow the Greek custom of eating out cheaply and often.
It would probably be in a village but on the edge, where it is quieter;
Greek villages are surprisingly noisy. Before dawn tractors, pick-up vans
and cockerels compete; in the day, mothers shriek for their children; and,
in the evening, the local lads parade their motorbikes.
Outside, basil and geranium would be growing in old olive oil cans painted
white. In the kitchen, there would be green olive oil from a local press;
currants hand-packed into old Nescafe tins, with bay leaves put among them;
and, if in Crete, a large bottle of raki, a drink distilled from fermenting
grapes three weeks after they have been pressed for wine, and drunk in
thimble-size glasses.
Raise a glass, then, in the old toast for new houses: kalorizika. It means
'good roots.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

931106

