FT934-11155

FT  02 NOV 93 / B&B to build German operation


   By ALISON SMITH


BRADFORD & Bingley, the UK's seventh largest building society, has become
the first non-German institution to be given permission to set up a
Bausparkasse, the German equivalent of a building society.
The society said yesterday that it would establish two operations in
Hamburg: a Bausparkasse and a marketing company. The latter would distribute
the B&B Bausparkasse tariffs, or contracts, through brokers and sales
companies. It would also target independent insurance and investment houses,
which could add B&B products to their ranges. Most German societies are
owned by insurance companies or by banks with a link to an insurance
company.
The move marks a further stage in UK societies' interest in developing
businesses in continental Europe.
Halifax, the largest society, has been granted a licence to take retail
deposits for mortgage lending in Spain and will open a bank in Madrid later
this month.
The B&B Bausparkasse will open in January and take deposits for 18 months
before issuing loans. B&B believes the project will make a small profit in
its first full year.
It aims to win 1 per cent of the market. The 34 existing Bausparkassen
accounted for DM4.5bn (Pounds 1.8bn) in net lending in 1991 - some 15 per
cent of the total, according to the Bundesbank. About 17m Germans have
contracts with Bausparkassen.
Formerly, the German home loans market has been served almost exclusively by
domestic institutions, apart from loans made by foreign-owned banks.
While the relatively low level of home-ownership - 40 per cent of Germans
are owner-occupiers compared with 67 per cent in the UK - makes the German
market attractive, regulatory requirements have deterred other societies
from establishing operations.
Mr John Smith, B&B's finance director, said the German system of fixed rates
for lenders and savers had benefits for both sides, and gave an extra
stability to the arrangements.
The move represented 'a good way into a major market without any great
balance-sheet risk', he said.
B&B also believes that the operation will enable it to market a range of
financial services. It should leave it well placed for the opening up of the
life insurance industry when the EC's third life directive comes into effect
next July.
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 25

931102

