FT933-12688

FT  23 JUL 93 / German hunger strikers warned


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BERLIN


THE struggle between the Treuhand, the agency charged with privatising
eastern German industry, and hunger striking potash miners could influence
the pace of investment in eastern Germany, a government official said
yesterday.
The issue at stake is the future of Bischofferode potash mine in the eastern
state of Thuringia, where, for 23 days, 40 miners have been on hunger strike
in an attempt to prevent the mine closing.
The miners insist Bischofferode should not be sacrificed to facilitate the
merger of the potash industry in western and eastern Germany. The Treuhand
this month completed the merger of the east German Mitteldeutschen Kali
mines with its western counterpart, Kali + Salz, a subsidiary of BASF, in a
move to make the industry more competitive, reduce capacity, and at the same
time, save five of the remaining potash mines in eastern Germany.
Since then, 40 of the 700 miners at Bischofferode have been on hunger
strike, despite a recent compromise offer by the Treuhand, the federal
government and the authorities in Thuringia to keep the mine open until
December and guarantee the jobs for a further 2 1/2 years. The miners have
rejected this, saying they want the mine to be kept open permanently, even
though it is one of the most inefficient in the region.
Yesterday, following talks with miners' representatives, the Treuhand, the
chancellery and the government said the merger of Mitteldeutschen Kali and
Kali + Salz would go ahead, and the commitment to pay the workers at
Bischofferode until late 1995 would be honoured.
'There is a danger that the continuation of the hunger strike would worsen
the investment climate in a region where investment is urgently needed,'
said Mr Friedrich Bohl, Mr Helmut Kohl's chief of staff.
Government officials fear that if the Treuhand gives into the strikers'
demands, a precedent will be set for other miners to use the strike weapon
to prevent the closure of other unprofitable pits.
However, if one of the strikers were to die, opposition to the Treuhand's
plans to conclude the privatisation of the two giant brown coal fields at
both Mibrag and Laubag, as well as the energy sector, would increase.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930723

