FT932-53

FT  30 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Court turns down German
challenge to banana regime


   By DAVID GARDNER


   LUXEMBOURG


GERMANY yesterday lost its battle to get the European Court of Justice in
Luxembourg to suspend the controversial new EC banana regime, which comes
into force tomorrow.
The regime puts a 2m tonnes quota on European Community imports of Latin
American, or 'dollar zone' bananas, subject to 20 per cent duty, and an
Ecu850- (Pounds 650-) a tonne tariff, equivalent to 170 per cent, on imports
above that level. The measure is designed to protect higher-cost banana
producers in the EC's outlying territories and former colonies, to which it
is bound by the Lome trade and aid convention.
The new regime also distributes 30 per cent of the dollar banana quota among
traditional importers from the Lome countries, effectively allowing them to
cross-subsidise their operations.
Senior Brussels officials say the banana regulation has been the most
lobbied issue in EC history, and the community still faces action by the
Latin American producers through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Germany, backed by the Benelux countries and German banana importers, argued
that it was protected by a 'banana protocol' to the EC's Treaty of Rome,
guaranteeing it unimpeded access to the fruit. Germans ate the majority of
the 2.4m tonnes of dollar bananas the EC imported in 1991, out of total
consumption of 3.7m tonnes.
Bonn and the German importers also claimed the measure amounted to an
expropriation and redistribution of market share, which it would not be
possible to reverse once the new rules took effect. The court yesterday
ruled that the new regime did not cause 'serious and irreparable damage' to
Germany, because the regulation, passed by a majority of the 12 in February
after six years of wrangling, allowed the European Commission to rectify
'eventual difficulties'. Brussels says it will raise the quota in line with
demand.
Lawyers acting for dollar banana importers say judges were irritated by a
flood of new pleadings. Germany argued for its own exemption - impossible to
work in a border-free single market - and then for raising the quota to 2.9m
tonnes.
Brussels in the interim produced revised EC figures, showing that the
community imported only 2.2m tonnes of dollar bananas last year, and not, as
previously thought, 2.8m tonnes.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930630

