FT934-8319

FT  16 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Tadpole swims back into the profits stream


   By ALAN CANE


TADPOLE Technology, the high technology electronics group, turned a Pounds
1.7m loss into a Pounds 749,000 pre-tax profit and almost doubled sales in
its first year after moving to the main market
The company warned, however, that it was likely to raise fresh capital from
new and existing shareholders next year, further to strengthen the balance
sheet and fund growth.
Mr George Grey, Tadpole's co-founder and chief executive, said he did not
believe the company would be forced to raise new money but it would be
prudent to do so.
The shares fell 10p to 279p.
For the year ended September 30 sales expanded 83 per cent from Pounds 12.5m
to Pounds 22.9m. Earnings per share were 3.5p compared with losses of 16.5p
a year earlier. In keeping with the practice common to most US-based high
technology stocks, no dividend will be paid.
Tadpole has its principal offices in Cambridge, and Austin, Texas.
The profit figure was helped by net interest payments of only Pounds 53,000
this year compared with Pounds 256,000 in 1992.
The company has net cash of just over Pounds 1m. Net assets are now Pounds
3m compared with Pounds 1m last year while the accumulated deficit is Pounds
2.45m (Pounds 2.84m).
Tadpole specialises in an esoteric area of electronics involving the
manufacture of high specification printed circuit boards and notebook
computers which compress the power of advanced workstations into portable
form.
Mr Grey said that most of the improvement in revenues was the result of
increasing sales of Sparcbook notebook computers based on Sun Microsystems
most powerful microprocessor.
The Sparcbook business grew by over 400 per cent during the year, despite
shortages of key components including monitor screen and disk drives.
The component problem had been solved and next year IBM would be launching a
notebook computer designed and manufactured by Tadpole based on IBM's Power
PC chip, Mr Grey said.
COMMENT
Tadpole is reaping the benefits of heavy investment in engineering and
marketing. It is still, however, an early stage in the development of the
Sparcbook market. The IBM portable workstation is an attractive proposition
but it will not be until the middle of next year before it will be possible
to judge whether the company justifies its historic p/e of 79.7. Analysts
are estimating pre-tax profits of about Pounds 5m for next year. The company
plans a Nasdaq ADR listing. Should Tadpole's notebooks achieve their
anticipated success, US interest could boost the share price substantially
if Micro Focus' experience is any guide.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

931116

