FT934-8726

FT  13 NOV 93 / Minister for a Day: Soul before profits - Sir Peter Hall
takes over the culture portfolio


   By Sir PETER HALL


MY ONLY day as Minister of Culture would be brief and decisive. I would have
to leave sorting out the mess of our broadcasting system (now that its
traditions of public service have been so weakened) until a second and more
extensive term. I would concentrate on general policy and the performing
arts. And since I would have to do only three things, I should be home by
tea-time, if not for lunch.
I would not have taken the job, even for a day, unless new and substantial
funds were available. The money we spend on the arts is still pathetically
small compared with our European partners. So, first, I would double the
subvention to the Arts Council.
Even so, the amount is peanuts: an insignificant footnote in the defence or
social services budgets. Yet, no action could make a more dramatic change to
our society. Our quality of life would improve immediately and, with it, the
educational potention of our young people. Our tourist industry would thrive
and so would our international standing. Television and film would flourish
because of the influx of new talents.
I would then turn to the administration of these new funds. I would not wish
to control them myself or regard myself, because I was minister, as the
arbiter of taste for the arts. I would not philosophise. I would leave
policy to the artists. The further the arts are kept away from politics and
politicians, the better.
I would, therefore, reform the Arts Council and reinstate the power and
independence it had 20 years ago. It was an institution that worked
wonderfully, born as it was of the idealism and hopes of the immediate
post-war years. The council effectively solved the problem of state
interference and made a minister of culture, in the European mode,
superfluous. So, I would happily do myself out of a job.
No society, and certainly no democracy, is healthy without many independent
artists criticising and challenging it. Governments, of whatever stripe, are
uncomfortable with artists and would prefer them safely dead and elevated to
the nostalgic status of the classic. Politicians never like critics of the
present, especially if they are artists.
This insecurity can reach extreme forms: the censor always proclaims a sick
society. Yet, governments know that we treasure the lessons of the artist
more than the lessons of their rulers. We remember Mozart rather than the
name of the emperor who failed to support him.
The council's arms-length principle arose from an understanding that
governments must never proscribe what the artist says. The piper must be
paid, but the tune must be emphatically his own. Otherwise, he is useless to
us.
The council did not try to plan art into existence - always a barren and
schematic procedure. The policy was to watch out for creativity wherever it
occurred and then encourage it with a mite of subsidy. The process was
organic.
Artists also decided the policy of the council. Major painters, composers
and writers served on it. I remember the days when Henry Moore, Michael
Tippett and Peggy Ashcroft were deciding the future of the arts, helped (and
not dictated to) by the officers of the council. Now, the artists have gone
and the bureaucrats rule.
The council has declined slowly. It no longer fights for the arts and has
become an instrument of government. Its policy over the past decade has been
to reduce subsidy even if it closed down creativity. This is absurd.
The reasons why the arts need subsidy, and why society needs the arts
desperately, have been forgotten in a welter of monetarist dogma. It took
nearly 40 years to create a support structure which recognised that public
funding should be the primary support for many arts, and not the box office
income. For a brief period, this made London the international capital of
music, and the British theatre the most prolific producer of new plays -
plays, moreover, that went round the world. All this improved directly
Britain's balance of payments and the potency of its tourist trade.
British arts are one of the country's few success stories of the post-war
years. We have forgotten that their renaissance was produced by subsidy; and
that their decline is parallelled by a succession of government manoeuvres
using private sponsorship (no bad thing in itself: after all, we live in a
mixed economy ) as a covert means of reducing central subsidy.
Subsidy also kept admission prices low, so that the arts were available to
anyone who wanted them. Years of the application of market forces have
destroyed this principle. Subsidised art is now priced as high as the market
will bear, thus removing its social point. I find something obscene in
Covent Garden charging Pounds 120 for a stall seat while it receives a
subsidy of Pounds 18m a year. Your taxes and mine are not going to people
who cannot afford the arts, but to the very rich.
So, my third action as minister would help the young. I would construct my
budget so that everybody under 25 could have free admission by right to any
of the subsidised arts. Nothing would have a greater effect on the taste of
the future; or on its wisdom and maturity. I have found the arts a more
trustworthy guide to the problems of life than the dogma of any organised
religion. Art asks the right questions; it does not give easy answers.
As a democrat, I distrust paternalism and believe in freedom of choice. But
we must be given the best to choose from, not the worst. That is why the
arts are important. I fear, though, that the next few years will see the
dismantling of the subsidised arts. This process will be seen as a logical
adjunct to the end of the welfare state. At the same time, we shall be
colonised by hours and hours of cheap American television. Is this what we
want?
There would be no point in being Minister of Culture unless I was part of a
government which believed that the soul of the nation - its heritage, its
language, and its contemporary creativity - was as important as its
productivity.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

931113

