FT932-13386

FT  23 APR 93 / Exchange to look at US option for trading system


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


THE London Stock Exchange has decided to consider a computer system from
Nasdaq, the US exchange, as a replacement for its Seaq trading system.
Parts of the Nasdaq system will be considered as an alternative to the
exchange's own proposed new system, which is being developed by Andersen
Consulting.
The decision to consider both systems was made by the Stock Exchange board
yesterday. The board also agreed to concentrate on 'core functions', and to
transfer the exchange's Topic electronic information system to two outside
vendors, Telekurs of Switzerland and ICV of Woking.
The Nasdaq decision is a victory for five big City securities houses. They
commissioned a study from Booz Allen, the management consultants, which
concluded it would be better to buy a system from another exchange.
Some houses lack confidence in the exchange's ability to develop systems
after the failure last month of its planned Taurus automated settlement
system.
'The board is clear that it will invest in supporting a market system and we
are looking anxiously at making a final decision on that in the near
future,' said Sir Andrew Hugh Smith, Stock Exchange chairman.
The two systems will be compared over the next month. The decision between
them will be taken at the board's next meeting, in late May. There will be
an independent assessment of the two systems, which is likely to mean the
appointment of a third set of consultants.
Mr James Spellman, of Nasdaq in Washington, said the first elements of the
new Nasdaq system would be distributed to customers this autumn, but the
whole project would take five to seven years to complete.
The exchange has considered buying a system from Nasdaq twice in the last
five years, most recently two years ago.
The exchange's new strategy reflects a desire to 'concentrate wholly on its
core functions,' according to a board statement yesterday.
These were organising and regulating the UK central market in securities;
running the Seaq International market in international securities; and
acting as the legally designated authority for listing securities.
'The exchange would continue to operate as a non-profit making co-operative
on behalf of the market,' said the statement.
This marks a shift from views expressed by Peter Rawlins, the chief
executive who left the exchange after the Taurus collapse. He had argued at
times for a profit-making role for the exchange.
Topic changes hands, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930423

