FT934-11608

FT  30 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Queens Moat plans to form core hotel chain
 -New management puts strategy to banks


   By MAGGIE URRY and MICHAEL SKAPINKER


THE ESSENCE of the business strategy Queens Moat Houses has put to its banks
is a plan to form a core chain of 50 UK hotels, which will be rebranded and
form a base for eventual expansion.
The new management expects to be ready to launch this chain by the first
quarter of 1995. The 50 hotels are expected to contribute 80 per cent of
budgeted trading profits for 1994.
The new chain, a name for which has yet to be chosen, will be 'leading,
three star plus' hotels, each with more than 100 rooms, located in or near
city centres, and having a restaurant and bar.
QMH believes these can achieve 'substantial increases in both trading
profits and cash flows'. The operational gearing in hotels is such that
profits can rebound sharply once occupancy and room rates are moving
upwards.
The rest of the group's hotels, another 53 in the UK and 86 in continental
Europe, will be not be put up for sale immediately. They will run for profit
with the aim of maximising their value either through eventual sales or as
additional security for the group's lenders.
Hotel sales in the present climate - with large numbers of UK hotels in
receivership and the market in continental Europe worsening - are unlikely
on a large scale although some, such as the Dutch hotels, are up for sale.
At the same time the financial restructuring will give the group a balance
sheet more appropriate to its operations. This will involve a substantial
debt for equity swap, cutting the interest charges QMH must service from its
operation and giving the banks control of a majority of the equity. The
exact size of the swap has yet to be decided but it is certain the existing
shareholders will be substantially diluted.
Bankers who have seen the business plan say the new management team has put
forward 'sensible projections' which indicate a beginning of a recovery in
UK profits in 1993 and 1994, with a larger rise later on. Profits from
continental Europe are still under pressure.
In the UK occupancy rates began to pick up in late May and early June, QMH
said yesterday, although room rates were still under pressure. A rise in
room rates is expected in 1994, however.
UK hoteliers were increasingly confident that the downturn had ended, Mr
Trevor Ward, a director of the Horwath hotels and leisure consultancy said
yesterday. The consultancy's quarterly survey in September found that nearly
80 per cent of hoteliers questioned believed recovery had started, compared
with 57 per cent three months previously. Over 80 per cent, however,
believed full recovery was a year or more away.
Mr Maurice Segal, chairman of Expotel, a large reservations agency, said
yesterday that QMH appeared to be trading reasonably well but that room
rates for the industry were still lower than last year.
The plan assumes some revival in hotel prices in the longer term, which
could even repay the group's loans in full. One banker said yesterday, 'if
the banks sit tight the restructuring has to be better than receivership'.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931030

