FT934-10259

FT  06 NOV 93 / Royal Ordnance to cut 300 jobs


   By DAVID WHITE and DAVID OWEN


ROYAL ORDNANCE, the munitions-making subsidiary of British Aerospace,
yesterday announced plans to cut more than 300 jobs even though it has won a
crucial medium-term order for the Ministry of Defence.
The company said 216 of the 534 jobs at Birtley near Gateshead, Tyne and
Wear, would go. It warned that additional orders would be needed to stave
off further job losses at the plant, which makes cartridge cases and shell
bodies.
Its factory at Glascoed, Gwent, will lose 97 of its 418 jobs. Royal Ordnance
said this factory, which assembles large calibre weapons, had sufficient
firm orders to sustain the remaining workforce.
Yesterday's announcement came as Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, firmly rejected calls for the government to help defence
companies to diversify.
He said it did not make sense for taxpayers' money to be used to help the
defence industry to compete against companies in civil markets.
Mr David Clark, the shadow defence secretary, attributed yesterday's job
losses to 'inept defence planning', and attacked Mr Malcolm Rifkind, his
opposite number, for having 'no strategy for the future of Britain's
defences'.
Mr Clark responded to reports that the government plans to make substantial
cuts in defence spending over the next three years by urging Mr Rifkind to
meet Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, to rethink plans 'as a matter of the
utmost urgency'.
Last month Royal Ordnance was awarded five-year contracts worth about Pounds
200m for ammunition types ranging from small arms to tank shells and worth
about Pounds 200m. The deal, delayed after coming under scrutiny from the
Treasury, was won against strong competition.
However, following the defence cuts, the new order is worth only about half
the previous five-year deal agreed in 1988. This was after BAe's purchase of
Royal Ordnance, a controversial transitional arrangement which guaranteed
the company's place as dominant UK supplier.
The company said the impact on jobs would have been 'considerably worse' if
it had not secured all the new orders, and that several of its 13 UK sites
would have been threatened.
It said it hoped to achieve the cuts through voluntary measures but could
not rule out compulsory redundancies.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931106

