FT932-227

FT  30 JUN 93 / Whitewash claimed over death of Algerian leader


   By MARK NICHOLSON


   ALGIERS


MORE THAN 1,000 Algerians gathered yesterday at the tomb of Mr Mohammed
Boudiaf to commemorate the assassination of the head of state a year ago and
protest at what they consider a whitewash in the official explanation of his
death.
At the government's behest, traffic across the country came to a respectful
halt during a moment of silence at 11.30am, the hour of his shooting in the
eastern town of Annaba.
However, crowds at the el-Alia cemetery turned the gathering into a
demonstration, waving banners calling on the government to tell 'the whole
truth' about the killing and chanting 'The assassins are in power'.
Postcards were distributed addressed to President Ali Kafi demanding a full
explanation of the assassination.
The official verdict on the killing, the result of a commission of inquiry,
was that the assassination was the act of one of his bodyguards, Mr Lembarek
Boumarafi, who opened fire on the 72-year-old leader while he was making a
speech. Mr Boumarafi is under arrest and waiting trial.
Mr Boudiaf had returned to Algeria barely six months earlier from nearly 30
years of exile to lead his country, after the resignation of Mr Chadli
Bendjedid as president, and immediately gained popularity for his plain
speaking and claims that he would clean up corruption.
But yesterday's demonstration, and press comment this week, indicate that
few Algerians are satisfied. 'The explanations given have convinced no one,'
said an editorial yesterday in Liberte, the francophone daily.
The unease and suspicion have been heightened among Algeria's secular
intellectuals in recent months by a spate of other murders of prominent
scholars and writers in what appear to have been carefully planned
operations.
The most recent victim, Mr Mohammed Boukhobza, a sociologist and head of the
National Institute for Global and Strategic Studies, was killed a last week,
his throat slit in his own home by four assailants in front of his family.
The killings are widely - though not universally - assumed to be the work of
Islamic extremists who have been involved in a bloody hit-and-run battle
with security forces since the 1991 elections were suspended. Since a state
of emergency was imposed in January 1992 at least 1,000 people have died in
political violence.
However, Mrs Fatiha Boudiaf claimed in a newspaper interview this week that
the killings of intellectuals were part of the 'same morbid plan' as the
conspiracy she claims lay behind her husband's death.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930630

