FT931-4185

FT  12 MAR 93 / US plans finance for switch from defence


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE CLINTON administration plans a Dollars 19.5bn package of job retraining
programmes, technology investment and economic development incentives over
the next five years, to help companies and communities convert from defence
to the civilian economy.
President Bill Clinton launched the plan, which in part bundles together
existing programmes, in a speech to workers at a defence company in
Maryland, but the announcement was also geared to help soften the impact
today of the Defence Department's list of military bases which it wants to
close.
Mr Clinton said the impact of cuts in defence spending could be eased if the
country were to act decisively and intelligently. 'Clearly, defence
conversion can be done, and can be done well, making change our friend and
not our enemy,' he said.
But members of Congress - especially those from California and South
Carolina, which are expected to be hit particularly hard by the base
closures to be announced today - complained that the measures would only
ease a small part of their pain.
Mr Clinton said the government wanted to promote dual-use research and
civilian use of technology developed for military purposes.
Mr Gene Sperling, deputy assistant to the president for economic policy,
said the defence conversion programme was 'a major sea change in economic
policy'.
A total of Dollars 1.7bn will be spent this year on defence conversion, Mr
Sperling said, most of it money already allotted to the task by Congress
last year, but which the Bush administration had not spent.
Mr Sperling said the president believed that, 'from soldiers to scientists,
it is morally right and economically right that we seek to redirect the
energies and talents of the people who were responsible for winning the cold
war to the new investments in the economy that we need for national economic
security.'
The administration estimates that about 1m uniformed and civilian defence
personnel will lose their jobs because of defence cuts, along with another
1m civilians working in private sector defence companies.
Retail sales rose in February by a modest 0.3 per cent compared with the
previous month, according to Commerce Department figures. The department
also revised down its original estimates for January, from an improvement of
0.3 per cent to no change from December, when sales had jumped by 1.1 per
cent.
Last month, durable goods sales fell by 0.5 per cent, largely because of
weak demand for cars and light trucks. Non-durable sales went up by 0.7 per
cent, led by strong performances at grocery stores and petrol stations.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930312

