FT932-134

FT  30 JUN 93 / Leading Article: Second best pensions


IN BRITAIN, as in continental Europe, public finances have been
deteriorating and the population is ageing. Political reality thus dictates
that pension provision will be undertaken increasingly by the private sector
in the decades ahead. Against that background the National Association of
Pension Funds' call for a national debate on meeting the financial needs of
the elderly is all to the good. But the pensions lobbyists have slightly
spoiled their case by suggesting, before the debate has even begun, that the
answer lies in the current approach to occupational pensions. This is not
self-evident; and the NAPF's campaign may anyway have come too late.
If occupational pensions have become a Pounds 350bn-plus business in
Britain, it is because governments have provided tax relief for pension
contributions, while employers have been prepared to remunerate employees in
a tax-efficient form. The political tide has long since turned against such
pension fund paternalism. Tax reliefs for pension contributions are under
attack by the backdoor, the latest instance being the reduction in tax
credits on UK dividends. Personal pensions, meantime, have been expensively
promoted.
On the employer side it now seems questionable, with unemployment at record
levels, whether companies need to enter the financial services business to
compete in the labour market for employees. Having enjoyed pension fund
holidays when investment returns were high, employers will think twice about
taking on big commitments to new employees now that the pension fund
surpluses are eroding. The temptation to limit the company's financial
obligation by switching to defined contribution schemes, which simply pay
out what the contributors put in, together with the investment return on the
money, must be strong. It could become stronger if the Goode committee on
pension law adds to the burden on companies.
Older workers
At first sight, a switch to defined contributions might seem no bad thing.
Employees might be able to exercise some control over their deferred pay,
since the company would not be underwriting the solvency of the fund and
thus wanting control as a quid pro quo. Many of the cross-subsidies that mar
the workings of defined benefit schemes, which favour long stayers against
the mobile or the redundant, and the low paid against the high paid, would
be eliminated.
Equally important, defined contribution schemes do not incorporate an
incentive to sack older workers, in contrast with the existing system which
has probably made a significant contribution to long-term unemployment
because the cost of funding an individual's pension tends to rise towards
retirement. Also, ownership rights can readily be identified and valued.
Arbitrary level
But there are snags with defined contribution schemes, not least the
arbitrary level of the pension received. Retiring in one week rather than
another in October 1987, when global stock markets crashed, would have
dramatically affected a pensioner's living standards. Because of the need to
diversify against such volatility, fund managers are forced to adopt a
lower-risk, and thus lower-reward, investment policy. And if the defined
contribution scheme takes the form of a personal pension, costs can be
absurdly high.
It would be dangerous to underestimate the staying power of defined benefit
schemes, not least because the biggest beneficiaries tend to be the bosses,
many of whom have shamelessly manipulated pre-retirement salaries to boost
their pensions. It may be that, as with Churchill's celebrated verdict on
democracy, they are the worst form of private pension provision, apart from
all the others. But in the absence of authoritative data to establish who
loses how much from each type of system on a range of assumptions about
employee mobility and investment returns, the proponents of the status quo
will find it hard to beat off an alternative that is transparent, much less
prone to conflicts of interest and far more healthy for labour mobility and
employment. The challenge for the pensions lobby is to come up with
convincing numbers and facts. Assertions will not be enough.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930630

