FT933-10217

FT  05 AUG 93 / Arts: Kreizberg Prom - Concert


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


A young musician would be hard put to find a more receptive audience than at
the Proms (the BBC Proms, as the programmes proudly remind us this year). At
Tuesday's concert both the conductor and the soloist can be counted class of
1986 or '87, the years in which they respectively won major music
competitions.
The Russian conductor Yakov Kreizberg won the Leopold Stokowski Conducting
Competition in 1986. In Britain he is best known for his Glyndebourne debut
with Janacek's Jenufa, widely counted a notable success. 'Sensational' was
one description trailed in the Proms prospectus, but quite misleadingly so,
as it turned out. Whatever other strong characteristics he displayed, a
taste for sensation was not among them.
It is tempting to plot a course showing how Tchaikovsky interpretation has
changed in Russia since the war. The start would be Mravinsky, impassioned,
volatile, always on the brink of hysteria; then Svetlanov, the master
showman, making the symphonies highly-charged melodramas. But it seems the
younger generation do not see Tchaikovsky in that way, as Valery Gergiev's
cultured performances have already suggested.
Kreizberg conducted the Sixth Symphony at his Prom - once the ultimate
invitation to indulge the emotions, but not here. The performance was crisp,
rhythmical, underplayed. Where conductors used to throw caution to the
winds, even if balance and ensemble flew out of control too, Kreizberg kept
a firm grip on every detail. So clear and decisive were his intentions that
it was surprising the BBC Symphony Orchestra's playing was not sharper
still. Where his view of the symphony impressed, it did so by clarity of
thought and understatement.
A clean, purposeful, classical style also provided the orchestral foundation
for Chopin's Second Piano Concerto with Vladimir Ovchinikov (the 1987
prizewinner at Leeds). No dawdling was allowed, or any indulgent
self-communing, but that probably suited Ovchinikov, who likes to hit every
note with crystal clarity, just touching in the poetry of the music.
As though to make youth feature in each item on the programme, the evening
had begun with Rakhmaninov's early Spring cantata. In later life the
composer was to look back with disdain on his orchestration in this score,
but it was difficult to see why in Kreizberg's expressive, never indulgent
performance. The BBC Symphony Chorus enunciated the Russian text with
diligent clarity and David Wilson-Johnson sang well as the bass soloist, who
is saved from murdering his adulterous wife by the arrival of Spring.
Knowing that Shalyapin was the original singer does, however, put a very
different gloss on the work.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930805

