FT932-3381

FT  15 JUN 93 / Canadian Tories take gamble on Campbell: The new PM


   By BERNARD SIMON


BY CHOOSING Ms Kim Campbell to succeed Brian Mulroney as party leader and
prime minister, Canada's ruling Progressive Conservatives have taken a
gamble.
If it pays off, the Tories will find themselves in power for a third
consecutive term after the election Ms Campbell is likely to call in
September.
The country may then have a prime minister with the forcefulness to press
ahead vigorously for the next five years with the tasks which Mr Mulroney
began - adjusting the economy to the rigours of greater competition,
especially in North America, bringing down a ballooning budget deficit,
reforming the costly social security system and giving a freer rein to
private enterprise.
As a native of Vancouver, Ms Campbell may be the ideal leader to accommodate
Canada's regional and linguistic disparities, while maintaining an
over-arching role for the federal government in Ottawa.
Her intellect, sophisticated tastes and considerable exposure to the world
outside North America could give the new prime minister and her country as
much attention on the international stage in the 1990s as Mr Pierre Trudeau
won for it in the 1970s.
Ms Campbell, aged 46, is in many ways an unusual - and therefore, for her
party, a risky - choice as Canada's 19th prime minister. Besides being the
first woman in the post, she is the first prime minister with western roots
since Mr John Diefenbaker in the late 1950s. Ms Campbell, who has spent much
of her life studying or teaching, was elected to the House of Commons in
Ottawa only five years ago.
Her previous experience in politics was limited to a school board in
Vancouver and to British Columbia's right-wing Social Credit party. She is
barely fluent in French, and has little first-hand knowledge of Quebec, more
than 2,000 miles from Vancouver.
The general election race will be wide open. The Tories have a fillip from
Mr Mulroney's departure, and are now running neck and neck with the
opposition Liberals in public opinion polls. But, with voters in an
unusually volatile mood, polls now offer little guidance to the outcome. For
one thing, Ms Campbell's chief opponent, Liberal party leader Mr Jean
Chretien, is among the country's most seasoned politicians.
Ms Campbell will make her international debut at next month's Group of Seven
summit in Tokyo - an event which Tory organisers hope will also help boost
her image at home ahead of the general election.
The other G7 leaders are likely to find that their new Canadian counterpart
has a more piercing intellect than Mr Mulroney, but is less convivial.
The same traits have won her affection in some quarters, but disdain in
others. One of her political confidants notes that it was just as well there
were no microphones at hand last Saturday evening as Ms Campbell sat
watching the keynote speeches of the other four candidates at the
Conservative leadership convention.
Her comments were, it seems, such that a Campbell fan would have regarded
them as reflecting her impish sense of humour, a detractor as proof of a
condescending manner.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930615

