FT932-13272

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance - Survey of
Investment Trusts (24): High returns, but proceed with caution - Confusion
over different types of share has often led to disappointment and panic /
Income Shares


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


INCOME SHARES of split-capital investment trusts are just one of the victims
of chancellor Norman Lamont's Budget.
His decision to lower advance corporation tax from 25 per cent to 20 per
cent has the effect of reducing the income of pension and other
non-taxpaying funds like personal equity plans (Peps). They are now only
able to reclaim 20 per cent of the notional tax paid on dividend income
instead of 25 per cent.
Nigel Sidebottom, associate director of brokers Gerrard Vivian Gray, says:
'Split-level income shares - particularly those with very high flat yields
and annuity characteristics - provide virtually all their return to
shareholders in the form of income. Pension funds holding these shares will,
as a result, suffer significant reduction in returns.'
If this is to be avoided, companies will have to change their dividend
policy to cushion shareholders from part of their loss, but this may prove
difficult at a time when many companies have low dividend cover - the amount
by which pay-outs are covered by profits.
The upshot, according to Mr Sidebottom, is that 'this will reduce the
attraction of high-yielding income shares to gross funds, encouraging them
to switch to alternative investments which may offer the potential for
better returns.
'The attraction of high-yielding income shares within Peps is similarly
reduced. Lower-yielding income shares, where little or no loss of capital is
expected, will now be relatively more attractive than very high yielding
annuity-type shares.'
It remains to be seen whether the Budget changes will dent the revived
popularity of income shares after the disappointing trading during most of
1992. Lower dividend payments, which in turn generated less revenue for the
shares, were the main cause of flagging interest in income shares last year,
according to SG Warburg Securities.
Once the UK left the exchange rate mechanism last September, the
accompanying fall in interest rates led to a rise in income share yields,
contributing to renewed interest in income shares, particularly as returns
from the building society have diminished.
When Schroder launched its split fund in March, demand for the income shares
was so great that that it was obliged to increase the size of the trust and
buy large amounts of the other classes of share itself.
However, income shares have had bad publicity recently, and the main reason
has been 'misconceptions, ignorance and misplaced arithmetic logic,'
according to Greig Middleton, stockbrokers.
The main problem appears to have been caused by an inability to
differentiate between the different types of income share, which has
resulted, in some cases, in disappointment and panic.
There are basically two very different types of income share: conventional
and geared.
Conventional income shares have a fixed repayment price, payable on
maturity. There are two main variations: the 'traditional' and the 'annuity'
type. Lewis Aaron, investment trust analyst at SG Warburg Securities,
describes the traditional type as a kind of bond: 'You pay me Pounds 1 and I
will pay back Pounds 1. In the meantime, you are entitled to the dividend
income stream.'
This sounds straightforward enough. The problem is that, in the initial
years of the trust's life, the trading price of the traditional shares may
rise well above this maturity value, because of the attractions of the high
income. But as the maturity date approaches, the trading price will steadily
decline towards the repayment value.
For example, the income shares of M&G's Dual Income trust will be repaid at
100p in 1996 when the trust is wound up. But you would have to buy them at
325p in the last week of March, if you wanted the yield of 27 per cent.
The danger for private investors is that, not realising this, they may buy
the shares at the peak price, only to find that the capital value will
steadily deteriorate.
The annuity-type also has a fixed repayment price, but it is miniscule,
usually 0.1p. Mr Aaron describes this type as 'you pay me Pounds 1, I give
you back a penny, but in the meantime, you get a high yield.' Once again,
the risk to private investors is that they may buy these shares without
realising that their capital will fall to virtually nil when the trust is
wound up.
Conventional income shares, therefore, offer a measure of certainty, because
you know the price that will be paid on maturity (provided, of course, the
assets of the trust are sufficient to meet this bill).
But the second category of income share - known as ordinary, or geared,
income shares - is far more volatile. These are usually one class of capital
in a trust which otherwise has zero-coupon preference shares.
Ordinary shares take all the dividends of the trust but, in return for
taking the trust's income, holders of the zero-dividend shares have prior
claim on a trust's capital. So holders of the income shares will be entitled
to the assets of the trust only after the zeros have been repaid.
Thus the repayment value is highly dependent on the extent to which the
trust's assets grow. 'The trusts do require some growth before the ordinary
income shares pay back their share price,' said Mr Aaron. 'In most cases,
the average of the sector is 5 per cent growth per annum. So the assets must
grow by that amount for you to get back your share price.'
Income shares fell by 2 to 3 per cent after the Budget, because of the ACT
changes, according to Mr Sidebottom, but until then ordinary income shares
had been enjoying a revival on the back of a strong stock market
performance.
However, Mr Sidebottom warns: 'These are high-risk investments. You could
lose all your capital. They are volatile investments. For example, the share
price of ordinary income shares in Sphere has fallen from a peak of 47p down
to 12p, and are now back up to about 19p.'
If you know what you are buying, income shares have their attractions,
particularly within a Pep; but you should take expert advice to guide you in
this complex area.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

930423

