FT933-12730

FT  22 JUL 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Output goals leave China with
feed gap - Changes in eating habits are posing problems for the future


   By LYNNE O'DONNELL


THE GROWING affluence of the urban Chinese is leading to changes in eating
habits that could make the country one of the biggest markets for feed grain
and a net importer by the end of the century.
Despite China's almost desperate desire to be self-sufficient, consumption
of animal and dairy products is growing each year by up to 6 per cent while
the value of crop output is rising each year by barely 1 per cent.
'It's not a long way off that China will be a net feed importer,' says Mr
Jeff Brown, representative in Beijing of the US Feed Grains Council. 'We are
looking at a nationwide steady 5 to 6 per cent increase in the consumption
of meat, milk and eggs, per capita per annum.'
Last year, according to official figures, China produced 34.5m tonnes of
ready-to-use feed, known as compound feed, for livestock and poultry, an
increase of 7.5 per cent on the year before. China is the world's biggest
producer of meat and eggs but industry officials in Beijing say less than
one third of all poultry and livestock receive compound feed.
The officials estimate that, with private production factored in, China's
actual compound feed production was probably closer to 50m tonnes, but the
figure remains a fraction of the 200m tonnes produced each year by the US.
Analysts say China's production of feed grains - maize, sorghum and
soyabeans - can in no way keep pace with long term demand.
'Soyabeans are the way of the future,' says one Western feed grain industry
executive. 'Demand for (soyabean) feed has gone up by 50 per cent in four or
five years, from 4m to 6m tonnes.'
He puts annual soyabean demand at 12m tonnes. China grows an annual average
of some 10m tonnes, exporting about 3.5m tonnes either as beans or meal.
China's GDP grew by 12 per cent in 1992. Official figures show that crop
output value was up 1.2 per cent on 1991, and animal husbandry output was up
by 6.1 per cent. The total value of agricultural production was reported to
be USDollars 150m.
With those figures on the board and with seemingly fantastic agricultural
output goals to achieve by the end of the century, China's only option for
maintaining production at a level that can keep pace with demand would
appear to be the import of huge amounts of feed grains.
For instance, China wants to increase egg production by 10 per cent a year
by 2000 and double per capita consumption by then from the present 100 eggs
a year to 200. To achieve that, the chicken population would have to grow to
the same level as the human population and China is expected by the turn of
the century to be home to more than 1.3bn people.
'Can they hit that?' asks a Western industry observer of Beijing's egg
production target. 'No way. Because that alone would need an extra 10m
tonnes of soyabean meal a year and (China) cannot afford it.'
Pork and poultry production goals would add another 5m tonnes to soyabean
meal demand, boosting China's total annual need by the end of the millennium
to more than 20m tonnes.
'They are going to have to slow down,' says another expert. 'Prices are
going to have to limit demand and that's a trend we are already noticing.
Prices went up 80 per cent between February and August last year and though
they're back down, they're still 50 per cent higher than they were a year
ago.'
Shortages after this year's spring harvest were exacerbated by farmers who
held on to soyabeans for later planting in the hope of taking advantage of
higher prices. However, with little agricultural sophistication and almost
no forward planning, this could do little more than to follow up the
shortage with a glut.
The shortage also squeezed the availability of supplies to meet China's
export obligations. Inability to fulfil soyabean export contracts to Japan
and South-east Asia caused such friction for Beijing that it quietly began
looking around on the international market for up to 500,000 tonnes of
soyabean meal.
The US has also been working hard to convince China that corn gluten meal is
an economically-viable alternative to Peruvian fish meal as a livestock and
poultry feed source. According to the US Feed Grains Council, China is the
only Asian country not using imported corn gluten meal, which is Dollars 150
a tonne cheaper than Peruvian fish meal and was expected to be imported this
year in at least trial quantities.
Total US exports of corn gluten meal in 1990 were 535,000 tonnes. 'So even
if China imports 50,000 to 100,000 tonnes, it would be a significant market
to us,' says the council's Mr Brown.
A US agriculture official predicts that China's demand for maize must also
rise to meet growing feed needs.
'In the past few years, China has become self-sufficient in a lot of things
they weren't self-sufficient in before - vegetable oil, cotton, corn
(maize), and protein meals like cotton seed meal, rape seed meal, corn meal,
all of them feed products,' he says.
'But we think they'll be after more corn pretty soon because they can't keep
pace with demand. They don't even know what real demand is.'
Another western expert in Beijing observes: 'The Chinese don't like to hear
that they'll be importing because they're such sticklers for
self-sufficiency.
'But anyone who's honest, even at high levels, admits that the day will come
that they'll be importing feed for the livestock industries. They'd like
that to be 10 years off, we believe it's eight, and the more bullish
projections give it five years'.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930722

