FT934-8788

FT  13 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Stanhope extends revolving credit


   By ANDREW BOLGER


STANHOPE Properties has extended its revolving credit facilities to 1996,
subject to continued compliance with specified covenants and to interim
reviews by the group's banks.
The group, which is joint owner of the Broadgate complex in the City of
London, announced that it had reduced its annual pre-tax losses from Pounds
214.7m to Pounds 62m in the year to June 30.
However, Stanhope's also revealed that its net assets had fallen to a
deficit of Pounds 15.8m at the year-end, compared with a surplus of Pounds
42.2m. The group has therefore called an extraordinary general meeting for
December 13.
The Companies Act requires a company to call a meeting if its net assets are
less than half its called-up share capital, to consider what action, if any,
needs to be taken.
Stanhope said this deficit should represent the nadir of the group's
performance and was against the background of an extremely severe and
protracted downturn in property values.
The board was reviewing options for strengthening the group's balance sheet,
including the possibility of raising new equity and a further restructuring
of the company's banking arrangements.
Stanhope said that last year many commentators believed that the property
cycle had reached the bottom and that by the end of 1993 values and rents
could start to rise.
'This belief has been fulfilled. The rapid and substantial fall in interest
rates, resulting in property yields exceeding bond yields for the first time
in a number of years, has benefited Grade A buildings as evidenced by the
sale of 175 Bishopsgate and two disposals since the year end totalling
approximately Pounds 70m which have taken place at Stockley Park.'
The directors said they were 'confident that the bottom of the property
cycle has passed. With the rising demand for high quality office
investments, which make up the bulk of our portfolio, we expect to see slow
but steady progress over the coming 12 months and thereafter.'
As a result of its disposal programme, Stanhope said it had reduced
borrowings from Pounds 254m at June 30, 1992, to the current level of
approximately Pounds 132m.
Turnover fell from Pounds 56.9m to Pounds 52.2m. Losses per share were
37.35p, compared with 128.6p last time. There was again no dividend.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931113

