FT934-8425

FT  16 NOV 93 / BT wants 'grotesque' alliance of its rivals banned


   By ROLAND RUDD


BRITISH Telecommunications yesterday stepped up its campaign against what it
called the 'grotesque' proposed link between the world's three largest
telecommunications operators.
Mr Iain Vallance, BT chairman, made his most outspoken attack yet on Project
Atlantic, the putative alliance between France Telecom, Deutsche Telekom and
American Telephone and Telegraph. 'I trust that the European Commission will
have no truck with this grotesque proposal,' he told the CBI conference.
BT later said it had had a series of meetings with senior officials at the
commission's competition directorate, to protest against the proposal to
create what it described as 'the biggest telecommunications monopoly in the
world'.
Mr Vallance plans to meet Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European
Commission, to press BT's case. The BT chairman is also confident of
enlisting the support of Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry
secretary.
Mr Vallance paid tribute to the commission's role in achieving 'such
progress as there has been to date' in moving towards liberalising Europe's
telecommunications.
But he added: 'It should be a matter of deep concern that the commission has
been pushed into a position where it has to defend the basic tenets of the
Treaty of Rome, that there should be open and free competition across
Europe, rather than the phone companies having to defend why they should
enjoy a continuing monopoly.'
He said he believed his European counterparts recognised that liberalisation
was inevitable. 'But their approach seems to be that of St Augustine, 'Oh
Lord, let me be chaste, but not yet'.' To leave the telecommunications
infrastructure in the hands of the state phone companies, he argued, was 'to
condemn Europe to the lifestyle of Jurassic Park'.
He said it was dismaying that the new directive of telecommunications
service liberalisation would not come into effect until 1998.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931116

