FT932-3246

FT  15 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Alpine directors seek to allay pension
fears


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER and CATHERINE MILTON


DIRECTORS OF Alpine (Double Glazing), the window company which ceased
trading at the end of May, are seeking to allay fears over pension
contributions by inviting employees to discuss individual options with a
representative of Allied Dunbar, the assurance group.
In a letter received by pension contributors this weekend but dated June 9,
Mr Robert Pollock and Mr Robin Speirs, chairman and chief executive of
Alpine, cite a meeting to be held yesterday. However, they failed to include
either the time or place for the meeting.
The letter also states that 'the Allied Dunbar representative has been in
discussions with members'. It is understood, however, that formal talks with
Allied Dunbar broke down several months ago.
'The company has never implemented proposals presented by us some months
ago,' Allied said.
Mr Pollock and Mr Speirs inform pension contributors that following Alpine's
trading difficulties, contributions had been transferred from a 'separate
trust bank account' to a client account at the company's solicitors,
believed to be London firm, Beveridge Ross and Prevezers. The funds would be
held pending a decision as to how contributors wished to proceed, the letter
states. About Pounds 50,000 is in the client account, according to Mr Grant
Jones, Alpine's receiver.
The funds had initially been held in a trust account, Mr Pollock and Mr
Speirs state in their capacity as trustees, pending resolution of a dispute
with ADT Trustees.
Trustees of the pension fund at ADT, the company which previously owned
Alpine, had refused to transfer funds in 1992 following Alpine's purchase
out of administration with the backing of Mr Clive Smith, the Midlands
entrepreneur.
ADT trustees said Alpine had never presented an approved pension plan to
which funds could be transferred. Deferred pensions or individual transfers
have since been arranged for eligible employees.
Alpine's creditors are due to meet in London this afternoon to vote on
whether the company should be liquidated.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930615

