FT932-6724

FT  27 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Basis for Ulster talks on talks
remains elusive


   By TIM COONE


   DUBLIN


THE political landscape of Northern Ireland has long been a bleak,
inhospitable place for new ideas to take root in and flourish.
Like trench warfare, the province's politics has turned into a classic war
of attrition, the winner being the side which holds out the longest,
regardless of the costs.
As ministers from both the British and Irish governments have been quick to
point out, last week's district council elections in the province have done
little to change that landscape. But in the words of Sir Patrick Mayhew, the
Northern Ireland secretary: 'The vast majority voted for dialogue' - a fact
from which he said he drew 'rational hope'.
Indeed, 58 per cent of the electorate voted for the UUP, SDLP and Alliance
parties, the three parties most committed to the so called Anglo-Irish talks
aimed at drawing up a new political structure for the administration of
Northern Ireland to replace direct rule from Westminster.
The uncomfortable fact, however, is that almost a third of the electorate
voted for parties opposed to the talks on the basis on which they are
currently being proposed, with 12.5 per cent voting for Sinn Fein, which
insists on a place at the negotiating table.
A further 17.2 per cent voted for the Democratic Unionists, who made it an
electoral issue not to be involved in talks until the republic amended two
articles of its constitution, thereby dropping its territorial claim to the
province.
To break the logjam the British government is to drop its hitherto neutral
stance, which was to favour no particular outcome to the negotiations, and
is now preparing its own blueprint for the province.
Sir Patrick, though, says he will not bring out this particular football for
it to be kicked around - until all the players from the last round are back
on the field. The preconditions set by the DUP for its own participation
could therefore prevent this proposal from ever seeing the light of day.
Mr John Hume, the SDLP leader, is meanwhile continuing a series of talks
with Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, in the hope of eventually
bringing them into the talks process on the basis of an agreed political
strategy. He says his talks with the Sinn Fein president will continue
'until I have explored fully, and presumably until Mr Adams has explored
fully, the possibility of the agreement we are talking about'.
The move has drawn taunts from opponents north and south of the border,
although significantly both governments consider his motives to be sincere.
Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister said this week: 'Mr Hume is
trying to get Sinn Fein away from the path of violence. I wish him every
success in that.' Mr Richard McAuley, a Sinn Fein spokesman, said: 'We want
a consensus agreement in which all sides will have to compromise, and part
of which will be a commitment by the British to disengage.'
Clearly a commitment to disengage is unlikely to form the basis of Sir
Patrick's new blueprint, but the Irish government was yesterday making it
known through selective leaks in Dublin that it is not happy with the Mayhew
plan.
Dublin is now drawing up its own proposals which seek to counter what is
being perceived as an 'imbalance' appearing in the Mayhew blueprint. In the
wake of last week's district council elections therefore, in which the
extremes on both sides emerged strengthened, it appears that the nationalist
and unionist camps may now consolidate to take different, but possibly
converging, tacks.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930527

