FT932-6543

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (11): The worst of both worlds - The
creative energies of the new entrepreneurs need to be carefully channelled


   By LEYLA BOULTON


THE GENERAL secretary of Russia's tiny but noisy economic Freedom Party, Ms
Irina Hakamada, 38, wears tight mini-skirts and drives a Toyota. The
Soviet-born daughter of a Japanese Communist, she is a standard-bearer of
Russia's new class of entrepreneurs.
Taking the title used by Soviet Communist party leaders who ruled the
country for 70 years was originally intended as a joke. But the class she
represents is extremely serious about asserting itself - even if many of its
members are stashing away money and assets abroad just in case things do not
work out in Russia.
Having previously exercised influence on the political class indirectly,
many new rich will be standing for election at parliamentary elections
brought forward to the end of this year as a result of President Boris
Yeltsin's referendum victory.
Having begun to accumulate alternative sources of influence such as
newspapers and television time, all the new class needs is political
legitimacy.
Some potential national leaders are already emerging, including Mr Yegor
Gaidar, the former prime minister who launched the radical economic reforms
which have allowed the new class to flourish. As a mark of the gratitude and
respect which he commands, he was recently chosen to head the Association of
Privatised and Private Businesses.
Although it is not clear whether he will stand for parliament, one thing is
clear. Money will matter in the forthcoming elections in a way that
Communist party connections mattered in the last elections, held in 1990,
when the Soviet Union was still a monolithic state run by Communists.
Ms Hakamada says she will be among the new candidates, together with the
party's co-chairman, Mr Konstantin Borovol, the founder of one of Russia's
biggest commodity exchanges, and Mr Syvatoslav Fyodorov, a millionaire
eye-surgeon. She plans a western-style electoral campaign with a simple
message: Russia's entrepreneurs need genuine economic freedom to benefit
both the individual and society.
Mr Gaidar's liberalisation of most prices and trade last year both legalised
and multiplied entrepreneurs who had previously operated in conditions of
semi-illegality. But, for many of their compatriots, this has translated
into a living nightmare of capitalism as portrayed by Communist party
propaganda in the old days.
Moscow's roads are busy with flashy foreign cars, driven by the men in dark
glasses whose profession is invariably 'trade' or 'banking.' The streets are
also full of new shops, restaurants and kiosks selling imported luxuries
which most of the population cannot afford. The inequalities of capitalism
are there for all to see, with its benefits for the people still blurry.
Indeed, the interruption of the liberalisation programme, under conservative
pressure, has now given Russia the worst of both worlds. Price distortions,
soaring inflation, and a tumbling Russian currency mean it is far more
profitable to export Russia's natural wealth than to invest money inside the
country. With GNP getting smaller, a growing share of a shrinking pie for a
small group of people is potentially explosive.
Also enriching themselves are corrupt bureaucrats who retain control of
large areas of economic decision-making, together with some managers of
state-owned enterprises who are siphoning off profitable parts of businesses
for themselves through so-called 'nomenklatura privatisation.'
Russia's new rich rest in former Communist party establishment sanatoria,
and live in former Soviet leaders' country homes - at least until they have
time to build their own, grander dachas. They flaunt their wealth now rather
than hide it as before.
No wonder the results of last month's referendum surprised most of the
country's political class, showing 52 per cent support for unpopular,
divisive radical economic reforms. But the small margin of support also
shows that while most Russian people prefer moving forward to moving
backwards, a lot will have to be done to prove their instincts are right.
Russia already has a few wealthy entrepreneurs who are beginning to think
long-term. One example is Mr Andrei Chuguyevsky, 34, who won a tender to
exploit Russia's huge Udokan copper deposit (see report above), and says he
wants to turn to the 'real economy' as opposed to the export and trading
deals which have made him a rouble billionaire.
But he believes it remains an open question as to whether Russia will
advance along the path of a mafia state, uniting the interests of officials
and shrewd businessmen feeding off a distorted economy, or towards an open
market economy.
For the latter to take place, it is up to the government to devise policies
reversing a situation where it is only logical for entrepreneurs to act as
most do now.

The Financial Times


London Page X

930527

