FT932-6911

FT  26 MAY 93 / International Company News: Dell shares slide as results
fall short


   By JEREMY BENNALLACK-HART


   NEW YORK


SHARES in Dell Computer tumbled more than 20 per cent yesterday after the
group reported first-quarter earnings well below expectations and said it
would not meet its full-year forecast. The shares fell Dollars 7 3/8 to
Dollars 24 3/4 on the Nasdaq market in New York.
Poor results from the notebook computer business were blamed for the drop in
net income to Dollars 10.2m, or 25 cents a share, from Dollars 19.8m, or 52
cents.
The company said significant costs associated with delayed and cancelled
notebook projects combined to lower pre-tax income by more than Dollars 20m
and earnings per share by as much as 35 cents.
Mr Bruce Sinclair, managing director of Dell in the UK, where sales and
profits grew strongly through the quarter, said the company had
underestimated the resources necessary to design and manufacture world-class
notebook computers.
Dell's problem is worrying because the notebook computer sector is
fast-growing and it has an excellent reputation for quality products. Taken
together with sharply rising costs, there are concerns senior management has
lost its sharp focus on the market.
Mr Michael Dell, chairman and chief executive officer, said the delays and
cancellations would continue to hit earnings over the next two quarters.
'As a result, we no longer expect to reach our earnings forecast of Dollars
3.30 for this fiscal year. But, because of the strong momentum in our core
desktop and server business, we believe we can achieve revenues in excess of
Dollars 3bn this fiscal year.'
Industry analysts felt Dell's problems may go beyond notebook computers.
They noted that costs were increasing - cost of sales grew from Dollars
270.1m to Dollars 559.2m - as the company expanded distribution worldwide at
a time of low profit margins for the personal computer industry.
An official at rival Compaq Computer said its notebook products were in
strong demand and the company expected to overtake Toshiba of Japan as the
number one supplier of notebook computers in Europe in the current quarter.
Dell's sales in the quarter rose 84 per cent to Dollars 672m despite the
notebook shortfall. Sales to leading corporate, government and educational
accounts more than doubled at Dollars 330m. Those to medium and small-sized
businesses and individual customers showed gains of 76 per cent to Dollars
259m.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930526

