FT931-3877

FT  13 MAR 93 / Man in the News: Textbook leader with a legal brief - Ruslan
Khasbulatov / John Lloyd on Russia's parliamentary speaker


   By JOHN LLOYD


This was the devil's work,' said Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov this week of the
agreement he had signed with President Boris Yeltsin three months ago,
permitting a referendum on the constitutional division of powers in Russia.
In three increasingly febrile days in the Congress of People's Deputies, the
parliamentary speaker has undone that work - and set devils running in the
country whose final destination he cannot know.
'Ruslan Khasbulatov intends to concentrate all power into his own hands,'
said Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov, Mr Yeltsin's acid press secretary yesterday.
'We are on the brink of 'All Power to the Soviets'.'
'Khasbulatov wants to retire us,' said a government minister on Thursday
after the speaker had threatened to cut off ministerial salaries. 'He should
be thinking about his own pension soon.'
The man who occupies the parliamentary chair embodies many of the
contradictions which run through Russia: a state which has shed an ideology
of communism while being unable to give up its habits and systems, so
ingrained have they become. Speaking in the name of the popular will, he has
a popularity score (in the most recent poll from the Public Opinion Research
Centre) of only five, less than a quarter of the much-diminished 22 scored
by Mr Yeltsin.
Standing on the grounds of democratic order, he owes his position to a
Soviet-era constitution and his authority over the parliament to the
pre-democratic factional soup which is its politics. Seeking to embody
Russia, he is a Caucasian from Chechnya, an autonomous republic which has
declared its independence from the motherland and which has disowned him as
one of its representatives.
There runs this same division in his career. Born in Chechnya in November
1942 and deported during the war with many of his people to Kazakhstan for
alleged collaboration with the Germans, Mr Khasbulatov grew up in poverty -
'but not moral poverty', as he writes in his recently published memoirs. He
managed to enter the faculty of law at Alma Ata, then Moscow, universities,
later switching to economics (Marxist, naturally, though he says he later
became a convert to Adam Smith).
A rapidly rising career in the Komsomol (young Communist League) put him on
that body's central committee; he taught at the Plekhanov Institute of
Economics in Moscow in the late 1970s to 1990, when he was elected as a
Russian deputy, representing Grozny, the capital of Chechnya.
Much of this was textbook Soviet man: the lad from the poor background
rising to be a leader of society. Though he says he was early to question
the orthodoxy of the party in which he did so well, he only began openly to
criticise that orthodoxy from the perestroika period, when it was relatively
safe to do so.
His breakthrough was in choosing to side with Mr Yeltsin when the latter
became chairman of the Russian parliament in 1990 - a route that most other
members of the parliament's leadership did not take, preferring to side with
the harder-line communists. When Mr Yeltsin was elected president in 1991,
Mr Khasbulatov became acting chairman, or speaker - a position in which he
was confirmed after the August 1991 putsch.
In that putsch he showed, on his own and others' account, considerable
bravery: remaining with Yeltsin and others in the White House when they
believed (with reason) that an attack was being prepared upon them which
they had no hope of resisting. This was the making of him, and of Mr
Yeltsin, and many of the Russian leadership. He and they came out of the
experience with huge prestige, and with an apparently vast will behind
reform, including the radical economic reform for which he had long
agitated.
Yet almost immediately afterwards, in that strange period of months in which
the Russian government drifted inactively and frittered away its store of
support, Mr Khasbulatov turned sharply against the government Mr Yeltsin
appointed, especially Mr Yegor Gaidar, the then deputy prime minister who
headed the economic reform team. 'Little boys who have lost their way' he
called them early in 1992 after the liberalisation of prices. At intervals
throughout the year, he blasted them, the IMF and the foreign advisers who
were leading Russia to perdition. 'Competition,' he wrote late last year,
'cannot flourish in the present conditions.'
Over the past two years, the Supreme Soviets and the Congresses (the first
is the small permanent form of the second) he has chaired have become more
confrontational and critical of the government: time and again, government
ministers, presidents' emissaries, even the president himself have been set
before a bear pit of angry questions and derisive baying.
This is not the work of Mr Khasbulatov alone: indeed, there have been times
when he has moderated it. Some of the deputies were always ideologically
opposed: many more became so. Others are responding to the complaints of
their hard-pressed electorates, frustrated by falling living standards and a
collapse of their institutions.
Mr Yeltsin and his circle have made much of the parliament's origins in
Soviet times. There is a good point in this, but it remains arguable whether
a freely elected parliament would have been more, or less, amenable. What is
sure is that it would have depended less on a speaker who is not
particularly popular, but whose guile, skill and rhetoric wins
cross-factional support.
The economic issue, however, has become secondary to the constitutional one:
it has been at the centre of Mr Khasbulatov's concerns for some time. In his
writings and speeches, he has increasingly come to see the presidency - and
the figure of Mr Yeltsin himself - as at best potentially authoritarian.
Parliament, by contrast, because of its 'open, public style of working', is
a stabilising and democratising factor. 'Parliament protects the government
from a possible slide into severe, authoritarian methods of rule.'
For Mr Yeltsin, by contrast, the imperative has been different: how,
belatedly, to press through economic reform? The answer which has
increasingly suggested itself to him is through strong presidential rule.
But now he has been fought almost to a political standstill by Mr
Khasbulatov's Congress.
Thus, this week, these two men confronted each other - past friends and
comrades; both poor boys made good under two systems; both ruthless,
calculating, bold and limited, at the head of rival and shaky coalitions of
political, economic and clan interests.
Mr Khasbulatov, on his home ground, won. On the first day, reacting to Mr
Yeltsin's clumsy hints about 'special measures', he lambasted the president
for 'devaluing the existing constitution, destabilising the political
situation in the country, even involving the army and the interior and
security ministries'. Parliament, he insisted from the first, wanted
compromise - but 'naturally all of this must be on the basis of the Russian
constitution and the Russian constitution alone'.
He listened, sometimes nodding, as his deputy Mr Nikolai Ryabov told Mr
Yeltsin that 'he cannot be regarded as someone who is the equal of the
Congress: we have no problems with the current division of powers'. But it
was on the second day, after speeches by Mr Yeltsin and Mr Victor
Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, demanding more freedom of action and more
power, that he let rip with apparently genuine fury.
The president's men were 'swaggerers before the microphones', the
parliamentarians were honest workers. Venomously, he asked Mr Chernomyrdin
who was boss in his cabinet, demanded the sacking of Mr Anatoly Chubais, the
deputy prime minister for privatisation, threatened to dock ministerial
salaries. Off the cuff, sarcastic, outraged, it was a rhetorical tour de
force, a pointed contrast to a stumbling Mr Yeltsin.
Finally, yesterday, he saw the apparent climax of his efforts: the passing
of a resolution which kills the 'devil's work', and puts the president's
office at the mercy of the parliament. Yet he also has a confrontation on
his hands (which he may not have wanted). Mr Yeltsin, determined on a
referendum, has ended the unequal struggle and is set to bypass, even to
destroy, Mr Khasbulatov's power base. Prolonging the session until today,
the speaker warned his colleagues of possible presidential infractions of
the constitution. The fight begins in earnest.
In it, both men fight for their political lives. Neither has anywhere else
to go, and while Russian politics are theatrical to a fault - with all sides
going to rhetorical extremes then often clawing back to the centre to paper
over an abyss - there is now no route back for either one, save
capitulation. The revolution in which both participated is choking its
children. They cannot escape the coils of a system which winds itself around
their actions, continuing an apparently indestructible life after its
advertised death.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930313

