FT933-10165

FT  05 AUG 93 / UK Company News: The custodian with his feet on the ground -
John Jennings, the new chairman of Shell Transport, talks to David Lascelles
about its changing culture


   By DAVID LASCELLES


   JOHN JENNINGS gets a good view of the Houses of Parliament


and most of London for that matter - from his 22nd floor office in the Shell
Centre on the south bank of the Thames. 'It's hard not to let it go to your
head,' he said yesterday.
He is settling in to the chairman's office at Shell Transport and Trading,
where he succeeded Sir Peter Holmes a month ago. Unlike his predecessor, who
was famous for his effortless style and wide-ranging pursuits, Mr Jennings
gives the impression of a man who has come up the hard way. More heavily
built with a mane of white hair, he is blunter, less intellectual, though
like Sir Peter he is a Shell man through and through.
He will be announcing his first set of results today when Royal Dutch Shell
produces what are expected to be good interims.
Mr Jennings will say he is not content with them. 'In the last few years
we've become dissatisfied with our overall performance. We've become
convinced that we must improve returns on shareholders' funds,' he said. 'We
have to lift our game.'
These are hard words from a company which has a strong, even unassailable
position at the top of the world oil industry, with a reputation for
thoroughness and excellence. But recent years have not been easy for Shell.
Shell Oil, the US subsidiary, has performed badly, its Japanese associate
recently lost more than Pounds 700m on currency speculation, and Shell's
returns have not measured up to those of its main rival Exxon.
Could Shell have allowed things to go to its head?
'Complacency and arrogance are the siren voices of the successful. I'd hate
to think we were complacent. But sometimes no doubt we are.'
Several companies in the Shell group have costs which are too high, says Mr
Jennings. 'But rather than turning to Mecca and praying for higher oil
prices we have to look at what we can do to help ourselves.'
Shell has already announced wide-ranging job cuts and efficiency drives. 'It
is not just automating the past, but looking at the future in a creative
way, giving more people in the organisation access to what you already know.
By redesigning you can get rid of bottlenecks.'
As well as raising performance, Mr Jennings believes that Shell must
steadily work to modify its culture so that it becomes less intent on
expansion and more on improving its own internal processes.
'The people in the organisation who keep the company going 24 hours a day
seven days a week don't get enough recognition, but the builder of a new
project at the sharp end, the glamorous end, gets all the attention. This
leads to an acquisitive culture. It produces a state of mind which makes it
easier to add to the portfolio than to stand back and ask: is this something
we should be doing? We must be careful not to neglect what we have already
got.'
Mr Jennings, who has been a member of the group's managing committee since
1987, thinks he already sees signs of this cultural shift. The group
structure is being shaken up.
Parts of it, like the crop protection business, are being sold off, others
are being merged with other companies, like polyolefins with Ferruzzi of
Italy, or metals with Gencor of South Africa. 'These moves are not a cop out
which say we can't manage. It's all about making our portfolio more
profitable, more robust. We have to maintain our view of the horizon, not
stray into short termism,' says Mr Jennings.
Although Mr Jennings now occupies the chairman's offices, he stresses his
limited role in Shell's complex structure where ultimate power lies in the
five-member joint managing committee with Royal Dutch. 'I can't say 'Now
that I'm chairman things are going to be different'. I'm a member of a
collective team.' There are no abrupt changes of style in Shell, only a
'continuum'.
Where his influence will be felt strongest is in his four areas of specific
responsibility.
One is for the group's business in the Asia Pacific region 'an enormous and
exciting area' likely to produce the strongest growth - and one where Royal
Dutch has a history going back 100 years. Another is for coal and natural
gas, the latter in particular a growth area in which Shell has a large
position, though Mr Jennings says that gas will have to overcome the
obstacle of long-distance transportation. A third is for research, and the
fourth for health, safety and the environment, all of which he holds to be
of 'fundamental importance' to the group.
'We should be modest about the past. Through a process of selection you are
put in the role of custodian. You have to look after a portfolio of assets
built up over a century. To take credit for the past is wholly
inappropriate.'
He glances out at the view again. 'You have to keep your feet firmly on the
ground.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930805

