FT932-6882

FT  26 MAY 93 / World Stock Markets: Shenzhen seeks a sharper image to
attract investors - Equity market regulatory reforms


   By TONY WALKER


The Shenzhen market, similar to China's other fledgling stock market in
Shanghai, has proved extremely volatile recently, sliding by about 7 per
cent in the first week of May.
Prospects of tighter supervision over the Shenzhen exchange under new
national regulations, and a growing belief among foreign investors that
Chinese investments are best made through Hong Kong-listed companies, are
among factors taking the gloss off the local markets.
Located in one of China's pioneering special economic zones, Shenzhen has
experienced dramatic ups and downs since formal operations began on July 3,
1991, including riots last August when investors engaged in an unseemly
scramble for new issues.
Ms Chao Xia, an exchange official, says that in spite of a rocky start the
exchange is continuing to expand with a steady build-up of new listings.
Ambitious plans are also in hand for a new stock exchange complex, combining
not only equities trading, but also commodities and futures.
Some 33 companies are listed on Shenzhen's A-share local currency market,
which is open to Chinese investors, while nine companies, restricted to
foreign investors, comprise the B-index. The market also encompasses bond
trading.
According to Ms Chao, market capitalisation of both A and B shares combined
had reached Rmb64bn (Dollars 11.2bn) by the first quarter of this year,
compared with Rmb44bn at the end of 1992. Turnover on both markets reached
Rmb24bn in the first three months.
Some 250 brokers are registered with the Shenzhen exchange. The trading
floor can seat 210, but less than 80 brokerage houses are active at this
stage. Ms Chao says that, like Shanghai, plans are under way to allow
foreign brokers to be represented directly.
On the sensitive issue of whether Shenzhen feels something like a poor
relation compared with the much larger Shanghai bourse, Ms Chao says it is
'policy' not to make comments on each other.
But she does observe that Shenzhen is intent on developing a market with its
own 'characteristics', by which she means that the exchange will provide a
focus for companies in southern China, including those on Hainan island,
which itself is undergoing a devel-opment boom. There are no plans, she
says, for cross-listings between the two.
She attributed Shenzhen's rather sluggish B-share market performance to the
fact that investors were awaiting the listing on the Hong Kong market of a
number of mainland companies, including Qingdao Brewery and Shanghai
Petrochemical.
Ms Chao also indicates that Shenzhen has learned its lesson from last
August's riots, when it sought to list a number of companies, all in one
day, under a lottery scheme which was open to manipula-tion by unscrupulous
local officials.
That episode pushed Beijing into belated efforts to enhance its regulatory
capabilities. Last October the state council, or 'cabinet', announced the
establishment of a securities policy committee and a securities regulatory
commission to advise on securities-related matters.
Both bodies have been advising a special securities law-drafting committee,
which recently circulated a proposed law covering the gamut of equity
securities issues, from insider trading to the operations of futures markets
and the establishment of securities companies and investment funds.
Sensitive, perhaps, to the prospect of national regulation, the Shenzhen
city government recently set up its own supervisory body. To be headed by Mr
Li Youwei, the mayor, the agency will draft laws, codes and rules for the
stock market, an announcement said.
One of its tasks will be to bolster confidence and help eradicate erratic
price fluctuations which appear to be unconnected with the health or
otherwise of companies themselves or of the local economy.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

930526

