FT934-8618

FT  15 NOV 93 / Ministers step up attack on CBI over Europe: Business
leaders aim to defuse ERM row


   By TONY JACKSON and ROLAND RUDD


MINISTERS yesterday stepped up their criticism of the Confederation of
British Industry's pro-European policy as the row appeared to be causing
further unhappiness in government circles.
Senior ministers attacked Mr Howard Davies, CBI director-general, for
'dancing to his paymasters' tune' and making 'errors of judgment' in urging
the government not to close off the option of a single currency.
However, Mr Davies said in Harrogate, on the eve of the CBI's annual
conference, that he had been misrepresented in an interview in The Guardian
last week, when he was quoted as attacking the government's stance.
He said yesterday: 'Our position is certainly that of the Bank of England
and, I suspect, of the government, that we should aim at convergence between
the major currencies before we can talk sensibly about a single currency.'
He added: 'It would cause us no concern if the Maastricht timetable were
formally abandoned.'
Mr David Hunt, employment secretary, will remind the CBI in a speech
tomorrow that European unity is not about institutions but about people.
He will tell the conference: 'It is people, not those in the community, or
Whitehall or even in boardrooms, that will decide the future in Europe. It
is the people who will set the pace.'
For that reason he believes Mr Davies's criticism of the government for
appearing anti-European was misguided as it failed to take public opinion
into account.
A government adviser said: 'There is no one more pro-European than Mr Hunt
but the CBI must remember that you have to take the people with you.'
Lord Parkinson, the former cabinet minister and chairman of Eurorail who
addresses the CBI today, was equally disparaging about Mr Davies's
'unthinking pro-European' stance.
He said: 'There is nothing less convincing than businessmen talking about
politics. Of course industrialists want exchange rate stability and
certainty. But at what price? The reality is that we are light years away
from a single currency.'
Sir Edward Heath, the former Conservative prime minister, backed the CBI's
call for a more pro-European approach. On BBC's Breakfast with Frost
programme he said: 'Thank God the CBI have spoken up at last. They are the
industrial basis of this country. They have to deal with finance. They are
the people who have to get our exports for us and put our economy right.
They ought to be listened to.'
He accused the government of trying to dominate Europe. 'That is not a
community. We are not out to dominate everybody else and the more we try the
more we are going to suffer.
'Who are we to set the agenda? The agenda is something to be set by all the
members that are credited. For us to brag that we are doing that - in other
words dominating the Community - is absolutely wrong and it is not a
community.'
The CBI moved to defuse the the row with the government. Sir Michael Angus,
CBI president, said: 'The ERM is fairly low down our members' list of
priorities. I think it is on the government's too.'
He pointed out that the results of a CBI survey of business leaders,
released yesterday, had been 'very much in line with the feelings of
government'.
The survey showed that just over half of business leaders regarded a single
currency as unnecessary, while believing it would help business in the long
term. Eight per cent thought a single currency would be damaging to European
prosperity. Only 7 per cent believed the UK would belong to a single
currency by the end of the decade.
There was also criticism of the European Commission, the president of which,
Mr Jacques Delors, addresses the CBI conference today. More than 60 per cent
of those surveyed thought the effect of the commission on wealth creation
was 'on balance negative'.
This view was borne out by two other surveys yesterday. A poll of MBA
graduates by the Warwick Business School showed 53 per cent thought the UK
should never re-enter the ERM.
The West Midlands Business Survey, conducted by the universities of Warwick
and Wolverhampton and by Price Waterhouse, showed that 60 per cent of
executives thought the government should not aim at full monetary union even
in the long term.
Only 10 per cent thought the ERM's virtual collapse this year would harm
their companies, with more than half saying it would make no difference and
the balance regarding it as helpful.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931115

