FT934-11534

FT  30 OCT 93 / Sport: Mansell keeps the fire of desire alight - Motor
Racing


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


   LIFE IN the US and on the IndyCar circuit has changed Nigel Mansell


outside the cockpit, at least.
After a year away from the political world of Formula One, Mansell has lost
the wary defensiveness which appeared to make him the most miserable grand
prix world champion on record. He is confident, relaxed and smiles readily.
The paranoia has gone.
Today the only racing driver in history to hold both the grand prix and
IndyCar world championships simultaneously might have been on his way to
Adelaide to drive in next week's final grand prix of the season. With the
IndyCar title tucked safely in his belt he was contractually free to take up
offers from a couple of serious grand prix teams to drive in both the
Japanese and Australian grands prix. That could have earned him close to
Pounds 1m.
Instead, today and tomorrow he will be at Donington Park in central England,
racing a Ford Mondeo touring car and one of the cheap but mighty Tuscans
produced by the Blackpool sports car maker, TVR.
If he wins in the Mondeo he will earn Pounds 12,000 in prize money on top of
the comparitively modest Pounds 100,000 Ford isthought to be paying him. TVR
chairman Peter Wheeler, who will be racing against Mansell himself, says
Mansell will be driving the TVR for 'a couple of coffees and a bun like the
rest of us'.
If it is not for the money or prestige, I ask Mansell, is he doing the
unthinkable by grand prix standards - and just driving for the hell of it?
The grin that comes back is huge. He wants, he says, 'to have some fun.'
Every driver will be risking all to beat him. The chances are that someone
will. These drivers have raced together all season. They know their cars;
each others' foibles. Whichever way it goes, Mansell is the, theoretically,
loser. If he wins, that is no more than the world expects. If he is beaten,
the popular press will have a field day.
But Mansell will give both races all he has. It is plain that even after all
this time at the top, he would race dustbin lorries if there were nothing
else to hand.
It is that undiminished desire to compete which, allied to his unquestioned
track skills, explains so much of Mansell's success. His attitude this
weekend is in stark contrast to the jaded tensions which envelope grand
prix, and once again causes it to say goodbye to its new world champion,
Alain Prost.
Prost's critics say that that he has lost motivation - that the fire has
gone out. There was a fierce parting shot from Bernie Ecclestone, head of
the Formula One Constructors' Association and the man effectively in charge
of grand prix. 'Nobody,' he declared, 'is bothered about Prost. Racing will
go on without him.'
It was understandable that Prost, 38, should take the attack personally. But
the episode has a wider significance, it provides evidence of a shift in
attitudes towards drivers. It is perceived that starting grids have become
over-populated with overpaid, over-aged and too often under-committed
drivers. Fearful of losing its huge audiences and sponsorship, grand prix
has tended to cling to its established stars. But this year in the absence
of one of Mansell, it has found out how quickly, among the public, new
heroes can supplant the old.
At the Portugese Grand Prix in Estoril, Prost's young fellow Williams driver
Damon Hill started from the back of the grid, Hill scythed his way through
the field and was only seven seconds behind Prost by the end. Between them,
Hill and Prost display most of the ingredients which go to make up
successful racing drivers.
Prost is nicknamed 'the Professor'. His approach has become wholly scientic.
In Prost's world, a racing car driven with its tail hanging even slightly
out is a car wasting energy which should be propelling it forward. Prost is
the ultimately 'tidy' driver.
But that very precision has frequently been called boring. So has been
Prost's wholly rational philosophy of winning races at the slowest possible
speed and least possible risk.
Prost has mostly won from the front this year in a car universally
acknowledged to be the quickest. Had the Williams-Renault proved vulnerable,
few would have expected Prost to tiger his way round any performance deficit
as Michael Schumacher has done so brilliantly in the Benetton.
Hill, in contrast, has everything to play for. His natural talent and innate
car control are not in doubt. But nor is that of Hakkinen, Schumacher, Jean
Alesi, Rubens Barichello and several others among the up and coming F1
driver crop.
Both young and old guard are, almost without exception, physically fit.
There is no choice if massively variable forces of up to 5g are to be
survived for nearly two hours.
Where they differ is in commitment - the willingness to go out to the ragged
edge, and occasionally and expensively beyond, in seizing any and every
overtaking opportunity.
Only a very few, such as Mansell and Senna, retain their aggression
undiminished - Senna sometimes off the track as well as on - as Mansell's
kamikaze antics on Indy's ovals have shown. Cliche it may be, but grand prix
drivers require courage. But then, back in the early 1980s, former world
champion Nicky Lauda could be heard talking about the enthusiasm and
'madness' of his young team mate, Alain Prost.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

931030

