FT932-3357

FT  15 JUN 93 / Sihanouk hails era of democracy


   By VICTOR MALLET


   PHNOM PENH


PRINCE Norodom Sihanouk, the Cambodian leader, celebrated the opening of the
elected assembly yesterday by announcing a new era of liberal democracy and
free enterprise and calling for a solid ceasefire between the country's
warring factions.
The 120-member assembly, chosen in last month's UN-organised election, is
obliged to draw up a new constitution and form a government within three
months under an international peace plan agreed in Paris in 1991.
Mr Yasushi Akashi, head of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia, urged
the elected representatives to 'bury the hatchet of yesterday' and said he
was proud to have led the UN's most ambitious undertaking to date. Untac's
Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.2bn) mission is supposed to end with the formation of
a new government.
'Your presence here is a clear affirmation of democracy in Cambodia and of
the unmistakeable will of the people to become the masters of their own
country,' Mr Akashi said, holding out the promise of support from foreign
donors and investors if stability returns to Cambodia.
Mr Akashi and his staff are likely to face a difficult three months dealing
with the unpredictable Prince Sihanouk and with an incumbent communist
administration unwilling to yield power to Funcinpec, the royalist
opposition party which won the most seats in the election.
Several leaders of the ruling communist Cambodian People's party have
established an 'autonomous zone' along the Vietnamese border, terrorising
Funcinpec supporters and driving out UN civilian workers at gunpoint; Khmer
Rouge guerrillas opposed to the CPP have their own zone on the Thai border
in the west.
After entering the assembly under a golden umbrella, the 70-year-old Prince
Sihanouk told its members that the Cambodian people wanted a united and
peaceful country and a better standard of living.
He condemned deforestation and the theft of archaeological treasures from
the ruins of Angkor in the north, and suggested a return to the 'prosperous
agriculture of the 1950s and 1960s' - the time when he was in power.
One of the assembly's first acts yesterday was to mollify the prince by
declaring the coup d'etat against him by Gen Lon Nol in 1970 to be null and
void, and by reaffirming him as head of state 'so that he can effectively
save our country and allow Cambodia once more to know progress and
prosperity, as in the days of the Sangkum Reastr Niyum'.
Untac officials said the decision was of doubtful legal force - since the
assembly has yet to pass a constitution - and did not necessarily bode well
for democracy; the Sangkum, or 'People's Socialist Community', was a
national movement founded by Prince Sihanouk with the purpose of
obliterating other political parties, and won its first election with the
help of intimidation and vote-rigging in 1955.
Cambodian rice yields and per capita income, furthermore, were among the
lowest in south-east Asia in the 1960s.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930615

