FT934-11183

FT  02 NOV 93 / Letters to the Editor: Short-term rate cut no long-term
answer


   From Mr LAURENS VAN DEN MUYZENBERG


Sir, Your editorial 'Monetarism in retreat' (October 30/31) states: 'France
is defiantly refusing to enter the pro-growth era. It has refused the
significant cut in interest rates that France's low inflation rate allows.'
This is a statement typical of a continuous stream of articles in the
British press, with very little resonance on the Continent. Why? The franc
one-year interest rate is 6 to 5 7/8 per cent as compared with sterling 5
1/2 to 5 7/16 per cent. A difference of  1/2 - 1/8 percentage point. This
result has been achieved by keeping the franc owners almost 20 per cent
wealthier than the sterling owners.
The other side of the ocean, David Mullins, vice-chairman of the US Federal
Reserve, said last week: 'I think you have to be very careful with rapid
short-term rate cuts. There is a great risk that long rates react in the
opposite way.'
The French, English and German unemployment problems are not caused by high
interest rates, but by the combination of business globalisation and lack of
European competitiveness and flexibility. The jobs that have disappeared
will not come back. They have migrated to other countries.
The container and the fax, which make it possible to carry out any task
where best value for money is delivered, will not disappear. Investments
will only be made, and so jobs created, when there is much greater
flexibility in increasing and decreasing company size, working hours,
compensation, geographical mobility, acceptance of new technologies and work
practices, etc.
This flexibility, combined with stable currencies and entrepreneurial
enthusiasm, can solve the unemployment problems, but not another short-term
interest rate cut, in France or in the UK. That is a commonly held view on
the other side of the Channel.
Laurens van den Muyzenberg,
management consultant,
MMC,
1 Queens Terrace,
Windsor SL4 2AR

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931102

