FT934-11659

FT  30 OCT 93 / EC Summit: European bank a boost for Frankfurt - Wrangling
ends as EC institutions are parcelled out among competing member nations


   By QUENTIN PEEL and DAVID BUCHAN


   BONN


FOR Chancellor Helmut Kohl, the decision to put the European Monetary
Institute in Frankfurt after months of wrangling and resistance from the
British government, is a much-needed demonstration of solidarity from his EC
partners.
For the city of Frankfurt, it will provide a welcome boost to a flat
property market and to the more distant hope of becoming a greater rival to
the City of London as an international financial centre.
Mr Kohl has argued all along that he needed to persuade doubting German
voters that the future European currency would be as stable as the D-Mark -
and the one way to do so was to site the EMI in the shadow of the German
Bundesbank.
His unwavering commitment to the cause of European union, both political and
economic, has yet to produce much visible reward for Germany. He can now
present the EMI, which is supposed to become the future European central
bank, as just that.
There was celebration in Frankfurt last night that the decision, blocked
only by a British veto at the Lisbon EC summit in June 1992, has at last
been made.
Mr Martin Kohlhaussen, chief executive of Commerzbank, said the decision was
'above all, a well-earned recognition of the outstanding role of the
Bundesbank in its lasting commitment to monetary stability. It is an
expression of trust and an obligation, at the same time'.
Mr Jurgen Sarrazin, head of Dresdner Bank, said it presented Germany with
'the great responsibility of making a further step forward for Europe.'
The Bank of England said last night: 'It's a pity, not for the City but for
the EMI.' However, the Bank added that London would retain its pre-eminent
position as a financial centre irrespective of where the EMI was sited.
The UK Treasury said: 'We thought all along London would be the best place
for the EMI on the grounds that it is the financial centre for Europe. But
the decision is not a body blow to London in terms of its standing in the
financial markets. London will be able to survive the decision.'
Mr Avinash Persaud, economist with J P Morgan, the US bank, said: 'Frankfurt
as a location for the EMI will give a much needed injection of credibility
back to the European exchange rate mechanism.
'But it is clearly a disappointment for London. In the longer term, if the
Maastricht process is put back together again, London will lose out as a
major foreign exchange centre.'
Mr Stephen Hannah, head of research at IBJ International, the Japanese Bank,
in London said: 'I don't think it comes as any surprise given the
Bundesbank's decision to cut rates a week or two ago. It did itself no harm
by cutting them rather surprisingly when it did.'
He added that the location of the EMI in Frankfurt was seen as underpinning
the credentials of a future European Central Bank, 'but the idea of a
central bank ever emerging still remains a dream rather than a reality'.
The Association of French Banks acknowledged last night that over the long
term the choice of Frankfurt as the seat of the future European central bank
would attract some business away from Paris and other financial centres.
In the meantime the Paris market is increasing its links with Frankfurt,'
said an AFB official.
No fewer than three French cities - Lyons, Lille and Strasbourg - had touted
for the EMI but none received official backing from the French government
which knew from the start that basing the central bank in Germany was the
price to be paid for monetary union.
Where in Frankfurt the EMI might set up headquarters has yet to be decided.
One proposal has been to put it in the former headquarters of the IG Farben
chemical combine, a gigantic, marble-clad building dating from the late
1920s, currently used as headquarters of the US Army in Germany. The
disadvantage is the historical connotation of a company closely identified
with the Nazi regime, and responsible for the deaths of thousands of slave
labourers during the Second World War.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
EUROPEAN INSTITUTIONS
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Who has what:
Brussels                                           Council of Ministers
                                                    European Commission
Luxembourg                                             Court of Justice
                                         European Investment Bank (EIB)
                                                                Euratom
                                                      Court of Auditors
Strasbourg                                          European Parliament
Munich                                           European Patent Office
London                                 European Bank for Reconstruction
                                                 and Development (EBRD)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Who gets what:
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Frankfurt                                   European Monetary Institute
The Hague                                          Europol Drugs Agency
Spain                         Health and Safety in the Workplace Agency
                                    (Spanish government to choose city)
Madrid                                                 Trademark Office
London                              European Medicine Evaluation Agency
Dublin                            European Veterinary Inspection Agency
Lisbon                                       European Drugs Observatory
Turin                                  European Foundation for Training
Salonika                                European centre for development
                                                 of vocational training
Luxembourg                              Translation services centre for
                                                the European Commission
Copenhagen                                  European Environment Agency
Site for plant-breeders' rights not agreed
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931030

