FT934-10115

FT  06 NOV 93 / Arts: House that Rachel built - Lynn MacRitchie finds this
Turner Prize contender no demolition job


   By LYNN MACRITCHIE


YOU WILL almost certainly have seen Rachel Whiteread's 'House' by now, in
other newspapers or on your television screen. You will have read the
furious and foolish comments, seen the former inhabitant invited to make
mock, covered your ears at that whiny old saw, 'Is it art?' But have you
visited it, taken yourself off to the junction of Grove Road and Roman Road
London E8, where it stands so impressively, looming white against the
surrounding green space? You should, and quickly too, because at the end of
this month it may have to be demolished, and vanish as if it had never been.
And if that happens, London will have lost one of the only truly successful
pieces of contemporary monumental sculpture I have ever seen.
'House' is successful for contradictory reasons. Indubitably monumental in
scale, it is also absolutely intimate in content, consisting as it does of
the cast form of the former living spaces. To create it, the empty interior
was sprayed with concrete from within, the house's walls forming the casing
for this mould of its inner life. When the concrete was dry, the outside
bricks and mortar were knocked away, leaving the form of the interior, made
visible for the first time. The wooden floor joists and stair treads were
left in place, providing a natural articulation for the concrete mass. Seen
from the front, it is narrow, almost elegant, the bow window emphasising the
upward thrust. Seen from the side, its blocky mass recalling the Hayward
Gallery or other brutalist constructions, the random sprawl backward is
revealed, the higgledy piggledy rooms petering out in ever smaller
extensions.
The concrete itself proves to be the most sensitive of materials, picking
up, retaining and presenting in perfect reversal all the details of the
construction - skirting boards and door frames, outside-in fireplaces and
window embrasures, indented light switches and electric cable runners - but
also the varying surfaces of the walls, including traces of colour from the
wallpapers, recalling the touching revelations of hidden lives offered by
half demolished buildings.
Whiteread's casting technique was developed to record the spaces under
baths, sinks or beds, revealing them as intimate repositories of human
activity. The idea itself is very simple, but the materials chosen, such as
plaster or rubber, and decisions such as whether or not to allow the hessian
from the surface of an old mattress to adhere to the rubber in which the
space beneath it is cast, offer a surprising variety of volume, tone and
surface.
Whiteread's first cast piece was 'Closet', 1988, made by turning a wardrobe
on its back on the floor, filling it with plaster and breaking off the wood.
She had remembered clambering in to a wardrobe as a child and the powerful
sensation of that enclosed, secret space, the sort of transitory zone adults
never enter but children seek out naturally, determined to discover magic in
the dark corners of the everyday. Whiteread's cast spaces are not magical,
but they are moving, perfectly poised between minimalism and intimacy.
A progress through wardrobes, beds, sinks and baths led to her first very
large scale piece, 'Ghost' 1990, cast in plaster from the inside of a
bedsitting room. 'I thought of casting a house after completing 'Ghost','
she told me. Finding a suitable site took nearly two years. The Grove Road
terrace was being cleared to make a park, thus providing the perfect mix of
a building about to be demolished and an open space.
The process of casting used sprayed concrete - 'I wanted to use a 'building'
material,' she explains. Technically, the piece was difficult, requiring new
foundations and an internal wire mesh structure. Whiteread, conscious that
the concrete would pick up every trace from the interior, had to have the
windows reboarded when one of the builders working with her wrote large
numbers on each piece of hardboard. All such attention to detail takes place
before a space is cast; the final surface is left as it emerges.
The creation of 'House' moved Whiteread's work, for this piece at least,
decisively into the public domain. 'I had no idea what I was letting myself
in for,' she admits. Working in the street, the creation and unveiling of
the piece inevitably became a public event, with the explosion of comment
that engendered, some of it inevitably highly political. Whiteread insists
she has not suddenly become 'a radical political artist standing on my
soapbox. The work I have always made is very quiet, spiritual, poetic -
there is nothing different to the sense of this piece.' This is quite true.
The work grew naturally from her previous explorations, was in one sense no
more than a continuation of them. But by growing in scale from room to
house, her process of quiet exploration, simply by having to be made
manifest on a grand scale, became a public monument, exposing in a way no
one has ever quite done before the spaces which shape our lives.
Standing revealed before us, our homes, secured at such cost, are proved to
be poor crooked things, their mean interiors measuring out our days. That
hopes and dreams and indeed art itself should emerge from these haphazard
shelters is testimony to the human spirit, a worthy subject for a remarkable
monument.
'House', by Rachel Whiteread. Opposite 182 Grove Road, near the corner of
Grove Road and Roman Road, London E8. Until the end of November. An
Artangel/Becks commission, co-sponsored by Tarmac Structural Repairs. Rachel
Whiteread is one of the four artists shortlisted for the Turner Prize. The
others are Hannah Collins, Vong Phaophanit and Sean Scully. The Turner Prize
Exhibition is at the Tate Gallery, November 3-28. The winner will be
announced on Channel 4, sponsor of the prize, on November 23. See Private
View, page XXIV

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

931106

