FT933-12552

FT  23 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Motorway fatigue


IT IS EASY to make a case for turning part of London's M25 orbital motorway
into a 14-lane super-highway. The stretch concerned is the busiest section
of motorway in the country; it is only 7 1/2 miles long; the cost of
widening it will be small in relation to the congestion relief it will
bring; and the government says most of the rest of the motorway will stay at
four lanes each way, at least for the foreseeable future.
Yet the scheme cannot be judged so glibly. Short though the 14-lane section
may be, the fact that a highway of such proportions should be considered
acceptable anywhere in the UK crystallises the debate about how the country
is to cope with continuing traffic growth. If a 14-lane motorway is
acceptable now, will a 28-lane one be acceptable in another decade or two?
And a 56-lane one when the 28-lane one is full?
It sounds far-fetched: and the argument against is that traffic growth will
stagnate once car ownership reaches saturation point. Statistics, however,
show that traffic grows inexorably in line with gross domestic product. As
more goods and services are produced, more transport is needed to carry
them. With more time and money on their hands, people shop and travel more.
Governments impede this process at their peril. Yet environmental
considerations demand that they do something other than accommodate the
traffic jams with ever-increasing swathes of Tarmac. Even if technology
succeeds in producing a non-polluting car engine, the problems of land-take,
noise and visual intrusion are likely to prove unacceptable.
Sadly, the alternative most often favoured by environmentalists - more use
of the railways - will not provide the solution. Railways account for such a
small proportion of traffic (6 per cent of passenger miles and 7 per cent of
goods miles) that even to double their use would provide only a hiatus in
road traffic growth.
The best hope of bringing demand for road space into line with supply
therefore appears to lie in the mechanism used to regulate supply and demand
elsewhere: price. If people had to pay for using busy parts of the road
network, they might consider undertaking their journeys at a quieter time,
using public transport, or not undertaking the journey at all. Ultimately,
changes in land use and planning would bring people closer to where they
lived, worked and played, so restraining traffic growth.
In the meantime, the government needs to come up with a more coherent
strategy for dealing with traffic growth than has so far been in evidence.
People need roads, and more will have to be built, but there will never be
enough to meet unrestrained demand. If the government is serious about
resolving this conundrum, it could start by addressing the fact that Britain
not only has some of the worst traffic jams in the European Community, but
also some of the cheapest petrol.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930723

