FT932-7055

FT  26 MAY 93 / Guatemalan president suspends constitution


   By EDWARD ORLEBAR


   GUATEMALA CITY


GUATEMALA'S President Jorge Serrano yesterday suspended the country's
constitution, dissolving congress and the supreme court in what he said was
an attempt to 'purify the state of all its corruption'.
US president Bill Clinton reacted by calling on Mr Serrano to reverse his
'illegitimate' actions. State department spokesman Richard Boucher
threatened to press for an emergency meeting of foreign ministers of the
Organisation of American States if the measures were not reversed.
Mr Serrano took the unexpected decision, which included the suspension of Mr
Edgar Tuna Valladores, the attorney general, after meeting the military high
command, which has shown growing dissatisfaction with recent civil unrest
over the government's unpopular economic measures.
Mr Tuna Valladores, together with heads of congress and the supreme court,
was placed under house arrest.
Mr Serrano said later that a new national assembly would be elected within
60 days to draw up a new constitution.
Students have been protesting over transport price rises and there has been
discontent over government attempts to raise electricity charges in keeping
with its IMF standby agreement. Yesterday, however, the capital's streets
were quiet with security forces surrounding most public buildings.
The human rights ombudsman, Mr Ramiro de Leon Carpio, an acerbic critic of
the government and the military, has gone underground, according to radio
reports.
Mr Serrano attacked the supreme court for failing to administer justice and
for allowing criminals to go free.
'For two and half years I've been subjected to political blackmail by some
members of congress,' he said on national radio.
Mr Serrano, a fundamentalist evangelical who won a landslide victory in
January 1991 to become only the third democratically elected civilian
president in Guatemalan history, this month lost a working alliance he
enjoyed in congress with the opposition parties.
His uncomfortable presidency has deteriorated recently. Talks with the
leftist National Guatemalan Revolutionary Unity guerrillas broke down this
month with both sides accusing the other of a lack of political will to
negotiate.
Foreign observers drew parallels with the so-called self coup of President
Alberto Fujimori of Peru in April last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930526

