FT934-11096

FT  02 NOV 93 / International Company News: Hectic start to trading in
Singapore Telecom shares


   By KIERAN COOKE


   KUALA LUMPUR


SINGAPORE Telecom (ST), the island republic's telecommunications and posts
utility, made its debut on the Singapore stock market yesterday, quickly
dwarfing other companies and accounting for about half the total valuation
of the market.
The Singapore government has floated about 11 per cent of ST, setting a
price of SDollars 1.90 or SDollars 2 on its shares. At one stage yesterday
ST shares rose to a high of SDollars 5, giving the group a market valuation
of more than SDollars 70bn (USDollars 44bn), and a p/e ratio in the mid 60s.
The combined capitalisation of companies on the Singapore exchange,
excluding ST, is SDollars 140bn. 'Investors are not bothering to look at
fundamentals any more,' said one local broker. 'There's more than a bit of
craziness in the market right now, with too much money chasing too few
quality stocks.'
At the close of trading, ST's shares were SDollars 4.14, still well above
market expectations.
The Singapore government had issued shares in three tranches. Group A and B
shares - about 50 per cent of the shares on offer and priced at SDollars
1.90 and SDollars 2 respectively - were reserved for Singaporeans only.
Group C shares were available to both Singaporean and foreign buyers on a
tender basis. The strike price for the C shares, announced last Friday, was
set at SDollars 3.60.
The feeling in Singapore is that local, rather than overseas, investors are
responsible for the aggressive ST performance.
'We are still waiting for a correction,' said a foreign fund manager.
'No-one doubts ST is a good company, but at present price levels it looks
very, very expensive.'
Market analysts said the absence of foreign buyers meant the first day's
trading in ST was not as exciting as expected.
The Singapore stock exchange had doubled its trading hours in anticipation
of hectic trading. However, late yesterday it announced trading would revert
to the normal six and a half hours tomorrow.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

931102

