FT934-8405

FT  16 NOV 93 / Building sector 'could shrink by 20%'


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


UP TO a fifth of construction companies could disappear in the next 18
months as a result of company failures and enforced mergers, says a report
to be published this week by Price Waterhouse, the accountants.
The report warns that receiverships and liquidations are likely to remain at
a high level because of overcapacity in the industry, even when construction
output starts to recover.
Mr Colin McKay, Price Waterhouse partner responsible for construction, said
cuts in social housing and road and rail investment in the Budget would only
make matters worse.
Recession in continental European construction markets and the removal of
European trade barriers meant that competition from continental contractors
had increased in British markets, he said.
The recent award of tunnelling contracts to continental European contractors
for London Underground's Jubilee Line extension has prompted criticism from
British civil engineers, who argued that they did not have the same
opportunities to win work in other European Union countries.
Price Waterhouse estimates that there is up to 30 per cent overcapacity
among British contractors in spite of record levels of receiverships and
liquidations.
The number of construction company failures this year, although likely to be
lower than the peak of 3,830 recorded by the Department of Trade last year,
is still expected to exceed 3,000 for the third year running. This compares
with 1,590 company failures in 1988 and 1,638 in 1989.
Price Waterhouse says construction company failures could rise again as the
industry comes out of recession, and as banks step up pressure on companies
for repayment of long-standing borrowings. Construction output is forecast
by the industry to rise by up to 2 per cent next year.
Mr McKay said such a small increase would not be sufficient to reduce
overcapacity in the industry, and could be reversed if the government cuts
construction expenditure in the Budget.
He said: 'Cashflow pressures, irrespective of what happens in the Budget,
are likely to remain intense. Contractors have been taking work at cost or
even at a loss just to keep cash coming in to help meet overheads and pay
wages. This cannot continue.'
Mr McKay added: 'The logical outcome is that the numbers of companies
competing for work must reduce and that means more mergers or an increase in
company failures.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931116

