FT934-11226

FT  02 NOV 93 / Business and the Law: Employers must justify unequal pay -
European Court


   By BRICK COURT CHAMBERS


   BRUSSELS


The European Court of Justice ruled last week that the equal pay provisions
of the EC treaty require employers to demonstrate an objective justification
of the existence of appreciable differences in pay between male and female
workers doing work of equal value.
The Court's ruling was made in a case referred by the English Appeal Court
involving a female speech therapist, who brought an action against her
employers for sex discrimination.
Mrs Pamela Enderby claimed that her pay, in a profession that is
overwhelmingly staffed by women, was less than that for members of
comparable professions, such as clinical psychologists or principal
pharmacists, which are largely staffed by men.
The European Court of Justice was first asked whether employers were bound
under the EC treaty provisions to justify objectively differences in pay
such as those which had occurred in this case.
The Court said that, although normally the onus of proving alleged facts in
support of a claim lay with the claimant, the burden should shift when it
was necessary to avoid depriving workers, who appeared to be victims of
discrimination, of any effective means of enforcing their rights to equal
pay.
It then said that, in spite of the fact that the circumstances of the
present case did not constitute de facto discrimination, they did constitute
a prima facie case of discrimination.
Given that workers would be unable to enforce their rights to equal pay
before national courts if evidence of a prima facie case of discrimination
did not shift the burden to the employer of showing that the difference was
not in fact discriminatory, the Court ruled that, in circumstances such as
those of the present case, it was for the employer to show that an objective
justification existed for the difference in pay.
The Court was also asked whether it was sufficient justification for the
difference in pay if the rates of pay for the jobs in question had been
decided by collective bargaining processes. It said the fact that rates of
pay had been decided by such processes did not preclude a finding of prima
facie discrimination, where the results of the collective bargaining showed
that two groups with the same employer and the same trade union were treated
differently.
The third question asked by the English Appeal Court was whether or to what
extent the fact that the differences in pay were attributable to a shortage
of candidates for one job and the need to attract them by higher salaries
could serve as objective justification for the pay differential.
The Court said that such a finding of fact was for the national court.
However, it made it clear that, if the national court was able to determine
what proportion of the increase in pay was attributable to market forces
such as those suggested, the pay differential would be objectively justified
to the extent of that proportion.
If, on the other hand, the national court had not been able to determine the
particular proportion, then it would have to assess whether the role of
market forces in determining the rate of pay was significant enough to
provide objective justification for part or all of the difference.
C-127/92: Enderby v Frenchay Health Authority and health secretary, ECJ FC,
October 27 1993.
Application to reopen Commission merger proceedings inad-missible
An application by third-party shareholders for the annulment of a decision
by the European Commission refusing to reopen its merger proceedings in
relation to a particular transaction has been ruled inadmissible by the
European Court of Justice.
The Court said the applicants had failed to demonstrate that they were
directly and individually concerned as required by the Rome treaty
provisions.
The Commission's decision that the transaction between the two companies did
not fall within the scope of the merger regulation did not of itself affect
the substance or extent of the shareholders' rights.
T-83/92: Zunis Holding SA and others v Commission, CF1 2CH, October 28 1993.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931102

