FT934-11524

FT  30 OCT 93 / Fashion: You can't keep a good shirt down - This time the
look is long, lean and romantic or ascetic. It may be the one essential
autumn buy


   By AVRIL GROOM


THE WHITE shirt is the many-headed Hydra of fashion. There are countless
versions of this basic essential, and each time it seems about to disappear,
because of a change in design direction, it renews itself more strongly.
Designers are capable of perpetually reinventing it.
This time it is the swashbuckling dandy, the romantic poet or the ascetic
nun which inspires the transformation. The square-cut, plain-collared,
button-cuffed shirt always looks smart in its classic way - but it does not
have quite the elan of this winter's style.
The details to look for include: long, rather lean-cut shapes with
pronounced tails; long, ruffled or double cuffs and an interesting neckline
with elongated revers; stock-ties or jabots; and cavalier lace trim.
The significance of these details lies in the way the white shirt is worn
now. This is a season of layers and the shirt, as the basic ingredient,
gives them topicality. It goes over, or under, a succession of lean, often
fine-fabric layers and it is usually longer than the rest.
The protruding tails, cuffs and collar proclaim the vintage of your outfit,
the details - a bold stock-tie, a romantic soft ruffle or a puritanically
plain buttoned-up collar - say which of the season's fashion 'characters'
you have decided to espouse.
For this autumn, designers have again plundered the dressing-up box and the
shirt is the shortest way to a specific theme. Wear a very plain,
high-necked style with simple, monochrome tailoring and skinny, undersized
knits and you have a deconstructed look bordering on the ecclesiastical.
Anything with a hint of lace worn with velvet, smacks of the dandy while a
shirt peeking from long, knitted layers updates a revived classic.
So strong is the impression created by the shirt that there is a case for
making it your one essential autumn buy. Certainly some of the top designers
seem to think so. You have a Chanel jacket, however old, or - whisper it - a
tweed lookalike in your wardrobe? Then follow Karl Lagerfeld's train of
thought.
He put just about every jacket-shape he has designed for the house on the
catwalk, all of them worn over saggy jersey trousers and a white shirt with
tails and cuffs flying - and very fresh they looked.
It is a similar story at the newly-opened London shop of Dior where
Gianfranco Ferre, its designer, has always been a serious shirt man.
He is best known for his flamboyant evening wear but his impeccable white,
cotton day shirts, their collars and cuffs cut and top-stitched with
mathematical precision, would lend drama and presence to any jacket. At more
than Pounds 300 they are expensive, but compare this with the cost of a
jacket of equal quality.
At lower price levels the choice is vast and often represents very good
value. If you are choosing a plain style, check for neat top-stitching, even
hems and attractive buttons and cufflinks. With more ornate styles, for
good-quality embroidery or lace trims, Next and Laura Ashley have
inexpensive shirts trimmed with good-looking lace. At whichever level you
buy you are unlikely to be disappointed. Your white shirt will be a
long-running item, although by next year the designers will doubtless have
thought up a different way for you to wear it.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

931030

