FT934-8684

FT  13 NOV 93 / Arts: In praise of youth - This adolescent Hamlet explains a
lot


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


ONE of the best Hamlets you are likely to see has arrived at the Donmar
Warehouse, the smallest of London's mainstream theatres. There are many
virtues in Stephen Unwin's production for the English Touring Theatre
(formerly the Century Theatre), but the greatest of all is youth.
Alan Cumming's Hamlet is a very young man, perhaps still an adolescent. This
is not the way the Prince of Denmark is usually portrayed: even the text
suggests that he must be at least 26. Yet to play him younger explains an
awful lot.
This Hamlet is an only child with all the arrogance of an advantaged
background. True, he has most of the qualities that are attributed to him.
He can fence: he can remember huge chunks of Dido and Aeneas from a single
hearing, and he has good manners when he wants to, mainly to outsiders like
the Players.
He can also be petulant, rude and immature. He cannot understand that his
mother can still have sexual desires at her age - she must be at least 45.
Nevertheless, he still longs to be mothered and there are early moments when
he seems intimidated by his step-father. He is a clever boy, but dreadfully
spoiled.
Cumming's Hamlet is not the glass of fashion. He dresses in a black T-shirt
and short black leggings. He has wildish hair which he keeps pushing back.
Everyone else is smarter. But again this is the only child, born to be king,
doing what he likes.
Cumming's one very distinctive trait is to speak with a Scottish accent
while the rest of the cast is English. He also has a marvellous talent of
appealing directly to the audience. He delivers his soliloquies as if he
were thinking of the words for the first time - the idea of staging a play
to catch the conscience of the king seems to come to him suddenly out of the
blue.
It is not all Cumming, however. There is a style to Unwin's direction which
runs throughout. When Pip Donaghy's Claudius comes to his own soliloquy, he
has the same technique of eyeing the spectators. The Donmar Warehouse is a
wonderful place to do this.
Some of the other characters come out in new light. Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern are not the customary stooges and sycophants. Sometimes they
behave like the older boys in the school who might just give Hamlet a
roughing up him to teach him a lesson.
There is a moving Ophelia played by Hilary Lyon who, like Hamlet, seems to
weep real tears. Gertrude is played by Eleanor Bron not as a particularly
sensuous-looking woman, but one who goes along in a practical way with
remarriage when her husband dies. Apart from Laertes, whose character is not
defined, this is one of the hardest parts in Hamlet. Ms Bron carries it off
by not over-acting.
There are some cuts. The production is not as magisterial as the recent
Royal Shakespeare Company's. But the narrative flows - the piece still lasts
3 1/4 hours, the bare stage at the Donmar is just right and it is good that
the Hamlets should be getting younger.
Donmar Warehouse until November 27. (071) 867 1150

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

931113

