FT932-13305

FT  23 APR 93 / World Stock Markets: Dublin enjoys thrills of the
roller-coaster - Falling interest rates and overseas demand are driving
equities


   By TIM COONE


The Irish stock market has had all the thrills of a ride on a funfair roller
coaster over the past six months, and all the unpredictability of Irish
weather.
The cries of alarm and dire predictions of deepening gloom in the autumn of
last year, as the market plunged to a four-year low, have since been
replaced by squeals of delight and forecasts of better to come as the ISEQ
overall index bottomed out and has since climbed rapidly to a three-year
high.
It has gained 30 per cent since the end of December, half of that in March
alone, and a remarkable 45 per cent since the four-year low last October,
making Dublin one of the world's best performing markets this year to date.
It eased 2.47 yesterday to 1,554.27.
The crucial turning point was the punt's devaluation at the end of January
and the steady fall in interest rates since then, which has brought a burst
of optimism flooding through analysts' forecasts.
Financial stocks such as Bank of Ireland and AIB have bounced back
particularly strongly, the sector advancing 38 per cent in the year to date;
while food shares such as Avonmore, Waterford, and Golden Vale have also
outperformed the market as a whole, as has the blue chip construction stock
CRH and a number of second line industrials.
The ERM crisis in the autumn of last year, which threw the Irish currency
into crisis and interest rates soaring, had been particularly depressing for
the financial stocks and for companies trading into the UK. But with that
cloud now lifted, recovery has been strong, with the potential for more to
come.
Mr John Horgan, head of research at Riada stockbrokers in Dublin, comments:
'The market is still 20 per cent below its all-time high and price-earnings
multiples are 13 for 1993, while they are 17 in the US and 15 in the UK.'
He says a promising economic outlook over the next two years, combined with
favourable technical factors, 'could mean that there is still some 15 to 20
per cent to go and could make this year an exceptionally good one for the
market'.
Two technical factors are particularly significant. From May 1, Irish stocks
will be included in the Morgan Stanley Capital International index, which
will serve to attract additional US funds into the market. Secondly, when
Dublin money market rates were very high in January, there were heavy
redemptions of unit-linked funds, making the Irish institutions forced
sellers.
That position has now been reversed, and Irish institutions will again be
net buyers of stock at the same time as there are few expectations of any of
the leading Irish stocks coming to the market with new issues in the months
ahead, keeping supply of paper tight, while demand remains firm.
A more cautious note is being sounded by Davy stockbrokers in Dublin. They
say much of the bull market of the past two months has been driven by
overseas buying, and those stocks which have attracted most interest 'no
longer look unduly cheap by international comparisons . . . we find it
difficult to see how the market as a whole can push significantly ahead from
these levels without inducing some overseas profit-taking'.
Further ahead, however, Davy is forecasting that interest rates will fall a
further 2 to 3 percentage points to around 6 per cent in 1994 and GNP growth
will recover to 4 per cent next year, 'which should be sufficient to allow
the market to make further and significant gains on a 12 to 18-month view'.
Mr Robbie Kelleher, head of research at Davy, says: 'We remain strategic
bulls. There is a very benign picture of the economy emerging over the next
18 months.'
Mr David Kingston, chief executive of Irish Life, Ireland's largest fund
manager, is also bullish and says he is 'generally optimistic that interest
rates will continue to fall over the next two years'.
Under such a scenario, overall earnings growth in the Irish market is
forecast to be in the region of 20 per cent over the next two years, giving
a 1994 p/e forecast of around 11 which will continue to offer bargains for
those that like the thrill of Dublin's roller-coaster ride.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

930423

