FT934-10026

FT  08 NOV 93 / Management: A clear mind and a planned itinerary - Tips from
the top / Sir Colin Marshall, chairman of British Airways, offers advice on
how to cope with business trips


   By Sir COLIN MARSHALL


I suppose one of the best ways of coping with a busy foreign business trip
is to be asked to contribute an article on the subject by the Financial
Times. The work of collecting some thoughts and committing them to paper for
this piece is occupying a pleasant slice of the flying time between London
and Washington DC.
I have to confess that I am travelling on one of our Concorde services
which, of course, is the only means by which commerce and industry can buy
time as a commodity.
Supersonic travel has, for 17 years, given businessmen the option of buying
personal comfort and business efficiency across the North Atlantic. Pity
that technical, environmental and economic constraints have not allowed a
wider spread of Concorde service for the business traveller.
Although modern aircraft have dramatically improved the quality of airborne
life - cabin pressure has been reduced, more space and light have been
incorporated into cabin design, improved products and service facilities
have been enabled - the potential for travel weariness remains with us.
Long, non-stop ranges of aircraft such as the Boeing 747-400 mean that we
can reach Asia and Australia more quickly than before. The result is that we
are generally spending much longer periods of time aloft; but less time at
our destinations.
A colleague recently needed to be in Sydney to sort out an urgent problem.
His schedule did not allow much time away from base, but the new, fast,
one-stop flights allowed him to complete the trip in three days, including a
good working day in Sydney. (On departure, the Australian immigration
official was heard to exclaim: 'Crikey, mate, did you get time for a beer?')
He was none the worse for the experience, principally because the trip was
sharply focused and he had used the flying time outbound to study the
background to the problem and to relax before setting out to tackle it. On
the way back, he wrote up reports and associated correspondence, before
pushing the seat recline button in an uncluttered frame of mind. For me,
therein lies the secret.
First, get the trip, however long, very carefully planned in advance and
have the itinerary committed as much to memory as possible. There is nothing
so debilitating as not knowing what is going to happen next when on the
road. I find, by the way, that it is best to get into the pace of a new
time-zone straightaway. Otherwise, you are forever in a catch-up situation.
Second, while there are no hero-grams for the workaholic, it does pay to
regard part of the flight as 'office' time to avoid departure panic
(outstanding, urgent work is quite capable of travelling with you); the
isolation of an aircraft cabin allows single-minded concentration on
business ahead.
Third, on long trips, always carry some clean laundry in the hand baggage -
changing into a fresh shirt a couple of hours from the destination is quite
rejuvenating.
Fourth - and this falls into the category of 'he would say that, wouldn't
he,' but it is meant genuinely - buy the best quality of travel and hotel
accommodation you can afford. It is as much an investment in business
development as your time overseas.
The usual, well-versed advice about airborne alcohol and inflight feasting
goes without saying, but that does not mean we should not enjoy a glass of
decent wine with a lightish meal.
To sum up, as I have already indicated the most important - probably the
vital - piece of travel equipment is a clean and clear mind. Every plan and
arrangement must, therefore, ensure it stays that way throughout.
And now, you will have to excuse me. I need to take my mandatory pre-descent
'cat-nap' so I am fresh for my arrival at Dulles International Airport and a
dinner appointment in Washington later.
Next Monday: Martin Broughton of BAT Industries on how to handle
communications with the City.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931108

