FT933-5134

FT  04 SEP 93 / Motoring: Still very working class


   By STUART MARSHALL


THE RUSH into the recreational on-off/road 4 x 4 market has seen the Land
Rover and Daihatsu Fourtrak (photographed right) put up a stout fight
against gentrification. The Land Rover Defender, although equipped some
years ago with the Range Rover's more civilised underpinnings, remains a
working vehicle.
Some might say it is now the smartest 4 x 4 of all in which to be seen
because it implies, first, that you have broad acres and, second, that you
suffer its discomforts gladly because you - or your men - must be able to
drive to the furthest, muddiest parts of your estate loaded with straw bales
or Fortnum's hampers.
Capable though they are off road, most of the Shoguns and Troopers,
Discoveries and Mavericks, Cherokees and Fronteras, Land Cruisers and
Vitaras are seen on school runs and in supermarket car parks, not axle deep
in mire. As Glass's Guide, the car trade's bible, noted the other day, these
life-style on-off/roaders bucked the recession and sales are reaching new
heights. They are bought by seekers after individuality, many of whom had
found their beloved hot hatchbacks no longer insurable at sensible cost.
The Daihatsu Fourtrak never really fitted the recreational mould, though. It
was a worker, with simple leaf springs and a beefy diesel engine. Farmers
love Fourtraks. You see a lot of them, battered and long suffering, hauling
sheep trailers in the wilder parts of Britain.
The life-style market is, however, too big to be ignored and Daihatsu wants
a larger slice of it. So, the latest Fourtrak has independent front
suspension, a coil sprung back axle, wheel arch extensions to accommodate
fatter tyres, and a wider track. The car-like interior seats five, or seven
if you sacrifice all luggage space.
It still feels rugged, and it banged about resiliently on moorland tracks on
the Isle of Man where I drove one recently. The on-road ride and handling
are much better than before although, as the wheelbase is still fairly
short, it is more inclined to pitch on minor roads than, say, a long
wheelbase Shogun, Maverick or Frontera.
One is more aware of its 2.8-litre, 100 horsepower turbo-diesel than in an
ultra-refined, Nissan-built Ford Maverick or Terrano II. Not that this is
likely to trouble the traditional kind of buyer who pulls a two-horse
trailer; a Fourtrak tows up to 3,500 kg. Prices are Pounds 15,650 for a TDL,
Pounds 16,895 for the better equipped TDX.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

930904

