FT933-5159

FT  04 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: Insurers under fire


   By BETHAN HUTTON


THE COMPANIES involved in the home insurance market came under attack from
two directions this week.
A report in the Consumers' Association magazine Which? accused insurance
companies of making consumers pay for their own past mistakes, while Direct
Line, the telephone-based insurer, hit out at the huge amounts of commission
earned by building societies for selling home insurance to their customers.
The Consumers' Association said increases in claim rates for theft had
slowed, and subsidence claims had almost halved since 1991, but premiums
continued to soar.
'The insurers' return to profit should benefit consumers and not the
industry alone,' the association said.
Its figures, based on premiums from five of the biggest insurers, show
contents premiums more than doubling, and buildings insurance rising by
about 60 per cent since 1987.
Figures from the Association of British Insurers also show substantial
increases for buildings insurance, rising from an average of Pounds 108 in
1987 to Pounds 195 in 1993, while contents rose from an average of Pounds 71
to Pounds 114.
These statistics are from the government's family expenditure survey, which
records how much families spend on insurance, including if they have swapped
insurers or reduced the level of cover, rather than how much the price of
identical policies has gone up.
Direct Line, which aims to increase its share of the household insurance
market, attacked building societies for the amounts of commission they made
from selling home contents and buildings insurance policies, and argued for
legislation to protect the consumer.
'The status quo in this market is maintained by protective and punitive
action taken by building societies and by a lack of competitive information
from the industry,' the company said.
According to its submission to the Office of Fair Trading, the average
consumer will pay Pounds 3,000 in commission over the period he or she holds
household insurance policies.
Most are unaware of how much money goes to the intermediary as commission.
Up to 30 per cent of buildings premiums can be commission. Consumers are
easy targets, preoccupied with moving house, Direct Line said. It called for
disclosure of commission levels.
The report pointed out that while insurers had made consumers pay for rising
claim levels, they had not seen the benefit of falling costs, such as house
rebuilding costs, which have dropped 10 per cent during the last 18 months.
The company also criticised the building societies' practice of making
mortgage offers conditional on customers buying household insurance from
them, and discouraging them from changing insurers later by charging a fee.
The Building Societies Association's 1989 code of practice does not allow
mortgages to be tied to the sale of insurance products, except for special
packages, such as fixed rate or first time buyer mortgages.
The sale of such packages has taken off recently and now accounts for more
than half of new lending. Most packages oblige borrowers to buy insurance
products.
Some home insurance providers now use the quirks of the market as a sales
ploy, offering new customers who were previously insured through their
mortgage lenders a first year discount of about Pounds 25, equivalent to the
'administration fee' charged for switching insurers by many building
societies.
Direct Line said that existing legislation could remedy problems of
commission disclosure and compulsory tie-ins, but it had not been
implemented.
The Association of British Insurers dismissed Direct Line's submission as
publicity seeking, seeing no need for legislation.
'It is perfectly acceptable for lenders to offer package deals to consumers;
normally lenders are willing to do non-package deals as well  - it is up to
the consumer to choose.'
The obligation to buy insurance as part of a package was generally made
clear, the association said. Administration charges for switching buildings
insurance were justified as lenders had a lot at risk, and had to check
cover was adequate.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930904

