FT934-11154

FT  02 NOV 93 / Capital Cities in stock buy-back


   By FRANK MCGURTY


   NEW YORK


CAPITAL Cities/ABC has offered to buy from its shareholders up to about 12
per cent of its existing common stock which could cost the cash-rich group
between Dollars 1.18bn and Dollars 1.26bn (Pounds 851m).
The move stands in contrast to the current emphasis within the US media
industry on building new technological alliances though acquisitions and
joint ventures.
Capital Cities, which owns the ABC television network, also announced
yesterday that its president and chief executive, Mr Daniel Burke, 64, would
retire in February. Mr Thomas Murphy, chairman, will assume the duties of
chief executive while continuing in his present position.
The enhanced role for Mr Murphy, who is 68, is surprising. Industry
observers had expected Mr Robert Iger, who as president of the television
network helped increase the profitability of its prime-time programming, to
be given at least one of Mr Burke's titles.
Under terms of the tender offer, Capital Cities has invited shareholders to
specify a price - within a range of Dollars 630 to Dollars 590 a share - at
which they are willing to sell their stock.
Assuming the offer - known as a Dutch auction - generates sufficient
interest, the company will then determine the lowest price at which it would
be able to buy 2m shares and proceed with the purchase of all shares offered
at or below that price.
On Wall Street early yesterday, the shares were Dollars 5 3/8 higher at
Dollars 615 in light trading.
Capital Cities said it had decided to make the offer because it was the most
attractive use for its cash surplus of about Dollars 1.2bn.
'Acquisitions have not been available at prices the company believes would
result in attractive returns for its shareholders.' It said that after the
stock repurchase it would have ready access to sufficient capital to pursue
any attractive investment opportunities that might arise.
The company added it had paid off all its long-term debt available for
repayment, including Dollars 500m in liabilities this year.
Mr Peter Appert, an analyst with CJ Lawrence, the New York securities house,
said the offer 'shows Capital Cities is going to stick with its financial
discipline and not get sucked into the euphoria over consolidation and
acquisitions'.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

931102

