FT932-6841

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (14): In the shadow of the
deficit - The pound: the good news is confined to the short term


   By EMMA TUCKER


EIGHT MONTHS is a long time in the life of a European currency. From the
turbulent days of September, when sterling was ejected from the exchange
rate mechanism and heavily devalued, the pound is now enjoying a somewhat
brighter - and certainly calmer - outlook.
Over the past two months, sterling has clawed back some of the losses
suffered when it was first left to float on the international foreign
exchange markets.
At its lowest point, reached in February this year, the pound had devalued
by almost 20 per cent from where it stood on the morning of September 16 -
Black Wednesday. But allowing for recent gains, the devaluation amounts to
roughly 13 per cent.
In the short-term, analysts believe prospects for the pound are fairly rosy.
The consensus among 40 analysts earlier this month was that, by the end of
the year, the pound will be at 79.1 on the Bank of England's trade weighted
exchange rate index against a basket of currencies. This compares with the
low of 76.0 reached in February. Against the D-Mark, the consensus sees the
pound at about DM2.60 in the third and fourth quarters.
Sterling is currently benefiting from a perception among investors that,
assuming economic recovery does not falter, interest rates in the UK have
reached their floor.
The view is not shared by everyone. A number of analysts believe the
government will jump to cut rates at the first sign that the recovery is
losing pace. Nonetheless, there is a widespread belief that the next move
for interest rates will be upwards. By contrast, interest rates in the rest
of Europe are headed decisively downwards.
Good economic data is further boosting the pound, at least for the moment.
The past few months have seen a succession of optimistic figures on the
economy, suggesting that the UK is through the worst of its economic woes.
The figures stand out against the bad news coming from Europe's main
economies, in particular Germany where it is sinking into recession.
Underlining the optimism about the pound is a feeling, particularly outside
the UK, that sterling is undervalued.
'On the whole, the general view of overseas investors is that the
devaluation of the pound was just too big,' says Mr Jeremy Hawkins, of Bank
of America in London. 'They complain that the currency is too competitive
now.'
Mr Stephen Hannah, head of research at IBJ International, says: 'Many
investors realise that the pound is a little bit on the cheap side, so from
that point of view, at least against most European currencies, there is some
chance we can push on ahead.'
The good news about the pound, however, is confined mainly to the
short-term. Looking ahead, several developments could hinder sterling's
advance.
The blackest cloud hovering over the pound is the UK's current account
deficit. The financial markets are already anticipating nervously the
publication of first-quarter trade figures next month. The old series of
figures was suspended at the start of the year as a new system for measuring
European Community trade flows was introduced.
Although the Central Statistical Office has warned against deducing trends
from the figures that are available - the non-EC trade figures - traders and
analysts are disconcerted by their poor performance since the beginning of
the year, and are expecting bad news when the EC figures are released.
Apart from the potential shock of the first-quarter trade figures, there is
a more general fear that the current account deficit will deteriorate
sharply over the next two years, putting pressure on the government to
maintain a low pound.
Mr Paul Chertkow, currency analyst at UBS, believes the poor trade balance
will add to pressure on the government to stay out of the European exchange
rate mechanism, so that nothing can get in the way of a policy to ease the
burden of the trade deficit with an aggressively low pound.
Adding to the more cautious long-term outlook for the pound is a general
perception among foreign investors that UK economic policy is adrift.
'You don't take anything on trust from this government, given the chopping
and changing we have seen,' says Mr Hannah.
Mr Chertkow says the perception he picks-up from overseas is one of
considerable scepticism about the economic policy of Mr John Major, the
prime minister.
'There is a general feeling that the UK hasn't solved the Europe problem
yet, and beyond that there is disquiet that the rest of Europe may go ahead
without the UK,' he says.
Another reason to doubt the ability of the pound to recoup its losses in the
long term is that, historically, it has settled at a lower level following
devaluation, as high inflation has whittled away the competitive gains won
through devaluation.
'We have had one of the deepest recessions of any G7 country, and still
there is a question-mark over inflation,' says Mr Hannah, who does not
believe the UK has conquered its attachment to inflation.
'Over 10 to 20 years, it is best to assume that the pound will depreciate,'
he says.
Mr Chertkow takes a similarly gloomy long-term view. UBS's five - year
forecast for sterling sees it at parity with the dollar and at about DM2.00
against the German currency.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930526

