FT932-13400

FT  23 APR 93 / Quiet on the eastern front: Obstacles facing developers
could keep Berlin a divided city


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


East Berlin is struggling to rebuild itself. Disputes over property rights,
bureaucracy and complex planning regulations are presenting developers with
a frustrating obstacle course. Their difficulties threaten to prolong the
division between the two halves of the country's new capital and demonstrate
the problems of urban renewal facing eastern Germany.
In parts of the Mitte - the traditional city centre - there are pockets of
activity. Contractors are tearing up the streets and renovating the
transport and water systems and housing stock. Some international property
developers, such as Tischmann Spier of the US, are building new office and
shopping complexes.
But for most areas the building boom expected by contractors after the
collapse of the Berlin wall in November 1989 has been slow to spark. A sense
of dereliction hangs over much of the former Prussian capital.
Mr Mark Palmer, a former US ambassador to Hungary and now a property
developer, says he had little idea about the problems he would face when he
arrived in the city after the wall came down.
Mr Palmer, backed by Ronald Lauder, the cosmetics magnate, plans to develop
a 20,000 square-metre American Business Centre alongside Checkpoint Charlie.
In 1990, he started to buy 48 plots of land, some from the city council,
others from the Treuhand, the agency responsible for privatising eastern
German industry, and the rest from private owners.
'We soon discovered that many people were claiming rights over the
property,' said Mr Palmer. His staff spent hours in the Berlin land registry
tracing the original owners of the land. In one case, 214 heirs were
claiming a 600 square-metre plot of land. Mr Palmer said he paid former
property owners the market value, which between 1990 and 1993 rose as high
as DM20,000 (Pounds 8,130) a square metre - the highest in Germany.
In another case, finally resolved earlier this month, Mrs Hilde Frank, an
elderly Jewish lady living in New York, wanted to reclaim her small plot of
land, rather than seek compensation from Mr Palmer. Under the terms of 1991
legislation on compensation and restitution, investors in eastern Germany
have priority over restitution from former property owners if they can prove
they are providing jobs and housing.
But that law was amended in 1992, enabling former Jewish owners the right to
restitution. Mr Palmer had bought the disputed plot from the city council,
before the law was changed. Mrs Frank wanted the 1992 version of the law
applied so that she could get her property back. Both sides eventually
settled out of court. It has taken Mr Palmer almost three years to resolve
all the outstanding property claims. He hopes to start building the DM1bn
office complex in September.
'There's one thing we learned about doing business here. You cannot go in
blind. You must be prepared to deal with property rights. It takes time. But
it can be done,' said Mr Palmer. There are already over 119,000 pending
property claims in east Berlin.
It not only the question of property rights which has delayed the
development of east Berlin. Mr Rainer Wagner, the manager of Sony, the
Japanese electronics company, says the bureaucracy of planning can be 'a
nightmare'.
In 1991, Sony bought 31,000 square-metres of land in Potsdamer Platz for
DM101m, intending to use the site for its new European headquarters.
'When we bought the land, we didn't know that the city of Berlin was going
to develop around our site. This involves building a street tunnel on the
western side, and a huge underground railway station on the eastern side of
Potsdamer Platz. We had to revise our plans several times so that they
fitted into these changes,' says Mr Wagner.
Other property developers say Berlin's divided coalition government presents
particular difficulties. 'The Christian Democrats and Socialists can't make
up their minds if they will allow high rise buildings. They keep changing
their minds about what buildings should be torn down in eastern Berlin.
Sometimes I feel they are overwhelmed by the task of uniting the city,' says
one French planner.
Some politicians have tried to make it easier for developers. 'Mr Wolfgang
Nagel, head of the planning department, is committed to making Berlin open
for investors and developers. But really, very little can be done in this
city without connections, money, and a big name,' said Mr Wagner. 'You also
have to remember that many of the planning experts in the government moved
to the private sector after 1989, so you are dealing with inexperienced
officials.'
The problems of settling property rights claims and obtaining planning
permission means that developers must take a long-term view. 'You don't come
to Berlin and develop with the fast buck in mind. This is a long haul. The
Japanese are here because they believe that Berlin, in the future, will be a
very important city in the heart of Europe. There's going to be a need for
high-quality office space,' explained Mr Wagner. Berlin has only three
square-metres of office space per capita, compared with Frankfurt's 12, and
Dusseldorf's six.
'Berlin is underdeveloped. There was no need to think about an office
infrastructure before 1989,' said Mr Palmer. The need for office space is
likely to increase, following the decision by the federal government to move
Germany's ministries from from Bonn to Berlin.
No date has been set for the move, which is expected to take several years,
but President Richard Von Weizsaker has said he will move his official
residence permanently to the new German capital by the end of 1993.
Property developers, however, do not believe the move by the government will
push prices much higher than their present levels. 'The euphoria of late
1989 has gone; the rush to buy property at any price has subsided,' said Mr
Julian Rudd-Jones, a planner for Stanhope, the British developer. 'The price
of land has stabilised.'
But the price has stabilised at a very high level - between DM10,000 and
DM15,000 a square-metre - and construction costs can be prohibitive. East
German labourers demand the same wages as their western counterparts and
there is a shortage of skilled workers. 'This is an expensive city.
Construction costs are 40 per cent higher than Hamburg. Hamburg used to be
the highest in Germany,' said Mr Palmer.
Financial pressures have combined with the problems of planning and
regulation to create a mood of anxiety among developers. They are urging the
Bundesbank to cut interest rates further to ease some of the pressure while
they try to complete their projects.
'To tell you the truth, our money is not working for us. The banks might get
nervous if we don't start building soon and fill these empty spaces with
tenants. That's why the Sony and Palmer projects are so important. They will
send a signal to other developers that Berlin is finally on the move,' says
one developer.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930423

