FT932-6797

FT  27 MAY 93 / Christopher reasserts US world role


   By JUREK MARTIN


MR Warren Christopher, the US secretary of state, asserted yesterday that
'the need for American leadership in the post-cold war world remains
undiminished' and that the US stood 'prepared to act decisively to protect
our interests wherever and whenever it is necessary'.
But, in a separate television interview, he argued that the US must limit
its involvement in Bosnia or risk an 'indefinite' military commitment.
Americans, he said, had little enthusiasm for involvement 'in a humanitarian
crisis a long way from home in the middle of another continent'.
His comments, backed by similar statements about US leadership from Ms Dee
Dee Myers, the White House press spokeswoman, appeared intended to counter a
speech given on Tuesday by an unidentified senior State Department official,
believed to be Mr Peter Tarnoff, undersecretary for political affairs.
This off-the-record speech to journalists emphasised the primacy of US
economic interests and the limits of US resources. US foreign policy must be
'commensurate with these realities,' and 'may on occasion fall short of what
some Americans would like and others would hope for,' he said.
Mr Christopher, under fire as the architect of the policy that opposes a US
military presence in Bosnia, insisted to the Washington Post that 'there is
no derogation of our powers and our responsibility to lead'. But, he said in
a clear reference to the Balkans, 'in some situations we will try to involve
other countries - we would not remain a superpower for long if we have to do
everything on our own'.
But his dismissive reference to humanitarian issues in Bosnia also runs
counter to one of the administration's basic foreign policy principles. In
another indication of this apparent ambivalence this week the US made
available an additional Dollars 30m (Pounds 19.4m) to the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees, but Mrs Sadako Ogata, the commissioner, had been
unable by midday yesterday to secure a session with Mr Christopher or
President Bill Clinton.
Mrs Ogata is also understood to be personally upset by a deal struck between
Mr Christopher and Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, under
which she loses her current American deputy.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930527

