FT934-11321

FT  02 NOV 93 / BT tariff cuts to take Pounds 125m off phone bills


   By ALAN CANE


BT is cutting the cost of weekend telephone calls and reducing certain
business rates in a parcel of tariff changes which should take about Pounds
125m off the nation's phone bills.
Further reductions are in prospect, including a version of a US scheme,
'Friends and Family', where discounts are given on frequently dialled
numbers.
The cuts, which will take effect from December 4, reflect increasing
competition between telephone operators and a tough pricing regime. Under an
agreement with telecoms watchdog Oftel, BT is bound to keep increases in its
main charges to the rate of inflation minus 7.5 percentage points. With
inflation below 2 per cent, BT has to find ways to cut prices by some Pounds
500m.
Mr Michael Hepher, BT group managing director, refused to predict the effect
of the cuts on profitability, arguing that BT was due to report its
half-year results in a few days.
The cuts were welcomed by the Telecommunications Users Association, which
said the new tariffs showed that BT was taking seriously the influence of
new competitors. The association said it would continue to lobby for more
accurate time-based tariffs rather than BT's existing 4.2p basic unit
method.
Mercury Communications said the changes were a response to its own
residential pricing initiatives and the launch of the One-2-One portable
phone system.
BT's price reductions were aimed mainly at residential subscribers. A
permanent national weekend rate is being introduced that will cut prices by
up to 60 per cent. A three-minute call that would have cost between 15p and
25p at the old rate will cost 10p.  Public payphones and BT chargecards are
included in the new scheme. BT says a three-minute, 100-mile, weekend call
will cost 8.4p compared with 40.24p in Germany, 25.09p in the US and 18.47p
in Australia.
For business users who lease private circuits, BT has to meet new price
controls which limit overall price changes to the rate of inflation. For its
advanced Kilostream data communications rentals are being held steady, while
connection charges for the faster Megastream circuits will be cut from
Pounds 6,200 to Pounds 4,650. Charges for analogue services will increase by
an average 1.1 per cent on rentals and 2.5 per cent on connnections.
Union abandons BT strike ballot, Page 12
Lex, Page 24
London stocks, Page 48

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931102

