FT932-6771

FT  27 MAY 93 / VW seeks 50% rise in market share


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


THE Volkswagen group, the largest European carmaker, aims to increase the
market share of its VW and Audi makes in the UK market for new cars by about
50 per cent during the next five years.
Volkswagen acquired VAG (United Kingdom), the British distributor of
Volkswagen and Audi vehicles, from Lonrho, the UK-based international
trading group, for Pounds 124m at the end of last year.
Following the takeover the German carmaker wants to expand substantially its
presence in Britain, which has traditionally been one of its weakest markets
in Europe. Together the VW and Audi makes captured about 14.7 per cent of
west European new car sales last year, but held a share of only 5.2 per cent
in the UK.
Mr Detlef Wittig, sales director for the VW brand worldwide and the recently
appointed chairman of VAG (United Kingdom), said the company had set a
target of capturing 7.5 per cent of UK new-car sales by 1998.
The target announced by Mr Wittig is a significant retreat, however, from
the much more aggressive UK expansion outlined by Mr Daniel Goeudevert,
deputy chairman of the Volkswagen group and chairman of the VW volume car
division, in March.
Mr Goeudevert announced that the group was seeking to double the VW/Audi
share in the UK to more than 11 per cent by the late 1990s. He has been
forced to reduce the group's ambitions in the face of VW's financial
difficulties and the growing level of competition in the UK.
In the drive for a higher British sales volume it is being forced to modify
its traditional premium pricing in the UK and to seek higher fleet and
company car sales.
The VW group plans to increase the separation of the retail sales operations
of the VW and Audi brands in the UK. It aims to increase the number of
dealers selling only the VW make from 100 to 130, while reducing the number
of joint VW/Audi dealers to 190 from 220 at present.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930527

