FT933-12464

FT  23 JUL 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC unveils plans to curb wine
surplus


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


THE EUROPEAN Commission yesterday unveiled plans for curbing the European
Community's growing wine lake, starting with a U-turn on its policy of using
generous subsidies to encourage the distillation of surplus wine.
Mr Rene Steichen, EC farm commissioner, said the commission favoured
measures to prevent surpluses, such as higher premiums to dig up vineyards
and the reduction of sugaring, which farmers use to produce higher yields.
Mr Steichen's new policy comes in response to falling wine consumption and
higher yields in Europe and tougher competition from cheap imports from
Latin America and eastern Europe.
The EC's current wine surplus is about 22m hectolitres. The commission
initiative is intended to complement the common agricultural policy reform
of 1992, which aims to reduce excess cereal production and to curb export
subsidies.
Mr Steichen forecast that, on present trends, without reforms, the EC wine
surplus would expand 40m hectolitres by the year 2000. Only 15m hectolitres
could be disposed of by distillation, he said.
'There is too much wine,' he told a news conference, 'the reduction of the
area of cultivation is more than offset by the increase in yield and the
decrease in consumption.
Mr Steichen expressed dissatisfaction with the earlier EC policy of
encouraging distillation of excess wine. This encouraged fraud and increased
the incentive for farmers to over-produce because EC subsidies made this
profitable.
As a result, the commission intended to reverse the thrust of its present
aid programme, the commissioner said.
In 1993, the EC is expected to spend Ecu1.6bn (Pounds 1.2bn) supporting the
wine market, some Ecu900m of which will be used to drain off the so-called
wine lake.
Under the new regime, the Commission intends to use the bulk of its budget
to prevent surpluses rather than to dispose of them. Dissuasive measures
such as compulsory distillation will be reinforced with national quotas and
lower prices.
The commission adopted Mr Steichen's proposals at a meeting in Brussels
yesterday. The next step is to seek approval from the Council of Ministers
from the 12 member states.
The EC's wine surplus was estimated at 37m hectolitres in 1992-93 on a
harvest estimated at 192.7m hectolitres. Mr Steichen declined to forecast
the 1993-94 wine harvest.
Although some 50,000 hectares of vineyards a year are being dug up under
EC-funded schemes, mostly in Italy, France and Spain, the vines are often
the oldest and least productive.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930723

