FT934-8482

FT  15 NOV 93 / Meat trade takes on the City


   By RACHEL JOHNSON


SMITHFIELD'S meat traders will next month pit brain as well as brawn against
the Corporation of London in what promises to be a Dickensian denouement to
the battle between the oldest meat market in the world and the most medieval
local authority in Britain.
The conflict has forced the Corporation to draw up unprecedented plans to
reform its voting system.
As the result of an EC directive Smithfield's bloodstained sawdust and
hanging carcases will by next year have to be replaced by a
temperature-controlled zone where meat is electronically pulleyed through
self-locking doors rather carted around the Victorian market by aproned men
with wooden wheelbarrows.
Although the Corporation has already spent more than Pounds 30m on the first
phase of the 'upgrade', the traders and Smithfield tenants are having to pay
a heavy price to meet the higher standards - both in terms of capital cost
of fitting out their stalls - up to Pounds 170,000 (Dollars 250,000 each) -
and higher rents.
After rejecting tenancy terms offered by the Corporation in April, the meat
traders are now plotting to infiltrate its decision-making body, the 132
members of common councilmen, in the annual elections to be held early next
month. They intend to pack the City's wards with their own supporters and
hope to create their own powerful cabal of 'meatiemen' within the council.
The Corporation, however, remains confident. As one of the three medieval
institutions left in England - the others are the monarchy and the House of
Lords - it is not going to cede an inch to the the meatpackers.
But the Corporation may reform its archaic system of voting and for the
first time give public companies a vote in deciding how the City is
governed.
Members are elected by the most restricted franchise in the UK, with votes
going to partnerships, sole traders, livery companies and City residents.
Anomalies mean that, for example, partners of large accountancy practices
with numerous offices in the square mile can vote in seven separate wards.
But BP, the square mile's largest employer, cannot.

The Financial Times


International Page 1

931115

