FT932-7090

FT  26 MAY 93 / De Klerk resists rule of black majority in S Africa


   By ANDREW GOWERS and MICHAEL HOLMAN


   CAPE TOWN


PRESIDENT FW de Klerk of South Africa in effect rejected black majority rule
yesterday, insisting that the white-led National party should play a central
role in a coalition government lasting into the next century.
The president's demand for indefinite power-sharing goes well beyond the
understanding reached between his National party and the African National
Congress that a five-year government of national unity will be formed by the
main parties after the country's first multiracial elections, expected next
spring.
In an interview with the Financial Times, Mr de Klerk said power-sharing
between the country's main political parties should be entrenched as a
permanent principle in any constitution adopted after next year's elections.
'We definitely believe that a final constitution must include the principle
of power-sharing,' he said. 'A winner-takes-all model is the worst possible
model there can be for South Africa.'
His demand is likely to complicate the present negotiations in Johannesburg
on South Africa's political future, as participants struggle to reach
sufficient agreement to announce an election date and the formation of a
Transitional Executive Council, perhaps as early as next week.
The talks met a further snag yesterday when the radical Pan-Africanist
Congress called for their suspension after nearly 50 of its members were
arrested. 'The process is now hanging by a very thin thread,' Mr Cyril
Ramaphosa, chief ANC negotiator, told delegates.
Mr de Klerk made clear that 'fundamental differences' on power-sharing had
still to be resolved.
The president denied that he was seeking formal veto powers for the National
party in any new government, but argued that South Africa would in future
have 'to be governed on the basis of consensus on fundamental issues between
the main role players'.
That might, he said, involve the creation of an executive committee
comprising party leaders, with the chairmanship rotating between them, to
deal with 'fundamental principles'. He implied that real power should lie
with that body, with a future president acting as head of state, not of
government.
His remarks are certain to dismay ANC leaders. Only last week, a senior ANC
official said: 'The idea of an inner cabinet of party leaders goes way
beyond the government of national unity we have offered.'
Firm hand on the tiller, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930526

