FT934-8494

FT  15 NOV 93 / What Nafta says about democracy: America


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


'We can limit the powers of organised interests only by limiting the powers
of government.' Friedrich Hayek
With luck, the US House of Representatives will vote narrowly in favour of
the North American Free Trade Agreement on Wednesday. Mr Al Gore, the
vice-president, demolished Mr Ross Perot in last week's televised debate and
public opinion appears to be swinging in Nafta's favour. Yet the vote could
still go the wrong way. And if a victory is won, it will be narrow enough to
raise serious questions about the US political process.
Mexican misgivings about Nafta, while misguided, are understandable. The
treaty would expose sensitive Mexican sectors - such as cars, financial
services and telecommunications - to competition from an economy that is 25
times larger. The US position is quite different, since its home market is
already largely open. Studies consistently show that Nafta will boost US
employment and growth; there is not even convincing evidence that it will
harm low-wage US workers.
Nafta's opponents, such as Mr Richard Gephardt, the house majority leader,
are in a curious position. For years they railed about the threat from
protectionist high-wage economies such as Japan. These arguments, while
fallacious, had an aura of plausibility. But Mexico is a low-wage economy
running a trade deficit with the US that is offering to reduce its trade
barriers. If both Japan and Mexico represent potent threats, with whom can
the US trade openly? Presumably only a country with exactly the same level
of wages, exactly the same working practices and a bilateral trade account
that is always precisely in balance.
Yet if the case against Nafta is so weak, why is congressional opposition so
strong? Why did the vice-president feel obliged to challenge Mr Perot to a
debate moderated by, of all people, Mr Larry King, the CNN talk show host?
This was hardly an appropriate forum in which to determine the fate of US
economic policy.
The answer is that Nafta provides a classic example of a serious failing of
modern democracies. Advocates of democracy in the 18th and 19th centuries
felt certain that, if all the people had a chance to vote, their
representatives would have to support policies in the interests of the
nation as a whole. Democracy would thus spell the end of arbitrary rule by
despotic minorities and usher in a marvellous new age of rational
government.
In the 20th century, most democracies have fallen far short of these high
ideals. On many economic issues, democratically elected representatives feel
obliged to support the narrow sectional interests of their regions or the
groups, such as unions or professions, that lavishly financed their
campaigns. The problem is especially acute in the US, where the dominance of
commercial television forces politicians to present their case in 30-second
'sound bites'. In these circumstances, whether a policy is in the national
interest is of little consequence; what determines the outcome is whether
enough sectional interests can be lined up to push the vote over 50 per
cent. If Mr Clinton gets Nafta through, the price will be many damaging
concessions on other issues of particular interest to various lobbies.
Nafta highlights the problem of sectional interests because the pain from
trade liberalisation will be felt immediately by specific groups whereas the
(larger) benefits will be broadly spread over the whole population. But the
same destructive dynamic affects a whole range of other policies: Europe's
lavish agricultural subsidies, for example, are clearly not in the interests
of European consumers yet majority governments seem impotent to curtail
them.
How can modern democracies neutralise the power of sectional interests? Mr
Clinton's answer is to hold 'town hall' meetings and use his considerable
powers of persuasion to convince voters that policies which hurt minority
groups are sometimes essential for the national interest. Such a strategy
may help at the margin.
But it does not address the core problem, which was identified by Friedrich
Hayek, the late Austrian economist. Hayek argued that it is an elected
assembly's virtually unlimited ability to promote the interests of
particular groups that exposes it to political blackmail. The solution, he
maintained, lay in a greater reliance on general rules, perceived to be in
the nation's long-term interests, that must be applied in particular
circumstances regardless of the consequences for specific groups.
Monetary policy could serve as a model. Several nations are trying to
insulate monetary authorities from perverse short-term political pressures
by setting specific inflation targets for central banks. In principle trade
could be treated in the same way: nations, perhaps through constitutional
amendments or other devices, could make a binding long-term commitment to
free trade principles. In the face of such a general rule, sectional and
local interests would soon recognise the futility of lobbying individual
politicians who would no longer be capable of feathering their nests.
It sounds utopian and probably is. Yet the hysteria over Nafta surely shows
that something must be done to insulate modern democracies from sectional
interests and to increase their ability to pursue rational policies in the
interests of the population as a whole.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

931115

