FT932-3076

FT  16 JUN 93 / Extent of audit change deplored


   By ANDREW JACK


COMPANIES ARE being bombarded with far too many demands for reform of
accounting and auditing, the chairman of a group of leading finance
directors said yesterday.
Mr Michael Lawrence, finance director of Prudential and chairman of the 100
Group of finance directors, told a Confederation of British Industry
conference in London that there was a 'huge labyrinth' through which people
were struggling to find their way.
'We are concerned about the volume of material being produced and the
numbers of bodies becoming involved,' he said.
'Many chairmen and chief executives will begin to lose patience with all
this,' he continued. 'They will see time and energy being spent by
self-interested bureaucracies producing sheaves of requirements. The good
and the essential will be criticised along with the unnecessary and the
unwieldy.'
He said he had received recent documents from bodies including the Institute
of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, the Association of Corporate
Treasurers and the Institute of Investment Management Research.
Mr Lawrence said the Accounting Standards Board should be the primary forum
for issuing standards, if balance and consistency were to be preserved.
He also criticised the proposals of the Auditing Practices Board to expand
the role of auditing. He said most corporate failures were failures of
financial reporting or basic auditing and did not require an expansion in
the scope of auditing.
He said there was a need for greater focus on the point that accounts are
primarily to communicate with shareholders, and not other potential
audiences such as employees and creditors.
'Financial reporting is essentially an exercise in practical communication,
and as with all communication should be geared to its audience and its
purpose,' he said.
He said that companies' financial reporting had been too flexible and
'innovative' in the past, and there was a need for less discretion in the
future.
He said the goal of international harmonisation of accounting standards was
well worth pursuing. But he added that there were many reporting differences
between different countries which did not need to be harmonised - but simply
understood.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930616

