FT932-13510

FT  23 APR 93 / Little progress likely on Community energy tax


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


CONTROVERSIAL plans for a European Community energy tax to combat global
warming look unlikely to progress much further when environment and energy
ministers of the 12 member states meet in Luxembourg today.
Although six EC countries, led by Germany, formally supported the tax last
month, opposition to the levy, spearheaded by the UK and Spain, looks set to
prevent any unanimous recommendation to the EC's finance ministers, with
whom the final decision rests.
Today's extraordinary 'jumbo' Council of Ministers was called by the Danish
presidency of the EC in the hope of getting a political agreement to
introduce the tax when finance ministers meet in June.
But the draft conclusions prepared for the ministers by senior officials of
the 12 reveal a clear split which today's meeting may be able to paper over
but is unlikely to resolve.
'The idea was to send a clear signal' to the June finance ministers'
meeting, said one senior UK official. 'But if there's a split it will be a
mixed signal.'
The tax would put Dollars 3 (Pounds 1.90) on each barrel of oil equivalent,
rising to Dollars 10 by the year 2000, half on the fuel content of all
non-renewable fuel and half on its carbon content.
Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Italy, Luxembourg and Denmark all insist
it is indispensable if the EC is to meet its commitment to stabilise carbon
dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by 2000. At Belgium's proposal, they call
in the conclusions for the tax to be recognised as 'a key element of the
global strategy' to fight the greenhouse effect.
The UK has inserted the rival formula that 'fiscal instruments at Community
and/or national level may be necessary as elements of a global strategy' -
an implicit reference by the government that its raising of fuel charges in
the last budget will enable the UK to meet the emissions target without an
EC-wide tax.
Ministers will today have to decide which of these counterpoised draft
amendments they steer closest to. The Danish presidency is hoping to blunt
the opposition of the poorest four EC states led by Spain, by proposing a
three-year pause before they would have to introduce the levy. France is
equivocal about the mix of the tax, favouring instead a levy purely on
fossil fuels in order to protect its extensive nuclear energy generation.
Supporters of the tax hope this week's promise by US President Bill Clinton
to match the EC's emission stabilisation targets, along with US fuel tax
plans, will strengthen their case. Introduction of the tax has been made
conditional on the EC's main trading partners adopting similar measures, to
safeguard European competitivity.
British officials were yesterday dismissive of the US moves, however. 'Those
noises are still some way from meeting the Community's conditionality
targets,' one said.
They add that European Commission studies, showing that purely national
efforts to reach the EC stabilisation target, which would result in a 3 per
cent increase in CO emissions by 2000, are 'well within the margin of
error'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

930423

