FT932-13289

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (7): A willing way
to bypass the taxman - John and Alison acknowledge their mortality, and Mr
Knibb's calculator provides comfort / The Plowshares


   By BEVERLY CHANDLER


THAT WASN'T at all what I'd expected,' said Alison, as she and John were
shown out of the office of Quills, the solicitors. 'I always thought that
making a Will was easy.'
They had just spent two rather dispiriting hours with Mr Knibb, the probate
partner, who had left them with a lot of things to think about.
John, too, had been taken aback. He had thought that all he had to do was
fill in a form obtainable at a stationers. But he was beginning to realise
that a Will should be tailor-made for individual circumstances, and that it
could be used to achieve tax savings.
First, they had been asked to list their assets, with approximate values.
Apparently, the reason was to assess the impact of inheritance tax. Whatever
they left to each other would be free of tax, but on the second death
everything, apart from the first Pounds 150,000, would be taxed at 40 per
cent.
Even in the current market, the Plowshares' house, jointly owned, must be
worth Pounds 250,000, or Pounds 125,000 each, with the Pounds 30,000
mortgage covered by an endowment policy. Shares, building society deposits
and Peps worked out at Pounds 53,000 for John and Pounds 54,000 for Alison,
after the small gifts that she had recently made to their children.
It was more difficult to estimate the value of the house contents and then
to split that value according to ownership. Most things were jointly owned,
but the bureau bookcase which Alison had been left by her grandfather must
be hers, and the 18th century architectural drawings collected by John were
his, and these now had a substantial value. They finally managed to arrive
at a figure of Pounds 50,000 for John and Pounds 20,000 for Alison.
John was dismayed to hear that his interest in his partnership was relevant,
but relieved to learn that only last year the Chancellor of the Exchequer
had introduced a relief of 100 per cent for certain business interests,
including partnership interests.
With the help of Mr Knibb's calculator, they experienced a strange mixture
of gratification and alarm when they discovered that they had total taxable
assets of Pounds 228,000 for John and Pounds 199,000 for Alison. A final
flourish on the redoubtable calculator revealed an ultimate inheritance tax
bill of about Pounds 111,000.
Debts, funeral expenses and pre-death tax bills, let alone the costs of
administering the estate, might require that an immediate Pounds 120,000 be
drawn from the estate. But shares, Peps and building society deposits would
realise only Pounds 107,000, leaving a considerable shortfall. Therefore
something would have to be sold immediately, most likely the house and its
contents, or John's share in his business.
This appeared to put paid to Alison's ideas of leaving the house to the
children. But Mr Knibb, who annoyingly believed himself well-versed in human
nature, felt the children would wish to sell the house anyway.
However, he did reveal that, even at John's and Alison's ages, 'joint life
and last survivor' insurance was relatively cheap and could be written in
trust for the children, so that the policy proceeds would themselves escape
taxation.
He took their dates of birth and promised to furnish them with a quotation,
explaining that any commission he might receive from the insurance taken out
would be paid over to the Plowshares, under Law Society rules.
Mr Knibb suggested two other ways of mitigating the ultimate tax bill. They
could each give away Pounds 3,000 each year, and any larger gifts would be
free of tax if they survived seven years from the date of the gift. But here
there were practical problems: they could not afford to give away much in
the way of cash or shares; and Mr Knibb explained that, while a gift of
house or contents would be possible, the seven-year period would not start
running until they had excluded themselves from any benefit from the gifted
assets. Also, a gift would trigger a capital gains tax charge where tax
would have been payable on a sale. The idea of buying a house for Toby when
he went to university receded. However, gifts made by the survivor after the
first death would be free of tax after seven years.
Alternatively, their Wills could be drawn so that they took advantage of the
'nil rate band' of Pounds 150,000 on the first death as well, saving Pounds
60,000 in tax. This would involve each leaving the first Pounds 150,000 or a
lesser amount away from the survivor.
But this also had complications. Since the survivor would need the liquid
assets, the Pounds 150,000 would have to be found out of the house and the
'joint tenancy' under which the house was held would have to be turned into
a 'tenancy in common', otherwise the survivor would still inherit by
'operation of law', no matter what the Will might say.
This route seemed sensible, until Mr Knibb pointed out that, where children
share ownership of a house with a surviving parent, pressure might be
brought to sell, perhaps by sons- or daughters-in-law. On hearing this, both
John and Alison suppressed a small shudder at the thought of Lucy's charming
but unreliable boyfriend Tom having influence over the fate of either of
them.
Until now, Mr Knibb had been a man with a problem for every solution, but at
last he came up with an answer. They should each leave a 'discretionary
legacy' to the value of the unused nil-rate band. Their executors, the
survivor and one other, would have power, during the period of two years
after the first death, to decide how much should go to Toby and Lucy in the
light of circumstances at that time, and for tax purposes that would be
treated as if it were in the original Will. The balance would go to the
survivor, who would have to survive a 30-day period to cover the risk of
John and Alison being killed together. The survivor could also subsequently
make additional gifts to Lucy and Toby.
'I agree that it was helpful,' said Alison, as they arrived home, 'but we
haven't signed anything yet - it doesn't feel that we have actually achieved
anything.'
John reminded her that Mr Knibb was preparing a draft Will under which each
would leave a nil rate band discretionary legacy, with the balance of their
estates going to the survivor, conditional upon surviving 30 days, and in
default everything would go to Toby and Lucy equally at 25.
If no age was specified, apparently they would inherit at 18, which John and
Alison felt was far too soon. It merely remained for them to decide whether
to ask John's business partner, or perhaps Mr Knibb himself, to act as the
second executor.
This episode of the Plowshares was written with the assistance of Michael
Hayes, head of tax and financial planning at Macfarlanes.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

930423

