FT931-4005

FT  12 MAR 93 / International Capital Markets: First Matif contracts to be
listed on Globex


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


   THE FIRST Matif contracts


its three-month Pibor and Ecu bond futures and options - are to be listed on
Globex, the electronic futures trading system, from today. Backers of Globex
are hoping that the addition of products listed on the Matif, the French
futures exchange, and the link-up of 80 terminals in Paris, will help boost
trading volume on the system.
Trading on Globex of the more active French government bond futures will
start in two weeks, and the CAC-40 index future will be listed in a month.
Globex, the after-hours system developed by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange,
the Chicago Board of Trade and Reuters, currently trades just under 3,500
contracts per day, with 300 screens worldwide.
Initially, Matif products cannot be traded on Globex screens in the UK as
the Department of Trade and Industry has not yet accepted the Matif as a
recognised investment exchange. Further, the necessary bilateral agreements
on cross-exchange access for trading in the US have not yet been completed.
An official at the Matif said CME and CBOT members should have access to
Matif products in the next few days.
The Matif is abolishing its current after-hours telephone trading system,
known as THS (Transactions Hors Sceance), which currently accounts for about
12 per cent of volume. An official at Globex said he hoped as much as half
this volume would shift to Globex.
Globex received formal approval to trade in Japan last month, but, according
to a Reuters official, only a couple of terminals have been installed so
far, with 28 more on order. The first screens in Hong Kong are being linked
up this month, while screens in Geneva will be added in April.
Since the launch of the system last June, volume in the CME's Eurodollar
contract has accounted for 37 per cent of trading while the CBOT's T-bond
contract had made up 27 per cent of volume.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930312

