FT934-8505

FT  15 NOV 93 / US Money and Credit: Attention riveted on Senate Nafta vote
on Wednesday


   By MARTIN DICKSON


THE FATE of the North American Free Trade Agreement hangs on a cliff-hanger
vote in the US House of Representatives on Wednesday - and so, too, could
sentiment in the US stock and bond markets.
Defeat for Nafta, which will create a free trade area between the US, Mexico
and Canada, could prompt a sharp sell-off in the American securities
markets.
It is easy to see why stock markets should be upset by a 'no' vote. The
preponderance of evidence suggests that Nafta will boost US growth, and
corporate America, which usually knows which side its bread is buttered,
strongly supports the treaty.
Failure of Nafta would also throw into grave doubt the chances of agreement
in the Uruguay round of global trade liberalisation talks, which in turn
could set off a round of beggar-my-neighbour trade protectionist measures.
But why should the credit markets, which thrive on slow economic growth,
because this usually means low inflation, be concerned at a Nafta defeat?
First, because this would represent a severe setback for the Clinton
administration, which has belatedly lobbied hard for Nafta, and would cast
doubt on the administration's ability to push through the rest of its policy
agenda. The market does not like political uncertainty.
Second, Messrs John Lipsky and Robert DiClemente of Salomon Brothers,
suggest that rejection of Nafta, accompanied by rising protectionist
sentiment, would actually boost the bond market's long-term inflation
jitters.
'Stalled progress in breaking down trade barriers also would invite new
pessimism about long-term productivity trends, making it harder for the
Federal Reserve to keep inflation down.'
As it is, Wall Street last week regained some of its nerve about
inflationary trends, following the bond market's sharp sell-off the previous
week in the face of good US economic news.
The market took heart from news of a 0.2 per cent drop in the producer price
index during October - far better than the 0.3 per cent increase widely
expected - while a 0.4 per cent rise in the consumer price index was in line
with market forecasts. Many analysts expect the consumer index to rise by a
modest 3 per cent, or possibly less, next year.
However, the positive impact of these figures was largely offset by some
unsettling statistics: a 1.5 per cent jump in the Commodity Research Index,
led by increases in grain and soya-bean contracts, and then on Friday a 1.5
per cent rise in October retail sales - the biggest gain in six months.
The retail report initially pushed bond prices lower but the market rallied
later on Friday, when analysts decided the figures were due more to higher
prices, already factored into their inflation expectations, than a sudden
splurge in consumer spending. Sentiment was also helped by a drop in the
University of Michigan's consumer confidence index.
The upshot was that the benchmark 30-year Treasury issue closed on Friday
night with a yield of 6.15 per cent, down from 6.20 at the end of the
previous week.
Tomorrow, the Federal Reserve's policy-making Open Market Committee will
hold one of its regular six-weekly meetings, amid speculation that the
somewhat stronger signs of growth might encourage it to adopt a 'bias
towards tightening', while not actually raising interest rates.
The Fed funds rate is expected to remain for a considerable time yet at 3
per cent, where it has been for the past 14 months.
That, along with the relatively humdrum nature of this week's statistical
news (housing starts and industrial production) means the market's attention
will be riveted on Wednesday's Nafta vote.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

931115

