FT932-7156

FT  25 MAY 93 / International Capital Markets: Futures regulator brings
charges against CBOT


   By LAURIE MORSE


   CHICAGO


FEDERAL regulators have charged the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) with lax
financial monitoring and failure to enforce its own rules in an action that,
if successful, could result in more than Dollars 1m in fines for the world's
largest futures exchange.
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the futures industry's
chief regulator in the US, made the 10-count administrative complaint
against the CBOT in connection with the August 1990 collapse of Stotler and
Company, a large Chicago-based clearing firm. At the time the firm failed,
Mr Karsten Mahlmann, who was a principal in Stotler, was also the chairman
of the CBOT.
Mr Mahlmann, who was not named in the complaint, subsequently resigned as
exchange chairman. The CFTC and the CBOT transferred 65,000 customer
accounts from Stotler to other firms in August 1990 to protect them from
losses.
Mr Patrick Arbor, CBOT chairman, said the CFTC's complaint lacked merit. He
said the CFTC was unfairly holding the exchange responsible for a member
firm that lied to its customers and regulators and altered reporting
documents sent to the exchange.
This is the first time the CFTC has charged the CBOT in a complaint, and the
action has serious implications. The CFTC has the right, if its charges
succeed, to delist the CBOT as an exchange. Few expect that to happen.
In a related complaint, Coopers and Lybrand, the international accountancy
firm, was charged with failing to perform adequate audits of Stotler during
the years 1988 and 1989, when the firm was undercapitalised by Dollars 1m
and Dollars 7.1m, respectively.
Coopers and Lybrand has settled its case with the CFTC, without
acknowledging guilt, by paying the sum of Dollars 500,000.
Also charged by the CFTC were Mr Thomas Egan, formerly chief executive of
Stotler, Mr Phillip Zarcone who had been chief financial officer of Stotler,
and Mr Thomas Kolter, an attorney and president of Stotler Funds, a money
management firm.
Mr Egan has settled his charges with the CFTC and has agreed to never engage
in customer related futures trading again.
Mr Dennis Klejna, head of the CFTC's enforcement division, said the
complaint came so long after Stotler's collapse because 'these are very
complicated financial cases with sweeping allegations'.
The CFTC in early August, 1990, obtained an injunction against Stotler to
keep it from using customer funds to shore up its capital base. At nearly
the same time the CFTC filed an administrative complaint against Stotler and
ordered its registration as a futures dealer to be revoked.
Attorneys for Coopers and Lybrand and Mr Zarcone could not be reached for
comment yesterday. Mr Kolter, who is representing himself in the case, also
could not be reached.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930525

