FT932-6600

FT  27 MAY 93 / International Company News: Amax deal enriches Cyprus
Minerals' core - Laurie Morse examines prospects of a new power in the coal
and copper industries


   By LAURIE MORSE


MR Milton Ward, chairman of Cyprus Minerals, has enhanced his reputation as
something of a corporate fox. On Tuesday, he snapped up the assets of
undervalued Amax, the US mining group, at a point when analysts believe
copper and aluminium markets could be close to the bottom.
Mr Ward and his Amax counterpart, Mr Allen Born, agreed to a merger as Amax
struggled with Dollars 2.54bn in long-term debt, declining revenues from
sagging metals prices, and lack of sufficient capital to expand its core
business.
Both men are respected veterans of the mining business, and their alliance,
analysts say, show they are taking a realistic view of world competition and
market conditions.
'We are going to see more of these strategic alliances within the mining
industry, as companies cope with the globalisation of the business and the
effect the collapse of the CIS has had on world commodity prices,' says Mr
Vahid Fathi, analyst with Kemper Securities in Chicago. 'Mining is in a very
dynamic situation right now.'
Mr Ward, who moved to Cyprus a year ago after nearly two decades at the US
natural resource company Freeport McMoRan, has earned a reputation as an
effective cost-cutter.
He and Mr Born, who went to Amax from Placer Dome, will share the new
company's chairmanship, but Mr Ward will be chief executive officer.
In acquiring Amax and creating Cyprus-Amax, Mr Ward has continued to focus
on two primary businesses - coal and copper. The deal involves the exchange
of one Cyprus share for two Amax, subject to adjustments for price
fluctuations in Cyprus stock.
The new company will be North America's second-largest copper producer, with
reserves of 2.6bn tons of mineable ore. Last year, Cyprus produced 660m
pounds of copper, and has a Dollars 200m capital expenditure programme under
way to reduce copper production costs.
From Amax, Cyprus will get 1bn tonnes of new coal reserves and, combined,
the two companies will produce about 60m tons of coal annually. Cyprus will
add its new 40 per cent interest in Australia's McIlwraith McEacharn to the
deal. That company, whose markets are mainly Pacific Rim countries, produces
11m tons of coal a year.
Cyprus-Amax will also have a 40 per cent stake in Amax Gold, which has
annual production of about 250,000 ounces and reserves of about 8.6m ounces.
Cyprus has shed some gold operations in Australia and New Zealand, but gold
will be included in the combined company's commodity portfolio. Cyprus is
already in talks to acquire several high grade gold deposits in locations
around the world.
The new company will also have dominant positions in lithium, which is used
in aluminum smelting, and molybdenum, used as an alloy in steelmaking.
Amax's oil and natural gas subsidiary will be part of the merger, but Mr
Ward admits the business is not a good fit with his commodity strategy.
Notably, the new company will not have aluminium operations. Amax's large
Alumax arm will be spun off independently to Amax shareholders before the
merger.
'It is a very nicely structured deal. Cyprus didn't have to take the
aluminum business,' says Mr Tom Hess, research analyst with Northern Trust
Co.
With most metals markets in the middle of a 13-year decline, analysts say
the Cyprus/Amax deal has substantial potential once metals prices begin to
recover. In the meantime, Dollars 100m in immediate cost savings are
projected, through staff redundancies and closing Amax's New York office.
The merger will also allow a fresh look at Amax's remaining businesses,
which Mr Ward is expected to streamline, aiming to be a lowest cost
producer, as he has done at Cyprus.
'Milton Ward is going to have huge potential to the upside over the next
several years, and very little potential for downside. If metals prices go
lower, other companies, with higher costs, will be forced to curtail
production first,' notes Mr Hess.
Amax's Alumax spin-off is receiving close Wall Street scrutiny. 'It will be
a pure aluminum play,' says SG Warburg metals analyst Mr. Victor Lazarovici.
'It has more primary metal to sell in proportion to its size than any other
company.' While the company recorded an operating loss in 1992 because of
expenses related to the start up of its new Quebec smelter, Alumax, which
turned in Dollars 2.4bn in sales last year. is one of the world's lowest
cost aluminium producers.
It is valued at around Dollars 850m. If aluminium prices rise 30 per cent,
that valuation could jump to about Dollars 1.6bn, analysts say, and such
market responsiveness could, they add, make it a popular bet on the
direction of the world economy.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930527

