FT932-3431

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (4): Offshore banks offer window on the
world - Mark Nicholson considers whether the country will emerge as North
Africa's natural banking centre


   By MARK NICHOLSON


TUNISIA does not leap to mind if one is compiling a list of the world's tax
havens and offshore banking centres. But it is at least 17 years since the
first offshore banks opened for business in Tunis, and the tax advantages
are the equal of most of its better-known peers: Bahrain, Cyprus, the
Channel Islands, for instance. So why is Tunisia so little known?
The question baffles some ministers, who argue that Tunisia not only offers
all the usual offshore banking perks, but good infrastructure, close
proximity to southern Europe, a highly convivial and congenial lifestyle and
more besides. Yet, there are only six offshore banks established in Tunis.
The matter also puzzles some of the bankers. They believe part of the answer
is government reluctance to sell Tunisia hard. 'The government wanted to be
able to give everything possible to foreign investors into the country,
through the offshore banks,' says one banker, 'but without attracting any of
the negative aspects associated with tax havens elsewhere.'
Tunisia's offshore banks are there, essentially, to serve the Tunisian
economy, runs this view. And for a host of largely external reasons, the
sector has never quite fulfilled the more global ambitions held out for it
by the government which, in 1976, passed Tunisia's first offshore banking
law.
This law, as much as anything, aimed to offer a Tunisian shelter for
fugitive banks and capital fleeing the civil war which was to end Beirut's
primacy as the Arab banking centre of the 1960s and early 1970s. And, at the
time, some 12 banks arrived, including Citibank and Bank of America.
Within a few years, however, Bahrain had comfortably wrested Beirut's
mantle. Offshore banking there was fuelled both by the surge of petrodollars
to recycle and by the need to finance Saudi Arabia's voracious appetite for
expansion. Tunisia, out on a limb from all that and without an equally
dynamic regional Maghrebi economy to compete, began to lose some of the
early arrivals - Bank of America closed down, Banco de Brazil, National Bank
of Abu Dhabi and others followed.
Tunisia's remaining offshore banks settled thereafter into their present
role as the leading financial intermediaries for foreign investors. For a
largely inward-looking local banking system, spawned from the dirigiste
economy of the 1960s and screened from the outside world by the central
bank, the offshore banks offered a window on the world.
They, alone, were legally entitled to offer exporters established as
'non-resident' companies, but manufacturing out of Tunisia, hard currency
transactions without prior approval from the central bank. They also tended
to lead the way on trade finance. But the size and scope of the offshore
banks came to be tied directly to the fortunes of Tunisia's economy.
Several banks carved out particular niches. Very broadly: BEST bank, a joint
venture between the central bank and the Albaraka group, encouraged Saudi
investment in Tunisia; North African International Bank focused on
Tunisian-Libyan trade finance; Citibank took a lead in treasury operations,
in particular with Maghreb currencies; and Tunis International Bank
developed private banking, trade and investment finance.
Both BEST and Citibank also evolved onshore operations. These are
permissible under laws permitting offshore banks to deal in local currencies
to the value of equity investments they have brought into the country. BEST
bank, for instance, reckons on having brought in Dollars 200m of such
investment and has created an onshore dinar operation accordingly, within a
further ceiling which permits offshore banks to take dinar deposits only up
to 1 per cent of total domestic deposits.
But there is soon to be an erosion of the offshore banks' most
distinguishing feature - their privileged position as foreign currency
intermediaries. The government's decision to introduce current account
convertibility of the dinar earlier this year now means that foreign
currency transactions for import and export deals can be transacted without
prior central bank approval, merely subsequent notification and record.
As the government moves towards full convertibility, pencilled in for 1996,
the local banks will be increasingly exposed to direct international
dealings and differences between the local and offshore banks will diminish
accordingly. This, at least, is the hope and, indeed, the cue for the
offshore banks' next role.
This will be, primarily, as the catalyst for the regeneration and
internationalisation of Tunisia's still underdeveloped banking sector. By
virtue of their previously exclusive international experience and a small
salary premium over local banks, the offshore banks harbour the greater part
of Tunisia's best bankers. As the country begins to develop its embryonic
financial markets and accelerate its drive to attract inward investment, the
offshore banks are positioning themselves to expand their products,
particularly in investment and merchant banking.
The process is about to receive a small fillip in the shape of Arab Banking
Corporation's arrival as a fully-fledged offshore bank. The Bahrain-based
bank's representative office of some years standing has won approval for
offshore status and the bank is aiming eventually to add onshore facilities.
ABC, which already has an office in Tripoli and is seeking another in
Casablanca, is the biggest international banking arrival in Tunis since the
seventies.
It is unlikely to herald a new era for Tunisia as an Arab banking capital to
rival Bahrain. Local bankers point out, for instance, that Tunisian banks
are almost without direct representation in the country's main trading
markets and have some way to go before they can aspire to that. ABC's
arrival, however, and, more particularly, the government's clear
determination to kick-start the financial sector nevertheless suggest that,
should the Maghreb countries succeed in putting their professed ambitions of
economic union into more effective practice, Tunis will emerge as North
Africa's natural banking centre.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930614

