FT934-8859

FT  13 NOV 93 / China wary of economic 'hard landing'


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


CHINA'S main task in its latest efforts to bring an overheating economy
under control was to avoid a 'hard landing,' a senior Chinese official said
yesterday.
Mr Lou Jiwei, director of the macro-economic department of the Commission
for Restructuring the Economy, said the government was involved in the
difficult task of trying to ensure continued economic growth while
maintaining the anti-inflation fight.
'In a market economy, it is quite normal for a government to adopt austerity
measures. But here whenever we talk about austerity and control people get
nervous,' said Mr Lou. 'People only want to hear about expansion.'
His remarks coincided with a meeting in Beijing of the Central Committee of
the Communist party, China's top policy-making body. The party plenum is
approving reforms in banking, finance, tax, trade and enterprise management.
Tax reforms will cover personal and corporate income, and also lay down a
new formula for revenue-sharing between the centre and the provinces.
Mr Lou, who is a close adviser to Mr Zhu Rongji, senior vice-premier in
charge of the economy, provided some revealing insights into the
difficulties associated with efforts to manage the Chinese economy through a
difficult phase.
He spoke of 'huge pressures' from the provinces over a credit squeeze
imposed in mid-year that was aimed at taking the steam out of speculative
areas such as real estate, and at imposing stricter financial discipline on
state enterprises.
Among other points made by Mr Lou were.
China had cut M1 money supply growth to an annualised 18.6 per cent in
October, down from 41 per cent in April and May. He indicated that the
central authorities may have 'overdone' efforts to curb monetary growth, by
getting it below 20 per cent so abruptly.
The inflation target at the end of first quarter next year was 10 per cent
for the whole country compared with 14.5 per cent for the twelve months to
September. Price rises in the main urban centres exceeded 20 per cent in
September.
Economic reforms next year would concentrate on the 'micro' aspects of the
economy such as banking, finance, and taxation.
Mr Lou said the authorities would approach enterprise reform cautiously.
Efforts would be devoted to 'transforming' the management of state
industries, many of which were loss-making. 'We can't fight on too many
fronts at once,' he said in reference to pressures on the reformists from
left and right.
The Chinese official said that for the time being commercial banks would be
obliged to carry the burden of providing credit to faltering state
industries, but 'one day we will need debt-restructuring for enterprises and
banks.' He said it was fortunate that the Chinese maintained one of the
highest savings rates in the world.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931113

