FT934-8552

FT  15 NOV 93 / Leading Article: High noon in world trade


THE NEXT 30 days will mark a watershed. In that time the still economically
dominant western powers will decide the fate of the liberal trading system
that underpinned their postwar success. Construction of a new international
order may well be beyond their ability. Preserving and extending this most
essential of legacies should not be.
A series of hurdles - the vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement in
the US House of Representatives, the meeting on Asian Pacific Economic
Co-operation in Seattle, but above all the deadline of the Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations on December 15 - lie before us. These
hurdles must be jumped. There is no sensible alternative.
The postwar trading system was animated by a single-minded determination to
avoid repetition of the protection that wreaked such havoc in the 1920s and
1930s. It succeeded beyond the wildest dreams of its designers. Between 1950
and 1991 the volume of world exports rose 12 times, while that of exports of
manufactures rose 23 times, an expansion that dragged global output, itself
up six times, behind it.
Policy choices made such success possible. Policy choices will also
determine whether it lasts. Industrial output per head in east Germany did
not fall to a third of that in the west because the people were inferior.
South Korea did not outstrip the North because of luck. These successful
countries shared active participation in the global market economy with all
the other dynamic economies of the postwar era.
The point has not been lost upon others. Sixty-three countries, 51 of them
either developing or former centrally planned economies, have notified the
Gatt trade liberalisation measures taken during the seven-year history of
the Uruguay round.
One reason these countries wish to increase their commitment to the liberal
world trade system is economic. Credence may not be placed in estimates of
the benefits of a successful Uruguay round, such as the Dollars 270bn
advanced last week by the OECD. But few can doubt that world economic
welfare would be far higher with comprehensive trade liberalisation than
without it.
No less important are the potential losses from failure. Nobody knows what
those might amount to, but that does not mean they would be small. They are
more likely to be unknowably large. As Peter Sutherland, the Gatt's new
director-general, has stressed: 'failure to reach agreement by the end of
this year would undermine the multilateral trading system with unpredictable
economic, political and, even, security consequences'.
Cost of failure
Those wider consequences of failure must never be forgotten. Does anyone
suppose, for example, that co-operation between the US and Europe would
survive a breakdown that could be plausibly blamed either on French
intransigence or on stubborn US nit-picking over the trading rules?
The challenge is to make arrangements that flourished in the shadow of the
cold war survive in its absence. Success is more difficult now, because
there is no longer a shared threat. But it is also still more important,
because trade friction has become a central part of international political
relations.
It is on the shoulders of the western powers, the US and the European Union,
that the outcome ultimately rests. But this is not just a burden upon them;
it is also an opportunity. The notion of a system of international trade law
governing a liberal global economy is both their achievement and their
legacy, but it is ceasing to be their possession. Their economies still
account for half of world output, but this share is in ineluctable decline.
What the western powers can do, though perhaps now for the last time, is
determine whether a working system is bequeathed to the more politically and
culturally diverse world now emerging.
The system is, in fact, a peculiarly American creation. At the end of half a
century of active engagement in global affairs, the US has every right to
feel satisfied with the outcome. Alas, it does not. So great is US
self-doubt that even the free trade agreement with Mexico stands on the
verge of rejection.
NAFTA must pass, not because it is that intrinsically important, which it is
not, even to its participants. Nor is it because it is unambiguously
desirable. In important respects, notably its restrictive rules of origin
and its two side agreements on labour and the environment, it is even quite
worrying. The latter, for example, though modest enough in themselves,
indicate US acceptance of the fallacious idea that trade between countries
with different standards is mutually impoverishing. They also introduce the
equivalent of the EU's acquis communautaire: the idea that regulations may
never be relaxed, however costly they turn out to be.
For all that, NAFTA must not fail, because it would do so for the wrong,
protectionist reasons. US credibility in international negotiations is at
stake. The administration realised this very late in the day. It is to be
hoped that it did not realise it too late.
The EU too is palsied by protectionism, notably in its attitudes towards
trade with eastern Europe and within agriculture. France, the EU's second
most important member state, is even prepared to undermine the EU's capacity
to act in order to preserve its right to dump subsidised agricultural
surpluses on world markets. Worse, the EU has not been prepared to confront
French intransigence, with the result that its principal negotiator, Sir
Leon Brittan, is forced to look over his shoulder in almost everything he
does.
Game of chicken
As Mr Sutherland has pointed out, the US and EU are playing a game of
chicken in the last stages of these negotiations, both hoping the other will
swerve first. Progress has been made in Geneva. A significant market access
package is being shaped, while there is almost complete agreement on a text
in services. But the negotiations have fallen well behind the schedule
agreed last summer. The market access negotiations, in particular, were
supposed to have been finished by November 15. It appears that the EU and US
hope everything will be wrapped up in a grand closing sale, failing which
each will blame the other for the breakdown.
The time of decision has arrived. The long-term economic and political
future of Europe is at stake, with the EU risking a grim future as an
increasingly marginal part of the world economy. The new Union must show
itself capable of sticking to agreements it has reached. Even the
Franco-German alliance may founder if it falls short of constructive
engagement with the rest of the world.
The challenge for the US is little less. Should Nafta be defeated, a
successful outcome to the Uruguay round may be still more difficult, but it
would also then be even more important. Should both fail, the legacy of half
a century of successful US-led effort would lie in ruins. No contemporary US
politician has the right thus to throw away the achievements of more
constructive times and wiser men.
The alternative to the Uruguay round would not be a harmonious world of
trading blocs. Anyone who believes that a US unable to implement Nafta could
negotiate free trade with Latin America or east Asia is dreaming. Anyone who
believes that an inward-looking EU would prove stable may be similarly
deluded.
The probable alternative to success would, instead, be a chaos of
simple-minded unilateralism and bilateralism. It would be a world of
unsuccessfully managed trade. It would, in short, be everything that
policymakers decided, half a century ago, they never wished to see again.
There is no good reason why their hopes should be betrayed. The world knows
better than that. Leaders of great economic powers should show they do too.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931115

