FT933-5285

FT  04 SEP 93 / Porter pledges to fight withdrawal of LBC licences


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


DAME Shirley Porter, chairman of the London Broadcasting Company, yesterday
vowed to fight to reverse a decision to withdraw the company's two
broadcasting licences after more than 20 years.
The Radio Authority, the regulatory body for commercial radio in the UK,
gave LBC's FM and AM frequencies to London News Radio.
Two new AM licences went to London Country Radio, a country music station,
and Sunrise Radio, an Asian station.
A total of 48 groups applied for eight radio licences - six of them held by
existing broadcasters.
Melody Radio, Kiss FM, the dance music station, Jazz FM and Spectrum
International Radio, the multi-ethnic station, all retained their
franchises.
Applications for business and sports radio were rejected on the grounds they
would not provide a rich mixture 24 hours a day.
LNR, chaired by Mr John Tusa, former managing director of the BBC World
Service, and bringing together many former LBC staff, is backed by Guinness
Mahon, the merchant bank, and Hachette, the French international media
group.
Dame Shirley, former leader of the Tory-controlled Westminster Council,
yesterday demanded an explanation from Lord Chalfont, Radio Authority
chairman, and launched a campaign to save the station under the slogan 'You
Can't Gag The Voice of London'.
A petition is being taken up and listeners are being invited on air to
support the campaign.
LBC which runs two radio services for the UK capital - Newstalk and Talkback
Radio - said thousands of callers ringing in to express their anger at the
decision had jammed the switchboard.
The authority appears unlikely to reverse its decision unless LBC can
demonstrate to the High Court that it had operated improperly.
Almost all of Thursday's Radio Authority meeting was taken up with LBC.
Taking away one of LBC's licences was considered and rejected because the
LNR concept - of a rolling news service and a more discursive service - was
seen as indivisable.
The key issue was programme quality and the judgment that LNR might offer
something better and more clearly differentiated.
The recent financial crisis at LBC's parent, Crown Communications, was not
seen as an issue following the injection of new money by Dame Shirely and
her family interests.
'Too loose, too light despite warnings,' said one of those involved in the
decision.
Others thought the presence of Mr Andrew Neil, as a presenter while being
editor of The Sunday Times, controversial.
LNR will take over from LBC in October 1994 for an eight year period with Mr
Peter Thornton, a former LBC editor, as editor in chief.
Losers will have another chance next year when Capital Radio's two licences
come up for renewal and two further FM frequencies for London may be
offered.
Subtle franchise bid displaced LBC, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930904

