FT934-10081

FT  08 NOV 93 / Accord near on Cocom successor


   By KAREN FOSSLI


   OSLO


WESTERN nations expect to conclude by the end of the year a new multilateral
control regime for technology exports including Russia, officials in Oslo
said yesterday.
Members of Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Control (Cocom)
met in Oslo last week where they made 'good progress' on establishing a
replacement to Cocom. This was the body established in 1951 to restrict
exports of high-technology goods of potential military or strategic value to
the Communist bloc countries.
The main outstanding issue yet to be finalised is whether Russia would have
to establish an effective export control system as a prerequisite for
joining any new entity, officials said.
The Oslo meeting was a follow-up to an appeal made by President Bill Clinton
in April after his Vancouver summit meeting with President Boris Yeltsin. Mr
Clinton called for a review of Cocom, noting that the end of the cold war
had made Russia an ally.
Mr Arthur Knudsen, an official with the Norwegian ministry of trade,
confirmed meetings of the 17-member western nation Cocom were held in Oslo
last Wednesday, but refused to be drawn on details of the talks. 'We made
good progress, but details cannot yet be revealed because nothing is yet
finalised,' Mr Knudsen said yesterday.
He would not say where or when new meetings could be expected to be held,
but said the replacement to Cocom would be finalised before the end of the
year. 'We will have a conclusion on these talks very soon,' Mr Knudsen
added.
The Clinton administration is the main thrust behind concluding the talks by
the end of the year, according to officials.
Since the end of the second world war Russia has been the main target of
restrictions on high technology exports to Communist nations under the Cocom
regime. Some of the restrictions have been relaxed but others are still in
place.
Last Thursday, in an interview with the German magazine Stern, President
Yeltsin urged western nations to abolish Cocom's discriminatory trade
restrictions. 'After all Russia is not a Communist country; we are carrying
out fundamental reforms, we are moving quickly to the market,' Mr Yeltsin
said.
Although Cocom's role in monitoring sensitive exports to Communist states
has been diminishing since the end of the cold war, there remain fears that
such exports may make their way into hands of terrorists or be purchased by
nations seeking illicitly to develop nuclear weapons.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931108

