FT933-12457

FT  23 JUL 93 / Foreign Exchanges: ERM battles once more


   By STEPHANIE FLANDERS


SPECULATIVE pressure left European currency markets reeling once again
yesterday as they digested the possibility that there would be no cut in
German interest rates next Thursday, writes Stephanie Flanders.
Although the Spanish peseta, the Danish krone and the Portuguese escudo all
sustained heavy losses against the D-Mark, attention focused on the French
franc. The Bundesbank intervened to buy francs several times during the day,
apparently trying to keep the French currency from weakening beyond
FFr3.4180 against the D-Mark.
On the French side, the Bank of France suspended a key lending facility to
make things more difficult for speculators, but did not raise interest rates
as some had expected. The French central bank would not confirm reports that
it was intervening to support the franc, but several traders were convinced
that French commercial banks were buying francs on behalf of the
authorities.
Pressure on the French currency re-emerged as a result of Wednesday's
disappointing German M3 figures. 'If the Bundesbank cannot reduce interest
rates next week,' said one London analyst, 'the attention goes back to
whether the French economy can get through the summer at today's high rates.
If the markets think the answer is no, then the Bank of France has to ask
itself whether it can credibly raise interest rates to defend the franc.'
Figures were released showing that last week's interventions had reduced the
Bank of France's net reserves by at least FFr17bn up to July 15. Observers
claimed that since then official losses due to further intervention will
have risen considerably.
Taking a large part of the speculative strain was the peseta, which fell
below its central rate in the ERM for the first time since its 8 per cent
devaluation on May 13.
Up to the early afternoon the Spanish currency had lost more than two
pesetas against the D-Mark, although it later recovered somewhat to finish
at Pta79.84, a little more than one peseta down from the previous close of
Pta78.74.
The Portuguese currency also fell dramatically, closing in Europe at
Esc100.25 against the D-Mark, still comfortably above its ERM floor of
Esc105.04, but considerably below its rate at the start of the week of
Esc97.10.
Early in the day, the Danish krone seemed to be in danger, as it lost ground
against the D-Mark. However, the markets were somewhat pacified by the
Danish central bank's decision to raise its official two-week repo rate from
9 per cent to 11 per cent. This helped the Danish unit to recover, closing
in London at around DKr3.8805 to the D-Mark, above its ERM floor of
DKr3.9016.
Sterling firmed  1/4 pfennig to end at DM2.5750. The dollar gained about a
pfennig to DM1.7080, and in New York it closed at DM1.7042.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930723

