FT932-301

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (3): Downtime goes up as
networks expand - Network managers are finding that the problems of control
have multiplied


   By GEORGE BLACK


AS MORE personal computers, servers and printers have been added to networks
and applications have become larger and more complex, downtime has been
growing steadily .
A US survey by Gallup for Computer Reseller News last year found that the
average large company suffered four hours of downtime a week - almost double
the figure shown in research two years earlier.
At a seminar in April Mr Enzo Torresi, president of the superserver maker
NetFrame, forecast that average downtime would rise to five hours a week
this year.
The survey results refer to local area networks. On wide area networks the
figures are likely to be considerably higher.
Such a level of downtime represents a huge loss of productivity,
particularly when it affects organisations which rely on online systems such
as banks, airlines and manufacturers. For them 99.99 per cent availability
is just not enough; it needs to be 99.999.
The problem seems likely to worsen, because surveys show that users plan to
add more hardware and software to their networks without adding to their
network management resources.
Mr Jim Pante, European managing director of Network General, a vendor of
software tools for network management, says that most users spend only 2-3
per cent of their information technology budget on network management,
whereas 10-15 per cent is needed.
Most large companies in Europe and the US at present spend only Pounds
15-75,000 a year on network management tools. They do not expect to increase
that figure by much, nor to hire more network managers.
Mr Pante says more planning is necessary. 'Users need to lay down basic
network requirements for availability and response times and then monitor
any events that may put those targets at risk.'
Users' expectations of what networks should be able to handle have grown
faster than their adoption of network management systems and of the
capabilities of those systems.
Mr Paul Trowbridge, UK marketing manager for the network products company
Synoptics, says that most people underestimate what is involved in network
management. He attributes this to a lack of skills among network managers
who are under so much pressure that they do not get adequate training and
often adopt a naive 'tick list' approach to purchasing software tools.
The arrival of a new gener- ation of applications, includ- ing multimedia
programs, could compound the problems. Such applications will con- sume far
more bandwidth than current systems; therefore demand for bandwidth will
need to be closely monitored and controlled.
One of the answers may lie in expert systems. These are software programs
which use a specialised form of artificial intelligence based on sets of
rules devised by subject experts. A set of such rules could help to alert
network managers to anomalies and enable them to take a more pro-active
approach to monitoring.
Another part of the solution will come through the development of standards.
Most computer networks today comprise equipment from a number of different
sources, each of which requires its own management system. Network
management needs a standard which will allow heterogeneous machines to be
effectively monitored and controlled by a single software system.
Such a standard is beginning to emerge, but it could be several years before
it has stabilised. After that, it could be several more years before old
non-standard machines are phased out and replaced by others that conform to
the new standard.
In this f i e l d, a s in others, the industry has been torn between
official and de facto standards. A few years ago users and vendors were
looking to the International Standards Organisation's Open Systems
Interconnection model to provide them with official standards for
networking.
They pinned their hopes on OSI's Common Management Information Protocol. But
that required so many features that it has so far failed to win much support
from manufacturers.
Meanwhile, the rival Simple Network Management Protocol, supported by the
Internet organisation, appears to have overtaken it and is now close to
becoming a de facto standard.
However, SNMP has been criticised for allowing too many options for
implementation by product vendors and for lack of security. A new version of
the protocol, SNMP2, which should deliver both greater standardisation and
improved security, is expected to be built into equipment towards the end of
this year or early next year.
The Open Software Foundation's Distributed Management Environment (DME) is
now making the running as a standard architecture for the product vendors.
It will support the SNMP protocol and should help to make network software
more portable.
Mr Justin van der Lande, networks marketing manager for NCR UK, an AT&T
subsidiary, says: 'Our difficulty is to know which standards to back.'
NCR's StarSentry, one of the leading network management products, already
has SNMP compliance and will add compliance with DME in its next release.
Though it has yet to achieve commercial success, StarSentry was rated best
network management product in a recent market report by consultancy
ButlerBloor.
Hewlett-Packard has recently announced enhancements to its market-leading
OpenView network management software which will take it in the direction of
centralised control of distributed systems. Ms Caroline Rowney, its UK
client-server programme manager, says that users wanting to migrate from a
mainframe environment to a distributed environment have been concerned about
a possible loss of control.
The latest version of OpenView also takes another significant step towards
the integration of system management with network management and thus
towards centralised control.
OpenView now seems to be on the way to becoming an industry standard, at
least in the open systems community, as it is being incorporated into DME
and into IBM's NetView products. Itis supported by around 170 partner firms
which have developed hardware and software additions to the system.
Whatever the industry standards turn out to be, networks of a few years
hence should be controllable from a single software system and therefore,
eventually, less subject to faults and crashes.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930629

