FT933-5113

FT  04 SEP 93 / The dissident who reckons there's nothing to be done: John
Lloyd is confronted with a bleak view of Russia's future when he meets
intellectual Vladimir Bukovsky, a Soviet exile


   By JOHN LLOYD


IF VLADIMIR Bukovsky cannot be president of Russia, he will have no more to
do with it. It is the last straw. 'After all', he says, 'even in the country
which I have made my home and which owes me nothing (Britain) I can be
anything I want except the king of it.'
Bukovsky is one of the handful of dissidents, expelled from the Soviet Union
in the early 1970s, whose prominence grew in exile (in Cambridge, as a don)
and who have returned when the power which threw him out collapsed. He has
tried to take an active part in the new politics but, in Moscow recently, he
told a round table of intellectuals and politicians that 'the more I return
here, the less hope I have of its reform.'
Bukovsky earned the right to speak the hard way: arrested and given a
12-year sentence in prisons, camps and mental hospitals in 1961 for
attending the reading of a poem on Mayakovsky's suicide 30 years earlier.
The poet, among the greatest of the literary enthusiasts for Soviet power,
committed suicide when he could no longer fit his Bolshevik idealism to the
tortuous path being taken by Stalin towards complete power.
In his memoirs, published in English as To Build a Castle, Bukovsky speaks
of his generation (or that tiny idealist part of it) reacting to the
invasion of Hungary in 1956 with a feeling of betrayal: 'We no longer
believed anyone. Our parents turned out to have been agents and informers,
our military leaders were butchers.'
He still believes in no-one in the former Soviet Union. Professing a
complete lack of illusion in the reform process, he sketches out an
impoverishing, disintegrating and dangerous future for the country of his
birth. The objection that he cannot be president - because of a clause in
the draft constitution (78) which denies that right to anyone who has not
resided in Russia for the past 10 years - is less an indication of
presidential ambition than a view that the current authorities are almost as
scared of those with a moral position as the old ones.
'They are the old apparatchiks in new clothes, after all. They cannot really
change. I have said many times here - to undo the effects of the revolution
you need a revolution, and there has not been one.'
Another sign of the times: 'Oleg Kalugin (a former KGB general turned
publicist) wrote in the Mail on Sunday that he had been instrumental in
developing the poison and the method of killing (Georgy) Markov (the
Bulgarian dissident in exile in London). It was tested on a horse and the
horse died. It was tested on a prisoner and the prisoner did not die.
(Apparently Soviet prisoners are stronger than horses, which did not
surprise me). Now - not a word of regret.
'We are seeing a reaction already, a sluggish reaction at every level of
power as the bureaucrats extend their authority. And the people round
Yeltsin are usually not competent, and terribly provincial. They know
nothing outside of their specialism or their district, nothing.'
He sees salvation nowhere. Yegor Gaidar, the former prime minister and now
one of the leaders of the liberal-conservative wing of Russian politics,
achieved little in the way of economic reform because 'he followed shock
therapy, the Polish model of liberating prices, which was all right for
Poland where there was already a large private sector. But (in Russia) it
meant the enterprises simply put up their prices and cut production and
no-one could stop them. They should have been privatised first - so
obvious.'
Yet for the economist and politician (and self-announced contender for the
presidency) whose strategy this is - Grigory Yavlinsky - Bukovsky expresses
more contempt than for 'clever but too bookish' Gaidar. 'Yavlinsky is
nothing but a self-publicist who uses his talent for getting known.' And for
Professor Jeffrey Sachs, the main foreign influence on economic reform, the
same strictures.
'All these people were brought up in the old system. They may have read good
things but it would be better had they simply lived in England and had to
pay taxes and buy food and pay the rent. Then they would have felt what a
free market was like.' Bukovsky thinks Boris Fyodorov, the new finance
minister, who spent almost two years in London at the European Bank, may,
for that reason, have a little better grasp, if not much better chance.
Bukovsky, a neurophysicist by training, now makes his money by advising
governments and companies in the former Soviet Union. His advice grows
darker and darker, though he retains energy and wit and has acquired English
self-irony ('the more gloomy the report you write for them the more they pay
you'). His view, stripped down, is that the same fate will befall Russia as
befell the USSR: it will disintegrate, messily, perhaps bloodily, perilously
for the world.
'Look, you must understand that what is happening here is not democracy. It
is the coming to power of the bureaucrat. The dream of the bureaucrat in the
Soviet system was to tell his boss to go to hell. Now he can. Now it is
happening at every level.
'If Moscow cannot control and pay, then the regions and the republics will
break away. Imagine the leaders of the Far Eastern Military District sitting
around one day. One says: 'Are they paying you anything?' The other says:
'No, nothing.' So they say: 'OK, who needs them (in Moscow)?' And so, with
the political leaders, they make a republic. For the people in the far east
it would be very attractive: they could give the Japanese back these four
stupid islands they want (the Kuriles) and get a lot of Japanese help.
'The fact that they are all Russians won't be enough in the face of economic
necessity. This inflation makes it more the case. So you will get them
printing their own money to try to stop the inflation. And if you print your
own money it is only a step to having your own central bank, your own
government, your own country. And if you had a country which bordered on
Yakutia (now called the Republic of Sakwa), which is fabulously wealthy in
diamonds, it would be too much temptation not to send some soldiers in there
and get some of the diamonds for yourself.
'Soon there will be no national services or culture: they will not pay for
them. Even now they cannot pay for communications, railways, roads, and do
you think the rest of the country will continue to support the Bolshoi
(Theatre)?
'Yeltsin cannot keep it together. People think he is strong and decisive
because he acts well in a crisis and he looks tough: actually he cannot take
decisions and compromises all the time. When people were burning their party
cards in the streets it took him months to decide to leave the party.
'Look how he hesitates to take the initiative against the parliament] He has
a fear of being blamed for acting in an authoritarian manner - because of
his past, when he was part of such a system. But no leader from outside that
system would have paused for a moment to do what has to be done.'
He repeats himself. 'This is not a democracy. Norris McWhirter (publisher of
The Guinness Book of Records) once told me what it was. He said there is a
word for Russia. It is a kleptocracy. Everyone steals everything. In a paper
I did for a company, I was hunting for a parallel state to Russia and I
found it: it is Nigeria. All the business is concentrated in the capital,
and it is fantastically corrupt. Yet you cannot say it is not a democracy
sometimes: you cannot say it is not a market economy.'
Bukovsky worked for some part of last year in the archives of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party - opened then to scholars and the curious,
now closed once more. There he found sustenance for his long-held belief
that the CP and the KGB had, especially in the era of detente, gone a long
way to suborning the liberal and left parties of the west.
'It was the old story: the Menshiviks and the Bolsheviks. The Menshiviks
always believed that you could bring them back into the fold, convince them
you don't have to use these terrible methods. These illusions persist.'
The contemporary illusion against which Bukovsky still attempts to tilt is
the western belief that its fear of an imploding Russia can be exorcised by
throwing money at it. 'If there is one thing you should say, it is: don't
give them the money] Don't do it] The west gave billions to Gorbachev and it
is impossible to find a single dollar of it. Where did it go? And this will
go the same way. It will just disappear.'
What is to be done? 'Nothing. Nothing to be done. Maybe in some years the
country will come together again, the various parts will federate. Maybe.
But to stop what is now happening - nothing to be done.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

930904

