FT933-5122

FT  04 SEP 93 / Arts: A worthy Falstaff - Edinburgh Festival / Opera


   By MAX LOPPERT


THE FINAL big offering of this year's musical and operatic programme at
Edinburgh provides one of the undoubted climaxes of an otherwise not
especially climax-notable festival season. It is Falstaff, the last Verdi
opera, which therefore supplies a peculiarly appropriate 'last movement' to
a festival that had Verdi as one of its thematic strands, and that earlier
had billed (in concert form) the very first Verdi opera, Oberto.
Since Falstaff arrives at the Playhouse in a revival of the 1988 production
that Peter Stein made for Welsh National Opera, there is an added thematic
appropriateness to the offering. Stein has figured as one of the four
international-heavyweight theatre directors to be spotlighted here this year
(Malcolm Rutherford wrote in yesterday's paper of his Salzburg staging of
Julius Caesar in its Edinburgh transplantation).
This response to Verdi's 'miracle of grace, generosity, confidence, fine
working, and marvellous invention' (Andrew Porter's phrase in an Edinburgh
programme-book essay) has all those qualities: it explains why Stein is
worth the fuss people have the past two decades been making over his work.
There should perhaps be one caveat. Although the revival comes up unstaled,
its working is not always fine without qualification: pauses for
scene-change take too long, and the relative clumsiness of the Windsor
Forest setting is still unimproved.
But the ensemble exuberance and ripe physicality of characterisation remain
irresistible. Above all, this refers to Donald Maxwell's Falstaff, who
glories in his girth with animal spirits even more untamed than five years
ago; but it also concerns the sheer 'go' of WNO's female quartet. This opera
treats many themes in its survey of human affections; one of them is the
eternal stupidity of men and the no-less-eternal forgivingness of women, a
theme handled by Stein with sharper point than in any other Falstaff I know.
The leader of the quartet, as in 1988, is Suzanne Murphy, witty, plucky and
altogether adorable as Alice Ford in spite of an announced cold. Other
well-remembered performances include Nuccia Focile's spicy Nannetta, and the
Caius, Bardolph and Pistol of Peter Bronder, John Harris and Geoffrey Moses.
The newcomers lend fresh lustre: Claire Powell's unusually youthful,
sensuous Quickly, Paul Charles Clarke's sweet-toned Fention, above all Bryn
Terfel as a Ford of dark magnificence.
In this (for Falstaff) huge theatre the shine tends to rub off the
orchestral sound. That said, the conducting of Richard Armstrong, WNO's
former chief, displays mastery still more substantial than in 1988: the
opera is taken steadily, with care for verbal clarity and meaning but with
no sacrifice of comic zest. Only one more Edinburgh Falstaff (tonight), then
the revival forms part of WNO's autumn repertory, and can thus be more
widely enjoyed.
An interesting point of comparison was suggested by the Edinburgh Verdi
conducting of Armstrong's WNO successor, Carlo Rizzi. In an Usher Hall
Requiem last weekend, given by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra and the
Edinburgh Festival Chorus (solid, well-schooled, strangely un-thrilling),
Rizzi's italianate vitality was sometimes exhilarating, and sometimes
hotheadedly immature in effect. Of the soloists it was the mezzo, Olga
Borodina, who with grave richness of tone most consistently sustained
'festival standard'; Jane Eaglen, the soprano, was splendidly powerful in
loud phrases, a shade below pitch in soft.
Falstaff is sponsored by Bank of Scotland, Requiem by Scottish Power

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

930904

