FT932-6640

FT  27 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Mixed response to North West Water scrip
option


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


ENHANCED scrip dividends, briefly April's corporate finance flavour of the
month for UK companies, burst back on the scene yesterday to mixed reviews
from shareholders.
'As a one-off, we don't mind it,' said one shareholder. Investors said North
West Water's finances appeared sufficiently healthy to avoid the view that
it had resorted to paying dividends in shares because cash was not
available.
'But there is a danger in the constant issue of new equity. We don't want a
series of disguised rights issues.' And, shareholders said, the structure of
the latest deal looked suspiciously like a capital raising exercise.
North West, one of the 10 privatised water companies, announced a cash final
dividend of 14.27p and offered investors an alternative in shares worth an
additional 50 per cent more at 21.405p. The point of the exercise, said the
company and its advisers, Swiss Bank Corporation (SBC), is to cut the bill
for Advance Corporation Tax.
The point concentrating the minds of investors is the company's calculation
of its tax savings relative to its total savings, assuming that 90 per cent
of shareholders choose shares rather than cash. North West says it will save
Pounds 60m, of which Pounds 13.3m is ACT savings. The remainder of the
savings are simply cash payments the company will not have to make, a move
which will effectively give it access to new capital.
North West yesterday tried to soothe its shareholders' anxieties, saying:
'There is no present intention to extend this to future dividends.' However,
RTZ, which was the first company to issue enhanced scrip dividends, said on
Tuesday that it would offer the option for its interim dividend as well, an
ominous note from shareholders' point of view.
'If companies want cash, they should simply conduct a rights offering,' said
one shareholder. In a rights, companies would be expected to spell out in
detail how they intended to use the cash and what return they expected to
earn on the new capital.
Yesterday, North West said it intended to use the funds for international
expansion, development of non-core activities and expanded research and
development.
Shareholders said that the plans went further than those outlined by the
company when it first contacted them informally to ask how an enhanced scrip
issue might be received. 'We told them we wanted to know more details,' one
investor said.
The deal, like the half dozen or so for other UK companies, works like this;
companies incur ACT on profits they earn which are passed along in the form
of dividends to shareholders. However, they may offset that by the amount of
corporation tax they owe, effectively eliminating the tax charge on their
dividend payments. There is no ACT payable on dividends issued in shares
rather than cash.
But some companies pay little UK corporation tax anyway, and thus do incur
additional tax when they pay cash dividends. Barclays de Zoete Wedd, in
April, led the first deal designed to get around that problem.
Up until today, the companies issuing scrip dividends have been those with
large earnings from abroad on which no UK corporation tax is incurred.
In the case of North West, its extensive capital expenditure programme has
given rise to such large tax write-offs that its corporation tax charge is
insignificant. SBC said that at least six other water companies are in a
similar situation, although it declined to say whether issues for those are
imminent.
'We are being selectively approached and we are selectively approaching
other companies,' maintained Mr Roger Luskam, SBC executive director.
Meanwhile, the Treasury, which stands to lose hundreds of millions of pounds
in tax revenues from the various enhanced scrip dividends announced so far,
said it was 'watching' the situation, although it has no plans to alter the
tax laws.
Chancellor Norman Lamont, in the March 16 Budget, announced a review of ACT
with respect to charges incurred on dividends paid out of overseas profits.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930527

