FT932-3154

FT  16 JUN 93 / Timex to close Dundee plant by Christmas


   By JAMES BUXTON and LISA WOOD


TIMEX yesterday abandoned its fight to preserve its electronics plant in
Dundee and announced that it would close by Christmas.
The decision followed the rejection by local union leaders of the company's
offer to reinstate the sacked workforce on lower wages and conditions. It
provoked a furious reaction among union leaders and opposition politicians.
Mr Mohammed Saleh, Timex's US vice-president for human resources, said the
plant's financial position had become 'impossible to sustain'. He laid the
blame squarely on the local unions, saying: 'They did everything possible
not to help us keep that plant going.'
Mr Saleh announced the company's decision after a final two-hour meeting
with local officials of the AEEU engineers union and two conveners of the
sacked workforce in a last attempt to settle the 20-week dispute which began
when Timex sacked its 343-strong workforce after a strike.
At the meeting, the employees reiterated their rejection of terms negotiated
by national AEEU officials under which the sacked workers would be offered
their jobs back subject to tests of suitability and the imposition of a 9.8
per cent pay cut, with a reduction in fringe benefits.
The closure of the plant, which was set up in 1946 and now assembles printed
circuit boards, marks the failure of long-term efforts by Timex to make it
profitable. Mr Saleh said Timex had lost Pounds 10m since 1987.
It also indicates Timex's failure to keep the plant going with the
substitute workforce hired after it sacked the original employees.
Timex now wants to go to the conciliation service Acas to negotiate an
orderly rundown and the proposal will be put by unions to a mass meeting on
Thursday. But union leaders in Dundee have said they will not support it.
Yesterday Mr John Kydd, district organiser for the AEEU, said: 'I am
absolutely sure in my own mind Timex engineered the dispute.' Mr Gavin
Laird, the union's general secretary, said it was 'a great tragedy for
Dundee and the UK. We regret we did not know how serious a position the
finances were in and that we were not involved before. If we had put forward
our proposals earlier they might have worked'.
He said that the trade union laws had not helped - they had stopped the
trade union having discussions with the company within a 90-day period.
Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, is understood to have worked behind the
scenes to prevent a closure, offering government help for training to
persuade Timex to stay. He also fought in cabinet committee to prevent
Dundee having its development area status downgraded.
Isolated from reality, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930616

