FT933-5194

FT  04 SEP 93 / London Stock Exchange: Widespread falls as account closes


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


THE TRADING account in the UK equity market came to a decidedly weak close
last night, when the FT-SE Index showed a fall of a further 15.3 points, and
trading for the new account opened without much sign of buying interest.
Weakness in the US dollar depressed blue chip equities towards the close but
British government bonds remained firm against a background of renewed
pressure within the European exchange rate currency network and a cut in key
interest rates in Spain.
The FT-SE Index fell 15.3 to a final reading of 3,057.3, virtually the low
of the session. The three-week trading account in equities, extended to
cover the UK August bank holiday, has seen share prices rise very sharply on
economic optimism, only to lose a significant portion of their gains over
the past four trading sessions.
At last night's close, the Footsie was still 1.6 per cent up over the
trading account but showing a loss of 43.3 points, or about 1.4 per cent,
over the week.
The picture was much the same in the FT-SE Mid 250 Index, 10.9 off at
3,478.9 yesterday, but 0.61 per cent up over the account.
UK stocks, already discouraged by a relative absence of US buyers, have
become apprehensive ahead of next week's heavy calendar of UK company
results, which, traders fear, could also bring further rights issue calls.
Uncertainty over the trading progress among UK companies has hurt share
prices this week. There was a cautious market response yesterday to the
trading statement from the chairman of GEC, the blue chip electronics group.
Indications that profit-taking has gathered pace were borne out by a jump in
Seaq trading volume to 727.4m shares from 674.3m in the previous session; on
Thursday, when the Footsie fell by 12.5 points, retail, or genuine customer
activity, reached Pounds 1.73bn, one of the highest daily figures recorded
this year.
Equity strategists were taking a cautious view of prospects for next week.
SG Warburg, still holding to its Footsie 2,900 forecast for the year-end,
warned that 'the risks are growing' in a market on strong share earnings
ratings and Strauss Turnbull urged 'a watchful eye on earnings.'
The long end of the gilt-edged market closed around 1/4 higher but the short
dates were little changed by the August MO money supply data.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930904

