FT932-6783

FT  27 MAY 93 / Asia looking to gas for expanding energy market


   By KIERAN COOKE


   SINGAPORE


ASIA'S energy capacity is set to expand to a level where it will surpass the
power capacity of the US by the year 2010, an Asia energy analyst said
yesterday at a Financial Times conference in Sing-apore.
Mr Daniel Goldman of US energy specialists Arthur D Little said governments,
the private sector and the multilateral agencies not only had to find the
funds for power generating expansion, they also had to find adequate
supplies of fuel.
He said gas fuel was an increasingly attractive option, mainly because of
cost and environmental factors. While Asia had abundant gas reserves, a
tripling of demand for gas in the region between now and the year 2000 would
result in regional supply shortages. At present about 12 per cent of Asia's
power is generated by gas.
Mr Guy Doyle, associate editor of International Coal Report, said coal
accounted for about 36 per cent of total generation in the region.
While he accepted that gas was the most favoured fuel, India and China, the
region's two biggest coal users, would continue to get the bulk of their
power needs from coal.
Some speakers at the conference said that serious environmental problems
would occur in the medium term if China and India did not switch to other
fuels or invest in new, more technologically advanced coal plants.
Mr Woodrow Williams of General Electric Nuclear Energy said nuclear energy
had become more acceptable and that there was considerable interest in its
use in most Asian countries. Japan, South Korea and Taiwan already had
considerable nuclear energy programmes. Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia
were investigating the possibilities of nuclear power.
Mr Frank Gray, conference chairman and editor of the Power in Asia
newsletter, said that over the past year several governments in the region
had implemented or announced plans to privatise their power utilities and
had also made conditions more attractive for private sector participation in
the power sector.
'The Philippines, which has been gripped by a power crisis, now says that
the immediate problems will be solved by the autumn. But the basic question
for everyone remains one of money. If power in the region is to grow as
forecast, enormous sums of capital have to be mobilised,' said Mr Gray.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930527

