FT932-7024

FT  26 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Beckett attacks Tory 'dishonesty'


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


LABOUR yesterday sought to inflict the maximum political damage over the
Treasury's scrutiny of the welfare state by challenging this week's
assurance by Mr John Major, the prime minister, that the exercise would
respect the spirit and the letter of the Tory general election manifesto.
In rowdy Commons exchanges, Mrs Margaret Beckett, Labour's deputy leader,
contrasted statements made by Mr Major in an interview with the Financial
Times published yesterday with actions already taken by the government.
She said pledges not to increase National Insurance contributions, not to
extend value added tax and to maintain tax relief on mortgage interest had
been broken.
But her attack was rejected by Mr Tony Newton, the leader of the Commons,
who insisted: 'This government is approaching its difficult task in a
responsible and considered way.'
Mr Major had made the position 'absolutely clear' in setting out the
government's intention to review public expenditure against the background
of 'the pledges we have made and the need to protect the most vulnerable.'
Mrs Beckett scoffed at ministerial claims about the government's readiness
to take tough decisions. 'When is the government going to make the tough
decision to admit even the smallest share of the blame for the state to
which this country is being reduced, never mind the price it is asking the
British people to pay.'
The most fundamental problem Britain faced today was that it had a
government whose 'dishonesty is exceeded only by its incompetence,' she
said.
Joining the attack, Mr Peter Mandelson, the Labour MP for Hartlepool, said
if the government introduced 'hotel charges' for hospital patients it would
destroy the principle that the National Health Service should be free at
time of need and at point of use.
Mr Newton answered by quoting the undertaking in the Conservative election
manifesto that 'need, not ability to pay' would remain the basis on which
care was offered to all in the NHS.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930526

