FT932-6546

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (8): A relentless slide in oil production -
Drastic measures are needed to curb the wasteful use of energy by industry


   By ANDREW GOWERS


IF there is a single Russian industry where, in theory, reform has a chance
of making a palpable difference, it has to be the energy sector.
Nothing would do more to help the economy through the storms of the next few
years than an increase in production and exports of oil, still Russia's
largest hard currency earner by far. Nothing, unfortunately, could seem more
remote.
Oil production has been on a precipitous slide for more than three years,
and continues to fall at an annual rate of more than 10 per cent, with
output this year expected to drop below 350m tonnes, compared with a peak in
the late-1980s of close to 600m tonnes.
Mr Yuri Shafranik, the newly appointed fuel and energy minister, reckons it
will be 1995 before the trend begins to bottom out, but even that cannot be
taken for granted.
And in that year, unless drastic measures are taken now to curb the wasteful
use of energy by industry, Russia - now still the world's largest producer -
will find itself facing the need to import oil.
The litany goes on. Many of the country's best oil reservoirs have been
damaged by inappropriate extraction methods, and the industry lacks the
means to repair them. It is chronically short of money to invest.
Russian domestic oil prices are a tiny fraction of the world level; taxes
are onerous; and, in any case, few enterprises are paying in full for the
oil they buy - one insider reckons that oil producers will this year have in
effect given away oil to a value larger than that of the central bank
credits that are chiefly held responsible for fuelling inflation.
IF all that were not enough to leave the industry dead on its feet, there is
a chronic shortage of production equipment - 80 per cent of the
equipment-manufacturing capacity of the former Soviet Union is located in
now independent Azerbaijan.
Two things are desperately needed to begin turning things round. One is
radical reform of the domestic energy pricing regime, identified by the
World Bank as of key importance in Russia's transition from the command
economy, but sadly neglected since the Gaidar government's initial burst of
reform in early 1992.
A rise in prices towards the world level would stimulate production, curtail
wasteful consumption and eliminate the rampant corruption that currently
afflicts the industry. Yegor Gaidar himself now reckons that failure to
achieve complete liberalisation of energy prices last year was his biggest
single mistake.
The other requirement, which would be encouraged by a serious move on
prices, is significant investment in opening new fields and repairing old
ones by the large western integrated oil companies.
So far, there has barely been a trickle, perhaps Dollars 500m, a minuscule
amount when compared with the scale of the task, though the Group of Seven
leading industrial countries is taking steps to foster more.
THE problem is not a lack of will on the part of the oil majors, most of
which still regard the former Soviet Union as one of the great exploration
opportunities left to them and several of which have already struck
promising deals in other, perhaps better organised, republics of the
Commonwealth of Independent States - notably Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan.
The problem is the chaos in Russia. Whenever western oil industry executives
gather to talk about Russia, they chant a familiar chorus of complaints:
first is the lack of any form of stable institutional and legal framework
for investing in the country.
Second, pervasive uncertainty as to who is responsible for what in the
central Moscow bureaucracy, in regional government and in the sprawling oil
'production associations' that run the industry in Siberia and elsewhere and
that are currently being reorganised into large joint stock companies in
readiness for eventual partial privatisation.
Third, a punitive and constantly changing tax regime, reflecting the
government's ever-growing appetite for funds to plug its budget deficit and,
on occasion, local demands for infrastructure spending. Other gripes include
the fact that foreign companies tend to be offered only a limited range of
investment opportunities - and not usually in the best fields - and the
Russian government's tendency to impose difficult-to-meet local content
requirements on procurement of kit.
'The lack of a clear framework is still the greatest single obstacle to
western oil company investment,' Mr Mark Moody-Stuart, managing director of
Shell for exploration, told a gathering of western and Russian oil bosses in
February.
'For significant investment to take place, there must be a clear general
policy, applicable to all ventures, with manifest legislative support to
ensure stability. We still seem to be some distance away from such
conditions,' he says.
This is more than just another industry whinge about 'level playing fields.'
Everyone in the business concurs that the reason why there has been so
little foreign investment thus far is that Russia presents a unique
concatenation of risks, with very little prospect of adequate returns for a
western oil company.
The tax system that has sprung up in the past year, for example - an
impenetrable thicket of export tariffs, royalty payments and other levies
based on production volumes rather than revenues - almost guarantees that
the most promising project will stand little chance of turning a profit.
Apart from a desire for revenue, this reflects deep-seated political
opposition to the involvement of foreign capital in exploiting Russia's
natural resources - a fact which acts as a residual deterrent to the western
oil companies.
'The international oil companies are used to living with political
instability, but they have to be assured of some return,' says Mr George
Reese, an oil expert with Ernst and Young in Moscow.' In the North Sea, the
tax regime may be onerous, but at least it's profit-based. Here, the risks
are political, technical and financial.'
That has certainly been the experience of one of the small and brave band of
western companies that have taken the plunge: Phibro of the US, with its
'White Nights' joint venture in western Siberia.
In operation for two years, the enterprise has yet to come within sight of a
return, thanks in part to payment problems with some of its Russian partners
and to the government's tardiness in fulfilling a promise to give it a
special exemption from export tax.
Clearly Mr Shafranik, the new energy minister who built up a strong
reputation as a defender of oil producer interests in his previous job as
governor of Siberia's oil-rich Tyumen region, faces a daunting set of
challenges. He says he is anxious to attract investment both in upstream and
downstream oil projects, and in the equipment industry.
More promisingly from the perspective of western oil companies, he also says
he wants to do something about the tax regime - 'certainly I'm not satisfied
with our tax policy. I try to solve it on my level, and I'm sure it will be
solved to the benefit of the oil producers.'
Mr Shafranik's forceful presence in government is among the more hopeful
signs foreign oil industry observers can discern amid the gloom. Another is
that the authorities appear to have begun listening more closely to the
western companies' concerns, with Mr Boris Fyodorov, the finance minister,
recently receiving a joint submission from 20 oil majors grouped in the
newly-founded Petroleum Advisory Forum.
ULTIMATELY, however, the proof of the government's better intentions will
come only through better experience. For this, the industry is closely
watching the progress of a consortium of western companies - McDermott and
Marathon of the US, Japan's Mitsui and Mitsubishi, and the Anglo-Dutch group
Shell - bidding to exploit some of the large gas reserves off Sakhalin
island in the Russian far east.
Having won the tender for a feasibility study last year, after much
confusion between federal and local authorities, they are now waiting to
learn whether they can proceed to the development stage. If this Dollars
10bn project goes even moderately smoothly, oil executives say it will serve
as a bellwether for the industry as a whole.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930527

