FT932-3116

FT  16 JUN 93 / Smooth sailing towards court for new nominee


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


JUDGE Ruth Bader Ginsburg yesterday began a round of courtesy calls in the
Senate, amid guarded predictions that she could be confirmed as the next
Supreme Court justice before the congressional summer recess.
Her nomination by President Bill Clinton on Monday has been greeted by
widespread approval; no apparent obstacles to her confirmation have
immediately surfaced.
Even pro-choice advocates in the abortion debate, recognising Judge
Ginsburg's long career as an advocate of women's rights, have qualified
their initial reservations about her stand on Roe vs Wade, the 1973 court
ruling guaranteeing freedom of reproductive choice.
Ms Kate Michelman, head of the national abortion rights league, said she
looked forward to hearing Judge Ginsburg's explanation of a recent speech,
in which she had said that the ruling may have prolonged political
divisiveness. Ms Michelman said that the judge would represent an
improvement on the attitudes of the man she is to replace at the court,
Justice Byron White, a Catholic who generally voted for curbs on abortion.
Judge Ginsburg's reputation on the federal appeals bench as a consensus
builder, an attribute complimented by Mr Clinton, seems to have reassured
Republicans and Democrats alike.
It is generally assumed she will strengthen the divided court's centre,
represented by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony Kennedy and David
Souter.
Even so, the process by which the president arrived at her nomination, after
an 88-day search, was still attracting criticism, as was his angry
termination of a news conference after the first question had suggested he
was prone to 'a zig-zag quality' when making up his mind.
Mr Clinton said yesterday he had no animus towards the media and, at his
latest news conference, offered an olive branch to the TV reporter who had
so annoyed him.
As for print media, an editorial in the New York Times said he was
'intemperate', the Washington Post blamed the 'running commentary from the
White House' on candidates for the court job, and the Wall Street Journal,
in typical ideological vein, wondered about 'the intellectual self-paralysis
of both Bill Clinton and modern liberalism.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930616

