FT934-8680

FT  13 NOV 93 / Arts: The shape of stars to come - Pyrotechnic wizardry is
taking over cinema screens


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


ALADDIN, Dick Tracy, Batman, Death Becomes Her, Terminator 2 . . . Have you
noticed something odd happening in cinema? It is getting harder and harder
to keep track of well-known faces and appearances. Stars vanish under mounds
of make-up. Actors mutate into cyborgs. Actresses's bodies turn into
avant-garde sculptures. And leading cartoon characters spend whole movies
making lightning transformations, like chameleons on benzedrine. We are in
the age - on screen if not off - of prosthetics, 'morphing',
computer-generated effects and other pyrotechnic wizardry.
Today's transformational impulses are less about regaining glamour, more
about reaching for the fantastical or flabbergasting. In Death Becomes Her,
Meryl Streep and Goldie Hawn turned into living Henry Moore sculptures: one
with a hole in her stomach, the other with a torso twisted back-to-front by
a stairway fall. In Batman and Dick Tracy a constellation of stars, from
Nicholson to Pacino, played 'Find me' under layers of Pelion-on-Ossa
character make-up. And in every new sci-fi Schwarzenegger vehicle the hero
and/or pursuing villain are called upon to dazzle us with quick-change
routines.
Terminator 2, the most indelible of these Arnie antics, popularised
'morphing'. This is the computer-created process whereby a hero-chasing
cyborg can seamlessly transform himself from metallic robot to human and
back again: sprouting, whenever he chooses, new limbs and bio-mechanical
weaponry.
Now in Disney's Aladdin, opening in Britain next week, this fascination with
fast-track metamorphosis has entered, or re-entered, what many might think
its natural home: the cartoon. Since opening in America last Christmas
Aladdin has become, according to some Tinseltown auditors, the most
profitable film ever made. Though earning less than its only 1993
out-grosser at the US box office Jurassic Park - Dollars 210m against
Dollars 330m - its production costs were tiny and its revenue outstripped
even Disney's 1992 animation phenomenon Beauty And The Beast.
Aladdin has a mimicry-prone genie (voiced by Robin Williams) who switches
voices and faces so fast, so gymnastically, that it is a rollercoaster ride
merely to keep up. Here is Robert De Niro, here Peter Lorre; now it's Ethel
Merman or Woody Allen or an air-line stewardess. And while the voices
change, so do the features and physique. They swirl in and out of new
likenesses with such speed and virtosity that the Disney technicians had to
use new computer techniques - just like their live-action rivals - since
even the plasticity of traditional animation could not do the job.
As this trend towards show-off Proteanism in the movies grows, the message
for cultural observers is becoming louder. Cinema is feeling time and
fashion's chariot hurrying near. It is not just that an
art-and-entertainment form soon to celebrate its 100th birthday (1995) is
reaching for the revitalisation pills and knocking them back to the point of
overdose. It is that cinema is becoming aware of the threat from video,
video games and computer software: forms that have attracted more and more -
and younger and younger - spectator-participants by demolishing all
frontiers between the Possible and Impossible in visual terms.
Jurassic Park itself, plundering trick-image techniques from these upstart
technologies, proved that the way to collar large audiences today is to meld
cinema's wall-to-wall realism - what is left of it in the age of shrinking
screens - with the perceptual gamesmanship of the new audio-visual systems.
Spielberg's creature feature did this deftly enough to become the
highest-grossing film of all time and to show that in today's ludic
zeitgeist a bunch of agile, capricious dinosaurs can act a bunch of stiffly
traditional human characters off the screen. (The real prehistoric monsters
in this film are Sam Neill, Laura Dern and company.)
Jurassic Park spotlights the most dramatic development of all in these New
Age movies: they make a mockery of what we used to think of as cinema's
charisma essentials. In the past stars and their roles were expected to be
bigger than life. (Video-game heroes and villains are smaller than life and
must make up for it in speed, agility and elastic identity.) And stars,
whatever their roles, were expected to be - at core - changeless. Indeed
what defined them as stars was their ability to stand there being luminously
iconic, giant points of light on a giant screen. Dietrich or John Wayne,
Bogart or Gary Cooper, they 'acted' by sending out small, flickering signals
from a largely monolithic face and voice.
Back in those days transformational showmanship was sidelined into
lunatic-fringe genres like horror, sci-fi or fantasy (The Wizard Of Oz).
Today, though, every genre must be able to flirt with the miraculous, the
metamorphic. (A romantic weepie can have a crackpot cryogenics plot -
Forever Young; a crime-and-gangster film can have a trunkful of masks and
funny faces - Dick Tracy). Likewise every star must join in in the game of
musical identities. Tom Cruise? Bring on the balding wig and wheelchair for
Born On The Fourth Of July. Warren Beatty? Off to the Richard Nixon
Lookalike Laboratory for Bugsy. As for Streep, Nicholson, Pacino, Hoffman
and De Niro: these are character actors who have seized the throne of
stardom today thanks to an age that likes its leading players versatile,
volatile and Olympically unpredictable.
Even the recent history of the Best Actor Oscar bears out the trend. Who
have been getting the statuettes? Day-Lewis, Irons, Hopkins, Pacino: each
for playing a broad-stroke character part ostentatiously removed from the
actor's known personality and traditional run of roles.
Today there are still a few white-bread, no-change male stars like Redford,
Gere, Costner and - since Born On The Fourth as if in contrition - Cruise.
And there are female stars like Cher who go in for the full surgical
overhaul in an oldfashioned bid to become ageless icons. But exceptions
prove rules - or at least draw attention to a new trend by hanging
'endangered' signs around on a stardom style that used to be the norm but
now seems an ever rarer beacon in a crashing, changing sea.
If the waves are starting to beat against these immutables, it is because
the waves are beating against the kind of cinema - and cinemas  - that
nourished them. Movie palaces yield to multiplexes; multiplexes yield to
VCRs. And as even VCRs lose their novelty value, kids are forsaking them for
the new moving pictureland of computer games. Screens shrink; so feature
films make larger gestures and louder noises to get noticed.
In recent years the leading cultural buzz-phrase has been Short Attention
Span. But what cinema is experiencing and reacting to today is more the
Shrinking Attention Zone. Reduced frames of action; larger portions of those
frames annexed by computerwork and other brave-new-worldery; diminishing
room inside for humans who just want to be expansively human.
From now on, shrinking 'delivery systems' may dictate an increasingly manic,
attention-grabbing style of delivery. Films like Demolition Man, Last Action
Hero and Jurassic Park pile on the plot twists, animate the once-inanimate
and push their human players through ever more demanding and eccentric
hoops. Audiences - and critics - had better learn to love the new game-plan
or the game itself may leave them behind. Meanwhile beleaguered old-style
film stars, whose effortless charisma depended on those giant screens with
their giant constancy of image, may have to mimic Gloria Swanson's famous
words in Sunset Boulevard. 'I am big] It's the pictures that have gotten
smaller.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

931113

