FT932-6736

FT  27 MAY 93 / Move to restrict merger accounting


   By ANDREW JACK


THE SCOPE for companies to boost profits through merger accounting will be
severely reduced under draft guidelines published yesterday by the
Accounting Standards Board.
The guidelines will clamp down on attempts to inflate profits and keep costs
low by using merger accounting when one business acquires another but calls
it a merger.
Merger accounting allows the new company to show the entire year's profits
of the two businesses in the combined accounts, even if the merger took
place on the last day of the financial year.
It also removes the need for revaluation of the acquired company's assets,
which would otherwise increase the depreciation charges in the profit and
loss account.
The practice was widespread until the mid 1980s, when companies attempting
to improve reported profits began to exploit the even greater loopholes
available by arranging pre-acquisition provisions in businesses they bought.
Mr David Tweedie, chairman of the board, said: 'They used to say if you
wanted instant profits you used merger accounting and if you wanted a rising
trend of profits you used acquisition accounting.'
The proposals say merger accounting can be used only if it satisfies five
tests: neither business is described as the acquirer or acquired; all
directors or appointees participate in creating the management structure of
the combined entity; the two businesses are of very different sizes; most
payment should be in equities; and no shareholders maintain an interest in
the future performance of only a part of the combination.
The board also suggests the alternative of abolishing merger accounting.
The board earlier this year issued a discussion document recommending the
abolition of pre-acquisition provisions. Yesterday's move is an attempt to
prevent companies reverting to the exploitation of the existing merger
accounting rules.
'This is slamming an escape route,' said Mr Tweedie. 'There are so very few
genuine mergers. The present standard leaks like a sieve.'
The merger accounting proposals are contained in an exposure draft.
Consultation is open until September 30 and the proposals could be a
standard by the start of next year.
FRED 6. Acquisitions and mergers. Accountancy Books, PO Box 620, Central
Milton Keynes, MK9 2JX. Pounds 6.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930527

