FT934-8700

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (15):
When the balloon goes up


   By IAN RODGER


RECENT visitors to the Alpine ski slopes may have noticed an increasing
number of skiers belonging to the ABS club. That, at least, is what it looks
like, as more and more skiers don bright red or purple rucksacks with ABS
printed in huge letters on them.
In fact, the letters stand for Avalanche Balloon Securesystem, and the
rucksack contains a clever device to help the adventurous skier survive an
avalanche.
The device consists of a large folded fabric balloon and a small aluminium
cylinder of nitrogen under 300 bar of pressure. In the event of an
avalanche, the user pulls a ring at the end of a cord on his chest - rather
like that for a parachute. This causes a pin to puncture the seal of the
nitrogen capsule and the nitrogen inflates the balloon.
The idea is that the resulting increase in volume per unit of weight will
make the body lighter than the snow, and so the skier will rise like a cork
to the surface of the avalanche flow.
As roughly 80 per cent of skiers killed in avalanches die from asphyxiation
after being buried, the device should save a lot of lives. Last winter,
Florian Schamaun, a guide at Davos, was caught in an avalanche while leading
a group in the Wolfgang area. 'Luckily I was the only one caught, because I
was the only one wearing the rucksack,' he says. 'It carried me 500 meters
and I ended stuck in the snow with my head sticking out. Without the
rucksack, I would not be here today.'
Ueli Gantenbein, head of the Davos Ski School, says that from now on all its
guides and customers who ski off piste will be required to wear an ABS
rucksack.
Many private guides have already adopted ABS. Bruno Sprecher, who guides
Prince Charles among others, was an early convert, and his small shop in
Klosters is filled with ABS rucksacks and promotion material.
The guides welcome ABS, not only as an additional element of security, but
also for professional indemnity. 'It could possibly reduce negligence
claims,' says John Hogg, a guide at Andermatt. 'If you have used every bit
of safety equipment, then you have a better defence in the case of an
accident.' But he adds: 'It is not foolproof. The user has to remember to
pull the cord.'
Peter Aschauer, the German developer of ABS, is the first to underline the
limits of the system. It is not a life-saver, he points out. Used properly,
all it can do is help someone be rescued. It does not guarantee that the
person being rescued will be alive or uninjured.
Aschauer, a marketing consultant who is a powder ski enthusiast, heard about
the concept in 1980. He contacted the inventor and bought the patent. By the
mid 1980s, after tests in different snow conditions, he arrived at the
optimum size for the balloon and weight of the rucksack. He then lined up
suppliers for the main components, restricting his own activity to
assembling the rucksacks at his home near Munich with a few friends.
Active marketing, if that is the way to put it, began in 1988. Aschauer
refuses to sell the system to just anyone. He fears that the inexperienced
punter would take it as a guarantee that he does not have to worry about
avalanches any more. Thus, he sells only through licenced guides, ski
schools and mountaineering shops.
Still, word has spread quickly. Last season, he sold 700 rucksacks and, on
the basis of orders already on hand, he expects to sell more than 1,000 this
year. So far, he sells only in Europe and doubts that he will ever be able
to sell in the US because of the high risk of facing astronomical product
liability claims there.
The rucksacks come in three sizes, with storage space from nine to 36
litres. Overall weights range from 3.6 kilogrammes to 4.9kg (the system
itself weighs 2kg), and prices from DM1,600 (Pounds 650) to DM1,915 (Pounds
778). Expensive - but one could save your life.
ABS Peter Aschauer GmbH, An der Dornwiese 3, 82166 Grafelfing, Germany. Tel
(49-89) 85-19-44. Fax (49-89) 854-3177.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

931113

