FT934-8751

FT  13 NOV 93 / The Long View: Juggling the books


   By BARRY RILEY


WOULD you buy Colombian 6 per cent loan certificates at Pounds 84? How about
Chilean 6 per cent stock at Pounds 89, to yield an attractive 7 per cent or
so? Alternatively, what about Mexico 7 1/4 per cent?
You have to be an incorrigible optimist to think so, but perhaps this is
Latin America's moment of financial maturity at last. Next Wednesday, the US
House of Representatives is due to approve the North American Free Trade
Agreement, after which Mexico at least will attain a new credit status. Its
paper could reach true investment grade. Many other Latin American countries
are also now enjoying a degree of financial standing which, historically, is
unusually respectable.
I should explain that the three bonds mentioned date from very different
periods. The Colombian loan was issued in 1822 to British investors, and it
marked the start of an amazing wave of speculation in Latin American
investments. London investors gambled more than Pounds 20m on the shaky
credit-worthiness of newly-independent nations emerging from the domination
of the Spanish and Portuguese monarchies. Within a few years the Colombian
loan, along with all the others, was more or less worthless as Colombia
itself splintered into three parts.
Chilean 6 per cents were part of the initial portfolio of the Foreign &
Colonial Government Trust, which was launched in 1868 with a Pounds 1m
portfolio of what was basically sovereign junk debt. By this time, a more
sophisticated theory of geographical diversification had been developed. The
investments ranged across five continents. The yield on the portfolio was 8
per cent, beating Consols out of sight.
Although F&C suffered its setbacks - as when the Spanish 3 per cent
government stock defaulted in 1875 - the trust survived and prospered for
125 years to the present day to become the UK's biggest investment trust,
with assets of more than Pounds 1.5bn.
As the fashion for so-called emerging market funds grows today, however, it
is important to look back at the portfolios of the 19th century investment
trusts. F&C's investments included Brazil, Egypt, Peru, Turkey and the
United States. All of these, bar one, would today be described trendily as
emerging markets, a term apparently intended to impart an image of progress
and development in order to attract investors.
In fact, a better distinction would be between high grade and low grade
markets. Movement from second category to the first is, in fact,
comparatively rare. Many countries never emerge from the poor quality, high
risk category and this has certainly applied to Latin America.
The Mexican bond, incidentally, brings us right up to date, being an issue
originated earlier this year. So far in 1993, Mexican borrowers have raised
some Dollars 6bn in the Eurobond market, and Mexican international equity
issues in 1992 totalled more than Dollars 3bn (although the pace has slowed
this year). American investment institutions, in particular, have become
more ready to seek high returns on exotic bonds, largely because of the
sharp drop in yields on domestic investments.
The 1822-25 bubble was generated by rather less sophisticated private
investors. The first Latin American debt crisis was well chronicled in a
1990 book of that title by Frank Griffith Dawson (Yale University Press).
There were, for instance, angry scenes in 1824 when it was discovered that
Colombia was proposing to pay dividends with money owed to it by Peru, which
in turn was planning to raise the cash by floating another loan in London.
Not much has really changed: there is now a long tradition of this kind of
financial juggling by South American debtors.
Later in the century, sentiment revived; but, by 1881, only Argentina,
Brazil and Venezuela out of 13 Latin American sovereign borrowers were
servicing their debts. More money went in periodically as the defaults were
patched up, and New York replaced London as a source of international
capital in the 1920s. This culminated in yet another wave of defaults in the
1930s.
Foreign investors had done rather better, however, when they invested
directly in Latin American enterprises. After 1850, there was a big outflow
of funds from the UK and elsewhere into developing countries on the basis of
the same sort of arguments you hear now - Europe was mature and
slow-growing, and surplus capital would earn a better return in high-growth
regions. Instead of last century's railroads, tramways and water companies,
today we have toll highways and telephone monopolies.
Any paper with a sovereign guarantee on it was untrustworthy, however. In
the depression of the 1930s, bond investors retired to lick their wounds and
re-decorate their lamp shades. By the late 1960s, though, the commercial
banks arrived on the scene. Naive loan officers, bolstered by the notion
that sovereign debt could never go bad (history was definitely not their
strong subject) proceeded to recycle billions in petro-dollars to Latin
American borrowers in the 1970s.
And so to the present day. Since the late 1980s, the overhang of unrepayable
debt has gradually been cut away, mainly through the Brady-type
restructuring formula which has involved large-scale write-offs and the
securitisation of the remaining bank debts in various forms (including such
exotica as temporary interest reduction bonds). Suddenly, Latin America has
become solvent yet again - although, as usual, not by repaying its debts.
The key to ultimate respectability probably lies in developing adequate
domestic long-term capital markets: foreign providers of capital will always
be highly vulnerable unless they share a common interest with domestic
investors. In this sense, the development of pension funds in countries like
Chile and Argentina is encouraging. But history tells us that, in Latin
America, manana never comes - or, at any rate, it can be rescheduled
repeatedly.

The Financial Times


London Page I

931113

