FT933-9870

FT  07 AUG 93 / TV-am seeks better luck at the tables of Crockfords Plc


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR GARRY NESBITT was trained as a tap dancer by his show business parents
but it was business he was interested in, so he took a gamble and applied
for a job at Crockfords when it opened as London's first legal casino in
1961.
As a gaming room valet dressed in 18th century breeches, he smoothed the
green baize of the tables and served chocolates to the ladies playing
chemin-de-fer.
Yesterday Mr Nesbitt, chairman of Crockfords, was looking forward to being
chairman of Crockfords Plc when the company is listed on the London Stock
Exchange on September 1.
It follows yesterday's reverse takeover by TV-am, the commercial breakfast
television company that gambled and lost in 1991's auction for new ITV
licences.
The deal will make Mr Nesbitt, who along the way ran casinos for Mecca and
created and sold the Our Price record chain to WH Smith for Pounds 46m, as
rich as many of the international gamblers to come to Crockfords in the
heart of London's Mayfair.
In Crockfords, under the Robert Adam ceilings of a house built in 1760, it
is possible to lose a great deal of money and some do - Pounds 500,000 or
even Pounds 1m in a single night. The lowest bet you can place at Crockfords
is Pounds 5 on a single number at roulette, although the Pounds 600 limit
gives a better idea of what goes on.
'You can bet more by private arrangement,' says Mr Nesbitt who then unlocks
the door of the salon privee, where the really high rollers can go if they
want solitude and silence to win or lose enormous sums.
Here, surrounded by prints and pictures, the minimum bet on the roulette
wheel is Pounds 1,000.
When Mr Nesbitt bought Crockfords in 1990 from Brent Walker for Pounds 50m
it was a huge gamble. 'It was a mid-market casino,' he says. 'It was
virtually a down-market casino. People were playing for Pounds 2. It was
ridiculous.' His aim has been to take Crockfords up market to appeal to the
international elite. 'We have created a very high-stake, high-volume
casino,' he adds.
Over the past three years, 10 'exceptional' players have accounted for 50
per cent of profits, which rose to almost Pounds 20m in 1992. One gambler in
his 60s accounted for no less than 40 per cent of last year's profits,
underlining how much casinos at the top end of the market rely on the right
high rollers coming through the door.
Institutions who backed TV-am and are staying to see how their luck holds at
the gaming tables must be hoping his health holds.
Recently an unknown South American walked into the club. A huge gambler in
Las Vegas, he had heard about Crockfords.
'London is still the gaming capital of the world,' Mr Nesbitt insists,
although in recent years Middle Eastern clients have given way in large part
to the rich of Hong Kong, Singapore and and Japan.
As long as they still come to London to do deals, there will be money to be
made in the premier league of London casinos, all within walking distance in
Mayfair. They include Aspinalls only two doors away from Crockfords in
Curzon Street.
'The British don't come. This is a 98 per cent export business. We should
get a Queen's Award for Exports,' says Mr Nesbitt, who now hopes to buy
other casinos in London and take the Crockfords way of doing business to
other countries.
For many people, the recession may be barely over but in London casinos
business is already beginning to boom, probably helped by the devaluation of
the pound. Last year the turnover at London's casinos reached Pounds 1.2bn.
This year, as much as Pounds 1.44bn in chips could be put at risk on the
smooth green baize.
Taking a gamble Page 8 Lex Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930807

