FT933-12564

FT  23 JUL 93 / The Property Market: Framework for the future - London needs
a fresh strategic outlook, says an advisory group


   By VANESSA HOULDER


'London is at a time of dramatic change. It needs a fresh strategic
framework to influence that change and give a clear sense of direction to
its future development.'
London Planning Advisory Committee.
Strategic planning has not been taken seriously in London in recent years.
In 1988, the last time the London Planning Advisory Committee, an
inter-borough body, put forward a city-wide planning framework, it was
virtually ignored by the government.
But the agonising over whether London is losing its way in the league of
Europe's top cities has renewed interest in the case for strategic planning.
That, together with the changed circumstances provoked by the impact of
recession on the capital, could lend more weight to LPAC's latest
consultation document, which covers topics such as the need for better
co-ordination between development and transport and environmental
considerations.
But the difficulties of laying down a planning framework is illustrated by
the extent to which conditions have changed for the office market in London
since LPAC's last guidelines in 1988. Offices require 'a radical shift in
strategic planning policy', according to the most recent LPAC report.
Instead of a shortage of supply, planning authorities need to manage the
surplus of existing office floorspace and cope with the huge excess of
development opportunity in the longer term.
This recommendation is based on employment growth projections in finance and
business services of between 30 per cent and 7 per cent between 1991 and
2006.
LPAC expects a minimal take-up of older, low-quality offices, which should
be put to alternative use, particularly housing and student hostels.
Using its most optimistic set of figures, LPAC estimates that demand for new
office space could total some 2.2m square feet a year from 1997  - half the
level during the 1986-90 period of rapid expansion. Under the pessimistic
scenario, demand for new space would be stuck in the current trough of about
500,000m sq ft a year.
Beyond 2000, take-up of new space could, at best, total some 3.5m-4m sq ft a
year, justifying new construction activity of about 3m sq ft a year, similar
to that in the early 1980s.
Such a level of activity could also justify developments of large-scale
projects of about 1.2m sq ft in areas such as the Isle of Dogs, King's
Cross, Paddington, Waterloo, London Bridge, Farringdon and Stratford in east
London.
LPAC notes, however, that there would not be demand for more than two or
three such schemes by 2006.
Draft 1993 Advice on Strategic Planning Guidance for London, Pounds 5 from
LPAC, Eastern House 8-10 Eastern Road, Romford RM1 3PN.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930723

