FT933-9949

FT  06 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Strong second quarter lifts BP to Pounds
1.17bn


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


BRITISH Petroleum yesterday reported a strong set of second quarter results
which exceeded the market's expectations.
On a replacement cost basis, operating profits in the second three months of
the year were Pounds 581m, up from Pounds 385m last time. After exceptional
items, the result was Pounds 261m, compared to last time's loss of Pounds
812m caused by over Pounds 1bn of restructuring charges following boardroom
upheavals.
The second quarter figures brought the half-year profit to Pounds 1.17bn,
compared with Pounds 808m for the first half of the previous year. After
exceptionals, profits of Pounds 510m compared with a previous deficit of
Pounds 717m.
The second quarterly dividend remains unchanged at 2.1p making 4.2p (6.3p)
to date.
The main reason for the improvement was the continuing effect of the cost
reduction programme launched last year. Exploration and production made an
operating profit of Pounds 474m, up from Pounds 356m in last year's second
quarter, though down from the first quarter of this year. The half year
result was Pounds 990m, up from Pounds 770m.
Refining and marketing made Pounds 197m, up from Pounds 59m last year,
bringing the half year profit to Pounds 321m, up from Pounds 95m. This was
the best quarterly result since 1991, and followed strengthening demand and
wider refining margins, and significant cost reductions.
The chemicals business reported a loss of Pounds 23m, compared to last
year's second quarter profit of Pounds 5m. Margins in petrochemicals and
polyethylene remain depressed, though they have been offset by improvements
in the acetyls, nitriles and specialties businesses and cost savings. The
overall first half loss of Pounds 37m included restructuring charges of
Pounds 24m.
BP pursued its strategy of divestment during the first half, realising
Dollars 1.6bn (Pounds 1.07bn) in the period. This strengthened cash flow and
enabled BP to continue paying down Dollars 1.1bn of debt. However, since
debt is largely denominated in dollars, the weakness of sterling left
gearing unchanged from the first quarter at 94 per cent.
Mr David Simon, chief executive, said that demand for oil would increase
worldwide by about 1.5 per cent, but that did not necessarily mean stronger
oil prices because of high levels of supply. Demand for oil products was
also weak in the US and Europe, and the trading environment for chemicals
was 'likely to remain difficult'. Disposals were expected to yield total
proceeds of Dollars 2bn by the end of the third quarter.
Mr John Browne, managing director for exploration and production, said that
recent changes in UK taxation were unlikely to alter BP's activity in the
North Sea, though it might be refocused.
BP is also optimistic about prospects in exploration areas such as Colombia,
Azerbaijan, west Africa, the Gulf of Mexico and the west of Shetlands.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930806

