FT934-8557

FT  15 NOV 93 / Runners under starter's orders: Raymond Snoddy examines the
corporate battle to operate the UK's first national lottery


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


The Dublin taxi driver had no doubt about the best things that had happened
in Ireland in the past 10 years. 'The visit of the Pope and the national
lottery,' he declared with great conviction.
The Irish lottery launched in 1987 has, by any standards, been a
considerable success. Nearly 60 per cent of Irish adults play once a week,
spending an average of just over IRPounds 3 and producing revenues last year
of more than IRPounds 252m from a population of 3.5m.
'It has entered the rhythm of Irish life,' said Mr Ray Bates, the lottery
director. At 8pm on Wednesday and Saturday evenings, when the big draws are
broadcast live, three-quarters of Irish homes tune in.
The corporate runners and riders now beginning to line up for the great
National Lottery stakes in the UK hope that this success can be replicated,
though on a grander scale. 'The televised draw will get a bigger audience
than Coronation Street (one of the most popular shows on British
television),' said Mr Gerry Robinson, chief executive of Granada, the
television company.
He is also executive chairman of The Great British Lottery Company, one of
the first of the bidders in pursuit of the single operator's licence to be
awarded in March or April next year. There will only be one operator's
licence although other companies can provide individual games.
If anything like the Irish experience were repeated in the much larger UK
economy, then the new National Lottery licence would be a prize worth
winning. On the basis of the Irish experience turnover could approach Pounds
10bn a year.
This is extremely unlikely, mainly because of competition from the Pounds
800m-a-year football pool markets, quite apart from other 'harder' forms of
gambling such as casinos and horse racing. Yet there is a growing belief
that Pounds 1.5bn-a-year estimates of potential revenues from Mr Peter
Brooke, the national heritage secretary, are conservative and that more than
Pounds 3bn looks possible when the lottery gets into its stride. The first
winning numbers could be chosen by next autumn.
In a recent study, including a model of future lottery finances,
stockbrokers Hoare Govett argued that the National Lottery was likely to
become the single largest 'consumer product' in the UK. 'Our forecast
turnover of Pounds 3.5bn in year five will produce revenues to the exchequer
of Pounds 420m and a sum for the beneficiaries of Pounds 1.8bn,' it said.
The beneficiaries will be - in equal proportions - the arts, sport,
charities, national heritage and a fund to pay for projects to celebrate the
millennium.
The other bidder already trotting off down the course is Camelot, a
consortium bringing together Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTECH, Racal
Electronics and ICL. Like The Great British Lottery Company, also a
broad-ranging consortium grouping Hambros, Associated Newspapers, Carlton
Communications and Vodaphone as well as Granada, Camelot has already hired
about 100 people and will probably spend about Pounds 2m by the time the bid
document is submitted; the expenditure will cover the cost of the bid in
addition to carrying out planning for the earliest possible national launch
of the lottery.
At least five other riders, some more committed than others, are approaching
the starting gate and most of them are likely to submit their bids in
February.
The definite starters include the Rank Organisation, N M Rothschild in a
joint venture with Tattersalls, the Australian lottery company, and the
Tote, the body responsible for managing on-course pooled betting at horse
races. The Tote has linked up with GEC, Thorn EMI and an unnamed lottery
equipment supplier which is an equity investor.
Ladbrokes, the betting and leisure group which owns Vernons football pools,
has not formally declared yet but is likely to submit a bid with partners.
A rather flightly outsider not to be ignored is Mr Richard Branson, who has
a team, advised by advertising agency J Walter Thompson, working on a
non-profit-making bid. 'We are spending a lot of time on this,' said Mr
Branson, who envisages a wholly commercial operating company which would
give all its profits to a charitable trust.
Most of the would-be lottery operators have gone down the consortium route,
pulling in expertise ranging from computer power to retailing and television
experience in the form of equity investors.
Mr Michael Gifford, chief executive of the Rank Organisation, has been
working on a possible bid for five years and will contract his outside
expertise. It is believed he has secured exclusive deals for all the
suppliers he needs, including Arthur Andersen, the consultancy which has a
specialist lottery team, and Dittler, the US lottery ticket company.
'We say we are an operator. We will buy at best value what is needed to make
it work,' said Mr Gifford. An indication of his seriousness comes today when
Mr Ian Neilson-Jones takes up his new job of leading Rank's lottery bid. Mr
Neilson-Jones previously ran the lottery in Ontario, Canada - the fifth
largest in the world.
Also later today Mr Anthony Fry of Rothschilds/Tattersalls will decide
whether to send out tender documents following the release of draft lottery
regulations last week or wait until the final versions are available next
month.
Work is now under way following the publication last week of draft licences
and application documents and a series of tough rules from the Department of
National Heritage. These include limits on rolling over the top prize for
more than three weeks, which would block Dollars 100m US-style payouts and
preventing tickets being sold in places such as betting shops or bingo
halls.
By next year the lottery will offer considerable opportunities to a wide
range of businesses - from suppliers of on-line terminals for the eventual
20,000-30,000 retail outlets, to printers of lottery tickets. An estimated
500 jobs could be created directly, double that if associated jobs are
included.
According to the National Institute of Economic and Social Research a total
of 85,000 jobs could be generated from the 'multiplier' effect, including
jobs in the construction industry from the money spent on good causes such
as building new sports facilities.
The winner of the lottery licence will have to fight for its profits. After
assuring Mr Peter Davis, director-general of the Office of the National
Lottery, the body responsible for setting up and regulating the lottery, of
its probity and reliability the contest will then turn on numbers - some of
them very small. The smallest percentages of administration costs will
impress Mr Davis as will small profit margins, although the main aim is to
maximise revenues.
Hoare Govett estimates that by the fifth year the operator could be earning
annual profits of Pounds 70m, though by then it would only have 18 months
left of its licence, which expires on March 31 2001.
Unlike experience almost everywhere else the UK lottery will probably start
with a 'big bang' - a national launch of on-line terminals where customers
can chose their own numbers and have them entered directly into the computer
system and receive a ticket in seconds. In other countries lotteries have
launched first with 'instant' games such as scratch cards and then moved on
to more sophisticated computerised versions.
The UK lottery is also unusual in that it will be the first 'privatised'
lottery in the European Union. Its supporters hope that it will share one
aspect of lotteries which is almost universal - if lotteries are properly
administered and there is an interesting diversity of games, they make more
money than originally forecast.
In the first week of the Irish lottery IRPounds 6m was taken in revenues on
scratch cards alone. And when the first big Lotto prize was won there was
even a religious echo - the winner used the letters in the name of her
favourite saint to help chose the winning permutation. For the seven likely
bidders plus any dark horses the permutations are endless.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

931115

