FT934-8435

FT  16 NOV 93 / World Trade News: 'Chaos' if Uruguay Round fails


   By TONY JACKSON


   HARROGATE


THE failure of the Uruguay Round next month would mean 'lurking chaos', Mr
Peter Sutherland, director-general of the General Agreement on Trade and
Tariffs, said yesterday.
In a speech to the British CBI conference in Harrogate, Mr Sutherland warned
of a return of the economic conditions which provoked the 1930s depression
and the second world war.
The deadline of December 15 was final, Mr Sutherland said. 'When I say the
end I mean the end. No further chances are going to be offered negotiators
and world leaders this time. The political and legal chemistry allows for no
further adjournment.'
Failure in December would not mean the status quo being maintained in trade
policies or growth, he said. 'We will be on a very slippery slope indeed,
and there will be no multilateral system of sufficient weight and
credibility to stop the world sliding into a mire of protectionism and lost
economic opportunity.
'I fear that it would provoke the kind of tensions which led us in the late
1920s from economic nationalism through high tariffs and competitive
devaluations in the Great Depression of the 1930s. Some say these tensions
led us ultimately into the second world war.'
Mr Sutherland appealed to the US and European Union to give a lead. 'They
have been lecturing the world since the last war,' he said. 'It is perhaps
an irony that they are the ones we have to call upon to deliver the
(Uruguay) Round today. The developing world now seems convinced of the need
for an open trading system.
'The EU and US have to recognise that purely domestically enforced
anti-dumping rules without any oversight or objective control is a slippery
slope to unilateralism and the law of the jungle. If that's what we want for
international trade, we will pay a heavy price.'
Tomorrow's US Congress vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement was
important for Gatt, he said. 'Beyond the immediate economic consequences for
the three countries involved, the potential knock-on effects of a loss of
Nafta would not be good for the Uruguay Round. If the protectionists taste
blood on Nafta on one side of the Atlantic, is there not a risk that it
would incite those on the other, and even further afield?'
He rejected calls for a compromise by which the most contentious areas such
as agriculture could be left on one side.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931116

