FT932-3292

FT  15 JUN 93 / Arts: Benvenuto Cellini - Opera


   By DAVID MURRAY


Never more than a semi-success during Berlioz's lifetime, on Sunday in the
Queen Elizabeth Hall his 1838 opera semi-seria proved to be a marvellous
tonic - as Chelsea Opera Group concert-performances regularly are. The
Group's knack for choosing exactly the operas that will reward current
revival, and bestowing historical care and dramatic flair upon them in equal
measure, makes their concerts indispensable fixtures in the London season.
Their Cellini was rewarding even beyond their excellent norm. It says a lot
for a performance three-and-a-quarter-hours long in concert dress without
any pretence at staging, that it not only held the delighted attention of a
full house but actually went from strength to strength. The COG has given
the opera before, but only in the compromised 'final' version that Berlioz
accepted for Liszt's Weimar performances in the 1850s. This time they
borrowed the fine Royal Opera recension, which restores most of the original
Paris score but sensibly trims the spoken dialogue and the later
recitatives.
From the Overture forward the conductor Adrian Brown's just tempi and
energetic confidence were relishable, whilst his four-square rhythms and his
disregard for the characteristic bated-breath pianissimi were a touch
disappointing. Something of Berlioz's volatile magic was lost. Yet in the
end, energy won through: unhampered by the weight of a stage production, the
score cantered along at a lively, natural pace, with satisfying variety and
not a single longueur. The COG chorus was good as ever, if run slightly
ragged in the quickest music.
The nine soloists, however, made a team of real distinction - boasting a
level of French diction unheard-of hereabouts even ten years ago. In lesser
roles, Michael Hart-Davis whined nasally but musically as the fretful
Innkeeper, and Lynton Atkinson and Martin Higgins brought alert character
and cutting edge to Cellini's chief assistants. For his patron Pope Clement
VII Brian Bannatyne-Scott's rich, ruminative bass served admirably.
Dour and funny, Jeremy White was no less stylish as the Papal treasurer
Balducci, Cellini's unwilling father-in-law-to-be. As the son-in-law he
would have preferred, Geoffrey Dolton's clever, idiomatic Fieramosca rose to
heroic defiance in his Act 2 aria. As Cellini's apprentice Ascanio the young
mezzo Margaret McDonald cut an irresistible figure in breeches, displayed a
remarkable vocal range and made a huge, unabashed success of her Act 2
party-piece - Offenbach before his time.
Not long ago, Teresa Cahill sang a lovely Daphne for the COG in Strauss's
opera. As Balducci's daughter Teresa here she made an unlikely 17-year-old,
with a mature soprano's sumptuously spreading tone where her inamorato
sported a youthful, tightly focused tenor; but her ripe musical thrust
carried all before it, full of generous, subtle feeling in a role that makes
relentless vocal demands. A couple of dodgy top-notes made no difference at
all.
Meanwhile her Cellini, Justin Lavender, fulfilled his promise of recent
years with springing elan. He has made a speciality of those 19th-century
French roles which prescribe a cruelly high tessitura for modern tenors,
from whom a lusty, full-throated attack is now expected where their period
predecessors probably got away with mere head-voice. In earlier Lavender
performances the strain has occasionally showed, even while he shaped a
vigorously elegant line. This time, as the challenges rose he not only met
them with ringing assurance, but left himself room still for wry asides in
roguish character. Berlioz would surely have been delighted.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930615

