FT931-4134

FT  12 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Ministers scale back plan for
generator coal stocks


   By MICHAEL SMITH and DAVID OWEN


THE GOVERNMENT is scaling down proposals to cajole electricity generators
into keeping large stocks of coal as a means of keeping open some of the 31
threatened pits.
The revision of its plans will increase fears in the coal industry that the
white paper, due in the next few weeks, will save just a handful of pits.
Slowing a planned reduction in generator stockpiles was one of the main
proposals in a draft white paper through which the Department of Trade and
Industry hoped to save 10 to 12 of the pits.
A government decision against persuading generators to keep stockpiles well
above commercial requirements would reduce the number of saved pits.
The generators have indicated they could take about 40m tonnes over five
years - above existing tentative deals - provided agreements can be reached
on issues including how the government subsidises it.
At the government's instigation talks have begun between British Coal and
the generators on this extra coal. These are far from nearing conclusion.
Anything above the 40m could involve stocking considerably above the
generators' commercial needs. But the DTI has made no response to proposals
made three weeks ago by the generators on stocking.
This does not mean the proposals have been abandoned, but industry sources
believe the government is scaling back its plans in part because of the cost
of stocking. PowerGen told the government it wanted compensation of more
than Pounds 140m for keeping stocks at existing high levels.
National Power appeared to be adopting a tougher stance still, saying it did
not want excess coal on its books because of the effects on its borrowing
requirements.
Meanwhile, the government is putting pressure on some of the regional
electricity companies to dismantle contracts with Nuclear Electric. This
would facilitate conclusion of tentative deals between British Coal and the
generators and parallel deals with the regional companies. It is expected
that at least one such switch will be agreed.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930312

