FT933-5384

FT  03 SEP 93 / Dr Pepper plants 'poison pill'to ward off Cadbury bid


   By RICHARD WATERS and GUY DE JONQUIERES


   NEW YORK, LONDON


DR PEPPER/Seven-Up, the US soft drinks group, has adopted a 'poison pill'
defence to ward off the possibility of a takeover bid from Cadbury
Schweppes, the UK soft drinks and confectionery group.
The creation of such defences has become rare as the takeover boom of the
late 1980s has waned, in part because companies fearing takeover already
have them in place. Institutional shareholders have also waged a campaign to
force companies to submit existing poison pill plans for shareholder
approval, making them less fashionable.
Dr Pepper's plan, approved by its board on Wednesday, would be triggered if
Cadbury raised its stake in the company above the 25.9 per cent of voting
and non-voting shares it already holds. All shareholders other than Cadbury
would then have the right to buy one new share at a 50 per cent discount for
every share they already owned, thus diluting the UK group's holding.
The poison pill would also come into play if another shareholder raised its
stake of voting shares above 10 per cent without the board's approval.
Dr Pepper said the plan had been adopted because of Cadbury, which added to
its 5.7 per cent holding of voting shares two weeks ago when it bought a
20.2 per cent stake of non-voting shares from Prudential Insurance. The UK
company said that it had applied on Wednesday for approval to convert its
entire holding into voting shares.
Cadbury stalked Dr Pepper in the mid-1980s, before a management buy-out took
the US company private in 1988. The company returned to the stock market
this year.
Dr Pepper said the plan 'is not intended to prevent a takeover on terms
beneficial to the company's stockholders, but rather to assure that all of
the company's stockholders are treated fairly should a takeover become
imminent'.
Cadbury said the move did not damage its own interests: 'It doesn't affect
the value of the investment we have made. Nor does it affect any plans we
have in the immediate future.'
According to the Washington-based Institutional Shareholder Services, two
thirds of all companies in the S&P 500 have poison pills defences. Some
companies have been forced by institutional pressure to resubmit them for
shareholder approval.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930903

