FT934-8588

FT  15 NOV 93 / Management: An art that deserves a high priority - Martin
Broughton, chief executive of BAT Industries, on how to handle
communications with the City / Tips from the top


   By MARTIN BROUGHTON


This is a dangerously presumptuous subject for an article as it presupposes
there is a 'right' way of handling communications with the City and that we
are arrogant enough to think we have found it. That would be far from the
truth. But I think what we have got right is recognising the need to give a
high priority to communications with the City.
What is investor relations? Is it an art or a science? The dictionary
defines the former as 'skill as the result of knowledge and practice', while
the latter is 'often opposite to art' or, more usefully, 'a branch of study
concerned with a demonstrated body of connected truths'. Given that no less
an expert than Lex in the FT once wrote that Wellcome's shares 'might either
double or halve', the field seems to be a little short on science.
Our objective is not directly to promote BAT as an investment, but rather to
explain the company. The syndicated tracking research which we do every year
through Mori is a useful starting point because it helps us to understand
what sources of information are important to our audience.
In terms of sources of information, for instance, it is remarkable that a
recent Mori survey reveals that more than 90 per cent of all investors
described brokers as 'most useful' to them in their jobs. This paints a very
different picture to the commonly held notion that institutions are paying
less and less attention to brokers' analysts. This is just as well, because
I know how much time BAT spends with the brokers' analysts, even though more
and more institutional representatives are now coming to our results
briefings.
BAT started reporting quarterly in 1987. It gives the company twice the
number of formal occasions on which to talk to the City, as well as making
the flow of information more frequent. The typical six-month gap between
preliminary and interim results can allow uncertainties to develop or can
lead to a company that is 'out of sight' also being 'out of mind'. Apart
from results days, when we hold a press conference and a video-conference
with US analysts, as well as the UK analysts' briefing, the other
face-to-face elements in our programme include facility visits to our
operations and small group meetings with investors.
A recent visit to Farmers, our US insurance subsidiary, shows how difficult
it is to manage these events. We intended to improve the parties' long-term
understanding of a key business and general feedback suggests that was
successfully achieved, but one analyst couldn't resist publicly reducing his
forecast before the presentations had even finished, leaving the market with
a different perception of the visit. Although BAT does not organise a
facility trip every year, we are committed to visiting our leading
shareholders in person annually.
What are shareholders looking for? Again, the Mori research tells us that
the two most important factors are the quality and strength of management
and the company's financial status. Given the first of these, it is not
surprising that leading investors should want to meet the management face to
face.
Contrary to what might be expected, I believe that companies try very hard
not to reveal any 'inside' information under these privileged conditions.
Indeed, in BAT's case, this part of our programme is always timed for the
period immediately following a reporting occasion.
I have tended to concentrate, in this article, on the core of our investor
relations activity but it does not exist in isolation, being supported by a
range of corporate information and even some corporate hospitality. The
annual and quarterly reports are another essential part, while advertising
our results on the financial pages of national newspapers enables us to
explain the company's performance, in a controlled way. We try hard, but we
know what we're up against in communications with the City. After all, to
invest can be an irregular verb. I have heard it conjugated: 'I invest. .
.you finance. . .they speculate.'
Next Monday: Mick Newmarch of Prudential Corporation on how to move the
corporate headquarters.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

931115

