FT933-12661

FT  23 JUL 93 / World Trade News: Thames to head Turkish water project


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ANKARA


A CONSORTIUM led by Thames Water, the privatised UK regional utility, has
signed a Dollars 700m agreement to build and run a water supply plant in
Turkey.
The plant at Izmit, south-east of Istanbul, will be operated for 15 years by
Thames which will recover the investment by selling water to the
municipality. The project is one of several under negotiation in Turkey
using the build, operate and transfer method of financing.
Philipp Holzmann of Germany is leading a construction consortium on the
DM2bn (Pounds 700m) Birecik dam project near the Syrian border. Enron,
acting for Midland Electricity, the privatised UK power utility, together
with Wing Merril, the private US engineering consultant, are negotiating a
Dollars 1bn power plant project for the Marmara region.
Thames's implementation agreement was signed this week by the consortium and
the mayor of Izmit at the end of a five-day visit to Turkey by Mr Richard
Needham, Britain's trade minister. UK content in the project is worth
Dollars 240m.
The consortium still has to agree loan terms and treasury guarantees,
although executives regarded the presence at the signing of Mr Osman Unsal,
head of the Turkish treasury, as clear indication the government was
prepared to back the deal.
The BOT concept was pioneered by Turkey's late President Turgut Ozal as a
way to establish large public infrastructure without affecting the
government's balance sheet, an important consideration at a time of severe
budget constraints and large foreign debt payments.
The argument for BOT is that as the private sector takes the risk financial
disciplines are tighter, because repayment is directly dependent on project
completion.
PWT Worldwide, Thames's wholly owned subsidiary, together with the Turkish
partners Gama and Guris, will conclude work on a partly completed dam,
construct two pumping stations and more than 100km of mains piping.
Construction is expected to be complete in 1997.
The financial package is to include Japanese aid funds, export credits,
commercial loans and a 15 per cent equity portion put up by the consortium
partners.
Chase Manhattan, financial advisers to the project, say the credit package
will be submitted next week to the UK Export Credit Guarantee Department and
other European agencies. Syndication with UK and Japanese commercial banks
will follow.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930723

