FT933-9866

FT  07 AUG 93 / EC warned of need to strengthen co-operation: Brussels
underlines threat to aim of monetary union


   By JAMES BLITZ


   BRUSSELS


THE EUROPEAN Commission yesterday issued a warning to all 12 European
Community member states that they must reinforce co-operation or risk losing
any chance of achieving economic and monetary union in the foreseeable
future.
At an emergency meeting to discuss the crisis over European monetary policy,
the Commission underlined the serious threat to both monetary union and the
single market programme after last weekend's relaxation of the exchange rate
mechanism.
The Commission did not say the timetable for Emu, as set out in the
Maastricht treaty, had been derailed by the currency market turmoil, but in
a communique released after its meeting, it issued a 'solemn appeal' to the
12 governments to reinforce their co-operation in all fields.
'The Commission in no way underestimates the gravity of the events which
have weakened the credibility of European construction,' the communique
said.
The clear implication was that, as European currencies float more freely
after the widening of bands in which ERM currencies may fluctuate, there is
a greater chance of nations indulging in competitive devaluations of their
currencies to boost export share in the single market.
Mr Henning Christopherson, the European commissioner for financial affairs,
said: 'We want to underline how serious the situation now is in the
Community.'
Sir Leon Brittan, external economic affairs commissioner, said: 'Emu is not
going away and will not go away. The case for it is too strong. No one
should underestimate the gravity of what happened at the weekend but equally
no one should underestimate the will to rebuild economic and monetary
co-operation.'
Yesterday's meeting was described as 'grave but collegial' by a Commission
spokesman. However, it is likely that detailed discussion was difficult
because three of the 17 commissioners were absent from the meeting,
including the two Germans Mr Martin Bangemann and Mr Peter Schmidhuber. One
of the French commissioners, Mrs Christiane Scrivener, responsible for EC
tax policy, was also absent on holiday.
The Commission underlined the importance of the assessments that it is due
to make before the end of the year on the progress of European economic and
monetary convergence.
These will accompany a white paper, which the Commission is planning to
submit to member states at the Brussels summit in December, and which will
deal with problems of competition, growth and employment.
Page 2
French cautious over rapid cuts in interest rates
Page 6
Man in the News: A foreign exchange dealer
Fated to share same cage
Victorian values, Page 7
Currencies, Page 11
Lex, Page 22
Investors' outlook, Wkd III

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930807

