FT932-13456

FT  23 APR 93 / Estate agents see increased activity


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


THE THAW in the housing market seen since the beginning of this year is
continuing, according to a survey of more than 100 estate agents conducted
just before Easter.
It provides further evidence of a revival in house sales and mortgage demand
reported by house builders and building societies.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, which conducted the survey in
England and Wales, said: 'Although recovery is slow, estate agents from
nearly all areas reported increases in activity and sales.'
Although experiences varied, more than 80 per cent of agents in the survey
said prices had remained stable in the previous three months.
Only 13 per cent reported price falls while 3 per cent said that prices had
risen by more than 2 per cent over the period. Large numbers of agents
reported falling prices at the beginning of the year.
The institution said that the improvement was beginning to penetrate into
the middle and upper price ranges which meant that there was a broader range
of purchaser in the market - so improving the chances of finding a buyer.
Concern over the state of local economies, particularly over job prospects,
continued to depress sales in some areas.
William H. Brown, agents in South Yorkshire, said that uncertainty over pit
closures was inhibiting sales in the Doncaster area. Agents in Halifax, York
and Brigg also suggested that sales had fallen back slightly in March
compared with February.
Renton & Renton, part of the Black Horse estate agency chain in Harrogate,
North Yorkshire, said that there had been a significant increase in sales:
'Just driving round the town people are noticing more 'sold' boards which
seems to be giving them confidence to take the plunge.'
Improved confidence was equally noticeable in London and south-east England
with a swathe of towns reporting much better conditions.
Croydon, however, defied the regional trend, 'reporting low confidence in an
area severely hit by negative equity'. The by-election town of Newbury was
also reported 'to have slowed down'.
Mr Peter Miller, the institution's housing spokesman, said: 'The trend is
encouraging but we still require a big increase in completed sales to be
sure of sustained recovery. The warning remains that sellers must not have
inflated expectations if they hope to sell their property in this still
price-sensitive market.'
RICS Housing Market Survey. RICS, 12 Great George St, London SW1P 3AD.
Annual subscription Pounds 50.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930423

