FT934-11411

FT  01 NOV 93 / Management: Opportunity knocks - A two-year-old initiative
which aims to help women at work


   By LISA WOOD


Ann Thomas is a deputy manager of one of the largest flagship stores of J.
Sainsbury, the British food retailer. But she only works on Sundays.
Five years ago, says Judith Evans, director of corporate personnel for the
group, a 10-hour working week in such a managerial job, where she is often
in sole charge of nearly 150 employees, would have been inconceivable.
The catalyst for changed thinking on how such a job could be made practical
was Opportunity 2000, the business-led initiative launched two years ago to
improve the position of women at work in the UK.
'Without Opportunity 2000 we would probably not have thought to ask Ann
Thomas if she wanted to come back to work immediately after having her third
child, and she probably would not have thought to ask us if she could,' says
Evans.
The campaign, she adds, provoked Sainsbury to question how obstacles could
be removed to assist women's progress.
Thomas may be exceptional at Sainsbury. But the personnel department and
line managers, mindful of the active interest of their chairman in the
initiative (he is a founder-member), are redoubling their efforts to promote
equality of opportunity among staff.
Opportunity 2000 - to which 216 British companies are now formally committed
 -was widely suspected of being a nine-day wonder. But the campaign's second
annual report - which is published today - may go some way to alter
perceptions by pinpointing initiatives and policies being developed in the
participating organisations. It discusses the ideas and approaches that have
worked, and those that have still to bear fruit.
Lady Howe, who chairs the campaign, says she believes there are signs of
Opportunity 2000 making a difference. But she says the campaign does not
promise overnight miracles. 'There is still a long way to go.'
Just how far was highlighted in a survey of 29,000 executives in 533
companies published last week by the National Institute of Economic and
Social Research and the London School of Economics. This showed that only 8
per cent of top executives in Britain are women and that the higher up the
corporate hierarchy you go the fewer women you find.
Paul Gregg and Stephen Machin, from the Institute, take issue with the claim
that women are increasing their share of the top executive jobs - defined as
everything between chief executive and middle management. They also found
that women are paid less than men even if they are working in the same job.
'There does appear to be a glass ceiling . . . and it does not appear to be
cracking,' they observe.
Opportunity 2000 campaigners stress that they are not just interested in
getting more women into the boardroom - although the report gives several
examples of 'firsts' such as the Bank of England appointing its first female
director. More generally, they are seeking to improve women's lot in the
workplace.
Progress here, though, is uneven. Childcare Vouchers is an organisation
which supplies companies with vouchers for eligible employees for the full
or part-time payment of their childcare costs. It claims that only a few of
the companies to sign up for Opportunity 2000 have introduced affordable and
practical ways of helping working women overcome the childcare hurdle.
The organisation has an axe to grind, but its criticism highlights the scale
of the task.
Many believe the government should provide more in the way of financial
incentives. At the moment, for example, tax relief is confined to workplace
nurseries which, for many women, is not an acceptable solution.
DayCare Trust, a national day care charity, also points out in a report
published today that fewer than four in every 100 trainees on
government-funded training schemes receive any help with childcare.
As the Opportunity 2000 report underlines, costs of implementing policies,
such as childcare, are a prime concern of employers (some of whom are
working with budgets as low as Pounds 1,000). Many companies are opting for
less expensive alternatives, such as job sharing and flexible working.
Under Opportunity 2000 there is no formal pathway to promoting equality.
Campaign companies set their own goals for increasing opportunities for
women in their workforce by 2000.
Those new to the idea need to start with basics - incorporating equal
opportunities into the business plan, for example, or investigating where
women are in the hierarchy and then seeking to diagnose the problems which
may hinder their upward mobility.
Others, however, are now in a position to measure year-on progress in areas
such as promotion, retention and returner rates. Marks and Spencer, the
retailer, is targeting areas such as its childcare and maternity
arrangements and its training programmes for investigation following its
monitoring exercises. Boots the Chemist has reported a rise in the number of
store staff returning after maternity leave.
Some companies have set clear targets - Iceland Frozen Foods aims to
increase the percentage of female retail managers from currently below 10
per cent now to 15 per cent in two years' time. Others, including Avon
Cosmetics, are investigating whether there are gender differences in pay and
conditions.
The Royal Bank of Scotland is 'profiling' jobs and individuals to ensure
that subjectivity is taken out of recruitment and selection decisions. HTV,
the television company, carried out a job evaluation in co-operation with
its five unions.
Many companies recognise the need to boost confidence among women. Fox's, a
biscuit-making subsidiary of Northern Foods, found that women were
particularly reticent about coming forward for management positions mainly
held by men.
As a result Fox's has run self-development programmes aimed at shop floor
and junior clerical roles.
'There will be no revolution overnight but we are making progress,' says
Philip Ward, group personnel executive at Northern Foods. In March 1991 only
3.7 per cent of employees at Northern Foods earning more than Pounds 30,000
a year were women. This has now gone up to 8.3 per cent.
'It would have happened without the campaign but Opportunity 2000 is another
important weapon in our armoury as we seek to talk both internally and
externally about these issues,' explains Ward.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931101

