FT931-4030

FT  12 MAR 93 / International Company News: Marc Rich hopes for resolution
of tax case


   By IAN RODGER


   ZUG


MR MARC RICH, the leading international commodity trader, still hopes for a
settlement of the tax evasion case that has left him a fugitive from the US
for a decade.
'I am convinced that at some time in the future US attornies will recognise
that the transactions were guided by expert tax counsel and were proper,' Mr
Rich said in an interview at his Zug headquarters. 'When that recognition
occurs, a resolution of this matter will be possible.'
The 58-year-old Mr Rich, who this week announced his resignation as chief
executive of the Marc Rich & Co international commodity trading group, said
he would continue to direct the business as chairman.
'I am not retiring,' he said. His new role would be mostly an advisory one,
and he would work a normal eight-hour day instead of 12 hours in the office
plus taking work home.
Mr Willy Strothotte, a former Rich executive who quit last year because of a
difference over management philosophy, has returned as chief executive with
responsibility for day-to-day management.
Mr Rich shed little light on Mr Strothotte's surprising return, saying: 'We
see eye to eye'.
He foresaw no large changes in the way the group was run. 'Mr Strothotte has
been with the company 15 years. He grew up in it and is fully familiar with
its spirit. The things which are good he will continue. I am sure he will
find new and different ways of doing things which obviously will be better.'
Mr Rich is reducing his share stake in Marc Rich & Co from slightly over 50
per cent to 40 per cent.
'What is happening is in line with a policy that my partners and I
established many years ago. We have been making shares available to younger
executives, and the aim was always that they should obtain a majority.'
He denied rumours that he needed the substantial sum he would get from
reducing his stake in the group which has a net worth of over Dollars 1bn.
He dismissed frequent charges that his group breaks international embargoes
in its trading practices.
'Our policy is that we obey laws, and we comply with embargoes wherever they
are. At the same time, I am a believer in free trade, and I believe that
people who are affected by embargoes always find ways around them.'
He said the group was wrongly accused of doing business with Iraq about 18
months ago.
'There was correspondence, but it made clear that everything was subject to
the United Nations sanctions being lifted. And what was involved was
humanitarian aid - food and medicine - not trade.'

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930312

