FT933-10064

FT  06 AUG 93 / A need to pedal out of poverty in Bolivia: The new
president's problems in the poorest country of South America


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


CROUCHED at the side of a dirt road in the 12 de Octubre market in El Alto,
the working-class township on the rim of the canyon above the Bolivian
capital, La Paz, with a huge pile of gnarled potatoes spread on a blanket in
front of her, Mrs Celia Ticono de Medina does not think highly of economic
stabilisation programmes.
Wrapped against the biting Andean air, in a colourful shawl with a
pink-faced baby suckling at her breast, she tips her bowler hat and opens
her mouth to reveal rotting teeth, blackened from chewing coca leaves to
stave off hunger.
Mrs Medina, aged far beyond her 32 years, has journeyed all night on the
back of a truck from the mining town of Potos to sell the potatoes for the
equivalent of a few dollars, however long it takes. She has five children
and is married to a miner who lost his job in 1985 during the government's
radical adjustment programme, often cited as the most successful such
revision carried out under democracy in Latin America. Mrs Medina is not
convinced: 'You can't eat stability.'
Bolivia has reduced annual inflation from 26,000 per cent to less than 10 -
the lowest in South America - and is seen as a model of how to tackle
hyperinflation and debt crisis in a democracy. But it also illustrates the
fact that economic stability does not necessarily bring prosperity. The
poorest country in the region, its return to economic growth since 1987 has
barely outpaced population growth.
Mr Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada, the victor of the presidential election held
in June, is due to be sworn in as president today - independence day. He was
planning minister in 1985-89 and the main author of economic adjustment.
Combating poverty and improving wealth distribution are the main challenges
facing him and he has no doubt about what voters want. 'The onus is on me to
get the economy moving and get money to the forgotten people,' he says.
Mr Palmiro Sora Sauzedo, assistant director of Plan International, a
development agency, warns: 'It's time to democratise the economy as well as
politics. Otherwise that was the last vote for the free market option'.
For the average Bolivian, the costs of balancing the budget have seemed more
tangible than the benefits. Living costs spiralled after the government
slashed subsidies and raised public sector tariffs; unemployment rose with
the sacking of state employees, including 23,000 metals miners; drastic cuts
in import tariffs have made life hard for local industry; the budget squeeze
has hit provision of public services.
According to the World Bank, Bolivia's per capita income has fallen more
than 20 per cent since 1980 to Dollars 700 (Pounds 469.70) now. The rural
population has been hit hardest. Bolivia has the highest percentage of rural
poverty in the world, with 97 per cent of the rural population below the
poverty line according to the UN International Fund for Agricultural
Development, compared to 85 per cent in 1986. Also during this period, the
rural population increased by 1.4m to 3.4m  - about half the country's
total.
Nowhere is this clearer than on the altiplano, the high Andean plain on
which 70 per cent of the rural population live. Scenes of llamas grazing on
the shores of Lake Titicaca, under the snow-capped Mount Illimani, look
misleadingly idyllic. Here average life expectancy is 46 years, infant
mortality is 172 per 1,000 live births and family income averages 72
bolivianos (Pounds 11.40) a month.
Mr Sandro Calvani, head of the UN Drug Control Programme in Bolivia and
former World Health Organisation representative in Africa, says, 'poverty
here is worse than in Ethiopia or Burkino Faso.' He is not surprised that,
for many, growing the coca leaf is the only way.
Some 10 per cent of the working population is involved in the coca trade,
including many former miners. Bolivia is now the second largest producer of
coca after Peru (and of cocaine after Colombia), generating some Dollars
650m-Dollars 700m a year, of which some Dollars 150m-Dollars 200m stays in
the country.
Rather than construct a real alternative to this ancient cultivation turned
drug source for the developed world, Bolivia has become highly dependent on
foreign aid. By contrast, foreign investment has been deterred by dithering
government in the face of strong union opposition. Exports are declining - a
trade surplus of Dollars 104m in 1989 had turned into a Dollars 561m deficit
last year, the worst in a decade.
Mr Sanchez de Lozada denies that the adjustment programme has worsened
conditions: 'That's like blaming the fireman for the fire. People forget
that, from 1980 till adjustment in 1985, GNP shrank 27 per cent because of
the collapse in tin prices (Bolivia's main legal export) and the debt
crisis. We found a very poor country with hyperinflation and left a very
poor country without hyperinflation.'
He blames the last government for not building on stabilisation. 'The
problem is that, since then, we've had stagnation and thus not dealt with
the terrible social problems left over from the 1980s.'
The new president plans an ambitious transfer of wealth through the
distribution of shares in state companies worth an estimated Dollars 4,000
per person. He declares: 'Stability is like a bike. We've stabilised and
must now start pedallling, otherwise we will fall.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930806

