FT934-8437

FT  16 NOV 93 / World Trade News: Beijing responds to Clinton's change of
approach - Seattle meeting reflects China's delight that the US is to stop
preaching and start talking


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL


THAT Mr Bill Clinton and Mr Jiang Zemin should meet this week on friendly
terms is a remarkable turn of events which could help to end a turbulent
period in Sino-American relations.
Deep divisions will certainly remain between the US and Chinese presidents
on issues such as human rights and trade. But Beijing's welcome for Mr
Clinton's abrupt decision this autumn to stop preaching to China and start
talking instead has set the stage for a possible lessening of friction in
some important areas.
The two men are due to meet in Seattle at the end of the week during the
informal meeting of Pacific leaders which follows the annual ministerial
gathering of the 15-member Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation group.
The rapid growth of China's economy, trade and investment is a central
element of the development of the influence of the Asia/Pacific region. It
is raising China's status as a world power and attracting massive interest
from US companies, which could suffer heavily from a sharp deterioration of
relations. Such a worsening seemed well under way as little as three months
ago.
Relations have been tense since Washington imposed sanctions on Beijing
after the June 1989 massacre of demonstrators in Tiananmen Square by Chinese
troops.
President George Bush pursued a minimalist approach to China policy which
both irked Beijing and failed to satisfy either the US critics of Chinese
human rights policy or those who favoured closer engagement.
As part of his failed bid for re-election, he allowed the sale of military
aircraft to Taiwan in order to preserve American jobs.
Mr Clinton, who had pledged to stop 'coddling' Beijing, faced conflicting
demands. On the one hand, the human rights lobby expected him to fulfil his
campaign promise by revoking China's Most Favoured Nation trading status. On
the other, a large number of American experts on China in academia, the
military and business saw it as vital to US interests to develop a broader
and more constructive relationship with Beijing.
Mr Clinton proceeded to make a series of moves which angered Beijing.
He placed conditions on MFN renewal in 1994 including 'overall, significant
progress by China' in human rights. In particular, he wants to see progress
towards implementation of a joint memorandum aimed at preventing exports of
goods manufactured in Chinese prisons, and passports being made available to
all Chinese citizens who are entitled to them. China rejects any linking of
trade and human rights.
Washington also imposed sanctioned on Beijing over alleged sales of missiles
to Pakistan, and then shadowed a Chinese ship which it suspected of carrying
poison gas ingredients to the US. An inspection found no trace and China
demanded an apology.
Other factors in the deterioration included US opposition to Beijing's
unsuccessful bid to host the 2000 Olympics, and China's arrest of dissidents
and journalists, its failure to re-admit a dissident, and its explosion of a
nuclear device in defiance of US requests not to carry out further testing.
Then came Mr Clinton's about-face, which followed a review of policy led by
his national security adviser, Mr Anthony Lake. Since October, US officials
have been talking of the need for 'engagement' with China. A cabinet member
as well as senior human rights, trade and defence officials have visited
Beijing and more such trips are planned.
US officials say the aim is not to reduce US pressure over human rights,
nuclear proliferation and trade but to make them part of a broader
relationship in which efforts are made to build trust and understanding.
Mr Mike Espy, the agriculture secretary, said in Beijing: 'You can't preach
and criticise standing 7,000 miles away. You have to engage on a more
personal level. I assured all the officials with whom we met that the visits
to China by the Clinton administration at very high levels would increase.'
China has responded positively to the US initiative. Mr Jiang accepted Mr
Clinton's invitation to Seattle, and China has termed the bilateral meeting
a summit. Mr Li Peng, the premier, said that 'a meeting between top leaders
of the two countries itself is a good thing and is of great significance.'
The latest sign of detente came last week when Mr Qian Qichen, foreign
minister, said China was prepared to discuss allowing the International
Committee of the Red Cross to visit Chinese prisons.
The US State Department responded: 'Access to Chinese prisons by the ICRC
would certainly be an important factor in determining whether or not there
has been overall significant progress in human rights.' Meanwhile, the US is
considering whether to cancel the sanctions imposed over sales to Pakistan.
US officials caution that Mr Clinton still faces pressures which could force
him to revoke MFN, despite the consequences for US trade and investment, if
his conditions are not met. Small gains made recently in talks with Beijing
on individual issues, particularly over trade, coupled with the overall
visible improvement in social conditions in China, have to be set against
strong feelings in Washington about human rights.
A US official says: 'Lots of congressmen do believe that this (MFN) is not
the right instrument to use. But Clinton is a domestic president and he
would not put his domestic programmes at risk for foreign policy
considerations when the result would be to lose the support of significant
numbers of members of Congress.'
However, both US and Chinese officials believe sufficient groundwork has
been done, albeit in a short time, for this week's meeting to mark a new
phase of a long-standing love-hate relationship. Mr Wu Jianmin, Foreign
Ministry spokesman in Beijing, says: 'We believe that to address the
differences between China and the US it is necessary to increase contacts.
The difficulties should not hamper co-operation.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931116

