FT932-80

FT  30 JUN 93 / International Company News: Nordic groups link in venture


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


HUHTAMAKI, the Finnish consumer products group, is buying the European
confectionery operations of Sweden's Procordia for SKr900m (Dollars 115.4m)
as part of a broad collaboration between the two companies.
The deal will be funded by an issue of 3m new shares to Procordia, making it
the third-largest shareholder in the Finnish company with a 10.9 per cent
stake.
The groups will also set up a joint venture pharmaceuticals operation to
boost European sales of two gynaecological products outside Scandinavia.
Buying Procordia's European confectionery businesses, which had 1992 sales
of SKr1.05bn, will add 60 per cent to the European sales of Huhtamaki's Leaf
group, already the world's 10th-largest confectionery company. Until now,
two-thirds of Leaf's sales have been generated in North America. Its 1992
European sales were FM1.32bn (Dollars 230.4m).
Huhtamaki gains a presence in several new European markets - including
Norway, Denmark and Spain - it gets access to important brands, including
Lakerol throat pastilles and SorBits sugarless chewing gum. The deal gives
Huhtamaki manufacturing units in Sweden, Denmark, Germany and Spain, and
sales organisations in nine European countries.
Huhtamaki's chief executive, Mr Timo Peltola, noted that the acquired
businesses made a SKr40m loss last year, and said their prospects 'will
remain depressed for a while'. He promised further rationalisation to
increase profitability.
The co-operation within pharmaceuticals centres on Procordia's Kabi
Pharmacia unit and Huhtamaki's Leiras division, and involves joint marketing
of Kabi's Estring vaginal ring for hormonal replacement therapy and Leiras'
Levonova hormone-releasing contraceptive intra-uterine device.
Both groups are to explore further areas for co-operation, although
Procordia will be restricted to a maximum 21 per cent stake in Huhtamaki.
The transaction will not be affected by last month's accord between the
Swedish government and Volvo, the car and truck group, which will split
Procordia into separate pharmaceutical and food/consumer products units this
autumn.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930630

