FT932-286

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (8): Export credit insurance dilemma creates a
mess - Unhappy experiences of one sort or another have resulted in the
clearing banks curtailing or curbing one-stop non-recourse finance schemes /
Non-recourse finance


   By ALAN SPENCE


SHORT-TERM non-recourse export finance is a 'very messy area indeed', says
Mr Steve Gill, deputy head of trade and international banking at Midland
Bank.
In spite of last week's announcement of more government support,
uncertainties persist in the export credit insurance market over the issue
of re-insurance capacity for the leading insurers, Cardiff-based NCM and
London-based Trade Indemnity. There are also administrative difficulties
with what Mr Gill refers to as 'plug in and off you go' short-term
non-recourse schemes.
The four big high street banks - often first port of call for would-be or
existing small to medium-sized exporters - are unwilling to provide
non-recourse finance to companies if they do not have the matching comfort
of a credit insurance policy to offset risk.
Resolution of the re-insurance debate will be a key factor in determining
the future scope of such schemes, mainly designed to guarantee up to 100 per
cent of the invoice value of an exporter's receivables on provision of
appropriate evidence of shipment. They are also aimed at promoting smooth,
positive cashflow from markets where exporters may find pressing for payment
is administratively, if not culturally, difficult.
The 'non-recourse' component means that the bank cannot reclaim up-front
funding from the exporter in the event of buyer default - although this can
be the case if non-payment reflects a contractual dispute between buyer and
seller.
The short-term export credit insurance debate aside, off-the-shelf schemes
designed to assist small to medium-sized exporters have also experienced
other problems, including high cost-return ratios - given the often one-off
nature of fundings; the fraudulent presentation of documentation; and the
maladministration of credit insurance policies - either by accident or
design - by the exporter. The maladministration results in the
disqualification of the bank from claiming on the policy if the importer
fails to pay.
Then, fundamentally, there is the question of demand for such schemes. Mr
Gill says: 'At the right price, every exporter would like 100 per cent
non-recourse funding'. So why have the banks not been inundated with
customers? Some believe the price is not right, despite the security
provided - particularly as the vast majority of business relates to more
secure Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
markets.
Others suggest that a certain innate conservatism among small to
medium-sized UK companies towards exporting, let alone the non-recourse
funding of sales, is also responsible. Moreover, trade financiers point out
that many seasoned exporters often even prefer to ship without credit
insurance cover at all, raising cash on overdraft against receivables if
necessary.
Unhappy experiences of one sort or another have resulted in the clearers
curtailing or curbing one-stop non-recourse finance schemes. Lloyds and
National Westminster Bank are not providing such services. Midland and
Barclays continue to do so, but in a more focused manner than before.
Barclays offers two such schemes, Tradeline and Tradeflow, which date back
to the mid-1980s. However, according to Mr Stuart Natus, head of the bank's
international trade services division in Coventry: 'We are not advertising
the schemes in a broad sweep, but suggest them where we identify a need'.
Mr Gill confirms that Midland is following a similar line, making the
provision of non-recourse funding 'bank-client', rather than
'product'-based.
Lloyds and National Westminster are both thought likely to return with some
form of packaged funding, but are still working on the details. However, for
all four clearing banks to widely offer such schemes in the future -
suitable availability of export credit insurance notwithstanding - they
would have to address what one export finance executive terms the 'flawed
ability of the exporter' to administer his insurance policies.
This could perhaps involve an experienced third party overseeing the
handling of an exporter's policy to the mutual satisfaction of both the
exporter and the bank.
Meanwhile, what other forms of non-recourse, short-term funding are
available from the clearers to protect payments and/or improve cashflow?
Broadly speaking all four banks offer a similar range of services.
Forfaiting is increasingly becoming a short-term weapon, say some finance
executives, although it was once regarded as almost exclusively a
medium-term, non-recourse financing tool.
Factoring is widely regarded as a more appropriate trade finance and
receivables collection mechanism for small to medium-sized exporters,
particularly where a stream of small-scale contracts is involved.
The service typically offers prepayment of up to 80 per cent against
approved invoice, protection against bad debts and the removal of collection
hassles away from the exporter. Service charges can vary, but National
Westminster Bank's scheme, offered via Lombard Natwest, says its fees are
between 0.75 per cent and 3 per cent of total invoice value, plus finance
charges at levels similar to bank overdraft rates for those using prepayment
arrangements.
Alan Spence is editor of International Trade Finance, a fortnightly
newsletter published by FT Business Enterprises

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930629

