FT934-11351

FT  01 NOV 93 / International Company News: Hostile chorus to Volvo deal
reaches crescendo / A look at doubts over the Renault link


   By HUGH CARNEGY


WHEN Volvo and Renault announced in Paris on September 6 their plan to merge
the Swedish manufacturer's car and truck operations with the state-owned
French automotive group, the reaction in Sweden was largely one of sober
acceptance.
The right-centre government of Prime Minister Mr Carl Bildt, the opposition
Social Democratic party, the trade unions and most business leaders gave the
deal the thumbs up, saying it was the best way to ensure the future of
vehicle making in Sweden in the face of tumbling demand in Europe and heavy
overcapacity in the industry.
A Stockholm investment banker summed up the feeling with the comment
'regrettable, but inevitable'. By the end of last week, however, the climate
had changed so much that the same banker believed real doubt had arisen over
whether the merger would be approved by Volvo's shareholders.
'Perhaps it is not so inevitable after all,' he remarked.
The opposition did not find its voice until early October. Then a rejection
of the deal by Aktiespararna, the Swedish small shareholders' association,
and a vehement denunciation by the head of Scania, Volvo's rival truck
maker, combined to unleash a hostile chorus that by the weekend had reached
a crescendo.
Backed by strong support from the media, the opposition camp now includes
former senior Volvo executives, some trade unionists, an array of academics
and - to date - two prominent institutional shareholders.
The new atmosphere was encapsulated at a packed seminar on the deal in
Stockholm on Friday at which Mr Lennart Jeansson, head of Volvo cars and
designated chief financial officer of the new Renault-Volvo, and Mr Jan
Engstrom, Volvo's present chief of finance, were forced on the defensive by
a panel of professors and a journalist, chaired by a sceptical Mr Assar
Lindbeck, Sweden's best known economist.
The opposition inevitably includes a strong nationalist element which
objects to Volvo, the symbol of Swedish industrial pride, being 'sold out'
to foreigners. But what has Volvo most worried are the substantive questions
being raised by shareholders about the details of the merger agreement.
'The industrial logic of the merger for Volvo still seems more positive than
negative,' said a shareholder fund manager.
'But we have lots of questions about the valuations in the deal, the issue
of the privatisation of Renault and the French government's intention to
hold a golden share after privatisation.'
Volvo's case is suffering from two important weaknesses. Volvo and Renault
have refused to break down the values placed on their respective assets, or
give detailed performance forecasts, leaving many Swedes suspicious that
Volvo, once again profitable, will in effect be milked by Renault which is
suffering falling profits. Although Volvo will have a 35 per cent share in
the merged company, its direct stake will be less than 18 per cent, and this
is seen as a structural flaw.
The second weakness is the lack of cast-iron guarantee that Renault will be
privatised as promised. There is a strong view in Sweden that continued
recession, especially in the car industry, threatens the privatisation
timetable and could strengthen protectionist forces, to the disadvantage of
Volvo's Swedish operations in decisions on rationalisation.
From a Volvo shareholder's viewpoint there is another factor. After the
merger, the Volvo parent will become, in effect, a diversified investment
company with interests mainly in vehicle making, food and drinks and
pharmaceuticals. As Professor Ingemar Stahl of Lund University remarked at
Friday's seminar, an investor could almost certainly get better returns by
investing separately in top car, food and pharmaceutical companies.
Apart from the substantive issues, a further difficulty for Volvo lies in
the structure of its ownership.
Most of Sweden's other best known companies fall within the influence of the
industrial empire of the Wallenberg family.
Heavily-weighted preference shares ensure that strategic decisions of the
type taken by the Volvo board are made by one or two shareholders.
Volvo, by contrast, is a very democratic group in which no single
shareholder has more than 10 per cent of the voting capital and more than 40
per cent is held by about 15 institutions. After Renault, which has 10 per
cent of the votes, the next largest single shareholder is the so-called
Fourth Fund state pension fund with 7.5 per cent.
At the same time, many influential figures sit on the board of more than one
of these institutions, reflecting the small-world nature of Sweden's
business community. This can work to Volvo's advantage through, for example,
the seat on the board of Trygg-Hansa SPP, the insurance group held by Mr
Soren Gyll, the Volvo chief executive. In another typical feature of Swedish
business life, the trade unions hold many positions in the institutions and
have, to date, mostly supported the merger.
However, double-jobbing at board level is working against Volvo where
opponents exert their influence more than once. Nor are personal animosities
absent.
Men such as Mr Lars-Erik Forsgardh, the head of Aktiespararna, have long
battled against the flamboyant, and sometimes erratic, leadership of Volvo
by Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar.
'A lot of scores are being settled,' said the Stockholm investment banker.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

931101

