FT934-10285

FT  06 NOV 93 / German unemployment tops 3.5m


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


UNEMPLOYMENT in Germany rose above the 3.5m level in October, the highest
level since the second world war, reaching 7.6 per cent in the west and 15.3
per cent in the east, as the current wave of industrial redundancies took
its toll on the labour market.
The latest figures were greeted with a grim warning by Mr Rudolf Scharping,
leader of the opposition Social Democrats, that the rapid rise in
joblessness was a threat to the country's peace and social stability.
He called for an aggressive new labour market policy by the public sector,
involving direct wage subsidies to employers for a limited period, and
active measures for job creation.
However the prospects of a big wage confrontation in Germany's vital
engineering industry this winter loomed closer yesterday when the
Baden-Wurttemberg region of the IG Metall trade union tabled a claim for a
6.0 per cent pay rise.
On Thursday, North Rhine-Westphalia put in for 5.5 per cent.
Both claims have been flatly rejected by the engineering employers, who have
said that only a wage freeze would enable the industry to cut its costs.
The regions hardest hit by the latest increase in unemployment are the
formerly wealthiest states in the federal republic - Baden-Wurttemberg and
Bavaria - where Germany's machine-tool manufacturers, motor industry
suppliers, aerospace and other high technology employers are concentrated.
The figures published yesterday by the Federal Labour Office in Nuremberg
show unemployment in west Germany reached 2,358,847 last month, a
seasonally-unadjusted increase of 70,800 from September, and up almost
528,500 from one year ago.
The deterioration was less sharp in east Germany, where the number of
jobless reached 1,165,736 at the end of October, up 6,570 on September, and
up 68,300 on October 1992.
Short-time working in the west increased by 69,300 to 659,700, twice the
level of a year ago. It dropped marginally in east Germany, down 8,300 to
135,100.
Mr Bernhard Jagoda, president of the labour office, said that the rise in
unemployment in the west was a reflection both of the economic recession,
and of structural changes in industry.
In the east, however, it showed that labour market measures - such as job
creation schemes and retraining - were no longer capable of holding down the
absolute level of unemployment.
If all those in east Germany occupied in job creation schemes, retraining
and short-time working, and early retirement are added to the unemployed, it
suggests an underlying 'real' unemployment figure of more than 2.45m, which
is higher than for the whole of west Germany.
Mr Scharping's attack on the government's employment record came in a debate
on the German economy in the Bundesrat, the upper house of the German
parlia-ment.
He called on the government to put unemployment as its very highest
priority, and urged the creation of a broader consensus among employers and
trade unions, government and opposition, to forge a common policy.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl said that the German economy needed to create 5m
competitive jobs. That required an 'innovation offensive' by German
industry, and a concerted effort to reduce the cost of labour.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931106

