FT934-11596

FT  30 OCT 93 / International Company News: Wall Street turns to long bond
engineering


   By RICHARD WATERS


   NEW YORK


FACED with a shortage of long-term bonds issued by the US government, Wall
Street has decided to create its own.
Or rather, recreate them. In the 1980s, investment banks made money by
tearing Treasury bonds apart and selling the components for more than the
value of the whole.
Now, led by Salomon Brothers, the banks are ready to start putting the bits
back together to make whole T-bonds again.
The process has been spurred by the US Treasury's decision to issue fewer
30-year bonds. This has contributed to the bull market in so-called 'long
bonds', where yields have fallen to historic lows.
The dismantling, known as 'stripping', involved separating the coupons (or
interest payments) on the bonds from the underlying principal. Each part was
then sold separately as a zero-coupon bond.
On Thursday, Salomon - Wall Street's pre-eminent bond trading house and the
bank which first started stripping T-bonds back in 1982 - became the first
to reverse the process publicly. It launched an offer to buy back Dollars
10bn of zero-coupon bonds, which it and other investment banks had created
in 1984. The parts will be reassembled to create Treasury bonds which mature
in 2014, Salomon said.
The economics underlying this feat of financial engineering remained a
closely-guarded Salomon secret.
In return for their zero-coupon bonds, the bank is offering investors
identical instruments issued by the US Treasury - which started its own
'strips' programme in 1985 - or cash. These Treasury-created instruments are
worth more than those of the investment banks because they are traded in a
more liquid market, Salomon said.
Even after paying this premium, Salomon believes current market prices are
sufficiently out of line to yield a profit by turning series of zero-coupon
securities back into whole bonds.
Technical factors explain part of this: given their 20-year maturity and
high coupon rates (the stripped bonds were issued when interest rates were
at 12-13 per cent), the reconstituted bonds will prove cheap for investors
looking to deliver bonds in settlement of futures trades, Salomon said.
See Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931030

