FT934-11168

FT  02 NOV 93 / Big chopper falls with a thud: The trials of China's
reformists as they try to cool an overheating economy


   By TONY WALKER and EDWARD BALLS


Mr Zhu Rongji, China's economic supremo, can scarcely have encountered more
testing times than these in his stewardship of the Chinese economy. Nor can
China itself have entered a more critical phase in seeking to expand its
economic reforms.
When Mr Zhu surfaced in Shanghai a few days ago to open a bridge, it marked
one of the very few recent public appearances for a man rarely out of the
news in the first half of this year. China's senior vice-premier has had
much on his mind, and on his plate, since he unveiled in July a 16-point
austerity programme to control China's over-heating economy. For the
measures - which have raised interest rates, curbed speculative real estate
investments and imposed a credit squeeze on state enterprises - have
antagonised entrenched interests in the central bureaucracy, and among
powerful local officials.
Under pressure from the provinces, and from the state enterprise lobby at
the centre, Mr Zhu, who in June assumed the role of governor of the People's
Bank, the central bank, has begun to ease monetary policy. The bank loosened
credit restrictions in August and September, allowing money in circulation
to grow by Yuan10bn (Dollars 1.75bn) compared with Yuan1.46bn in the same
period last year.
As the Communist party prepares for the crucial third plenary session later
this year of its 14th Central Committee, an important policy-making body,
there are two questions: have Mr Zhu and his reformist colleagues managed to
preserve the integrity of measures advanced to cool an overheating economy;
and perhaps more important, have they laid the groundwork for progress
towards the next phase of the economic reform programme.
At this preliminary stage it appears that Mr Zhu, having weathered harsh
criticism over some aspects of his austerity package, is close to seeing a
fairly ambitious programme for reform of the banking, finance, and trade
sectors adopted by the third plenum. China is planning to stiffen the
regulatory functions of the People's Bank to enhance its authority over
monetary policy and enable it to concentrate primarily on fighting
inflation; to unveil a radical reform of the taxation system, including the
introduction of a new revenue-sharing formula between the centre and the
provinces; and to further liberalise trade to satisfy requirements for
accession to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. However, reform of
crumbling state enterprises remains a murky area, and Mr Zhu may well have
been obliged to back away from measures that would bring further hardship to
loss-making industries.
Little has emerged publicly of the heated debate within the Chinese
leadership over the way ahead, but interviews conducted by the Financial
Times with influential figures in economic policy-making have given a flavor
of the intensity of discussions. Mr Zhu, at a series of stormy private
meetings in Beijing and the provinces, has been forced to defend his
actions, especially those that have squeezed funds for state enterprises,
some of which are encountering wage difficulties.
Mr Dong Fureng, a member of the standing committee of the National People's
Congress (which acts like the UK cabinet), and a leading economist, was
surprisingly forthright. 'Personally, I think Zhu Rongji's macro-control
measures should be more flexible. Banks should quicken steps to provide
loans to troubled enterprises. The negative effects are growing. If he is
more flexible now, the economy will pay a lower price in the end.'
Other prominent officials such as Mr Ye Sen of the Commission for Economic
Restructuring were more circumspect, although they made little attempt to
disguise their misgivings. 'It is very necessary to have macroeconomic
controls, but we have to distinguish different situations  - we cannot just
cut with one big chopper,' he declared.
Mr Zhu's 'big chopper', a reference to the heavy-bladed kitchen utensil
wielded by Chinese cooks, has certainly fallen heavily. But it has fallen
less discriminately than Mr Zhu may have wished. His credit restrictions
were aimed at recalling loans made to the 'hot money' areas of the economy,
such as speculative property ventures. Commercial banks have since struggled
to recover real estate loans, so instead have recovered funds from
profitable state enterprises, which depend on bank credit to finance their
working capital.
A significant proportion of the new credits that the government has released
since September have been directed to state enterprises, many of them
faltering industries which need continuous cheap loans to stay afloat. Such
a move may make political sense, but hardly squares with Mr Zhu's policy of
redirecting investment towards profitable enterprises. Commercial bank
portfolios are bulging with what the Chinese classify as 'overdue' loans,
but are, in effect, non-performing.
In defence of his measures, Mr Zhu is likely to have argued that initial
gains in restraining unsustainable economic activity, and puncturing what
had become known as the speculative 'bubble economy', vindicate his
approach.
His 16-point plan has, in effect, put an end to illegal interbank lending
through financial intermediaries such as bank-controlled trust and
investment companies - so-called 'triangular debt'; drawn funds back into
the banking system by clamping down on the issuance of enterprise bonds; and
stabilised the exchange rate in currency trading houses known as 'swap
centres'. The exchange rate slipped to nearly Yuan11 to the US dollar in
June, while the black market rate depreciated even further. But higher
interest rates and central bank intervention have since stabilised the
exchange rate at about Yuan 8.7 to the dollar, while some exporters complain
that it is increasingly hard to sell their foreign exchange.
The austerity package has also taken some of the steam out of inflation.
Annual inflation in the 35 main urban centres was 20.7 per cent in
September, down from 23.3 per cent in July. Prices of commodities are also
down sharply. For instance, steel prices fell by 34 per cent in the third
quarter. Retail sales growth has also moderated.
Mr Zhu has also managed to find the money for infrastructure projects which
were starved of funds in the first half of the year and, perhaps more
important, he has ensured that restive farmers are being paid promptly for
produce acquired by the state. Delays in honoring commitments to peasants
had provoked political unrest.
In the six months to June, only 19 per cent of big construction projects
under the present 1991-95 five-year plan were being adequately funded. The
figure had risen to 70 per cent by September. However, fixed asset
investment fell by more than 10 per cent in August over July, although the
heady capital spending of the early part of the year resulted in a nearly 70
per cent increase in the eight months to August compared with last year.
But Mr Zhu is not out of the woods yet. World Bank officials express concern
that monetary policy has been loosened, even though inflation remains high
and industrial output and retail sales are both rising by more than 20 per
cent a year. Meanwhile, senior leader Deng Xiaoping's recent reported
intervention in the economic policy debate to urge a commitment to reform
and to continued economic growth was seen as a possible strike against party
conservatives.
The reformists are engaged in a delicate balancing act: they must exercise
continuing restraint over an economy expected to grow by 13 per cent this
year; at the same time they must confront the political difficulties
associated with pressing further ahead into the uncharted waters of China's
reform process. Mr Zhu will be worried that in his attempts to restrain
activity he risks a hard landing, which may impede his ability to implement
the reforms necessary to avoid another boom-and-bust cycle; but if he yields
too much ground to those urging an easing of credit he risks a resurgence of
inflation.
'Zhu Rongji has a much bigger agenda than slowing the economy,' said a
western official in Beijing. 'Without the next stage of reforms of the
institutions of macroeconomic policy, he knows that China will continue to
run the risk of excess demand and instability . . . He is trying to put the
thread through the eye of a very small needle.'

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931102

