FT932-7049

FT  26 MAY 93 / Detection system for insider-dealing considered: Central
computer may be used to combat market manipulation


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


THE Securities and Invest-ments Board is considering a new central
'facility' to gather reports of many different types of transactions in
individual securities and derivatives, some of which are not reported to
regulators at present.
Mr Andrew Large, SIB chairman, said: 'If the insider-dealing and
market-manipulation legislation is going to work we have to have an
intelligence system, and it's got to look at all the ways people can take a
position.'
The organisation is also assessing what steps to take, if any, to deal with
the way exchanges are reacting to the challenges posed by 'non-exchanges'
such as Reuters' Instinet service and the new Tradepoint share-dealing
system.
The proposal for a new facility, still at the initial stages, is mentioned
in the Large report. 'This would significantly enhance the provision of
vital raw material for preparing cases . . . of market manipulation and
insider dealing,' the report says.
The facility, which might be a central computer database, would bring
together in the regulators' hands for the first time records of a large
variety of transactions. In particular, it would provide details of
transactions at present not reported to regulators, such as over-the-counter
futures and options contracts.
Creating a central computer system to link with many different market
systems would be a substantial undertaking. SIB is still at the very early
stages of considering the issue, however, and it is not clear if such a
complex system is in fact likely to emerge from its discussions.
The initiative has been urged by the London Stock Exchange. It also has the
support of the Securities and Futures Association, which wants such a system
to aid its monitoring of the capital adequacy of market participants, and to
help it detect whether they are taking on more risks than they can afford.
The British Merchant Bankers Association wrote to the Treasury on Monday
saying that transaction-reporting should be expanded to aid the discovery of
market manipulation, including in the gilt and corporate bond markets.
The challenge to traditional exchanges is under consideration as SIB
prepares a discussion paper on market regulation policy.
Mr Large made it clear that he viewed transparency as a serious issue.
'Post-trade transparency is important not just for the Stock Exchange, it is
also important for the derivatives markets,' he said. Futures and options
markets rely on obtaining accurate prices from cash markets.
He added: 'Someone's got to say what level of post-trade transparency is
acceptable.' That someone, he said, was the SIB.
At present large share deals are published only after a delay, because
marketmakers fear that they would be commercially vulnerable if their rivals
could learn promptly what they were buying and selling.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930526

