FT934-8508

FT  15 NOV 93 / International Bonds: Solution found to Bank of Scotland tax
poser


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


EVERYTHING was going swimmingly in the undated sterling Eurobond market
until a couple of weeks ago, when someone decided to kick up a fuss about
tax.
This sector of the international bond market had been growing steadily over
the past two years because it provided UK financial institutions with a
cost-effective way to improve their capital ratios.
At the same time, pension funds and insurance companies were keen to buy
these high-yielding and long-dated assets because they could write their
business against them. They were also popular with retail investors seeking
to preserve their income as interest rates fell.
Last year, a new structure was devised to cut the cost of issuing these
securities further, but at the same time safeguarding their eligibility to
classify as tier-two capital.
Under the new structure, a call option, usually 10 or 20 years after issue,
and a simultaneous increase or 'step-up' in the coupon have been
incorporated into the bonds.
For example, if the issue came at a spread of 150 basis point over the yield
on the 20-year UK government bond (gilt) and the issuer does not call the
bonds, the coupon is re-set for a further five years at the higher of either
the existing coupon or the yield on the then five-year gilt plus 250 basis
points.
Investors have been willing to pay a little more for these so-called
'stepped-coupon' bonds because, although the bonds are undated, they are
perceived to have a finite maturity. This is because the nature of the call
option makes it highly likely that the issuer will exercise the option, with
the prior consent of the Bank of England.
Since these bonds offered benefits to the issuers and the investors, they
performed well in the secondary market and their yield spreads over gilts
tightened considerably.
From June last year to August this year, just over Pounds 1.3bn worth of the
bonds were issued by a range of UK financial institutions, mainly
high-street banks and building societies. However, even Bupa, the private
medical insurer, hopped on the bandwagon with a Pounds 100m issue in April
this year.
Despite all the benefits which the new structure offered, it also created a
fiscal problem for taxable investors because the potential rise in the
coupon on the bonds meant that the bonds were caught by a UK tax law
designed to prevent 'coupon-washing'.
This is a form of tax avoidance whereby taxable investors sell their bonds
just before the coupon is paid to a non-taxable investor and buy them back
afterwards.
Coupon-washing was outlawed in the UK in 1988, when the Income and
Corporation Taxes Act was passed. Section 717 (2) of the Act states which
bonds are taxed neutrally under the Accrued Income Scheme (AIS) and which
are not.
Those which are permitted neutral tax treatment under the AIS are bonds
either with a fixed rate of coupon, or with a coupon fixed over a published
base rate or a published price index. All other bonds are 'variable-rate'
instruments.
Under the AIS, both the buyer and the seller of bonds which are eligible for
neutral tax treatment are taxed on the interest that has accrued during
their respective period of ownership of the bonds.
By contrast, if variable-rate bonds are traded between interest payment
dates, both the buyer and the seller pay tax on the interest accrued on the
date of sale. As a result, accrued interest on these bonds is taxed twice.
Since the interest rate paid on 'stepped-coupon' bonds can change during the
life of the bonds, they are classified as 'variable-rate' bonds and are
therefore subject to penal tax treatment.
The tax position, which was included in the prospectuses of the issues
launched since June 1992, did not put off investors from buying the bonds
because they assumed that the Inland Revenue would tax them on a 'just and
reasonable' basis.
Therefore, Hoare Govett and Salomon Brothers had a nasty shock during the
launch last month of a Pounds 200m offering for the Bank of Scotland when a
handful of banks and institutions expressed their fears about the tax
implications.
The sudden anxiety attack prompted a sharp fall in prices of similar bonds
in the secondary market and threatened to derail the new issue for the Bank
of Scotland.
However, with the help of the best tax lawyers in the country, within 24
hours the lead managers came up with a solution which was acceptable to the
issuer and to investors.
The Bank of Scotland's issue is made up of a series of fixed-rate notes for
tax purposes while maintaining the perpetual nature of the security for
regulatory purposes. If the issuer does not call the first note, it will be
exchanged for another note with a new fixed-rate coupon.
Although the incident now seems like a storm in a teacup, the Bank of
Scotland's issue has helped the market regain its composure because it
provides a blueprint for future bond issues.
It also offers a way out for the outstanding bonds which have been caught by
the legislation. However, since changing the terms of the bonds would be
time-consuming and expensive, the issuers would rather the Inland Revenue
took the bonds out of the variable-rate category.
The Inland Revenue is understandably reluctant to tinker with such a
clearly-worded piece of anti-tax avoidance legislation. 'It would be
difficult to draw and hold the line between securities which should be taken
out of the provision and those which should be in the provision,' says an
official at the Inland Revenue.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931115

