FT934-11607

FT  30 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Depth and complexity of the problems stuns
City


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER, MICHAEL SKAPINKER and MAGGIE URRY


'TAKE a map of the London underground, superimpose it on Network South East
and you get some idea of the complexities.' So Mr Andrew Coppel, chief
executive, describes the challenge of sorting out troubled hotels group
Queens Moat.
Observers were stunned yesterday at news that Britain's third largest hotels
group had incurred pre-tax losses of Pounds 1.04bn, and had been operating
for at least two years with virtually no financial controls.
'We never had a whiff of it,' the head of a rival hotel group said
yesterday. While the industry knew the City had concerns about the group's
debt, QMH's hotels had seemed operationally sound.
Mr John Bairstow, the former chairman who left after the group was plunged
into crisis talks with bankers in March, would have held the same view. 'It
was a growth company and was doing extraordinarily well,' he said yesterday.
'The thing that went wrong was insufficient profits in 1992.'
Mr Bairstow, who created the south of England estate agents Bairstow Eves,
is unashamed of his entrepreneurial habits, which some have blamed for QMH's
troubles today. 'When a company is run with an entrepreneurial flair, it is
not the way accountants would run it . . . with everything done absolutely
properly, and due diligence on every acquisition and disposal.'
Mr Bairstow was unquestionably the driving force behind QMH's expansion. The
story is well documented of how Mr Bairstow built the company out of his
front room, opting to run an 18-room hotel from his Tudor home in Essex.
Less well documented is just what happened within QMH to bring it virtually
to its knees. QMH was hailed as a doyenne of the leisure sector in the late
1980s when it consistently produced strong profits, rising from Pounds 24.8m
in 1987 to Pounds 94.1m in 1990. Other leisure groups were puzzled by its
achievements and attributed them to a lean central office.
Mr Trevor Ward, a director of the Horwath hotels and leisure consultancy,
says the group's small head office and the management incentive scheme
appeared to fit in with the fashion for cutting central overheads and
delegating responsibility. 'They took it to extremes. They were delegating
responsibility but retaining no control.'
The latest revelations show that QMH's real achievement was in making a
string of acquisitions which buoyed profits growth but were basically
unmanageable with the group's resources. Even Mr Bairstow will admit as
much: 'We were certainly lacking in management expertise.'
The report issued to banks showed QMH had no monthly consolidated management
accounts which would allow the board to monitor the group's progress.
Board directors were also kept ill-informed, claim insiders. Although given
documents as they entered the boardroom, directors were asked to surrender
them as they left.
QHM's lax controls allowed it to enhance profits by booking in early the
earnings from hotels which were run on an incentive scheme.
Yesterday's statement also reveals that there had been no proper treasury
function. That lack, say insiders, resulted in a foreign exchange fiasco
which accounted for almost half the Pounds 300m increase in debt in 1992.
That year was the watershed for Queens Moat. The market was expecting
profits of some Pounds 80m for the year to December 31, a forecast which now
looks ridiculously high. During 1992 the group installed the incentive
scheme in Germany, which insiders say turned a group of hotels making
operating losses into contributors of more than Pounds 20m in profits.
Coincidentally, Mr Martin Marcus, the deputy chairman, aroused controversy
just before the results were to have been announced when he sold 1.1m shares
at 57p, making a profit of Pounds 600,000. The shares were suspended the
following month at 47 1/2 p.
Such entrepreneurial flair appears somewhat tarnished when confronted with
yesterday's results. Even Mr Bairstow will admit that his style of
management may not be appropriate to the 1990s. 'I never felt I was entirely
wrong, but if I had run the company more conservatively it would be much
smaller and . . . safer today.'
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1968       John Bairstow begins hotel career
Apr 1982   Buys 26 hotels from Grand Metropolitan for pounds 30m
Nov 1986   Buys Dutch Bilderberg Hotels for pounds 15.5m
Aug 1987   Buys 8 Globana hotels for pounds 73.8m and 16 Crest hotels
           for pounds 73.7m
Oct 1988   Buys seven Crest hotels for pounds 96m
Feb 1990   Wins control of Norfolk Capital for pounds 157m
Aug 1990   Buys 49 per cent of HI Management of France for pounds 30m
May 1991   Pounds 184m rights issue; paid pounds 45m for 15 continental
           European hotels
Jun 1991   Issues pounds 180m of convertible cumulative redeemable
           preferred shares
Aug 1992   Net debt of pounds 790m revealed with interim results
Mar 1993   Shares suspended
May 1993   Martin Marcus, deputy chairman, and David Hersey, finance
           director, resign
Jul 1993   Bairstow to quit as chairman; eight other directors resign
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931030

