FT933-5235

FT  04 SEP 93 / Men in the News: The Middle East's odd couple - Arafat and
Rabin / Hands of friendship across the desert


   By JULIAN OZANNE and ANDREW GOWERS


Cairo, January 1994. A small, pudgy Arab in well-pressed khaki fatigues
strides up the steps of the palace, salutes the presidential guard and
stands before an unsmiling Israeli with white, dishevelled hair. Hesitantly,
the two elderly men shake hands and look each other in the eye. Peace is
declared in a conflict that has shaken the Middle East since well before the
Jewish state was founded in 1948.
A summit meeting between Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation
Organisation, and Yitzhak Rabin, prime minister of Israel - lifetime enemies
who still cordially detest one another - is, of course, still a fantasy.
But it is a measure of the current momentous events that it no longer seems
unthinkable. A week ago, hardly anyone would have expected to see the
Israeli government negotiating with the PLO, or hear both sides hailing
unprecedented draft peace accords allowing for mutual recognition and for
Palestinian self-rule in parts of the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza
Strip.
Now it seems only a matter of days before agreements of this kind emerge -
possibly triggering a sharp acceleration of the Middle East peace process,
and the signing of similar accords between Israel and all its Arab
neighbours. Provided that nothing bloody or unforeseen occurs in this most
unpredictable of regions, it may not be too long before the world watches a
sight that few expected to see: Yassir Arafat staging a triumphal ride
through the sleepy Jordan valley town of Jericho.
That such events have moved from fiction to possible fact is, in significant
part, due to Rabin and Arafat.
Although the draft accords - due to be voted on by the PLO's central council
in Tunis and the Israeli Knesset in Jerusalem next week - were negotiated
for Israel by foreign minister and Labour party rival Shimon Peres, it is
Rabin's political imprimatur, and the trust in which he is held as a
guarantor of Israeli security, that has won them popular support in Israel.
On the Palestinian side, the accords are almost exclusively of Arafat's
making: a desperate last throw by a weakened leader to secure a part of
Palestine before all is lost. Whether he can make the agreements stick, or
how they will work in practice, must remain open questions. But there is no
doubt that he has staked his political life - and maybe his physical life as
well - on making them do so.
What makes this week's events vibrate with significance is the fact that the
principal personalities have featured on opposite sides of the Middle East's
most traumatic political divide for so long.
The life story of Rabin, a gravel-voiced, chain-smoking 71-year-old, reads
almost like a history of the state of Israel: a commander with the Palmach
guerrillas during the 1948 war of independence (in which Arafat claims to
have fought onm the Arab side), he has served as prime minister twice; first
time round in 1974 he was the first native-born Israeli to occupy the job.
He was chief of army staff during the 1967 Six Day War, Israel's most
stunning military success, and ambassador to Washington during the early
1970s as Israel fought the Arabs again and forged its strategic partnership
with the US.
Now, having conquered the West Bank, Gaza and Golan Heights 26 years ago, he
may find himself able to hand parts of them back.
To many Israelis, Rabin personifies the mixture of toughness and
plain-dealing they like to see in themselves. It has long been the
soldier-turned-politician's view that peace with the Arabs is necessary, but
that it should never be granted at the expense of Israel's security. As
defence minister in the 1980s he was behind the bombing of PLO headquarters
in Tunis, the assassination of Arafat's number two, Khalil-al Wazir, and the
policy of 'might, force and beatings' adopted to suppress the Palestinian
uprising in the occupied territories.
And it was as strong man prepared to negotiate from strength that he was
elected last year to a second term as premier after a bruising leadership
battle with Peres. Since then he has shown no let-up, deporting 400 Islamic
fundamentalists, sealing off the territories after a wave of stabbings and
launching a devastating bombardment against Lebanese civilians in
retaliation for guerrilla attacks against Israel.
Yet such actions have consistently been combined with calls for a negotiated
peace with Arabs.
Ever since his troops stormed through the West Bank in 1967, he has known
that Israel could not rule over their Palestinian inhabitants for ever and
remain a predominantly Jewish democracy. He has frequently pointed to the
dangers of weapons proliferation and increasing Islamic extremism in the
Arab world as arguments for Israel to exploit every opportunity to make a
deal - on its own terms.
That such an opportunity has now presented itself is largely thanks to the
PLO's Arafat, a man whose stubbly face and chequered keffiyeh have been
synonymous with the Palestinian struggle for more than 25 years. It was he
who decided, after 22 months of fruitless on-off negotiations between Israel
and a Palestinian delegation in Washington, to propose that Israel withdraw
its forces first from Gaza, a squalid sliver of land on the Mediterranean
where Arafat's parents were born, and from an area round Jericho in the West
Bank. Palestinians there would be granted self-rule - initially under PLO
authority - as part of a phased, interim programme for autonomy in the
occupied territories. Their final status would be settled later.
From Israel's point of view the deal is a dream: it leaves Jewish
settlements in the territories intact, preserves full Israeli control over
its security and borders, does not broach the thorny subject of Jerusalem
(claimed by Israel as its 'eternal, indivisible capital'), and does not
concede a Palestinian state. Instead it allows the two sides five years to
discover whether they can cohabit in something resembling harmony before
further steps have to be taken.
For the Palestinians, the fruits are more bittersweet. They have refused
countless better offers. stretching right back to the 1920s. On every
occasion they could advance good arguments for holding out for more. The
danger, as they discovered through hard experience, was that - like Bosnia's
Moslems - they would get nothing.
The hyperactive, obsessive Arafat has long been conscious of the need to
compromise. He confides to friends that he is haunted by the spectre of
failed Palestinian leaders in the past - men, as he puts it, who 'were
always right and ended up with nothing'. Since 1974, he has urged his
fractious cohorts to adopt more flexible approaches to their struggle for
statehood, culminating in 1988 in the PLO's decision to recognise Israel and
accept the partition that the Palestinians refused in the 1940s. Now he
appears to be going further, accepting arangements for autonomy he had
previously likened scornfully to South Africa's Bantustans.
Several factors have conspired to galvanise the PLO leader into his
desperate last throw. First, he is all too conscious of the weakness of his
organisation in faraway Tunis: bereft of money and powerful friends after
his disastrous alignment with Saddam Hussein in the Gulf war, and riven by
internal dissension. Second, he was deeply worried by the advance of Islamic
militancy - represented by the fundamentalist group Hamas - in the occupied
territories, Third, he may well have been rattled by the apparent emergence
of an alternative Palestinian leadership there in the person of his
long-time comrade Feisal al-Husseini. If there is one thing that Arafat has
single-mindedly striven to preserve in his 24 years as PLO chairman, it is
his own position in the limelight as representative of the Palestinian
cause.
Thus it is that the guerrilla leader of old is preparing to return and take
direct responsibility for the Palestinians under occupation, and that Israel
and the PLO find themselves - like F W de Klerk and Nelson Mandela in South
Africa - in the bizarre position of contemplating joining forces against the
extremists.
Even assuming he can force the mutual recognition and autonomy deals through
his organisation's inner councils in the next few days, he faces a challenge
keeping violent opponents within the territories in check. In Gaza at least,
where militants are particularly strong, something not far short of a
Palestinian civil war may be in prospect.
Arafat's hope must be that his return as figurehead of Palestinian
nationalism - coupled with the deployment of large amounts of international
aid money - will give such a strong boost to Palestinian morale that the
Islamic or other radicals will melt away. The alternative - that his deal
with the Israelis has come too late, and that the territories are now beyond
redemption through economic development or autocratic rule - is too awful to
contemplate.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930904

