FT934-10247

FT  06 NOV 93 / Weinberg aims to catch insurance tide: The opportunities in
the market that prompted a new venture


   By ALISON SMITH


SIR MARK WEINBERG'S latest venture is intended to catch two separate, but
related tides in the insurance market.
Its first element, an operation to take over life insurance companies, close
them to new business and manage them more efficiently, is directed at the
long-predicted shake-out in the life insurance industry.
The second element is seen as a way into the growing 'bancassurance'
industry - selling insurance products through banks and building societies.
Experts predict that by the end of the decade bancassurance will account for
30 per cent to 50 per cent of the UK retail financial services market.
Quite apart from the general belief that there is over-capacity in the life
insurance industry, life companies face the difficult prospect of tougher
regulations on how much information is disclosed about policies. Next year,
life insurance sales agents will have to tell potential customers more about
the products they are selling, including how much cash commission they
receive on each one.
The changes on disclosure are bound to affect the design of products,
turning them towards ones which have lower initial commissions either
because the commissions are spread or because costs are lower. This trend is
seen as favouring larger companies which can more easily cut costs and gain
fresh capital.
In general, Sir Mark's venture aims to cut those initial costs sharply by
managing funds that are closed, so doing away with the need for a
salesforce. It would not, however, close funds in which attracting new
business proved profitable.
'The real key is not to incur high front-end distribution costs,' says Mr
David Beynon, who will be chief executive of the organisation.
It will not be the first to move into this area - but those there at
present, such as Century Group, are only medium-sized insurance offices,
below the scale of Mr Beynon's plans.
Mr Michael Wadsworth, partner in the insurance practice at consulting
actuaries R. Watson and Co, believes the idea is a good one and well-timed,
since there are still a number of offices 'floating around' in search of a
buyer.
Mr Beynon says it would have been impossible to enter the market and ignore
the role that bancassurance is playing in intensifying competition.
However, the timing for this element of the venture is perhaps not quite as
propitious, leaving a smaller pool of potential partners than might have
been the case not long ago.
Five years ago, when the Financial Services Act determined that retailers of
financial services must either sell products of one producer exclusively, or
sell the best product of a broad range of producers, most banks and building
societies saw exclusive arrangements as more profitable.
Since then financial retailers' desire to control their own products has
made 'tied' arrangements less popular, and the trend is for banks and
building societies to set up their own life insurance operations.
The main clearing banks already have their own life companies, and many
building societies have already made, or are making, their own arrangements.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931106

