FT934-8784

FT  13 NOV 93 / Commodities (Week in the markets): Traders nervous ahead of
Opec talks


   By Our Commodities Staff


PROBLEMS for the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries continued to
pile up this week. The oil price fell to its lowest point since the Gulf war
at one point on Thursday. Then came reports that Saudi Arabia might consider
cutting the production ceiling set in late September by Opec, and this
helped to lift the price of Brent blend for December from the four-year low
of Dollars 15.20 a barrel. But late yesterday in London the price was still
only Dollars 15.47 1/2 .
The markets also strengthened on Thursday because of a vote by the United
Nations Security Council to impose new sanctions on Libya. The sanctions are
designed to gradually erode the country's export capacity, and could affect
the its ability to export oil. However, analysts said the uncertainty over
Libyan exports could help to underpin the oil prices temporarily.
The International Petroleum Exchange in London recorded a new peak in Brent
crude futures on Thursday as the price collapsed. Some 79,667 contracts were
traded, representing an increase of 14 per cent over the previous record set
in September 1993. In addition, total futures volume, including products,
rose to a record 104,181 from the previous high of 102,530 set on August 19
this year.
Traders remain very nervous ahead of the next Opec ministerial meeting in
Vienna on November 23 in case some producers actually take notice of the
various pleas for restraint echoing around the oil world. For example, Mr
Rehda Malek, the Algerian prime minister, was quoted by a newspaper in the
United Arab Emirates on Thursday as saying that oil producers 'should show
greater restraint' in order to boost prices.
Opec's economic commission meets next Monday to discuss its forecast for
short-term demand. It will prepare a report for Opec ministers that is
expected to show a continuing decline in demand for Opec oil. 'You don't
have to be a wizard to understand. What we have here is a combination of
seasonal factors, weak world demand and stepped-up, non-Opec production,' an
Opec official said.
Coffee prices slipped by Dollars 13 a tonne in London to Dollars 1,212 a
tonne yesterday as traders expressed scepticism over Brazil's commitment to
the producers' retention scheme. Brazil has only managed to buy 25,250 bags
at three auctions - a tenth of what was needed under the scheme. Brazilian
officials said yesterday they already held more than 1m bags in collateral
against loans made to producers, and that coffee will now be counted towards
the retention scheme. The loans were due to be repaid by the end of October,
but have been rescheduled to December 15.
'Brazil has probably complied with the letter, but not the spirit of the
retention scheme,' said Mr Lawrence Eagles at GNI, the London brokers. If
the loans are paid off by December and Brazil hands back the coffee held as
collateral, it will need to have been extremely active in the market to
replace that coffee. Mr Eagles calculates that Brasilia will have to
purchase 100,000 bags a week in the next two months if it is to replace that
coffee. Given the limited success of the auction system so far, some traders
are sceptical that this will happen.
Brazilian coffee traders told Reuters news agency they were upset at being
'deceived' by the government over its auction plans. The news caused a
sell-off in the coffee market with prices expected to go lower unless the
Brazilian government is seen buying heavily in coming weeks.
Other traders criticised the retention scheme plans as being ill
thought-out, but said the Brazilians needed just a few more weeks to get
their act together. 'It's giving a bad impression to the market because the
mechanics haven't been thought through,' said Mr Eagles, 'but I have no
doubt that Brazil is not committed to the scheme.'
The sugar market slumped on Tuesday following a dramatic sell-off in the New
York market. Traders put the price drop down to technical selling by New
York fund managers, with prices falling to Dollars 279 a tonne on the London
Commodity Exchange from Dollars 286.60 a tonne. The market stabilised at the
lower level during the rest of the week.
Analysts were split in opinion about the significance of a fall in total
London Metal Exchange stocks by 149 tonnes revealed yesterday - the first
such fall for about a year.
With total stocks at about 4.25m tonnes, a lot more metal would have to be
removed before there was any solid proof that demand was improving, one
dealer pointed out. However, others suggested that the efforts some
producers were making to cut production were at last bearing some fruit.
Nickel producers have been at the forefront, and yesterday Sumitomo of Japan
joined the list of those planning production cuts. It said that in the
second half of its present financial year it would hold its nickel output
down to 16,900 tonnes compared with the 17,159 tonnes produced in the same
period a year ago and 18,065 tonnes in the first half.
Unfortunately, any upward pressure this might have put on the price was
offset by Western Mining of Australia, which said its nickel smelter at
Kalgoorlie would resume production nine days ahead of schedule on November
17 after a temporary closure for the plant could to be upgraded. The
ADollars 61m (Dollars 39.30m) scheme has lifted the smelter's capacity from
55,000 to 80,000 tonnes.
 -------------------------------------------------
LME WAREHOUSE STOCKS
(As at Thursday's close)
tonnes
 -------------------------------------------------
Aluminium       +7,400    to    2,327,275
Copper          -7,775    to      592,800
Lead              -525    to      298,625
Nickel            -594    to      118,686
Zinc            +1,975    to      845,850
Tin               -290    to       19,645
 -------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931113

