FT934-8433

FT  16 NOV 93 / World Trade News: US reassures Japan and China on Asia
policy - Apec meeting shows importance to Washington of economic security
issues, says Christopher


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


THE US yesterday assured both Japan and China that they remain central to US
policies in Asia in spite of current difficulties.
At a press conference prior to his departure for the Apec summit in Seattle,
Mr Warren Christopher, the secretary of state, also asserted that the US
'remained unyielding' in its determination to retain its current security
posture in the region.
The Apec meeting itself, the secretary of state said, 'represents an
important but first step towards a more open liberal trading regime.' This,
he added, would take time to evolve but was another indication of the
administration's elevation of economic security issues to the front rank of
foreign policy priorities.
Mr Christopher reassured Japan that it remained 'the cornerstone of our
Asia-Pacific policy'. While he described the current Japanese bilateral
trade surplus as 'unacceptable', he said the US goal was to place economic
issues on the same sound and co-operative basis that characterised other
aspects of the relationship.
Similarly, on China the US wanted 'a comprehensive relationship that permits
resolution of differences in a broad strategic context'.
Nevertheless he also again warned China 'of the need to make early progress
on the human rights front' if the annual battle over the renewal of most
favoured nation trading status was to be avoided.
The US yesterday called on Pacific countries to co-operate in a programme of
simplification and harmonisation of customs regulations in order to reduce
obstacles to trade, Alexander Nicoll reports from Seattle.
Mr Ronald Noble, assistant treasury secretary for enforcement, told a
customs-trade symposium that such measures would not undermine national
sovereignty. They would recognise that Asia/Pacific countries, although they
had differences, were 'neighbours with more that unites us than divides us.'
The symposium was being held by Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation, the
15-member grouping which holds its annual ministerial meeting in Seattle
this week, to be followed on Friday and Saturday by an informal summit of
Apec leaders.
Mr Noble called for a four-part programme to:
Repeal obsolete laws so that customs procedures conform with current
business practices.
Introduce uniform standards in areas such as safety and packaging in which
national laws often created barriers designed to protect domestic markets.
Such standards would ensure that legitimate health and safety concerns were
still protected.
Co-operate on systems procedures and data exchange.
Work together to eliminate trade fraud in areas such as counterfeit
trademarks and falsification of country of origin to evade Multi-Fibre
Arrangement quotas.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931116

