FT932-7098

FT  25 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Rulings, relationships and regulatory
regimes - The slower profits growth expected from the forthcoming results of
the 10 privatised water companies


   By ANGUS FOSTER


THE TRADITIONAL rally in water companies' shares ahead of their annual
reporting season, largely prompted by expectations of increased dividends,
has so far failed to take off.
With the first of the 10 privatised companies, North West Water, announcing
results for the year to March 31 tomorrow, the sector has instead fallen
more than 10 per cent in the past month. The decline partly stems from
investors switching into recovery stocks, and partly from worries about
regulatory risk.
This year's results season, which rumbles on until mid July, will be the
last before Ofwat's 1994 periodic review, when price levels to the end of
the decade and beyond will be set. As such, this will be the last time until
after the review that attention will still focus on companies' results,
rather than their relationship with the regulator.
The results threaten to be unexciting. Although companies continue to
diversify into unregulated areas such as waste management and process
engineering, group results are still dominated by their core water and
sewage businesses. These businesses are predictable and few surprises are
likely.
Analysts expect average pre-tax profits growth to slow from previous years
to about 5-6 per cent. Operating profits are still growing rapidly, thanks
to guaranteed price rises. But pre-tax figures are constrained by higher
financing costs as borrowings on capital expenditure programmes start to
mount up.
North West, for example, is expected to report interest charges of about
Pounds 50m last year, compared with interest received of Pounds 16m in the
previous period.
Ms Angela Whelan, water analyst at BZW, expects most companies to have moved
into a lightly geared position. But, illustrating the strength of water
companies' balance sheets, average gearing is likely to increase to no more
than 30-35 per cent by 1995.
Behind the headline profit figures, which are all expected to be reported in
line with FRS 3, three special situations are expected to lift profits at
Northumbrian, Welsh and Wessex well above the sector average.
Northumbrian will include a Pounds 7.3m first half profit from an investment
fund, while Welsh will include a pre-tax Pounds 17m exceptional gain from
the sale of its 14.9 per cent stake in South Wales Electricity last
December. Wessex's results will be helped by a contribution of several
million pounds from UK Waste Management, its joint venture with Waste
Management International of the US.
Dividend growth, meanwhile, is expected to be more punchy, with companies
announcing increases of 9 per cent or more, or a real increase of up to 5
per cent.
As in previous years, this increase is likely to be seen by customers as
excessive. According to Mr Robert Miller-Bakewell at NatWest Securities, the
problem is partly due to falling inflation. 'Given that their dividend
policy for the whole year was formulated (at the interim stage) when
inflation was slightly higher, these final dividends will look pretty
generous,' he said.
Analysts therefore do not expect any further dividend increases to reflect
changes in the rates of advance corporation tax introduced in the budget.
With large capital allowances, water companies pay no mainstream corporation
tax and stand to benefit from lower levels of unrelieved ACT.
According to some analysts, companies stand to save up to Pounds 100m this
decade due to the changes. They may therefore be pressured by shareholders,
some of which will lose money because of the changes, to share the windfall
by paying higher dividends. Ofwat is likely to disagree.
With the regulatory review looming, companies will also be pressed for
initial thoughts about their strategic business plans, which will map out
targets for the following 10 years. The strategic plans are due to be
submitted to Ofwat next March and will form the basis for the regulator's
decisions on each companies' price increases from 1995.
As a first step towards the plans, companies are already consulting
customers about different market strategies and the various costs involved.
Anglian surprised some observers earlier this month when initial public
research suggested its customers may be prepared to pay more than the bare
minimum to improve standards. North West, in contrast, said its research
showed customers wanted to keep costs down.
Ofwat's review is likely to cast an ever lengthening shadow over share
prices in the lead up to the regulators' final rulings. According to some
analysts, the recent weakness in water shares also reflects investors'
realisation that a year of uncertainty has begun.
The regulatory regime is not expected to become excessive. But it is likely
to become tougher for the second half of the decade than it has been for the
first. Ofwat is also expected to start, probably this autumn, publishing its
conclusions on questions such as the cost of capital and companies'
efficiency savings. Each announcement will give scope for jitters as the
market weighs up each ruling's implications for the sector.
The last area of companies' results which will come under scrutiny is
returns from unregulated businesses. These were mainly acquired after the
1989 privatisation and have performed poorly so far, partly because of the
effects of recession.
Most companies see their unregulated businesses as a way to grow earnings
after the periodic review and maintain dividend growth.
Biffa, the waste management company acquired by Severn Trent in May 1991,
has become the most high profile example of a disappointing acquisition.
Biffa is expected to have remained loss making after interest costs last
year.
Elsewhere, analysts will be keen to hear updates from Yorkshire Water about
its engineering joint venture with Babcock.
Wessex should also have some early indications about the integration of
NFC's waste arm, which it bought with Waste Management International in
January.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
WATER SERVICES COMPANIES
Pre-tax profits and dividends forecasts for year to March 31 on an FRS3
basis
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Profit    Per cent    Final    Per cent
Date            Company      Pounds m    increase      div    increase
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
May 26          North West        245           7    14.27         8.7
May 27          South West         92           2     15.6         6.8
June 2          Thames            245           4     13.8         7.8
June 2          Yorkshire         136          10    14.05         8.1
June 8          Anglian           185           8     14.2         9.2
June 10         Northumbrian       69          13     15.0         9.5
June 15         Wessex             85          11     14.3        10.9
June 17         Severn Trent      265           0     14.0         9.4
June 17         Southern          120          10     14.4        10.8
July 15         Welsh             158          14     15.6         9.3
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: NatWest Securities
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930525

