FT934-10124

FT  06 NOV 93 / Sport: Apocalypse now - Soccer


   By PETER BERLIN


FIRST, nearly the end of the world, then the lights go out over Europe. On
Wednesday a bad night in European club competitions drew another set of
obituaries for British soccer. Both the remaining Scottish clubs and the top
two finishers from last season's English Premier League were eliminated in
only the second round.
Aberdeen and Aston Villa squandered hard-won advantages by losing at home.
In the Champions cup, Manchester United, ambushed by Galatasaray at home,
never looked capable of gaining the win it needed in Istanbul (where the
hosts deserved more than the whining tabloid chauvinism that greeted their
team's success).
It is the third year in a row that the English champions have been knocked
out in the second round of a cup that once spent six years in England. To
lose once at this stage in a cup competition may be bad luck, but to lose
three times in a row suggests carelessness.
And yet there were also signs of health. Norwich City completed a famous
victory over Bayern Munich in the UEFA Cup and Arsenal hit seven goals away
to Standard Liege in the Cup Winners Cup.
There is a school of thought that any night that Arsenal score seven is a
bad night for English soccer. Last season the club captured both English cup
competitions. But the grudging reaction of the press and the hostility of
opposing fans imply that the club's triumphs are of little worth because of
the defensive manner in which they were achieved.
This season, George Graham, the Arsenal manager, has become almost
evangelical in the way he talks about his club's style. He speaks as if he
is the keeper of a pure tradition of British soccer. 'We keep hearing about
these lovely passing teams,' he said after one of his side's goalless draws.
'What happens when they lose?'
After Wednesday night, Graham might well repeat the question. Villa and
United, two teams which invariably win style points from the critics, found
the simple passing game that works for them in England falling apart. Both
were sunk by their inability to construct creative moves in midfield. Paul
Ince, Roy Keane and the ageing Bryan Robson, United's international midfield
trio, were outplayed by their Turkish counterparts. Villa were made to look
like trundlers by Deportivo La Coruna. Villa's only midfield player capable
of thinking before he acted was Gordon Cowans. But he is 35 and by the time
he had thought it was often too late to act.
Both teams, like the England international side which has a midfield
anchored by Ince, are victims of the shortage of creative midfielders in
English soccer (Scotland, as always, is better supplied in this area). It is
a measure of the problem that so many Premier League teams rely for their
creativity on players well into their 30s: Cowans, Paul Davis, Ray Wilkins,
Glenn Hoddle, Gordon Strachan, Peter Beardsley, Chris Waddle, Paul Bracewell
and even lovable Steve McMahon.
A list of accomplished English midfield passers still in their (theoretical)
prime starts with Paul Gascoigne, ends with Nigel Clough and includes only
one other name: Ian Crook. Against a Bayern team stuffed with
internationals, Norwich, directed by Crook, never had any difficulty passing
the ball.
This shortage of what used to be known as midfield 'schemers' may be a
symptom of a flaw in the English game. Perhaps the helter-skelter pace of
play stunts the development of intelligent midfield players. It may also
simply be a historical accident. You wait for 10 years for a world class
midfield man, then three pass at once. There are several promising young
midfielders at Premier League clubs. Their development will be a measure of
English soccer's suitability as a habitat for the species.
The elimination of Bayern puts Wednesday's results in perspective. Nobody
would suggest that German soccer is in crisis because its most prestigious
team was outplayed by a side from an East Anglian market town.
The Germans do not over-react to failure. The English approach European
competitions with a constant inferiority complex. English clubs' recent
record in Europe is reminiscent of the early 1960s when even the best
English clubs seemed overawed by the idea of competing with Real Madrid and
Benfica. English teams, led by Liverpool in the days before teams were
limited to three 'foreigners', established a psychological dominance over
continental teams in the 1970s and 1980s; a period which coincided with a
poor period for the England international team. But this evaporated during
the five year ban following the Heysel Stadium riot in 1985.
The ban also meant that England slid to the bottom of the table of European
success which determines UEFA cup places. England now receives only two
against four before the ban. In a cup competition doubling a country's
entries doubles its chances of success.
Another effect of the Heysel ban was to reduce the number of high-level
games top English clubs played. England's run to the semi-finals of the 1990
World Cup followed five years of European exile and two seasons in which the
English first division contained just 20 clubs.
This year's international debacle is related to the damage done by the
increase in the matches top English players play at home and in Europe. When
the England squad assembles before internationals the hotel often looks like
a scene from MASH
But while English soccer struggles to compete on the pitch it is healthy off
it. It has huge television revenues and lucrative sponsorship and kit
contracts. Gates are rising and the the Football Trust is helping finance
the reconstruction of the grounds. English soccer's top clubs can compete
financially with the richest in Europe.
Before this recent bonanza English soccer's response to any financial
difficulty was to invent another competition. Now the problem is to persuade
the Premier League clubs to cut the games they play by trimming the size of
the division or from the Coca-Cola cup.
Two years ago when Graham Kelly, the Football Association secretary, was
luring the old first division clubs from the Football League to the Premier
League, he insisted that the league would eventually shrink to 18 sides. So
far he has not persuaded any clubs to vote themselves out of his new land of
milk and honey. Perhaps if the mood of gloom begins to depress gates and
revenues the clubs will act in the best interests of the English game. A few
more apocalyptic headlines might even help.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

931106

