FT934-11673

FT  30 OCT 93 / Malaysia to cut company taxes


   By KIERAN COOKE


   KUALA LUMPUR


MALAYSIA has unveiled a mildly expansionary 1994 budget with substantial
increases in development spending and a cut in corporate tax aimed at
promoting more investment in the country.
Mr Anwar Ibrahim, finance minister, said GDP growth would be more than 8 per
cent this year.
'With this growth, the Malaysian economy would have experienced growth rates
of 8 to 9 per cent for six successive years, an attainment which has never
been achieved before,' said Mr Anwar.
But fast growth had put serious strains on infrastructure. Mr Anwar said
that to overcome infrastructure bottlenecks, developmental expenditure would
be increased by 35 per cent to MDollars 13.35bn (Pounds 3.5bn).
'The present infrastructural constraints, especially in power and transport,
have occurred too often and are now being addressed as a matter of urgency,'
said Mr Anwar.
In spite of this increase in spending a rise in government revenues meant
there would be only a marginal budget deficit, said Mr Anwar.
The growth of both domestic and foreign investment in Malaysia has slowed
over the past 18 months.
Mr Anwar announced a 2 percentage point cut in corporate tax to 32 per cent
in 1994, with a further reduction to 30 per cent in 1995. 'Our company
income tax will be more comparable to those of neighbouring countries and
this will improve the investment climate of our country,' said Mr Anwar.
While there were no reductions in income tax, Mr Anwar announced measures to
help lower income groups, including a multi-million dollar plan to build low
cost urban housing.
Others measures include a financial package to encourage the development of
more skills, further moves towards the introduction of a sales and service
tax and the reduction or abolition of import duties on many items.
The worst news in the budget was for Malaysia's growing numbers of big motor
cycle riders.
Import duty on superbikes of engine capacity of 500cc and above will be
doubled from 60 to 120 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931030

