FT932-294

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (7): The prize groupware
delivers - The effect is of gathering what everyone in a team knows in one
room


   By MICHAEL DEMPSEY


Groupware - software that runs across a network, co-ordinating the work of
individuals within a team - is the current buzzword in PC-based computing.
Regardless of distance, each member's files are constantly and
simultaneously updated. Groupware reproduces electronically the effect of
putting everyone together in the one room.
It is impossible to discuss groupware without studying Lotus Notes. With
500,000 licences sold worldwide, Notes has defined the groupware market. But
the phenomenal success of Notes has obscured some networking issues. Until
the very latest release, each sub-set of up to 50 users required a dedicated
PC server running IBM's OS/2 operating system. This is not the first choice
of many network developers, who have to wait until later this year for the
Unix operating system release.
And while Notes has flown the banner of groupware, the idea of a
constellation of users hanging off a network but working to a common goal
has been around for a very long time. Intergraph, a manu- facturer of
engineering work- stations, has been selling a file-sharing facility called
Microstation for seven years. At Pounds 3,000 a licence, Micro- station is
targeted firmly at engineering professionals.
Microstation allows architects, structural engineers and cabling planners on
a construction project to view each other's files as the building
progresses. Running under Unix, Dos and Microsoft Windows operating environ-
ments, Microstation is more flexible in networking options than Notes.
The UK arm of international engineering firm Ralph M. Parsons uses
Microstation to co-ordinate work on designing chemical processing plants. Mr
Brian Dowling, head of computer integrated eng- ineering at Parsons in
Brentford, West London, explains that a formidable array of protocols is
employed in the company local area network.
With traditional PC Lans such as Ethernet, market standard network software
from Novell and Unix Lan programs, Parsons can only use groupware that will
run happily over a multi-protocol network. For the time being, that rules
out Notes.
So if groupware was propelled to prominence by Notes, the idea, if not the
buzzword, already existed. Mr Dowling says he already has 'the ability to
overlay another design file on top of your desk file, allowing team members
to see layers of information.' Netware is IT industry jargon to describe
such products as Microstation.
With a spectacular sales curve, Notes has attracted keen supporters. What
Notes has done, say its adherents, is cut out a significant amount of
unnecessary data duplication on networks.
Mr Jim Chapman is the managing director of Triangle, a Bournemouth-based
systems house that specialises in Lans. Installing Notes at Triangle has led
to significant savings, he says. By pushing files across the network,
constantly saving and relabelling, conventional Lans absorb huge amounts of
data storage space, he argues. Notes is far more economical in that it keeps
the one file running, and does not waste space by applying a number of
formats to files.
'Networks encourage file replication, they become data dustbins. Notes
compresses data, strips out the formating and rubbish that other products
put onto the file.'
Triangle needed Pounds 30,000 worth of hardware to function as a network
engine on its own Lan before Notes arrived. Mr Chapman boasts that the data
economy of Notes means he can run the network off Pounds 6,000 worth of
equipment. In a 60-strong company that is a significant saving. Triangle now
sells Notes licences.
Notes can cut back on one aspect of network costs. It offers every user the
chance to write applications. This is a big step in terms of user-
friendliness and decentralising power. But it can encourage staff to waste
time and resources.
Mr Michael Chapman Pincher organises the Lotus Notes User Group and has
implemented Notes at SMI, his North London marketing services group. He
warns that user enthusiasm can prove wasteful. 'Most Notes sites are
graveyards of applications that died because they were found to be
unusable.'
However, in the present- ation-orientated world of marketing Notes has
proved vital. 'For a paper based information organisation like SMI, it has
become a valuable business asset because it's so easy to lose track as the
draft of a proposal progresses.'
Saunders Sobell is a London law firm with a mission to prise paper out of
the lawyers' hands. The idea is to put every step of casework on a network
of PCs and tie the work process together. Computer services group ITnet has
been appointed to handle the introduction of Notes with a Pounds 600,000
contract. This involves installing a Lan and ensuring that Notes takes over
the legal paper mountain.
Mr Jeffrey Tyrrell is IT partner at Saunders and his job is to make sure the
network's 130 users are steered away from group- ware's profligate tendency.
All working applications will reside on desktop PCs while a 486-based server
is dedicated to handling network traffic. 'We're configuring the network so
it's difficult for people to come out of Notes. We don't want them going
away and fiddling in other parts of the system.'
Mr Tyrrell harbours no illusions about a paperless Law firm. 'I think
lawyers are wedded to paper.' But he sees the potential for a well- planned
Lan running groupware. 'What's exciting is being able to exchange so much
information,' he says. 'Law is about selling knowledge, but until now that's
been locked up in the minds of staff around the building.'
With groupware at hand, the computer network may be about to deliver a
powerful prize.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930629

