FT932-262

FT  29 JUN 93 / Midlands rail plan setback


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, Midlands Correspondent


PLANS for a rapid transit system in the West Midlands fell into disorder
yesterday when the board of Taylor Woodrow, one of the two companies
selected to develop and run the project, failed to endorse a contract agreed
and signed by its negotiators on June 20.
Taylor Woodrow and Ansaldo Trasporti, the Italian rail equipment group, in a
consortium called Centram, had been selected by Centro, the operating arm of
the West Midlands Transport Authority, to construct and operate Midland
Metro Line One, a light railway to run between Birmingham and Wolverhampton.
A letter from Centram to Centro, dated June 20, undertook to provide board
approval for the detailed terms of the development and operations contracts
by June 28. The approval arrived from Ansaldo, but not from Taylor Woodrow.
Centro now plans to start negotiations with a second consortium called
Eurotransit, made up of Tilbury Douglas, the UK construction group, and AEG
of Germany. Centro said Eurotransit's bid was Pounds 9m more expensive than
the Centram contract.
Meanwhile, Ansaldo says it is ready to take on the whole project, meeting
all the conditions spelt out in the Centram contract. The project agreed by
Centro had a capital cost of Pounds 112m.
Taylor Woodrow's refusal to endorse the contract caught Centro and Ansaldo
by surprise. Taylor Woodrow said: 'Unfortunately it has not been possible
for us to finalise the contractual arrangements on conditions satisfactory
to all parties in the timescale imposed.'
The group, which originally wanted three weeks for endorsement, is engaged
in economy drives to avert losses in its contracting business and its
negotiators may have gone further in their negotiations with Centro than the
board thought prudent.
Argent Group, the privately owned property company, has taken control of
Brindleyplace, which consists of 15 acres of land in central Birmingham,
next to the International Convention Centre.
It will start work on a shopping and restaurant centre in September. The
previous owner was Rosehaugh, the property group which called in the
receiver in December.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

930629

