FT933-10052

FT  06 AUG 93 / Japan's LDP wins stay on losing power


   By ROBERT THOMSON and GORDON CRAMB


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S Liberal Democratic party won a stay of execution yesterday through
skilled haggling over the procedural technicalities of a parliamentary
session that is to select a new prime minister and install a cabinet.
Much of the day was spent 'discussing how to discuss our disputes', one LDP
deputy explained. Japan ended the day with a prime minister, Mr Kiichi
Miyazawa, but without a cabinet, which formally resigned in expectation of a
stint in opposition.
For the first time since 1955, the LDP is on the verge of losing power, as
it is outnumbered 228 to 260 in the lower house by the seven-party
coalition.
The parties range from the left-leaning Social Democratic party through
several conservative parties to the Komeito, or Clean Government party,
which is Japan's version of the religious right.
In Kumamoto, the home town of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the coalition's prime
minister designate, revellers waiting to light ceremonial lanterns were left
with nothing to celebrate, as MPs from the government and opposition met
eight times without a settlement.
The LDP found fault with the coalition's choice of lower house speaker and
the planned length of the parliamentary session, and demanded that Mr
Hosokawa make a policy speech after his election to prime minister.
The haggling will begin again today and could last until early next week.
The LDP demanded the right to appoint a speaker as it is still the largest
single party, but the coalition wants Ms Takako Doi, the former Social
Democratic party leader, who would be the first woman to hold the post.
The LDP's other complaint had less merit, as the party itself had set the
original schedule for the parliamentary session, due to last until the end
of next week.
The request for Mr Hosokawa to explain his administration's policies is an
attempt to have him trip over the party lines of one or other of the
coalition members. Machine tool orders in Japan were down by more than a
quarter in the first half of the year and orders for the whole year may be
the lowest for a decade as domestic manufacturers continue to cut capital
spending, writes Gordon Cramb in Tokyo.
The Japan Machine Tool Builders' Association said yesterday that orders for
the six months to June were Y287.3bn (Pounds 1.82bn), down 25.6 per cent.
Export orders were down only 8.6 per cent from the same period of 1992 but
those placed by customers at home fell 33.2 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930806

