FT933-5153

FT  04 SEP 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Signs of the tee-times


   By NICK GARNETT


AN ENTREPRENEUR might harbour a sparkling idea for a new venture but good
timing is indispensable if he seeks an easy ride into company ownership. Ask
Chris Boxall. 'We think we have got the product right,' he says, 'but what
has gone wrong is the time it has taken to get everything organised and the
fact that it was a terrible time to set up such a business.'
Boxall, a 29-year-old chartered accountant with no interest in remaining a
professional bean counter, nurtured one of those ideas which spawns a little
niche enterprise. Since setting up CB Designs less than three years ago, he
has supplied more than 50 golf clubs with aluminium and stone signs, from
big entrance notices to individual tee markers which note the hole number,
par, yardage and recommended difficulty (stroke index). The little company
based in Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire, has just secured its largest contract
 -Pounds 30,000 for a series of granite boulders, on which maps of each hole
are etched, for the championship course at Valderrama, Spain.
On the face of it, CB Designs teed-off smoothly, raising sales from Pounds
30,000 in its first year (to April 1992) to Pounds 100,000 last year and
Pounds 91,000 in the first four months of this year. But Boxall found more
hazards than he expected and admits: 'I've learnt a lot of lessons.'
The company had difficulties with agents and distributors who either took no
interest in selling the signs or tried to snatch his ideas and set up in
competition. It took longer than expected to get the right quality of
designs while the recession also wrecked this year's performance projections
 -which bunkered the company's aim to shift most of its sales and profits
this year from direct marketing of signs to 'sponsorship.' This involves
offering signs to golf clubs at a very low cost but then taking all the
revenue from the advertising on these sponsored plaques. Fortunately, direct
sales, expected to be Pounds 100,000 for all of this year, are totalling
Pounds 77,000 in the first third.
Profits are hard to come by in the early years of a small business. CB lost
Pounds 15,000 in its first year and barely broke even last year. Boxall says
it will generate profit this year and he will be able to extract his first
salary.
He was working in France late in the late 1980s when the germ of an idea for
golf signs struck him. 'I thought it was a very good market served by some
very shoddy products,' he says. He tried taking a shot in France but failed.
'I found a distributor who already sold golf equipment. I think the guy
somehow took it up to keep me out of the market. He didn't do anything to
sell the signs.'
Deciding the UK, with its large potential market of 2,500 golf clubs, was a
better prospect, Boxall raised Pounds 20,000 from his family and set up in
Hertfordshire. He has since added an overdraft facility of Pounds 40,000
from a bank.
From the start, the company was handicapped by failing to offer competitive
signs. Switching sub-contractors cured this, Boxall says. More than 70 per
cent of sales are generated from aluminium plaques. The clubs send details
of its holes and crests and an outside pattern-maker produces a wooden
mock-up from which a mould is taken. A local foundry produces the castings
and painting is done by hand. Stone signs are etched by sand-blasting.
Large aluminium signs sell for about Pounds 200 and stones run from Pounds
85 to about Pounds 1,000. 'The ideal is to get an order for a large sign at
each hole and for smaller plaques for each of the three tees at each hole -
for competition, men and women,' Boxall says. Direct manufacturing accounts
for about 50 per cent of total business costs.
The company's information bible is the Royal and Ancient Golfer's Handbook,
which contains details of all the UK's golf clubs. This information has been
fed into CB's own computer base and Boxall claims that direct approaches by
letter, advertising in golf and greenkeepers' magazines (at a cost of Pounds
4,500 last year) and exhibitions (Pounds 4,000) ensures that someone in
authority at every golf club knows of its designs. 'Japanese-owned courses
have been particularly good for us,' he adds. 'They have the money and they
appreciate quality.' Courses with CB signs include the East Sussex National,
St Andrews, the Oxfordshire, Forest of Arden, and the Emirates club in
Dubai.
Market penetration, though, amounts to only 5 per cent of golf clubs. Boxall
blames this partly on competition from other sign-makers, golf club
conservatism and the recession, which sliced into club incomes. He concedes,
though, that he has occasionally found himself in the rough through faulty
stroke play.
A family friend, made an agent for Scotland, attempted to go into
competition using CB's own sign styles. Then, Boxall employed an extra
salesman who cost more than he generated. A system of agents set up to
locate companies willing to advertise on sponsored signs proved difficult to
run. And the contract for sponsored signs was drafted incompetently.
'We supplied some clubs with signs without getting sponsorship. For the
Cosby course in Leicestershire, only two of the 18 signs attracted
sponsorship. We've had to write-off the cost of that.' Indeed, the company
has recorded a loss of Pounds 7,000 on sponsored signs so far this year but
Boxall says the aim is to make a gross profit of 40 per cent and 12 per cent
net.
CB Designs offers signs for homes, too, and Boxall hopes contacts made on
the golf course will generate other commercial work. So far, the company has
pitched for just one of these, securing a contract to supply an insurance
company.
Boxall has his fingers crossed that a new idea will bear fruit. St Andrews
is thinking of selling, in its club shop, miniature tee plaques of the Old
Course holes. CB Designs would be able to supply the hardware for such
mantlepiece nostalgia.
CB Designs, 33 Station Road, Rickmansworth, Herts WD3 1QP. Tel: 0923-897
160.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

930904

