FT934-8682

FT  13 NOV 93 / Arts: An open race for also-rans - The Turner Prize is
moving even further away from its original rubric


   By WILLIAM PACKER


WHAT IS to be done with the Turner Prize? Here it comes again, marking the
silly season between Bonfire Night and Christmas with easy copy for the
Tate-Baiters. Clearly it is a hopeless case, and here we all are, standing
round the expiring patient, knowing just what the doctors should do if only
they would listen.
There always was a good case for generous prizes for the visual arts, and
Pounds 20,000 to the winner is certainly generous, though by no means
exceptional these days. The trouble with the Turner is that from the start,
and in the name of one of the greatest of painters, it laid claim to honour
and distinction above all the rest. Its rubric has been watered down over
the years from the 'best' or 'most significant', but still it reads: 'for an
outstanding exhibition or other presentation of work in the 12 months
preceding June 30 1993.' That shift from definite to indefinite article may
betray a certain loss of confidence in these correct and sensitive times, an
unwillingness to accept, perhaps, that there should ever be such things as
winners and losers. Even so, with its banquet and its speeches and
presentations on prime television, the Turner Prize is hardly yet a
shrinking violet.
For my part I could never see anything wrong in the idea that the art world
should have some fun and self-congratulation at the end of the year, with a
bit of a punt on the side. Any such race should be open, fair, and run under
consistent rules. It is the inconsistency of the Turner Prize that has so
fatally undermined its credibility, when all we want is to see the best set
against the best in a fair test.
Why is it that the Prize should latterly have been reserved for artists
under 50? Why should the nominations from which the jury picks the
short-list not be published? How is it that the sponsor, Channel 4, has been
allowed to limit the size of that short-list for its own broadcasting
convenience? Why has the Prize allowed itself, through its short-lists, to
become so narrowly identified with the experimental and conceptual, in
sculpture especially, at the expense of broader qualities and interests? To
ask for rational answers is to whistle in the wind.
This year the Prize is as loaded towards the conceptual as usual, and to
installation in particular, with two sculptors and a photographer set
against one abstract painter in a field of four. Hannah Collins (37) takes
photographs of decaying city streets, symbolic figure subjects and
still-life, which she blows up portentously large. 'Discussing a landscape
work . . . (She) said, 'I look in the back of the camera and work out the
relation between the viewer and, say, the height of the mountain in the
desert' . . . This approach . . . tends to produce . . . a dramatically
enhanced realism.' She is currently concerning herself with the movements of
refugees and economic migrants into Europe.
Vong Phaophanit (32) is a Laotian now living in England. He makes
installations, works tailored to the particular place and circumstance in
which they are to be shown. His 'Neon Rice Field', a set of low ridges of
heaped rice, with pink neon strips glowing along the troughs between, was
first shown at the Serpentine in the summer and is here reworked. It is
extremely seductive in a quietly theatrical way, redolent of the raked Zen
gardens of the Buddhist tradition.
Sean Scully (48) is the painter, his large, block-like panels, with their
bold rectilinear motifs and thick, lush paint, has the physical presence of
high relief. In terms both of colour and image, he imposes one set of strong
and simple values upon another, leaving them to fight it out. The resulting
accommodation is neither arbitrary nor strident, but oddly spiritual, grand
and monumental.
Rachel Whiteread (30) is preoccupied with the interior volumes of things.
From making casts of the insides of baths and basins, she moved on to
casting whole rooms, spaces as it were turned inside out. Lately she has
given a whole house the treatment in the East End. Her work stimulates, at
least in the first instance, a compulsive conceptual engagement. Whether it
bears endless repetition is another question.
The Turner Prize of 1993 seems to be a fairly open race for once, with
Scully to win from Whiteread, Phaophanit a decent each-way bet and Collins
the outsider.
The Turner Prize 1993 - The Tate Gallery, Millbank SW1, until November 28:
sponsored by Channel Four Television.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

931113

