FT934-8641

FT  15 NOV 93 / ILO standing at low ebb, say workers


   By DAVID GOODHART


THE standing of the International Labour Organisation is at a low ebb as
other international bodies usurp its functions and its 167 member-states
become increasingly reluctant to ratify new conventions, according to an
internal critique of the organisation.
The workers' group on the organisation's tripartite governing body, in a
document to be submitted to the current review of the ILO, is unusually
outspoken about what many see as the ineffectiveness of the organisation.
The submission makes a strong defence of the workers' group's focus on
worker protection in the face of growing pressure from the employers' group
to liberalise regulations and switch emphasis to employment creation.
It argues that the ILO must take the offensive in pressing for a 'world
social charter' and a social clause in the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade which would make access to world markets dependent on respect for
basic worker rights.
The document acknowledges that such a social clause could be seen as 'a
disguised protectionist mechanism' but argues that it could actually help
stem the rise of protectionist pressures and should only lead to trade
sanctions as a final resort. It also points out that various commodity trade
agreements - such as those covering rubber, cocoa, sugar and tin - already
have commitments to fair labour standards.
Mr Bill Brett, the main author of the document and leader of the British
civil service union IPMS, says that just as the International Monetary Fund
sees itself as guarantor of a world financial contract so the ILO should be
the guarantor of a world social contract.
Currently, argues Mr Brett, the ILO is just a 'spectator' in structural
adjustment programmes imposed by the IMF or World Bank which often lead to
violation of basic worker protections. And the ILO, a United Nations agency,
has also seen a 'dangerous incursion' by other institutions into what should
be its field of competence, for example the drawing up of labour codes for
African countries by the World Bank.
Mr Brett says that all countries must ratify the ILO's key conventions - on
freedom of association, forced labour and discrimination - by the year 2000.
Some of these conventions have been ratified by only just over 100 of the
167 member states. The paper also points out that the 17 new conventions
adopted between 1980 and 1990 have received an average of 12 ratifications
each.
The employer offensive, led by the American Mr Abe Katz, has stressed the
excessive legalism and inflexibility of existing legislation.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931115

