FT932-3279

FT  15 JUN 93 / Personal View: Where Mexico should draw the line


   By SIDNEY WEINTRAUB and ROGELIO RAMIREZ DE LA O


At US insistence, negotiations are now under way between Canada, Mexico, and
the US for side arrangements to the North American Free Trade Agreement on
environmental and labour issues, and to give extra protection to some
industries in the name of dealing with what are being called import surges.
President Clinton needs those parallel agreements to convince the Democratic
majority in Congress to support Nafta and to cater to some special
interests, such as the sugar lobby. The issue is no longer whether there
will be side agreements, but just how far the US will pressure its Nafta
partners - Mexico in particular  - to give way to satisfy domestic US
pressure.
Until now, Mexico has catered to almost every US demand. Mexico is even
going the extra mile. It has so far put more new money into clearing up the
environment at the US border than has the US. If there are import surges
that must be dealt with these days they are from the US into Mexico, but the
Mexican authorities have accepted these without raising new barriers.
Despite his misgivings about the wisdom of a special border tax on trade
among the Nafta countries to raise money to finance environmental projects,
Mexico's President Salinas may give way on this as well.
President Salinas is giving the impression that he is prepared to do almost
anything to get Nafta through. We believe he should do what is right in
Mexico's interest and he should show more spine when asked to agree to
unwise US demands or to cater to groups in the US, or people such as Ross
Perot, who will not support Nafta regardless of what Salinas does.
The Mexicans fear that if Nafta fails, investment into the country will dry
up. However, Mexico's best option is to proceed as if there were a Nafta. It
should continue to open its economy by reducing import barriers. The welcome
mat to foreign investment should not be withdrawn; if anything, it should be
extended beyond what was agreed in Nafta. The law protecting intellectual
property should not be erased. Many of the 50-plus pieces of new legislation
required to conform to Nafta provisions should proceed.
If Mexico further opens its economy, US businesses would still invest, based
on their having an assurance of policy continuation. The opponents of Nafta
could do nothing to stop this. By reducing its import duties further, Mexico
would permit producers there to continue their competitive drive. The
average US duty on imports from Mexico is now about 3 per cent. The
competitive position in the US market would not be much worse for most
products even if US tariffs did not decline to zero over 10 years, and could
even be stronger if the exchange rate of the peso were adjusted for this.
This would be a likely consequence of the market's reaction to the absence
of an agreement in any event. An adjustment of this kind would not
necessarily be a deterrent to foreign investment in Mexico, particularly for
equity investment, if properly enhanced by a consistent macroeconomic
package designed to control inflation.
The US would be just as exposed to competition from Mexico as it would be
under Nafta. The only way to prevent this would be to raise US import
barriers against Mexico. US protectionists would almost certainly try, and
the Clinton administration would then face a real test as to its trade bone
fides.
Those who insist that Mexican labour conditions are substandard in
comparison with the US would have no side agreement under which they could
leverage their demands. They would have to rely on Mexico's own perception
of its national interest in this area.
This is not an optimal outcome. Formalising the economic integration that is
occurring in any event has many advantages. It helps establish dozens of
consultative arrangements on specific issues such as customs administration,
sanitary standards, and technical requirements for products, and on broader
issues, including macroeconomic policies. Nafta gives some assurance against
backtracking on market opening by member countries. It provides a structure
for settlement of disputes on investment, financial and commercial matters,
and the use of countervailing and anti-dumping duties. Without Nafta the
remarkable political rapprochement that has been taking place in recent
years between Mexico and the US might be reversed. But US failure to approve
Nafta need not be an economic disaster for Mexico.
The authors are, respectively, director of the US-Mexico Policy Studies
Program at the Lyndon B Johnson School of Public Affairs, the University of
Texas at Austin, and president of Ecanal, an economic consulting firm in
Mexico City

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930615

