FT932-278

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (16): Taxing times for EC companies - New tax
rules within the European Community are more complicated than many had
expected / VAT Regulation


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


COMPANIES throughout the European Community have spent the past six months
adapting to the biggest shake-up in business taxation in nearly 20 years.
The creation of the EC single market on January 1 has led to far-reaching
changes in the way businesses account for value added tax. And the removal
of most border custom checks has shifted responsibility for collecting trade
statistics on to the companies.
With much of the detail of the new VAT rules undecided until the last
minute, companies have faced a desperate scramble to adapt to the
regulations in time.
UK Customs says it will treat genuine errors and omissions leniently in the
first few months. But business organisations such as the Confederation of
British Industry and the Institute of Directors have expressed concerns that
the new system is so complex that unintentional mistakes will be easily
made.
The new rules are complex because they are only part of a more far-reaching
change now to take place in January 1997. Because the new system is a hybrid
it has had to include a host of exceptions and special cases. EC member
states were unable to reach agreement on full change to an 'origin' system
of VAT in the run up to the single market, so it has been delayed until
1997. The system would mean that an exporter based in London and selling to
a customer in Milan would charge UK VAT.
Some doubt, however, whether governments will have the stomach to force
through a second VAT revolution in just four years.
A problem with the origin system is it depends on harmony between EC VAT
rates. And it could mean the UK dropping its zero-rating of children's
clothing and many foods.
It will also require the creation of a clearing house to redistribute VAT
revenues around the community. But some question whether this could work
effectively when countries such as Italy have a bad reputation for making
VAT transfers under the current regime.
In the meantime companies have been adjusting to their new VAT chores. Many
have had to modify and upgrade their computer systems to collate the
information previously collected by Customs or by their freight forwarders.
In the UK 140,000 companies are required to file quarterly trade returns to
Customs and 30,000 of the larger companies must file a more detailed monthly
return known as an Intrastat.
UK Customs calculates the once and for all start-up costs of the new system
for British businesses will be Pounds 100m, with a net saving of Pounds 135m
a year.
But these estimates have been criticised as being too optimistic.
Accountants KPMG Peat Marwick believes the change-over costs will be Pounds
200m when in-house costs of upgrading computer systems are taken into
account.
Because the new interim VAT regulations have not achieved the simplicity of
a thorough-going 'origin' system they have presented a number of special
situations, which make life more difficult for business. 'Triangular' trade
has proved far more common than expected. This is when a buying office in,
say, the UK orders goods from France for delivery in Germany. Companies have
been faced with registering in more than one country for VAT purposes. And
although a last-minute modification in the rules has been rushed through, it
does not cater for when four rather than three parties are involved in a
trade.
The commodities markets, notably oils and metals, have also encountered
unexpected problems. Shipments often change hands many times without moving
out of store. But under the new rules VAT is due on each transaction. The
VAT is reclaimable but the changeover has threatened to create a paperwork
mountain and serious cash flow problems.
And companies repairing or reconditioning equipment for a foreign customers
have found themselves liable for VAT because they are regarded as providing
a service.
In one instance, where two companies affected by this rule protested, UK
Customs proposed treating the two shipments involved as completely unrelated
transactions, thereby allowing VAT-free supply of goods.
Taxes are never popular but VAT is regarded, by small companies in
particular, as the most difficult to administer. UK Customs says it has done
its best to keep the new system simple.
The business community throughout Europe will be hoping that if further
changes are pushed through in 1997, the promise of simplicity is kept.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

930629

