FT932-298

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (4): Why to buy is better -
Global networks / A difficult decision


   By GEORGE BLACK


MANY organisations which are seeking to build global information networks
face a difficult 'buy' or 'make' decision in the near future.
The signs are that most will go for 'buy' rather than 'make'. The main
reason is that they believe this will be quicker, cheaper and easier.
That will be a reversal of what was the prevalent trend until recently. Most
large companies used to feel more secure owning and managing their own
networks. It took a lot of time, money and effort to set them up, but it
gave the users complete control.
Now many want to do 'one-stop shopping' for telecommunications services
worldwide. The arguments that have already convinced many users to outsource
computing services apply to telecommunications. Network design has become so
complex that many think it best to hand it over to experts on a fixed price
contract for several years.
Mr Pim Bilderbeek, manager of the European network research centre for
International Data Corporation, predicts: 'More will buy than make because
that way they will free capital for other purposes and be able to
concentrate on their core businesses.'
Just as important is that they will get rid of all the problems of
negotiations with a large number of equipment suppliers and maintainers and
with the national telephone companies of the countries in which they
operate.
These complex dealings have been the biggest hurdles for those companies
which have built their own global networks. When anything goes wrong on a
private network, it is often extremely hard to sort out who is responsible.
Another factor is that the technology is becoming obsolete so quickly that
users may prefer to leave it to service providers to keep up with all the
latest inventions.
For organisations seeking to do business in emerging regions such as eastern
Europe, setting up a network may be much harder than in the more
technologically advanced countries. Where cables are inadequate, they may
need to rely on service companies which can provide access to satellite
systems.
The expected switch to outsourcing is good news for the suppliers of managed
network services such as BT, Cable & Wireless and Infonet.
These companies have been increasing their revenue from network services but
have had to invest so heavily in establishing global networks that few have
reaped profits in this sector so far. But the prospect of a rapidly growing
customer base should reassure them of the wisdom of their investment.
Mr Trevor Watts, marketing manager for network services at service provider
AT&T Istel, says that global companies must ask themselves whether they want
to commit huge resources to running their own networks in every country.
He notes that to do so they must be able to cope with different technical
standards in each country, for instance for the new ISDN digital telephone
system.
Mr Peter Hickman, a senior business consultant with GE Information Services,
the leading supplier of electronic data interchange services, says it is now
extremely hard for even large companies to provide all the necessary
expertise and support for global networks.
But some large companies, notably the financial institutions, are still
reluctant to hand over all their communications requirements to service
providers because they are not convinced that managed networks are secure
enough for their sensitive data. Most of the banks use their jointly-owned
body, Swift, to perform their major network functions.
As banking becomes less of a retail chain and more of a network application,
the banks are increasingly concerned about the ability of other network
providers to come into their market. They may therefore try to become
network providers themselves. That already seems to be starting to happen at
some of the top European banks.
Both service providers and those who intend to build their own global
networks face some big technical challenges in keeping up with users'
demands. Most companies have allowed their networks to grow in a piecemeal
manner and have managed them only by firefighting problems as they occur
rather than by proper planning.
Mr Watts believes that part of the solution to global network problems will
lie in the new technologies of Frame Relay and Asynchronous Transfer Mode.
Frame Relay promises to overcome the restriction on throughput of
packet-switched data networks based on the Consultative Committee for
International Telephony and Telegraphy X25 standard. It is starting to be
seen as a cost-effective solution by US multinationals, but European
companies have yet to be persuaded of its advantages. However, Frame Relay
still needs more monitoring and diagnostics features to be able to deliver
substantial benefits to users.
ATM is seen as the next step after Frame Relay in increasing the rate of
data transfer and integrating local and wide area networks. US
multinationals are starting to investigate ways of adopting ATM as a future
backbone technology for achieving a higher still throughput of data.
Frame Relay and ATM may be the key to providing the increased bandwidth
which global companies will require for multimedia applications involving
image transmission. They appear to be well suited to users who need to
transmit very large files of data in short bursts to remote sites.
Competition for global customers will become intense in the next few years.
Last month AT&T launched a service in the Asia Pacific region called
'Worldsource'. It has created a set of partnerships with telecommunications
companies in other countries.
BT's recent announcement that it will take a 20 per cent stake in AT&T's
rival MCI points in the same direction. Others will seek to do the same to
get a share of the growing market in international voice and data
communications.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930629

