FT932-3203

FT  15 JUN 93 / Survey of Retail Chain Management (6): Pace of expansion
abroad quickens - Cross-border trade


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


RETAILING has long been one of the more fragmented of the world's
industries. But now at last it is becoming more international as retailers
look outside their home markets for acquisitions and alliances.
Indeed, the pace of cross-border expansion seems to have accelerated this
year.
Tesco, the UK's second-largest food retailer, has acquired the 92-store
Catteau chain in northern France, while Kingfisher took over Darty, France's
largest electrical retailer. Outside the EC, Migros, the Swiss co-operative,
has taken a dominant position in the Austrian grocery market through the
acquisition of 112 Familia supermarkets from the Zumtobel group, and a joint
venture with Konsum Osterreich, Austria's largest supermarket group.
Rewe, Germany's largest grocery retailer, has taken a stake in UK grocery
chain Budgens, while Toys 'R' Us, the US speciality retailer, has announced
moves into Belgium and Switzerland.
But retail experts say the sudden acceleration in cross-border alliances and
acquisitions is an illusion created by the high number of deals concluded
this year. In fact, many retailers have been pursuing cross-border
opportunities for several years.
Ahold of the Netherlands, Aldi and Tengelmann of Germany, and France's
Promodes and Carrefour have already increased the proportion of sales
outside their home countries to more than 30 per cent.
Mr Robert Clark, director of Corporate Intelligence Group, the UK retail
research group, predicts that increasing numbers of retailers will expand
abroad. His group has identified between 60 and 80 US companies with firm
plans to move into Europe.
Many leading European retailers, he says, are 'crawling all over'
neighbouring countries looking for opportunities. But he adds that large UK
retailers - despite deals struck this year by Tesco and Kingfisher - are
generally conspicuous in their lack of activity abroad.
'If they are not careful, UK retailers could get left behind,' he warns.
And the pressures on retailers to expand overseas are building. The
near-saturation of many core markets means they either have to use their
retailing skills to diversify into different sales formats or product areas
within their home country, or move into foreign markets.
But it is easy to underestimate the difficulties involved in expanding
abroad. Successful retailing is a delicate balancing act, involving the
delivery of the right goods and services to the local customer at the right
price. Diverse tastes, cultures, and even climate mean the demands of
customers vary considerably throughout Europe.
The need to provide different products to various markets can also mean
cross-border expansion does not always lead to economies of scale, or
increased buying muscle with suppliers.
And different legislation on areas such as opening hours, planning
restrictions, VAT and minimum wages, can make operating conditions very
different.
Ms Rosanne Murison, a retail expert with the Boston Consulting Group in
London, says the key to international retailing success is first to 'act
local', making sure the new venture is viably positioned in the local market
and responsive to that market's needs, and then to 'think global', realising
economies of scale where possible.
It is vital to conduct exhaustive research into customer demographics,
tastes and pricing attitudes, and into competitors and sites.
After some notable past failures there is evidence that retailers have
learned the need for a cautious, calculated approach to overseas expansion.
Tesco, for example, is using the relatively small Catteau acquisition to
gain experience of operating in France. Rewe may be using its stake in
Budgens in a similar way.
Migros is expanding initially into areas bordering Switzerland, where
customers' tastes are similar to those in its home market, and has chosen as
partner a diversified co-operative similar to itself.
Forming an alliance can be an attractive option to small and medium-sized
companies lacking the financial muscle to acquire businesses or establish
new operations abroad.
The UK's Institute of Grocery Distribution says there are four types of
alliance. The first is purchasing-based alliances, designed to improve the
buying power of members and develop new sourcing opportunities.
An example is Eurogroup, made up of Belgium's GIB, Switzerland's Coop
Schweiz, Germany's Rewe, France's Paridoc, and Vendex of the Netherlands.
Another category is the development-based alliance, which is an agreement
between two retailers to co-operate on a project. It has often been used by
a retailer keen to enter a new national market - for example, the venture
between Tengelmann of Germany and Superal of Italy. Tengelmann supplied
management experience and know-how so that Superal could consolidate its
presence in Italy.
A third category is the skills-based alliance, which involves retailers
sharing experience of different markets to their mutual benefit. An example
is Belgium's GIB Group and the UK's J. Sainsbury, which developed the
Homebase chain using GIB's experience in the DIY market and Sainsbury's UK
presence.
Another form is the multifunctional group, which combines elements of the
other three types. Chief among these are the European Retail Alliance - made
up of the UK's Argyll, Ahold of the Netherlands and France's Casino, and
Associated Marketing Services, which includes the ERA members plus seven
retailers from Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, Finland and Spain.
But several retailers, including Belgium's Delhaize, the UK's Tesco and
Tengelmann of Germany, have avoided buying alliances, often because of the
risk of being tied to partners who might become take-over targets in
overseas expansion plans.
But despite the difficulties and teething problems, the new wave of
internationalisation, especially through cross-border alliances, looks set
to be one of the most important retailing trends of the 1990s.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930615

