FT934-10210

FT  06 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture (Week in the markets): Oil
prices volatile as gold soars


   By Our Commodities Staff


OIL PRICES experienced sharp movements during the past week because of
confusion about demand in the main consuming countries and market
recognition that, even though northern hemisphere countries are approaching
their period of highest seasonal demand, supplies remain plentiful.
The price for Brent Blend for December plummetted on Wednesday to Dollars
15.60 a barrel, but had recovered to Dollars 16.20 in late London trading
yesterday.
When oil ministers from the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries
set a production ceiling of 24.52m barrels a day in September, they were
counting on that traditional rise in demand with the onset of the northern
hemisphere winter. But so far there have been few firm signs of a
substantial rise in demand.
Evidence which emerged during the week that recent economic growth in the US
has been stronger than expected was not matched by a rise in the use of
refined oil products, demand for which actually fell in October by 1.5 per
cent. Statistics published yesterday by the International Energy Agency
(IEA) showed better than expected demand in Europe, but the agency cut its
demand forecast for the main western industrial countries and Japan for the
current quarter to 40 million barrels a day from 40.1m b/d last month.
The IEA figures also confirmed earlier estimates that Opec production had
fallen in October to 24.65m b/d. That is above the Opec ceiling but not
sufficiently high to be a big worry for the markets, according to analysts.
They cite factors outside Opec control, such as buoyant Russian exports and
rising output from the North Sea, as additional reasons why oil prices
remain weak. If they remain weak, pressure will build for Opec ministers to
take additional action at their November 23 meeting in Vienna to cut output
further.
It also proved to be a week of contrasts in precious metals markets. Prices
were sent tumbling on Monday by weekend news from Xerox Corporation which
claimed to have developed a silver-free film process. Gold and platinum
prices followed silver down - there was no logical reason why they should
but some investment funds use computer programmes which link all precious
metals prices.
However, all this was forgotten by late on Wednesday when investment funds
started to buy gold futures on the New York Commodity Exchange (Comex). This
buying became hectic yesterday as share prices crashed around the world -
analysts linked the investment funds' renewed interest in gold futures to
weakening stock and bond markets and the need for them to find other outlets
for speculative money. Gold tested Dollars 380 a troy ounce at one stage
yesterday before closing in London at Dollars 376.75, up Dollars 7.95 over
the week.
Ms Rhona O'Connell, in a special report for stockbroker T Hoare & Co,
suggests gold's price will average Dollars 360 an ounce this year, 'only 5
per cent up on 1992 - but not a bad performance after hitting a low of
Dollars 326 in March'. Ms O'Connell looks for an average of Dollars 390 next
year and Dollars 420 in 1995.
Silver and platinum moved up with gold yesterday: silver ended the week up
11 US cents an ounce at Dollars 4.495 and platinum was at Dollars 380.25 an
ounce, up Dollars 5.75.
Analysts made the point that, although Xerox's new product, VerdeFilm, was
aimed solely at the graphic arts market (where it will substitute for the
silver-halide films used to make mastering plates for high-quality
photography used in many magazines and newspapers and commercial printing)
it did pose a potential long-term threat to silver usage.
Coffee prices fluctuated in a narrow range, but ended the week slightly
higher at Pounds 1,221 a tonne for the London Commodity Exchange's January
futures contract. The market had started the week with prices at Pounds
1,211 a tonne, but moved lower on Thursday following Brazil's first moves as
part of the producers' retention scheme.
Brazil bought 1,750 bags in Wednesday's auction - the first step towards its
declared target of purchasing 200,000 bags as part of producers' efforts to
boost prices. Coffee traders had expected producing countries to buy much
more in their initial foray into the market and their disappointed reaction
pushed prices lower on Thursday to test the psychological Pounds 1,200 a
tonne level. However prices recovered somewhat to see the second position
futures contract close at Pounds 1,216 a tonne.
Brazil entered the market again yesterday to purchase more coffee, but the
auction did not begin until London markets closed. Brazil said that after
yesterday's auction it would consider changing the rules for its market
forays since coffee supplies remain tight. Traders suggest the Brazilian
government must expand the range of coffees it is prepared to buy or it may
have to pay higher prices.
Producers are hoping that, by keeping stocks of coffee from the open market,
they will encourage consumers to draw down their own stocks and boost
prices. The US, the world's largest coffee consumer, has drawn down its own
stocks for the past two months and the market is entering the peak
consumption period - the northern hemisphere's winter. But traders still
remain sceptical about whether producing countries will have the discipline
to stick to the retention plan.
 --------------------------------------
          LME WAREHOUSE STOCKS
       (As at Thursday's close)
 --------------------------------------
tonnes
 --------------------------------------
Aluminium    +9,175 to 2,311,300
Copper       -5,575 to   606,675
Lead           +250 to   299,550
Nickel         +390 to   119,358
Zinc         +5,875 to   838,475
Tin            -310 to    20,165
 --------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931106

