FT934-11152

FT  02 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Ruberoid bounces back to the market -
Flotation completes Tarmac's programme of disposals


   By CATHERINE MILTON


RUBEROID yesterday announced a return to the stock market almost five years
to the day that Tarmac fought and won a bitter nine-week battle to take over
the roofing materials company with rival bidder Raine Industries.
The flotation, which is likely to value a now substantially smaller Ruberoid
at about Pounds 70m, completes Tarmac's programme of disposals intended to
strengthen the building materials and construction company's balance sheet
weakened by recession.
About 65 per cent of the new issue, sponsored by Robert Fleming, is likely
to be placed firmly with institutions and 35 per cent placed subject to
clawback in an open offer. The company does not expect to raise a
significant amount of new money.
Tarmac's Pounds 141.3m bid, described in 1988 as a classic white knight
operation, engaged the City for weeks as Mr Thomas Kenny, Ruberoid's then
chairman, engaged in a pointed public debate with Mr Peter Parkin, Raine's
chief executive.
Mr Ian McPherson, who is stepping into the top job at the new Ruberoid
company, said: 'I know Ruberoid will be remembered. It has only been off the
market since 1988.'
Ruberoid currently generates about 60 per cent of its sales from
contracting, of which 70 per cent comes from less cyclical refurbishment
work. The balance is in manufacturing bituminous waterproofing systems
predominantly for the construction industry and distributing them from
warehouses in Lancashire, Dundee and Enfield.
The company, which Tarmac roughly halved through disposals, has been on the
market for trade buyers since April but the parent said no realistic price
was suggested during preliminary talks with potential purchasers.
This made the prospect of seeking a listing on today's high market, with
investors now generally willing to pay more than trade buyers, all the more
attractive to both Tarmac and Ruberoid's management.
Mr Neville Simms, chief executive of Tarmac, said: 'Of course you take
advantage of the fact that there is a more obvious and visible value to the
people who are running the business.'
Mr McPherson, who is quitting the post of president of Tarmac America to
become chief executive of the new company, said: 'They are good businesses
and they always have been.' He said: 'Personally I have always wanted to run
a plc company because I have done everything else. I have lived with a huge
division inside a big group which has all of the disadvantages of a plc and
none of the advantages.' To fulfil this ambition he is bringing the
waterproofing businesses of Ruberoid and Tarmac to the market, of which the
main companies are Ruberoid, Permanite, Briggs Amasco, NEBI and ATAB.
Mr McPherson claims for the Ruberoid businesses a 25 per cent share of the
UK roofing market and a 16 per cent share of the country's specialist
roofing contracting market. The large shares might have given any trade
buyer difficulties with the Office of Fair Trading.
ATAB in Belgium and NEBI in the Netherlands are leading manufacturers of
waterproofing products as well as roofing and cladding contractors.
The businesses brought together for the flotation made pre-tax losses of
Pounds 12.8m (losses of Pounds 6.7m) in the year to December 31 on turnover
of Pounds 280.4m (Pounds 263.8m).
The deficit was struck after provisions of Pounds 11.3m (Pounds 6.9m) with
the bulk against redundancy and reorganisation as well as some to cover poor
contract results. There was also a notional interest charge of Pounds 6.1m
(Pounds 6.8m).
There are no exceptional items forecast for 1993 and the interest charge for
the current year is likely to be just below Pounds 1m following a
refinancing which should ensure an average gearing of about 10 per cent
during the year.
Mr McPherson said: 'The current order position supports our forecasts: we
don't yet see any major upturn in the UK: we think the market will be strong
by 1995.'
He said the board's strategy would be to 'major on the brand names' such as
'all the Permas and Rubers' which, he said, had become for builders as
generic as Hoover. The company expects to capitalise from roofs which have
been neglected during the recession.
Mr McPherson plans to hold equity in the company as do all the directors:
'We are going to put our money where our mouth is,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

931102

