FT932-7015

FT  26 MAY 93 / Management: The moral maze


   By TIM DICKSON


Over 500 business ethics courses are currently taught on US campuses. More
than 25 textbooks and three academic journals are dedicated to the topic.
And at least 16 business-ethics research centres - and several university
chairs - have been established.
Despite significant interest in the subject, though, managers in the US are
probably bewildered, claims Andrew Stark, an assistant professor at the
University of Toronto writing in the May-June issue of the Harvard Business
Review.
Stark says it is not that managers dislike doing the right thing: over the
years the problem has been an absence of practical advice on grey areas and
how to cope when competitive and institutional pressures lead the well
intentioned astray.
The old corporate social responsibility approach, he explains, held that the
market would ultimately reward ethical behaviour. When it was clear that
ethics and interests did come into conflict, though, academics became mired
in absolutist notions of moral philosophy. Scholars too often took an
unrealistic line, suggesting that a manager's motivation could either be
altruistic or self-interested, never both.
Stark says professional ethicists are now starting to address the moral
dilemmas that managers face on a daily basis. A new business ethics is
emerging that acknowledges and accepts the messy world of mixed motives,
where moderation, pragmatism and minimalism are legitimate concepts. He
cites - approvingly - the former chairman of the Stride Rite Corporation, a
Dollars 500m (Pounds 333.3m) US manufacturer of children's shoes which
combines a 'long-standing, quasi medical dedication to foot care' with
shrewd marketing (appealing designs and boutiques). Refusing to be drawn
into the 'ethics versus bottom line' conundrum, he is quoted as saying:
'We're unashamedly out to make a profit and we're very much concerned about
(children's) health. . . We run the business on both concerns'.
A fuller article on business ethics in the US - featuring the Nynex
telephone company - appeared on this page on May 14th.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930526

