FT934-8657

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Golden future for base metals


   By KENNETH GOODING


JULIAN Baring, manager of one of the best-performing gold funds, is
broadening his horizons to take in copper, aluminium, zinc and other metals
as well as coal, iron ore, diamonds and the like. He has persuaded his
bosses at Mercury Asset Management to set up the Mercury World Mining trust,
which is to raise a minimum of Pounds 50m.
According to Baring, base metals prices are today in a similar position to
the gold price a year ago - that is, down in the depths but ready to bounce
back in a few months. Consequently, he says it is reasonable to assume that
the new trust can make an 80 to 100 per cent return on its money over the
next five years.
Base metal prices may take time to recover and he intends that MWMT
initially should be biased more heavily towards gold shares than those of
companies producing other commodities. 'Gold shares are likely to behave
better earlier and base metals shares should behave better later,' he says.
One-quarter of the fund will be available to private investors when the
public offer, sponsored by SG Warburg Securieties and Cazenove & Co., is
made on November 23. The trust is offering ordinary shares at 100p each and
warrants on a one-for-five basis.
The initial net asset value will be 97p a share, indicating a 3 per cent
'joining fee.' The minimum investment will be Pounds 1,000 and the annual
management charge will be 1.25 per cent.
In spite of the diversity of the mining industry, MWMT's policy will be to
have at least half its investments by value in shares that qualify for
personal equity plans. This means investors will be able to put up to a
quarter (Pounds 1,500 at present) of each tax year's subscription limit in
MWMT shares for inclusion in a general Pep. Warrants will be traded
separately and may not be transferred into a Pep.
Baring's view of the metals business is shared by other analysts including
Euan Worthington, head of the Warburg mining team. In his recent
International Mining Outlook, Worthington suggested that many metal prices
were 'now at not only cyclical lows but at the lowest level ever in real
terms.'
He cautioned, however, about buying the shares of producers just yet because
of their 'stalwart resistance to cutting output, which means we may not have
seen the darkest hour for some metal prices in the current cycle.'

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

931113

