FT932-6578

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (6): Uncertainty over pensions -
Financial market reform is one of the government's frustrations


   By JOHN BARHAM


FINANCIAL market reform must rank among the government's great frustrations.
Despite Argentina's dramatic economic recovery, officials complain that few
private banks have made sufficient progress in modernisation.
And to the government's undisguised concern, bankers have responded to
deregulation by financing a consumer boom. The equity market has failed to
recover from a speculative binge last year.
The principal uncertainty hanging over financial markets is the shape of the
future pension system, which the government hopes will become a cornerstone
of a modern capital market. But pension reform has run into heavy opposition
in Congress.
Politicians have already rejected the plan of economy minister Domingo
Cavallo to force all employees to pay 11 per cent of their income into
individual retirement savings accounts, which would be administered by fund
managers.
Instead, Congress has made contribution to private pension schemes
voluntary. It has also ordered the government-owned Banco de la Nacion
Argentina (BNA) to provide contributors to its pension funds with a minimum
dollar-based guaranteed return.
Mr Cavallo maintains that these are only superficial changes, which do not
affect the heart of pension reform. He is confident that most people will
prefer private pension funds, which he believes will offer higher returns
and will be seen as less risky than the BNA's government-guaranteed fund.
Bankers nevertheless worry that BNA's guaranteed return could not only
hamper private sector competition but would also fail to lighten the burden
of the government's existing pension liabilities. They also wonder how the
government can guarantee millions of BNA clients guaranteed dollar incomes,
irrespective of the risk of a devaluation.
Question marks must also remain over the wider issue of how much and how
quickly the pension system can boost Argentina's savings rate and reduce its
reliance on imported capital. Mr Roque Fernandez, central bank president,
commented that pension funds 'will not bring a phenomenal change. I hope it
comes, but I think it will be gradual.'
Meanwhile, the equity market, which will one of the principal beneficiaries
of a reformed pension system, is in the doldrums. Share prices have been
unable to recover from a disastrous price slide that began last June. The
Merval market index now stands at less than half its May 1992 high of 882.
The decline has continued this year, spurred by a huge overhang of
overpriced shares still held by investors. Share prices dipped sharply in
April and May in anticipation of July's planned privatisation of Argentina's
largest company, the national oil corporation YPF. Uncertainty over
President Menem's re-election bid has also dampened enthusiasm. However,
Argentine stocks are still not cheap, with price/earnings ratios averaging
about 18.
Market capitalisation of USDollars 18bn is equivalent to only 8 per cent of
GDP, a low ratio even by regional standards. Daily turnover rarely exceeds
Dollars 30m, and the market continues to be gripped by a strong speculative
mentality.
Investors are deterred by a narrow market in which liquidity is a problem in
all but a few actively traded stocks. Three companies - two privatised
telephone stocks and the Perez Companc holding company - account for half of
market capitalisation.
Instead of listing, companies are actually departing the market, with only
164 companies now quoted against 171 last year. Thirty years ago, the Buenos
Aires market had more than 600 quoted companies. The government's Comision
Nacional de Valores checked capital markets regulator has approved more than
30 companies to list, but only a few have come to the market.
Low international interest rates make bond issues more attractive for
companies. Salomon Brothers says that last year more than 20 Argentine
companies issued Dollars 1.97bn in bonds, notes and commercial paper.
Possibly the government's greatest frustration is its inability to force
banks to lower interest rates and improve terms for industrial borrowers,
particularly for smaller companies unable to approach the local and
international capital markets.
Argentina's banking system has changed beyond recognition from the chaos and
speculative frenzy of the 1980s. In June 1989, as hyperinflation raged,
central bank liquid reserves were a mere Dollars 112m. In April, the second
anniversary of Argentina's celebrated convertibility law, the central bank's
liquid reserves exceeded Dollars 10bn.
As a result of the confidence brought by convertibility, bank deposits have
risen dramatically and maturities have been stretched out. Last month,
deposits - less than half of them in dollars - stood at Dollars 29.3bn,
against Dollars 18bn a year earlier. As a result, lending rose to Dollars
41.38bn, against Dollars 24.4bn in April 1992.
Banks are immensely profitable. Spreads at about 2-3 percentage points
remain high - although they have fallen sharply - and private banks have cut
costs aggressively and boosted lending and fee-based income.
For instance, Banco Frances, a locally owned commercial bank and one of
Argentina's top five banks, saw its net assets grow 137 per cent to Dollars
1.08bn last year, against Dollars 378m prior to currency convertibility. Net
income in the year to June 1993 is forecast at Dollars 47.6m, 37 per cent
more than last year.
Banks are less interested in lending to companies, especially risky small
and medium-sized ones. Instead, most of the profit growth is coming from
lending to consumers.
Mr Nicholas Grose Hodge, chief manager of Lloyds Bank in Argentina, says
'This continues to be a pretty good year for banks, with one notable
exception - that bad debts and credit risk are getting much worse.' Under an
admittedly broad central bank definition, problem loans stand at 4 to 6 per
cent of the private banking system's total loans.
The government is trying use the weight of BNA, which is also the country's
biggest financial institution, to drive interest rates down. Interest rates
vary from a real negative monthly rate of 0.5 per cent on blue chip
corporate loans to a stinging real 5 to 6 per cent per month for riskier
borrowers.
It has announced that BNA will lend Dollars 4.5bn at below market interest
rates to small companies and farmers. But bankers say BNA's efforts are
unlikely to have the desired effect, simply because they have little
intention of competing in the small company and farm lending sectors.
Neither are central bank capital adequacy regulations making much
difference. Central bank regulations require banks charging higher interest
rates to set aside more capital. The government believed this would force
banks to lower rates. But banks, whose gearing, at about 8 times capital, is
low by international standards, have been happy to use their capital as
profitably as possible.
Bankers say that the real culprits are inefficient regional banks, most of
them owned by provincial governments, which distort interest rates
throughout the system. Their funding costs are high, a reflection of the
poor quality of their portfolios. Their operating costs are also higher,
because few government-owned banks have cut costs sufficiently. The
government rejects these claims, stating that banks - private and government
banks alike - remain highly inefficient.
Living with stability is becoming increasingly difficult for smaller and
medium sized banks, a majority of which flourished in the bad old days of
heavy inflation and high interest rates. Argentina still has more than 160
banks of varying shapes and sizes. Many will probably merge, seek out niches
in the investment bank market or simply close down.
Some foreign banks with small branch networks have already decided to wind
up retail operations. Chase Manhattan has sold its 15-branch network and its
credit card business.
Marcelo Podesta, Chase's Buenos Aires managing director, says: 'We did not
want to invest in systems to get up to the scale the (retail) market
required. It is not a priority investment for the bank.' Instead, Chase is
concentrating on sophisticated financial products and project finance for
large clients. The trouble is that with so many banks thinking the same way,
competition in the wholesale market is fierce.
Many retail and wholesale banks have taken an increasingly active role in
privatisations. Some, such as Banco Rio de la Plata - the country's biggest
bank - have taken direct stakes in privatised companies. Others have backed
investors in privatisations, underwritten privatisation share flotations, or
structured financing for privatised companies' investments.
Mr Fernandez wants banks to adopt greater securitisation of both their
assets and liabilities, which would reduce institutions' vulnerability to
mismatching or sudden shifts in market conditions. Foreign bankers also
expect the market to make increasing use of sophisticated derivative
products, such as bond- and equity-linked swaps and options.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

930527

