FT934-11311

FT  02 NOV 93 / Reconstructing bankrupt east Germany: A tale of two cities -
Judy Dempsey talks to the mayors of Halle and Rostock


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


FEW yearn for the days when eastern Germany was communist-ruled. But many
remember how the capital, East Berlin, selected the party bosses who ran the
main cities.
There were several key cities to which the aspiring party apparatchik sought
promotion. One was Rostock, on the Baltic Sea, another Halle, deep in the
heartland of 'middle Germany'.
Each with a population of 300,000, they were important political and
economic sinecures of the old regime. Resources were pumped into Rostock,
aimed at making it the most important port in eastern Germany and showing it
could compete with the western shipbuilding centres of Hamburg and Bremen.
Red Halle, as it was known, also had funds directed its way to shore up
heavy industry. But the infrastructure, including water, sewerage, housing
and heating, was neglected.
Over-fulfilling the Five Year Plan in machine tool production took
precedence over everything else.
Three years after unification, the mayors of both cities are struggling to
rebuild an entire social, economic and local government infrastructure from
scratch. They also have to cope with unemployment rates of more than 40 per
cent.
No wonder Mr Klaus Rauen, mayor of Halle, Saxony-Anhalt, sees his job as a
mission. As a 'Wessi', or westerner, he believes he can contribute to
unification by passing on his experience as former mayor of Bonn.
'It has been rewarding and frustrating. I work about 15 hours a day. I don't
know for how much longer I can continue this life-style,' he says in his
office in the centre of Halle.
Mr Klaus Kiliman, his counterpart in Rostock, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, is an
'Ossi', or easterner. He had never dabbled in politics before unification.
He is a theoretical physicist. 'I thought I had something to contribute
after the Wende (the change). It has been hard. I often think about
returning to my physics,' he says.
Weak, coalition-led councils, suffering from inexperience and internal
bickering, have hindered the consolidation of local government structures in
both cities. Moral and financial bankruptcy have played their part as well.
'The people of the former east Germany still feel disoriented, and ashamed
because they feel they were in a system which has lost all respect,' says Mr
Rauen. He wants to restore the inner city as a means of generating
self-confidence, pride and a sense of the pre-communist era. The problem is
money.
Halle is also virtually bankrupt. It has a current expenditure budget of
DM1bn (Pounds 400m) and an investment budget of DM300m. However, the
collapse of the region's uncompetitive industry means that the city's share
of company tax revenue is less than DM65m a year. Personnel costs, including
administration wages, kindergartens and other employee services, account for
53 per cent of expenditure. To finance the deficit, the city has borrowed
DM100m from banks and in the bond market.
Rostock has a budget of DM700m and a deficit of DM81m. The council's
personnel costs account for 55 per cent of the budget - the average in
western Germany is 35 per cent. Mr Kiliman has raised DM81m in the bond
markets or through bank credits to finance his city's deficit.
Both mayors are legally obliged to reduce personnel costs. Halle has already
cut staff from 13,000 in 1991 to 6,000. Mr Rauen intends to reduce it to
4,000. He has until the end of the year to dismiss staff. After that, each
council employee will have tenure.
Mr Kiliman, a Social Democrat who heads a weak coalition government of
Christian Democrats and Social Democrats, says he also is committed to
cutting his staff to 4,000, a third of the 1990 level. But the local
parliament is opposing it. Cuts mean closing down kindergartens and other
employee services.
Neither Mr Rauen, a Christian Democrat, nor Mr Kiliman needs any persuading
about the need to create a lean, efficient city council. In 1992, the
eastern Lander, or states, employed 304 civil servants for each 10,000
inhabitants - 30 per cent more than western Germany. The eastern local
councils employed 427 civil servants for each 10,000 - twice the western
level. According to the German Federation of Taxpayers, 'eastern German
administration has about 440,000 employees more than can be justified'.
Yet some see a positive side to the dire state of the cities' finances. A
shortfall of revenue could speed up the privatisation of local services,
almost taboo in western Germany.
'If we do not have a mixture of public and the private investment, we will
not be able to overcome our (financial) problems,' says Mr Rauen.
Privatisation of water services in Rostock and electricity in Halle, both of
which were difficult to push through, revealed the unstable and paradoxical
nature of eastern Germany's political alliances. In Rostock, the Social
Democratic SPD voted for privatisation, and the Christian Democrat CDU
opposed it. In Halle, the SPD and the refashioned communist PDS tried to
block it.
Mr Tjark Woydt, head of Deutsche Bank in Rostock, explains how unification
has thrown unexpected alliances. 'Three years ago, politics in eastern
Germany was like a casino game, with everyone vying for a place in the new
order,' he says.
'Today, officials are slowly trying to make up their minds about where they
stand politically. It's taking time. People still don't know where they
stand ideologically. They don't know what the main parties stand for.'
Neither Mr Rauen nor Mr Kiliman has decided whether to remain on the eastern
German political scene long enough to see the emergence of stable political
structures. 'It's an uphill struggle,' says Mr Rauen. 'But both westerners
and easterners have to make it together.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931102

