FT933-12551

FT  23 JUL 93 / Leading Article: German dilemma


THE HUM of speculative activity across Europe's foreign exchange markets
has, since Wednesday, reached an anxious pitch. Higher-than-expected German
monetary growth in June now looks likely to prevent the Bundesbank from
delivering further cuts in short-term interest rates soon. But without the
prospect of a substantial cut in German rates, the chances of maintaining
current parities in the exchange rate mechanism look increasingly slim. A
speedy, and orderly, realignment would still be desirable; a further, and
bloody, crisis may be approaching.
The Bundesbank now looks boxed in. While presumably keen to avoid the blame
for the ERM's demise, the bank's council members are even more desperate not
to save it at the expense of their underlying objective: to secure
medium-term price stability. A rate cut now, in a week in which broad money
growth climbed to an annualised and seasonally adjusted rate of 7.1 per
cent, outside the bank's own target range for the year of 4.5-6.5 per cent,
would certainly look bad. It would look especially bad if, as expected,
consumer price inflation has risen to 4.3 per cent in July, more than twice
the Bundesbank's long-term 2 per cent target.
Surely, Germany's European partners cry, inflation cannot still be Germany's
main problem: the inverted shape of its yield curve, high real interest
rates and a deep industrial recession all point to an excessively tight,
rather than loose, policy. But many economists agree that the Bundesbank's
favoured analytic model remains valid: each percentage of above-target money
growth still appears to deliver a percentage point of above-target
inflation.
The reason for the confusion is that the Bundesbank is trying to control
inflation in a dual economy in which both parts are moving in opposite
directions. The private, industrial sector is starved of funds: deflation,
not inflation, is the problem. The International Bank Credit Analyst
estimates that bank lending to the west German private sector has fallen by
4 per cent this year, while wholesale prices fell 0.4 per cent in the year
to June. But the public sector is still growing and borrowing at an
unsustainable pace: bank lending to the public sector has grown 17 per cent
this year, driving up money growth and the non-traded components of consumer
prices.
The Bundesbank thus finds itself facing a dilemma. If the government will
not cut its borrowing, then all the bank can do is either to permit a higher
price level or attempt to offset this public profligacy with a fierce
squeeze in private sector credit, output and prices. But by doing so, it
risks damaging German industry, undermining public support for low inflation
and further weakening the ERM in the process. If the Bundesbank insists on
sticking rigidly to its short-term monetary and inflation targets, then it
must keep interest rates high. But both the bank, and the German government,
should be aware of the risks they run.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930723

