FT932-69

FT  30 JUN 93 / International Company News: Falling yields trigger
record-breaking run - The unexpected revival in the US bond market


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


SIX weeks is a long time in the US Treasury markets. A month-and-a-half ago,
investors in US government securities were fretting that the Federal Reserve
would tighten monetary policy to curb rising inflation.
Their concerns were depressing bond prices, and had sent the yield on the
long bond up to 7.05 per cent. The bond market rally, which for two years
had pushed stock prices to record levels and fuelled an unprecedented boom
in corporate bond issuance, looked over.
Today, investors' inflation fears have abated, Fed policy appears to be back
on hold, and bond yields are heading down again. Yesterday, the yield on the
benchmark 30-year government bond fell to under 6.6 per cent, the lowest it
has been since 1977, when the treasury began selling the 30-year issue on a
regular basis. Yields on shorter-dated securities also fell to record or
near-record levels.
Several factors have driven the impressive recovery in bond prices. First,
the inflation outlook has turned positive. In the opening months of 1993,
consumer and producer prices surged, threatening to take the annual
inflation rate above 4 per cent and beyond. Recent figures, however, showed
price rises have slowed once more. Analysts now predict annual inflation
this year will stay in the 3 per cent to 3.5 per cent range.
Second, the economy remains weak by normal post-recession standards. Since
economic growth put on a spurt in the final quarter of 1992, output growth
has slowed. Gross domestic product expanded by only 0.7 per cent in the
first quarter of this year, and is expected to remain relatively anaemic for
at least another two quarters.
Economists place much of the blame for the poor growth on President Bill
Clinton's planned tax increases, which are discouraging consumers from
spending and companies from hiring or investing in new capital, and on poor
demand from depressed overseas economies.
Third, the likelihood that the president's deficit-reduction package will be
passed by Congress this summer has cheered bond investors, who see it as the
first meaningful attempt by the administration to tackle the huge federal
budget deficit.
Finally, several technical factors are temporarily boosting bond prices.
They include the absence of immediate supply pressures (the treasury is not
due to sell new government securities until late July, which means there is
currently a shortage of notes and bonds in the market), and heavy buying of
bonds by municipal authorities eager to finance their higher-interest
bearing debt.
The impact of the bond market's unexpected revival, meanwhile, is being felt
throughout the economy.
The equity markets, which might otherwise be in serious trouble because of
the depressed economy, and the recent warnings from big companies about
earnings prospects, continue to be propped up by low interest rates. When
the 30-year yield hit a record low on Monday, the Dow Jones Industrial
Average jumped 40 points, to within less than 1 per cent of its all-time
high.
The market for new corporate debt is also benefiting greatly from low bond
yields. The interest rates on bonds issued by US companies are pegged to
treasury yields, and for the past two years corporations have been rushing
to take advantage of cheap debt by issuing bonds in record amounts.
Last year, companies issued a record Dollars 274bn in investment-grade debt,
well ahead of the previous record of Dollars 190bn set in 1991. This year,
the volume of new issues has been even greater.
According to preliminary figures just released by Securities Data in New
York, debt issuance is running at a record rate this year - up to June 29,
Dollars 208bn in investment-grade bonds had been sold in the US markets.
In May, when bond yields were rising, analysts feared it was inevitable the
boom in corporate bond issuance would slow. Now yields have dropped sharply
again they see the boom in new issues lasting at least another six months.
Mr James Quigley, head of US debt syndication at Wall Street securities
house Merrill Lynch, says: 'This year we felt that (attaining the levels of
1992) would be difficult - yet yesterday we surpassed Dollars 200bn. That
puts us on a pace for Dollars 400bn for the year. Although I think that's
unlikely, we should end the year at around Dollars 350bn.'
The vast sums of money being raised on the debt markets continues to be used
primarily to refinance older, more expensive debt. Refinancing has been a
profoundly important feature of the financial markets for the past two
years, helping to knock the balance sheet of Corporate America back into
shape after the indulgences of the highly-leveraged 1980s.
Moreover, there is little sign companies have exhausted their need for
refinancing. Mr Quigley says: 'If the long bond yield falls to 6.5 per cent,
we will see companies continuing to use debt to refinance in the third
quarter.'
Yet the Merrill banker says refinancing is not the only reason companies are
issuing debt. 'There will also be more of what I call 'opportunistic'
financing - where companies issue debt purely to take advantage of the low
rates, even if they don't need the money today.'
As for whether companies are issuing new debt to finance spending on new
capital and labour, Mr Quigley believes that will be determined primarily by
the health of the economy - 'financing for expansion is not yet pronounced'
in the market, he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930630

