FT934-11574

FT  30 OCT 93 / The Lex Column: Drowning in Queens Moat


Until March this year when its shares were suspended, Queens Moat Houses
appeared a respectable hotel chain with a long and successful history as a
publicly-quoted company. The document released by the company's new
management, however, depicts a company lacking the most basic financial
controls. Some of the choicer elements include the payment of unlawful
dividends over three years and the non-existence of records used to
construct the 1992 interim results. Even among the many horrors unearthed by
the recession, this catalogue of concerns ranks high. Despite the
praiseworthy efforts of the Cadbury committee and Accounting Standards
Board, many questions about corporate governance and financial reporting
remain unaddressed.
The most disturbing aspect is the flimsiness of opinions expressed by the
company's past advisers. It is perplexing, to say the very least, that two
firms of property valuers could arrive at such different valuations of QMH's
hotels in the space of a year. QMH's previous auditors and brokers deserve
censure for permitting the publication of misleading accounts. The
Department of Trade and Industry would appear to have much to investigate.
The new management has done its best to draw a line under past errors. But
given the incompleteness of records at QMH's 200-odd subsidiaries and its
remaining lease liabilities, this can only be drawn in pencil. The future
strategy of the group is dictated by circumstance. There is little point in
QMH's banks appointing receivers and dumping 200 properties on a glutted
hotel market.
The following months will doubtless see much haggling between QMH's 65 banks
and the two classes of preference shareholders over the terms of the
restructuring. Ordinary shareholders, though, have little hope of any
redress. QMH may only make Pounds 20m of trading profits this year,
sufficient to support about Pounds 250m of debt. The forthcoming
debt-for-equity swap will surely obliterate any remaining value.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

931030

