FT932-7033

FT  26 MAY 93 / Power group promises telecoms price war


   By ANDREW ADONIS


NATIONAL GRID Company gained a government licence yesterday to build a
public telecommunications network in competition with British
Telecommunications and Mercury, and promised to start a price war as early
as next spring.
Energis, National Grid's new telecoms subsidiary, intends to use its pylons
to install a fibre-optic telecoms network between Britain's leading towns.
It plans to have a network covering 17 of the 23 biggest towns and cities in
England and Wales operating by next April. It talked yesterday of prices
about 15 per cent lower than those of BT and Mercury.
Scottish Hydro-Electric also gained a licence yesterday. It too intends to
use its network to offer phone services, but is looking for a joint venture
partner to undertake the telecoms side of the business.
Businesses will be the main beneficiaries of the increased competition at
first, but Energis intends to market to residential customers from the
outset. Energis is budgeting to spend Pounds 100m on its fibre-optic network
in the next year. Although its pylon network does not extend to Scotland, it
is looking for arrangements with Scottish carriers - including
Hydro-Electric - to provide a network north of the border.
Energis is negotiating to connect with BT's local network to take calls the
last part of the way to businesses and private customers. It is also
starting connection talks with cable TV companies, 58 of which are building
local telephone networks in conurbations. This could enable it to bypass BT
in much of the country.
Mr Gordon Owen, Energis chairman, predicted that the company would soon be
'the third force' in UK telecoms. 'This is a significant milestone in our
plans to use the electricity industry to offer a full range of residential
and business services to UK communications customers.'
Four public network licences have been granted since the government decided
to open the UK's fixed-network market two years ago.
The others have gone to Ionica, which is building a national radio-based
network, and Colt, which this month gained permission to operate a fixed
network within the M25 area. Colt intends to start offering services in the
City later this year.
Together with the cable TV companies' local networks, the new operators look
set to end the BT and Mercury duopoly that has existed since 1984.
National Grid is jointly owned by the 12 regional electricity companies in
England and Wales. Hydro-Electric is an integrated supplier and distributor
of electricity in northern Scotland.
Four other electricity companies have also applied for telecommunications
licences: ScottishPower, East Midlands Electricity, Yorkshire Electricity
(through a joint venture with Kingston Communications, the Hull
telecommunications infrastructure operator) and Norweb. The applications are
still under consideration.
Cable television companies installed more than 15,000 new telephone lines in
April, bringing the total to more than 156,000. This is a rise of almost
50,000 since January.
At the same cable television subscribers rose by 3,943 during the month to
stand at 458,410 - an increase of 22,000 this year.
The Cable Television Association says the number of homes that are now close
to cable networks this year - and therefore available for subscription -
could reach nearly 1m.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930526

