FT932-187

FT  30 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Claims of 'improper pressure'
rejected


   By JOHN MASON, Law Courts Correspondent


   THE MOST potentially damaging claim by Mr Mates


that the Serious Fraud Office had applied 'improper pressure' on the trial
judge, Mr Justice Tucker - was dismissed as 'complete nonsense' last night
by a central figure involved in the investigations into the allegations of
corruption surrounding the Polly Peck trial.
The source - in no way connected with the SFO - said it was not the SFO that
had made the original allegation. The Metropolitan Police, initially
considered the claim - that an attempt might be made to bribe Mr Justice
Tucker using a Pounds 3.5m slush fund - worthy of investigation.
However, police soon discounted the possibility that a serious attempt had
been planned the bribe the judge. It was never discovered exactly who was
behind the bribery allegations, but it was considered to be an attempt to
disrupt the legal proceedings against Mr Nadir by generally 'muddying the
waters'.
The later allegations that Mr Nadir, Mr Wyn Jones of the Met Police, Mr
Anthony Scrivener QC, counsel for Mr Nadir and the trial judge were involved
in a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice were dismissed even faster.
One lawyer close to the case decribed the allegation as 'totally laughable'.
Mr Justice Tucker declined to comment on Mr Mates's statement. Mr Scrivener
also last night refused to comment.
When the corruption allegations were first made last November Mr Robert Owen
QC, the barrister who is bringing the Polly Peck prosecution for the SFO,
did invite the trial judge to consider his position in the light of the
claims.
However, the source last night denied Mr Owen had acted improperly, pointing
out that the Scotland Yard investigation of the corruption allegations was
under way and that a change of judge would not have significantly affected
Mr Nadir's trial.
The suggestion that Mr Owen had tried to mislead the judge over the police
investigation during the hearings - heard in camera - was complete nonsense,
he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930630

