FT932-6866

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (4): Taking positions in the
dining-room - Profile of Richard Edwards


   By JAMES BLITZ


YOU'VE HEARD of George Soros, the currency speculator who claims to have
broken the pound on Black Wednesday.
Now meet Richard Edwards, a 42-year old Cambridge University graduate who is
carrying out the same kind of short-term currency speculation from his flat
in Hampstead, North London.
As currency dealers go, the two men operate on different scales. Mr Soros's
Quantum fund, which is based in New York, has several billion dollars under
management. Mr Edwards, an ex-bank dealer who runs a one-man fund from his
dining room, says he controls funds which are under Pounds 100m.
Mr Soros can claim that his speculation was enough to help bring about the
devaluation of the pound.
By contrast, Mr Edwards has the more modest claim of having recently turned
Pounds 25,000 of his own money into Pounds 1m in 18 months.
What both men have in common, however, is that they are involved in intense
short-term speculation on financial markets, making them the scourge of
central bankers round the world. 'People in my profession are shy of calling
themselves speculators,' says Mr Edwards. 'I am not shy at all. A speculator
is what I undoubtedly am.'
Mr Edwards is one of the growing breed of commodity trading advisers (CTAs)
 -like the hedge funds - which are causing concern to central banks.
In recent years, the number of these funds has grown in the US and Europe as
national capital controls have broken down, exchange rate volatility has
gone up and returns on speculation have increased.
Mr Edwards says that the essence of their business is to take active
currency risks for a range of clients that want higher than average returns
on their money.
The client will first deposit a sum of capital with a commercial bank as
collateral. A manager like Mr Edwards is then given limited power of
attorney over its use. He can then buy and sell currencies in the foreign
exchange market, taking highly leveraged positions that are well in excess
of the collateral deposited.
Mr Edwards takes positions three times the size of the collateral. This
speculation is lucrative: 'My returns for customers have been slightly over
30 per cent,' he says.
But it is risky, too. 'I make thousands of decisions every year,' he says.
'If just one of them goes wrong, it can jeopardise all the others. If, last
year, I had speculated strongly that the French franc was about to devalue
and had held my position, I could have had everything wiped out.'
What technology do budding CTAs need? First - and the centrepiece of Mr
Edwards dining room - is a terminal with the latest exchange rates and a
chart-drawing function.
Second item: a portable telephone. 'I have to know about exchange rates and
bond prices constantly,' he says. 'It can be very tiring.'
Those who speak of the immorality of speculation are unaware of how the
financial markets are changing, he says.
'It used to be considered that there was a difference between investment -
which was honourable - and speculation - which wasn't,' he explains. 'But
the distinction between useful investment and useless speculation is
becoming blurred.'
Will this speculation grow? 'The currency market these days is so huge and
competition so intense that dealing costs are now very small. It is
therefore very cheap to get in and out of the market fast.'
Is he a millionaire? 'A millionaire these days is someone who makes a
million a year.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

930526

