FT933-5350

FT  03 SEP 93 / International Company News: Ahlstrom gets FM1.45bn for its
Enso-Gutzeit stake


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   STOCKHOLM


AHLSTROM, the Finnish machinery and paper group, yesterday placed its 17.5
per cent stake in Enso-Gutzeit, one of Finland's leading forestry groups,
with international investors for FM1.45bn (Dollars 246m).
The stake was acquired a year ago as payment for 100,000 hectares of forest
in south-eastern Finland.
It is a highly profitable deal for Ahlstrom as it gained FM38.7 for each of
the 37.4m shares sold, compared with an acquisition value of FM20 per share.
The price reflects the strong performance of the Finnish forestry sector
this year where exports have climbed sharply, despite weak market
conditions, due to the 30 per cent depreciation of the markka since November
1991.
The shares were placed by Barclays de Zoete Wedd at just under the FM39.3
price at which they closed on the Helsinki stock exchange on Wednesday.
Ahlstrom received both R class and A class shares when it sold its forest
land to Enso last December in a FM926m deal. All the R class shares,
carrying one-tenth of a vote, are now being sold, but the group is retaining
its holding of 6.6m one-vote A class shares which it acquired for FM27 each.
Mr Krister Ahlstrom, chief executive, said the proceeds would be used to pay
down the group's debt, which at the end of last year stood at FM8.6bn.
He said Ahlstrom had always intended to sell the shares when the price
reached a certain target, but he had been surprised at how quickly this had
been met. 'This was not a strategic holding,' he said, adding that the
company was likely to sell its remaining shares in due course.
Enso-Gutzeit is Europe's largest producer of sawn timber and liquid
packaging board, and the continent's fourth largest producer of newsprint.
The state remains its largest shareholder, directly or indirectly
controlling 58 per cent of the shares and 78 per cent of the votes.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930903

