FT934-11390

FT  01 NOV 93 / Letters to the Editor: Government commitment on Bosnia still
strong


   From Mr DOUGLAS HOGG MP


Sir, Edward Mortimer ('No news is good news', October 27) implies that,
because Bosnia and Iraq are now less in the headlines, the government's
concern, and Britain's efforts to promote peace and to relieve suffering,
have lessened. This is quite wrong. Notwithstanding a reduction in media
coverage, these issues and the plight of the civilian populations affected
remain very high on our agenda.
We are aware of the humanitarian crisis Bosnia faces as a result of the
continued fighting and winter conditions. All parties have been responsible
for actions which have disrupted the aid convoys. But all convoys in the
area covered by the 2,300 British UN forces get through, albeit sometimes
after delay. Our troops have escorted more than 1,500 convoys carrying
nearly 70,000 tonnes of supplies. The RAF has flown nearly 900 flights to
Sarajevo delivering more than 11,000 tonnes. We shall continue our aid
effort this winter.
There can be no question of using force to fight the aid through, as Mr
Mortimer suggests. This would inevitably draw the UN forces into the
conflict, threatening both their security and the humanitarian effort
itself. But the threat of air strikes agreed by Nato in August still stands:
the Serbs and others must be in no doubt about Nato's determination to
launch such strikes if they resume, for example, the strangulation of
Sarajevo.
It is true that the Bosnian Moslems' effective rejection in late September
of the peace package negotiated by Lord Owen and Mr Stoltenberg has dealt a
blow to the prospects for an early end to the fighting. But they are
continuing their efforts, which offer the only real hope of a lasting peace.
We do not suppose that reconvening the international conference - probably
in Geneva, not London - would, by itself, produce a solution. Any such
conference must be properly prepared, with movement beforehand by all
parties to the conflict. That is what the co-chairmen are pursuing.
As for Iraq, we have not relaxed our pressure. Nor will we do so until Iraq
complies fully with its obligations, under the Security Council's ceasefire
terms. We will do what we can to give political and material support to the
population in northern and southern Iraq while the regime continues its
repression. But recognition of an alternative provisional government is not
on the agenda. Indeed, the Iraqi opposition itself is committed, as we are,
to maintaining the unity of Iraq.
Douglas Hogg,
minister of state,
Foreign and Commonwealth Office,
London SW1A 2AH

The Financial Times


London Page 14

931101

