FT934-11393

FT  01 NOV 93 / Arts: A great mansion revealed - Architecture


   By COLIN AMERY


One of the greatest pleasures in life is looking at architecture with a good
guide or a learned friend. A good cicerone can be a writer, a historian or
an artist - or best of all a friend who is a mixture of all three. Sometimes
the ideal guide to a building or a place is a book that not only tells a
historical tale but nourishes the visual imagination as you read. One such
book has just been published and it has been, for the last few days, an
absorbing and enthralling companion. Spencer House: Chronicle of a Great
London Mansion by Joseph Friedman is published by Zwemmer, price Pounds
39.50.
Eighteenth-century Spencer House survived the wars and slumps that saw off
so many other aristocratic London palaces, but then, inevitably, declined
and was turned into offices. Its rescue, restoration and indeed resurrection
is the great achievement of the present Lord Rothschild and his companies
(RIT Capital Partners plc).
The realisation that this house on Green Park is immensely important was
only the first step in the tale of its redemption. The house's importance is
artistic, architectural and historical. It can be seen today as an excellent
exemplar of its period, not merely because it has been perfectly restored
but because the motives behind its rescue so clearly reflect the aesthetic
and intellectual reasons for its original creation.
Lord Rothschild was wise and generous enough to ensure that this
extraordinary effort was accomplished by a broadly based team. He saw
Spencer House as an opportunity to engage the very serious and impressive
range of talent that is available in England in the field of conservation
and historical refurbishment.
Those skills exist on two levels: first, at the level of historical research
 -often but not always accompanied by a degree of taste and aesthetic
judgment; and second, at the level of finely honed craftsmanship. Spencer
House today is a brilliant example of the skills of contemporary British
craftsmen and artists in paint, gilding, carving, sculpture and upholstery.
Last weekend there was a highly successful 'craftsman day' to show the
public how some of the fine results were achieved.
Joseph Friedman's chronicle is a rewarding account of the creation and
re-creation of the house.
He is right to emphasise the important transitional nature of the
architecture. Fascinatingly, the house was begun by one architect, John
Vardy, who died in 1765 and represented the English Palladian school of
classical architecture, and was completed by another, James Stuart
(1713-88), who was known as 'Athenian' Stuart and was the pioneer of the
Neo-Classical revival in England based on first Roman and then Greek
original sources. Friedman also points out the importance of symbolism,
allegory and metaphor in eighteenth century architecture - an area that
today needs exposition in a way that would have amazed our well-educated
eighteenth century forebears.
The story of the building of the house for the first Earl Spencer between
1756 and 1766 is colourfully told in this book - a clear picture unfolds of
the tastes and ambitions of the patron and of his Countess, the agreeable
and influential Georgiana. The selection of John Vardy as the architect was
partly because he came with the site that Spencer purchased in St James's. A
more interesting choice was that of Colonel George Gray as an adviser to the
21-year-old John Spencer. Little is know about Gray beyond the fact that he
was both a professional soldier and secretary and treasurer of the Society
of Dilettanti - a dining club for gentlemen who had accomplished the Grand
Tour. This group, when it was not engaged in serious drinking, had a
didactic purpose to rejuvenate English art and architecture by spreading
knowledge of classical archaeology.
Mr Friedman's research falls into two parts. First, he prepared an
impressive report on Spencer House before restoration started on site. This
helped to ensure a very high standard of accuracy throughout the project.
Second, the book is enriched, as the bibliography shows, by new material
including diaries and bills from various sources, which Mr Friedman
discovered while the restoration was under way.
To me the most fascinating part of the book is the section entitled 'A
Revolution in Taste', where the original classical sources are described and
illustrated with a rewarding thoroughness. Some of this may be speculative
but the publication of the illustrative sources for the Palm Room and the
Painted Room in particular seem to be exhaustive. The chapter on Athenian
Stuart's work on the first floor of Spencer House reveals both the author's
saturation in the source material and the controlled but rich nature of
Stuart's Neo-Classical style. There is nothing arid about the revival of the
classical past in this house and with Mr Friedman as your dragoman the lost
meaning of much of the decoration and the architecture comes intriguingly
back to life.
There is a great deal in this book about people and politics - indeed you
could simply read about the people and glance at the sumptuous pictures that
were specially commissioned from Mark Fiennes if the architectural detail
becomes overwhelming. But I suspect that you will agree that this is the
most enjoyable architectural book to be published for a long time - it is a
brilliant story, well told with a triumphantly happy ending.
Spencer House is available for private and corporate entertaining. It is
open on Sundays (except August and January). Booking enquiries: 071-499
8620.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

931101

