FT932-6951

FT  26 MAY 93 / UK Company News: When the life of Brian becomes less fun -
Williams' strategy after the departure of its chief executive


   By ROLAND RUDD


WHEN A conglomerate loses its chief executive because he cannot see much
scope for future big acquisitions it raises some awkward questions for the
group, not least about its future strategy.
Williams Holdings has made no secret of its view that hostile bids have
become almost impossible to pull off since it lost its bid for Racal
Electronics at the end of 1991.
But the industrial conglomerate has always held out the possibility of
returning to the takeover trail when the opportunity presented itself.
Mr Brian McGowan, who yesterday confirmed that he was stepping down as chief
executive, believes that route has now been shut off to Williams for the
foreseeable future. 'Big mega bids are out for the time being' he said
yesterday. 'From an enjoyment point of view its less fun carrying on as you
are than smelling the grease paint of a potential target.'
While Mr McGowan had privately made clear to his colleagues that he would
probably resign in two years time on his fiftieth birthday, his decision to
go by the end of December was born out of a frustration that there are
unlikely to be any big deals for the next few years.
Last year's negotiations with Thorn EMI brought this view to a head.
Williams entered into negotiations with Thorn over buying its defence,
lighting and security business for Pounds 300m.
When news of the talks leaked in the summer, Williams' share price
immediately fell to under Pounds 3, below which the management believed it
was no longer possible to fund such an acquisition by way of a share offer.
And since it did not have the cash to buy the businesses without
significantly increasing borrowings, it just settled for Thorn's fire
extinguisher business for Pounds 41m.
For Mr McGowan the failed Thorn negotiations were all too reminiscent of
what happened during its hostile bid for Racal. Williams' original Pounds
750m share offer fell more than Pounds 100m as the group's shares sliped
from 360p to a low of 287p during the battle.
After losing Racal, its third failed hostile bid, and no longer able to
finance medium sized deals with its shares, Mr McGowan says the future
strategy will be on looking for small infill acquisitions.
This was in marked contrast to its earlier strategy when it accumulated such
famous businesses as Yale locks, Rawlplug, Polycell and Valor Heating.
'That type of growth is no longer possible' said Mr McGowan ruefully. 'The
fat targets of the eighties are gone and the institutions are no longer so
willing to back big acquisitions'.
Mr McGowan still believes that UK managers may get 'weak and sloppy' again
in the future, making big acquisitions easier, but he is not prepared to
wait for those days to come back.
His long-time partner Mr Nigel Rudd, chairman, who founded the group with Mr
McGowan in 1982, does not contradict his chief executive. For the next 18
months he says Williams will be a conventional, if somewhat boring,
conglomerate to meet the needs of the nineties. Williams will be
concentrating on organic growth and small bolt-on acquisitions.
With Mr Roger Carr, managing director, responsible for the day-to-day
running of the businesses, Mr Rudd says there was simply not enough work to
keep three senior executive directors busy. Thus no one will replace Mr Carr
when he takes over from Mr McGowan as chief executive at the beginning of
next year.
Mr Rudd believes he has the depth of management in place to successfully
turn around an underperforming company. 'But I am not prepared to put the
group's resources behind a deal which can depend on the decision of a single
fund manager' he said.
Furthermore, the group's decision, announced at yesterday's annual general
meeting, to take reorganisation costs of acquired companies through the
profit and loss account could make acquisitions still less attractive for
Williams.
All of these factors have been underlined by Mr McGowan's decision to
retire. But Mr Rudd argues that many other conglomerates, such as BTR and
Hanson, are in the same position.
Faced with a problem of where its next acquisition was going to come from,
BTR recently surprised analysts by signing joint ventures with two Chinese
provinces which will entail an investment of more than Pounds 100m.
Many conglomerate analysts yesterday seized on the Chinese deal as evidence
that BTR attaches as much importance, if not more, to organic growth and
agreed deals as it does to big hostile bids.
A simular pattern has emerged at Hanson. The new management recently
underlined its belief that organic growth and small bolt-on acquisitions
provide the greatest opportunity for growth than big takeovers.
Although BTR's message has generally been well received in the market,
partly because it has stressed the need for managing companies for some
time, Hanson's change of heart over making big acquisitions has led to a
number of critical reports by stockbrokers.
Indeed, Williams' two brokers, Warburg Securities and Barclays de Zoete
Wedd, recently published a sell and hold note respectively on Hanson,
questioning whether it could sustain its growth without another big
acquisition.
Williams' advisers argue that the company has nothing to fear from Hanson's
experience because it has always modelled itself more on the lines of BTR.
They took heart that the group's shares only fell 10p yesterday to 310p. One
of its financial advisers said: 'Williams has been stressing its ability to
run businesses for some time. Mr McGowan's resignation underlines the change
in the group's strategy from an acquisitive conglomerate to a more prosaic
company managing industrial businesses.'
This view is echoed by Mr David McErlain, a close business friend of Mr
Rudd. Mr McErlain, former chairman of Anglo United, which took over Coalite,
the smokeless fuel business, in a leverage bid in 1988, believes Mr
McGowan's departure will give Mr Rudd a 'new lease of life' to focus on his
businesses, while developing a new partnership with Mr Carr.
But even Mr Rudd cannot disguise his hope that the glory days of the
eighties might return again, allowing him to make the type of takeovers that
within ten years took Williams from a shell company into the FT-SE 100 share
index.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930526

