FT934-11282

FT  02 NOV 93 / World Trade News: Devaluation - and Asia - lift Italian
exports / A remarkable expansion into the newly industrialised countries


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


MR PAOLO BARATTA has the rare distinction of possessing the one problem-free
portfolio in the Italian government.
As minister of foreign trade, he is presiding over the most remarkable
export growth any industrialised country has seen in the past two decades.
On average the value of exports in the first half of the year is up 19 per
cent compared with the same period in 1992. They are also up more than 7 per
cent in volume terms.
The growth is across the board. Italian exporters have been quick to switch
away from the stagnant markets of the main industrialised economies into the
fast growing economies of Asia and Latin America. But thanks to the free
float of the lira, which has seen it depreciated by about 20 per cent since
September 1992, Italy has also managed to increase its share of EC markets,
notably in Germany.
One reason for the sharp rise is the fact that exporters are no longer
under-declaring sales in the wake of the lira devaluation. In the two
previous years exporters had taken advantage of an over-valued lira to
under-invoice.
'Devaluation obviously has been important but I don't share the view that
this is the sole reason,' says Mr Baratta. 'One has to ask why British
exports, which have enjoyed a similar competitive advantage from devaluation
at the same time as the lira, have not performed nearly as well.'
Among the strongest sectors of Italian exports have been industrial
machinery and mechanical goods, the core of which are machine tools. This
industry, which has shrunk in the UK for instance, has remained well-rooted
in central and northern Italy.
'These are not big groups producing very large sophisticated machinery like
the Germans and the Japanese; but they are small and medium-sized, very
flexible and ideal for finding niches between what the Germans and Japanese
can offer,' says Mr Baratta.
He believes both the size and flexibility of Italian engineering groups
adapt well to the specific needs of the fast modernising economies of the
Far East, where the demand for machinery is rising exponentially. Their less
complex technology makes it easier to train people, both on the spot and in
intensive sessions.
China is a case in point where exports this year are set to double to more
than L4,000bn (Pounds 1.6bn), accounting for nearly 3 per cent of total
exports. The bulk of this is accounted for by machine tools and engineering
goods, especially machinery for the textile industry.
Such are the business prospects in China that the ministry, in conjunction
with its Chinese counterpart, is to set up a series of 'base camps' there.
These will be geared to small and medium-sized exporters, offering them
space near industrial zones for logistical support, parts storage space and
training facilities.
There is also strong demand for Italy's consumer products as a result of the
new income being generated in the fast growing economies. Clothing, shoes,
luxury goods and furniture and top-range household goods are all doing well.
They are competing less on price than they are on brand labels, design and
quality.
Trade with non-OECD countries in the first half this year was 26 per cent of
total exports compared with 18 per cent for 1992 and 15 per cent in 1990. If
this trend continues, non-EC exports will soon be more important than those
of the Community. So far this year Italy's exports to the EC account for 54
per cent of the total. Two years ago they were close to 60 per cent.
At the same time, with depressed domestic demand, Italy has seen its import
bill drop in spite of the devaluation. Thus in the case of Germany, Italy
has recorded a first half trade surplus of L2,734bn compared with a L3,995bn
deficit in the same period in 1992. A similar trend was evident with France
its second trade partner and to a lesser extent with the UK.
Italy's real exchange rate is now back to the level of the 1970s, when the
current account was broadly in balance. In the latter part of the 1980s and
in 1990-91 exports lost their momentum and the trade balance deteriorated.
The annual growth in 1991 exports was down to 3 per cent.
This reflected a combination of an over-valued lira and a period of
sustained high increases in production costs, especially wages. Having long
risen above inflation, wages for the past two years have been below
inflation in the main manufacturing sectors. So far this year wage rises
have been held down to at least one percentage point below inflation, which
has averaged 4.4 per cent a year. Exporters believe an agreement with the
unions in July, which abolished the indexation of wages and linked rises to
productivity, has introduced an important element of wage cost stability.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931102

