FT933-12837

FT  22 JUL 93 / Accountancy Column: Food for thought in Polly Peck's bitter
harvest - Andrew Jack argues that the profession could have done more to
highlight problems in the group's affairs


   By ANDREW JACK


THE story of Polly Peck International, the fruit-to-electrics group, which
went from wonder stock to insolvency within a few weeks in 1990, is almost
as sorry a tale for accountancy as it is for Mr Asil Nadir, its founder.
The most prominent finger of blame must point to Mr Nadir, who has illegally
fled to his native northern Cyprus, jumping bail conditions while awaiting
criminal prosecution for theft, and facing civil action for the recovery of
misappropriations totalling at least Pounds 371m.
The reputations of those who have pursued him - notably the Serious Fraud
Office, the Stock Exchange and the Inland Revenue - are not entirely
untarnished. But the episode has shown many facets of accountancy in an
equally poor light: preparers and users of accounts, standards, auditors,
administrators and professional bodies.
It appears that Meyna. the group's Turkish fruit business, has a turnover
one-fifth of that claimed for it in the group accounts. Against reported
trading profits of TL195bn (Pounds 11.6m) for the first six months of 1990,
the management accounts for the full year show gross profits of just TL13bn
and an overall net loss.
Whether this could have been detected earlier is open to question. There is
evidence that Nadir blatantly misled his auditors on at least one occasion,
by failing to discuss his interest in 1989 in Impexbank, a Turkish bank
which was instrumental in channelling Polly Peck funds into his own personal
and private business activities.
But there were other areas which arguably should have aroused more suspicion
at the time. Meyna was one of several PPI subsidiaries whose reported
performance did not tally with reality. It was listed as the UK's second
largest capital investment in Turkey and was apparently generating
substantial sales. Yet local traders suggest it had no more than 5 per cent
of the market, and the margins were mysteriously well in excess of those of
its competitors.
In northern Cyprus, Sunzest, PPI's fruit exporter, was apparently supplying
more oranges than the island's entire annual crop; while Unipac, its
packaging company, seems to have been producing more boxes than there was
fruit to fill them.
While this evidence was anecdotal - and could usefully have been
supplemented by a few more trips from investors and commentators to the Near
East while PPI was still trading - other information in the published
accounts should have raised some eyebrows.
The geographical split shows profits from operations in the near and Middle
East consistently above 25 per cent, and still consistently furnishing
two-thirds of group profits in 1989 when its contribution to turnover had
fallen to 35 per cent. The ratio of net purchase of tangible fixed assets to
depreciation was also abnormally high.
Stocks, debtors and work-in-progress all strangely grew year by year to
substantial levels, more than doubling between 1988 and 1989 alone. So did
the number of days in debtors, creditors and stock. Were these figures ever
verified, or considered recoverable?
This is all before considering the frequently highlighted treatment of
foreign currency, by which Polly Peck booked to profits large amounts of
interest from cash on deposit in high-inflation, soft currency regions,
while pushing the exchange losses on conversion through reserves.
Equally, there was the delicacy of the group's cash position. Recasting its
latest source and application of funds statement to the format of FRS 1, the
Accounting Standard Board's cash flow equivalent, shows net outflows from
operating activities of Pounds 129m in 1989 alone - and rising fast.
Both the foreign currency and cash positions can be derived from the
published accounts, though they were apparently neglected or dismissed by
investors boosting the shares and analysts helping hype them even days
before the group went into administration.
Much more important was the large amount of cash supposedly on deposit in
northern Cyprus, and the highly material profits claimed as generated in the
region. Stoy Hayward, PPI's group auditor, says it relied for the audit of
these subsidiaries on Erdal and Co, a small local firm which it introduced
to Horwath International, the network to which it is affiliated.
Mr Paul Hipps, Stoy's senior partner, says two partners and one or two
managers went to northern Cyprus each year to examine Erdal's working
papers, and sometimes visited Turkey. He says the firm had no choice in
selecting Erdal, which was chosen by PPI.
The senior audit partner on the job has since died, it has no copies of the
working papers it inspected in northern Cyprus and Erdal refuses to supply
any now. Other auditors argue that if Stoy had doubts about the quality of
Erdal's work, it could have conducted its own audit on the subsidiaries, or
qualified the PPI accounts. It did neither.
The administrators to Polly Peck also cannot entirely escape criticism.
Their strategy of initially co-operating with Mr Nadir in the hope of
realising high proceeds seemed logical, but failed. Their approach since,
including considerable litigation, has so far cost more than the recoveries
it has generated. Current estimates give creditors up to 4p in the pound.
More important, the role of the disciplinary processes of the Institute of
Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, and the conduct of one of its
largest members, are unfortunate. Accountants from Coopers & Lybrand carried
out many projects for PPI over the years and yet became administrators in
spite of ethical rules banning appointments when there has been a
'continuing professional relationship'.
Coopers claimed its internal systems were not able to pick up the conflicts.
That seems surprising in a firm offering computer consultancy to others, and
also since Mr Richard Stone, one of the administrators, was head of
corporate finance during some of the time his department was conducting work
for PPI.
The institute, as so often, appeared bound by existing archaic rules, which
limited the fines to just Pounds 1,000 to each of the two administrators,
and an examination of its systems.
Analysis with hindsight may be unfair, but it is likely to be causing a wry
smile on the lips of Mr Nadir. He would have had far less chance to throw a
smokescreen around his own conduct if those who tackled him had been more
unblemished in theirs.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930722

