FT932-7120

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (4): A determination to
catch up - Eastern Germany is a huge, if sluggish, market


   By ARIANE GENILLARD


The noise is deafening. The mammoth turbine hall is 600 metres long and 42
metres wide, big enough to accommodate a total of 12 210MW units.
Together with two 500MW units installed in 1980, eastern Germany's Boxberg
plant was for years the largest lignite-fired power station in Europe.
Today, it offers some of the largest contracts in continental Europe for
power generating equipment.
Boxberg, built with Soviet-designed turbosets in the lignite strip-mining
fields of eastern Germany, needs extensive refurbishing and plans are
underway for two new 800MW plants. The whole project is expected to cost
DM5bn-6bn.
While western Germany's power generating capacity is expected to remain
relatively stable over the next few years, the restructuring needs of the
ageing power industry in the east has opened an important market for
suppliers of generating equipment.
Some 30 per cent of eastern Germany's power stations are due to be closed by
mid-1996 as refurbishing is too costly. Moreover, the sharp decline in
energy consumption, caused by the economic slow-down and the energy waste
which characterised the old regime, makes a large portion of the 22,000MW
existing capacity superfluous. Instead, the power plants, which are mostly
small 200MW Russian types, will be replaced by large 800MW units.
Vereinigte Energie AG, VEAG, the east German utility company in charge of 70
per cent of the energy production in the five new German states, plans to
build 4,000MW of new brown coal-fired power stations and 2,000MW of hard
coal stations by 2005. Another 1,000MW will be available from
newly-installed gas turbines.
Brown coal, which is abundant,will provide 80 per cent of the energy fuel in
east Germany. By 2005, east Germany is expected to produce annually 60m to
70m tonnes of brown coal, according to VEAG.
Moreover, remaining plants will be fitted with sulphur and dust removal
equipment to reduce their pollution. VEAG has already committed DM6bn to
refurbish the two largest plants in east Germany, Janschwalde and Boxberg.
In contrast, expansion in west Germany will be minimal with a 2.5 per cent
addition to the installed 110,000MW capacity planned over the next five
years, according to Siemens. Mostly, projects in the west will focus on
replacement of old plants. In total, east Germany will need an estimated
DM30bn to rebuild and upgrade its power stations and modernise its
transmission lines.
The prime benefactor of this growth will be VEAG which was formed after the
disintegration of the energy 'Kombinat', the monopolistic structure in
charge of energy under the former communist regime. VEAG is still owned by
the Treuhand, the state holding agency in east Germany.
Remaining energy production is to be left with regional energy utilities and
town authorities.
Three large companies have been dominating the burgeoning market:
Siemens, acting mostly through its KWU energy subsidiary, has acquired 40
per cent of the market for coal-fired stations and 50 per cent of the market
for gas turbines. Its outstanding orders for east Germany amount to DM1.5bn,
with further projects in the pipeline.
Siemens orders have included the supply of two 800MW turbosets for the large
power plant to be built at the Schwarze Pumpe site in Brandenburg.
Siemens will also install a natural gas-fired and steam turbine cogeneration
plant near Dresden. This new plant, representing a total investment of
DM480m, will replace the lignite-fired cogeneration at the same site and
reduce pollution by 97 per cent.
Other projects include the design and planning of a backfit for the
lignit-fired Janschwalde power plant near Cottbus with a flue gas
desulphurisation plant and a combined gas and steam turbine cogeneration
plant near Halle.
Asea Brown-Boveri (ABB), the Swiss-Swedish power and engineering group, has
invested DM300m so far but its outstanding orders reach DM2bn.
ABB's largest order is for the Boxberg site for which it will be handling
the planning work and supplying two complete turbosets for DM435m. ABB has
also won a DM150m contract for a new coal-fired power plant in Rostock. GEC
Alsthom, the Anglo-French joint venture, has also acquired significant
market shares, with EGT, its gas turbine marker, claiming a 25 per cent
market share in Germany while MAN, its engineering division, has captured a
12 per cent market share. EVT, its manufacturer of boilers and environment
protection products, claims 20 per cent of the market, with competition
coming mostly from the German engineering companies, Deutsche Babcock and
Steinmuller.
These companies, all well-established in the West German market before
reunification, have largely applied similar strategies to access the eastern
market, acquiring sister companies formed with break-up of the monolithic
power industry in east Germany.
Other suppliers have included General Electric of the US which in early 1992
signed a contract with Blohm and Voss, the Hamburg-based machinery maker, to
offer steam turbine and combined-cycle plants with electrical outputs of 50
to 500MW.
Companies that have established a local presence through acquisition have
generally been more successful at winning contracts. This stems from the
efforts of VEAG to foster growth for local manufacturers and safeguard
existing employment levels.
'We attempt to award contracts to local companies as far as possible when
their offers are competitive in order to help the local economy,' says Mr
Albrecht Schleich of VEAG.
Contracts have been delayed, however, by the bitter battles between regional
utilities and towns for a slice of the pie allocated to VEAG. The rivalries
have led to appeals to the federal constitutional court against the
quasi-monopolistic power of VEAG.
After months of negotiations, VEAG has struck agreements with 14 of the 15
regional utilities in the new German states. But legal quarrels between the
regional utilities and the towns are still hampering the decision making
processes.
Suppliers will not admit that public-sectors contracts are being awarded too
slowly. But the uncertainty has led to a slow-down in allocating available
funds.
'Some delays have been observed for some projects but in many cases there
has been an awareness that decisions needed to be taken rapidly,' says Mr
Manfried Simon, a director of ABB Germany.
However, eastern Germany's economic slowdown, which has been sharper than
anticipated, has cooled initial expectations. 'Programmes have been
stretched because economic growth and energy consumption is below target.
The big volume did not in fact materialise and the market is overestimated,'
says Mr Wilhelm Heitmann, chairman of the board of GEC Alsthom's EVT
subsidiary.
But most suppliers that hope to pick up business in eastern Europe as a
whole remain confident.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930525

