FT934-8853

FT  13 NOV 93 / Peace could double tourism to Israel next year


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


THE BENEFITS of peace on the Israeli economy will far surpass any negative
impact, according to the first report on implications of peace carried out
by Bank Hapoalim, Israel's largest banking group.
Israel will gain from increased tourism, which accounts for a quarter of all
foreign currency revenues from service exports and earned Israel Dollars
1.8bn (Pounds 1.22bn) last year. It is expected to expand dramatically with
a doubling of the number of visitors forecast for next year.
The main negative impact will be the threat to Israel's textile, poultry and
vegetable sectors from cheap imports from the Palestinian entity.
The Bank is more optimistic than many Israeli economists about the impact on
Israeli-Arab trade after the lifting of the Arab boycott. The combined GDP
of 13 out of 15 Middle Eastern countries is only Dollars 280bn, but 'the
economic potential of these countries is far too great to ignore.'
Direct trade will grow slowly but a specific dividend will be the import of
cheap oil and gas from Arab states directly, lowering Israel's energy costs.
tiary Arab boycott, which places sanctions against companies that do
business with Israel and companies that deal with companies that trade with
Israel will be more significant and yield results more quickly.
The report says Israeli fears that the opening of Israel to free imports
from the occupied territories will flood the Israeli market with cheap goods
and hurt employment are 'exaggerated' because of the small size of the
Palestinian economy. But it says that agriculture, especially poultry and
eggs, will be affected by the reduction of Israeli controls, although those
sub-sectors are already subject to smuggling into Israel.
However the Bank also says Israel will benefit by the influx of Dollars 2bn
of aid into the Palestinian economy over the next five years as Palestinians
turn to Israel for consulting services, raw materials, technology and use of
Israel's financial system.
Joint ventures could provide an additional growth path.
The report predicts that the Palestinian economy will have a growth rate in
double digits for the next five years and could double its current GDP of
Dollars 2.5-3bn in six or seven years.
The bank says, however, that the peace dividend is unlikely to lead to
significant cuts in defence expenditure, currently 11 per cent of gross
domestic product. It says the main military threat to Israel - Iran and Iraq
 -will continue to pose a challenge to the Jewish state.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931113

