FT932-306

FT  29 JUN 93 / London Stock Exchange: Base rate hopes underpin share prices


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


INVESTMENT confidence stood up well in the London stock market yesterday to
the possible implications of the US air strike against Iraq, and share
prices responded strongly at first when sterling's strength gave fresh
impetus to hopes for a cut in domestic interest rates. However, with the
institutions still cautious, it was left to the stock index futures to
provide the lead and the stock market closed well below the day's best.
Equities opened nervously in London, although the firm performance from Far
Eastern markets had already indicated that the US missile attack on Baghdad
had not undermined the confidence of global investors. The reaction from the
US public to President Clinton's strong defence of the US action suggested
that Wall Street would also remain undisturbed by the unexpected turn in
events in the Middle East.
The London market soon turned its attention to the strong performance from
sterling which followed favourable analysis in the UK financial press. The
immediate view was that this would strengthen the chances of a cut in UK
base rates, and developments elsewhere in the currency markets focused
attention on this week's meeting of the Bundesbank's policy council.
In early trading, the FT-SE Index briefly regained the 2,900 mark with which
it jousted last week. But the initial advance of 16.3 points owed a great
deal to active arbitrage trading between stock index futures and underlying
blue chips.
Once the relative lack of underlying investment interest became evident the
equity market came off the top, halving its gain. A new upturn came,
however, when Wall Street opened, confirming expectations in London with an
opening gain of 21 Dow points. The final reading showed the FT-SE Index at
2,897 for a net rise on the day of 9.5.
In addition to the arbitrage business in the blue chip stocks, there was
renewed activity in the second line stocks, often driven by recommendations
from London investment houses. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index gained 10.8, closing
at yet another new peak of 3,223.9.
Trading in non-Seaq stocks jumped to around 67 per cent of the day's Seaq
total of 500m shares. On Friday, 509m shares traded through the Seaq
electronic network, representing Pounds 1.16bn in terms of retail or
customer business in equities.
Consumer and financial stocks were the chief beneficiaries of the renewed
base rate optimism. Store shares, hoping that their customers will spend
more readily if interest rates come down, were mostly firmer. Sector
analysts played an active role, with brewery stock downgraded by one leading
house.
Also moving higher were shares in the lending banks, where every reduction
in interest rates is regarded as easing the burden of bad debts still
weighing down bank balance sheets. But gains were small and the day's best
prices not always held at the close.
Pharmaceutical stocks, while under reduced selling pressure, remained under
the cloud of the bearish views shown by US investors over the past six
months. Zeneca, the new pharmaceutical group formed out of ICI's former bio
science interests, could make no headway now that the share placing
excitement has subsided.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

930629

