FT933-5133

FT  04 SEP 93 / Property: Not impossible - just difficult - Foreign buyers
still face a host of obstacles in Switzerland


   By IAN RODGER


THE NEW factor in the already immensely complicated process of trying to
purchase Swiss vacation property is altitude. With the recent trend to
milder winters in central Europe, many formerly popular resorts no longer
have secure supplies of snow and, consequently, it seems that their
attraction to the foreign buyer is waning.
Take, for example, Crans Montana and Villars. Crans Montana, a resort in
Valais with a lot of skiing over 2,500 metres, has sold out its 1993 quota
for foreigners already. Villars, a resort above Montreux that has long
welcomed foreigners, is having a tougher time and, recently, pleaded with
the authorities to ease the buying restrictions on them. Among other well
known resorts that have little or no skiing above 2,500 meters are
Grindelwald, Arosa, Morgins and Gstaad, although most of them have other
attractions to compensate. That is just as well, because hopes last year
that the panoply of restrictions on foreign buyers would be lifted in the
near future have been dashed.
The plan was that Switzerland would join the European Economic Area (EEA),
the proposed expanded free trade zone among the 12 countries of the European
Community and the seven members of the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA). Under the EEA treaty, Switzerland would have had to accept the EC's
so-called four freedoms, including the right of any citizen of the area to
own property anywhere within it.
Both Switzerland and Austria, which foresaw hordes of Germans descending on
their choicest alpine valleys, managed to negotiate the maximum five-year
transition period before their property markets would have to open. The most
threatened communities would probably have passed by-laws putting severe
limits on all property transactions (acceptable to Brussels because they
were non-discriminatory).
On December 6, however, a majority of Swiss voters rejected the EEA treaty.
So, for the moment, the situation in Switzerland remains, if not totally
impossible, quite difficult. The federal Lex Friedrich simply prohibits
investments in property by foreigners. In fact, there are exceptions, which
is obvious to anyone who thinks of the procession of famous people - from
conductor Sir Georg Solti to golfer Nick Faldo  - who have retreats in the
country. A foreigner who has a permanent resident's permit, for example, can
buy anything he wishes. A foreigner who has to work in Switzerland can buy
his principal residence there.
Foreigners also can buy vacation homes in the most popular alpine cantons -
Graubunden, Ticino, Valais, Vaud and the Bernese Oberland - but only subject
to a maze of limitations. First, there is an overall national annual quota
on sales to foreigners which is split among these cantons. But individual
communities retain the right not to participate. Several of the most famous
ones, such as Zermatt, St Moritz, Saas Fee and Davos have stopped allowing
foreigners to buy chalets and apartments. Some are even indulging in ethnic
cleansing, insisting that, when a foreigner sells, only a native can buy.
Then, there is a limit on the number of properties in any given development
that can be offered to foreigners (usually about 30 per cent) and a limit on
the size of property a foreigner may buy (100 square meters of living space
and 1,000 square meters on the total property). But these space limits apply
only on developments authorised after 1986, so older properties may be
larger.
To discourage speculation, the authorities insist that a foreigner must not
re-sell his property within given periods - for five years if to a Swiss, or
10 years to another foreigner. And, finally, in the typically thorough Swiss
way, purchases by foreigners must be vetted by the police and approved by
both local and national governments. 'Many people are put off by these laws,
but people do still buy,' says Jean Pierre Bernini, an agent with Revac in
Geneva. 'The motivation is perhaps less a holiday home as such but more the
fact that it is a safe country with a strong currency and completely
independent of an uncertain European scenario.'
David de Lara, of David de Lara & Partners, a London agency specialising in
Swiss vacation property, also emphasises the investment angle. 'At the very
worst, you will get the price you paid for a property. Look at the people
who bought in France and Spain. Now, they are stuck.'
Of course, safety, stability and independence do not come cheaply, and the
recent round of currency devaluations in many European countries has made
Swiss property even dearer for the foreign buyer. And while Swiss urban
property prices have declined sharply in the past three years, vacation
properties have held up reasonably well. Prices for properties available to
foreigners have held up even better, mainly because of the quotas.
An 80 sq metre, two-bedroom flat in Villars is still going to cost at least
SFr300,000; (Pounds 136,370) in more trendy Gstaad, perhaps three times as
much. That charming, traditional, fully detached chalet with a garden on an
alp costs rather more - unless you are willing to be in a less popular area.
De Lara offers chalets from Pounds 180,000 in places such as Champery and
Auxere.
Potential purchasers should be aware that the quotas also apply to re-sale.
In other words, if and when you come to sell your chalet or flat to another
foreigner, that transaction would have to be authorised from within the
annual quota for the locality. And, naturally, the authorities give priority
to applications for new developments when allocating their quota. So, there
may be a delay of some months before the sale can be made.
Following the defeat of the EEA treaty, the Swiss federal government has
adopted a policy of implementing as much EC compatible legislation as
possible. Thus, it is planning to review its policy on foreign property
ownership in the autumn, with a prospect of less restrictive legislation
being introduced next year. But the word in Bern is: don't hold your breath.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

930904

