FT933-10269

FT  05 AUG 93 / Pensions loophole under fire as bias claims mount


   By NORMA COHEN and DIANE SUMMERS


TRUSTEES of the Coloroll pension schemes are to ask the European Court of
Justice to close a loophole which could allow male pensioners to claim the
lion's share of benefits from the schemes.
The move comes as hundreds of thousands of public-sector and private-sector
male pensioners - including Coloroll scheme members - are rushing to file
claims for more generous pension benefits. They hope to beat a deadline
implied by a preliminary ruling on a case before the court.
Mr Mark Grant, of solicitors McKenna and Co, which represented the Coloroll
pension scheme in a landmark case on sex equality before the court, said
failure to close the loophole 'could lead to a situation where women in some
Coloroll schemes will get practically nothing'.
Because Coloroll, the former UK furnishings group, is in liquidation, the
only way to pay improved benefits to men is to take them out of women's
entitlement.
Coloroll pension scheme members had asked the court to clarify how an
earlier judgment on sex equality in pensions would work in practice for such
elements as money-purchase schemes or schemes which offered lump-sum
payments to pensioners.
The Coloroll schemes, like other European pension schemes, offered slightly
higher lump sums to women because of longer life expectation and the
consequent need for more money to buy an appropriate annuity.
On April 28, the advocate-general urged the court to rule that these
commutation payments must be the same for men and women but said no employer
would have to improve men's benefits for any period before the date of the
final decision, which is expected next month. He suggested that men who had
complaints in train at the date of the decision could also qualify for extra
benefits.
The Central Office of the Industrial Tribunals said yesterday that more than
140,000 police officers and retired officers had filed applications since
the advocate-general's ruling alleging sex discrimination in pension
benefits. The number of applications represents about two years' worth of
work for the tribunals.
The Police Federation has advised every serving male police officer to file
an application before judgment on the Coloroll group of cases is delivered.
It has also advised all male former police officers who have retired since
1976 to file claims. The total number of claims could exceed 200,000.
Other groups look set to follow suit. Some men among the 40,000 members of
the British Airways Pension Scheme plan to file applications and the Trades
Union Congress said it was advising 'all unions to examine schemes very
closely for areas of discrimination'. Some fire service workers and
employees at the Civil Aviation Authority have also lodged claims.
Mr John Allison, a national officer of the IPMS Civil Service union, which
represents some CAA workers, said he was liaising with other Civil Service
unions about possible sex discrimination claims. Unison, the 1.4m-strong
public-sector union, is also seeking legal advice about the terms of
pensions in local government and the utilities.
In the finance sector, the first claims are likely to be made against
Barclays Bank. Both the Barclays' staff union and Bifu, the banking union,
are advising members to consider tribunal claims. But Bifu is warning
members that 'any gains from lodging tribunal claims are likely to be
extremely limited'.
The Equal Opportunities Commission said it had advised 'hundreds' of men who
had contacted the commission to file claims.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930805

