FT931-3990

FT  12 MAR 93 / Money Markets: Rates dip briefly


THE UNCERTAINTY in the run up to Tuesday's UK Budget created a generally
quiet day on the London money markets yesterday, in spite of an early dip in
three-month interbank rates.
Prospects for fiscal tightening in the budget prompted a surge in optimism
in the morning, bringing the three-month interbank rate down to 5 7/8 per
cent on the offered side. However, it later rose in the afternoon, and ended
unchanged at 5 15/16 per cent on the offered side. Further out, six-month
money closed barely changed at 5 1/2 per cent.
Dealers said that the intra-day movement was partly due to generally easy
liquidity. Although the Bank of England had initially forecast a fairly
large shortage of Pounds 1.8bn, later revised to Pounds 2bn, then Pounds
1.9bn, this was successfully taken out early in the day.
However, other dealers said that rising hopes that the chancellor would
present a tight budget next week, coupled with recent interest rate cuts in
Europe, were also creating a more optimistic mood.
'You take your chances, but the hopes are all there in the markets right
now,' said one dealer.
Although three-month short sterling futures bounced ten basis points higher
early in the day, they closed barely unchanged at 94.52.
In continental European markets, German and French futures remained broadly
stable, although French Pibor futures closed slightly down at 91.54.
In spite of the recent cuts in the German repo rate, the Bank of France
yesterday announced that its own securities repurchase rate would be left
unchanged at 9.10 per cent. This provoked little surprise in the markets in
light of the franc's position near its ERM floor, and the ongoing political
uncertainty in the run-up to the French elections.
Nevertheless, opinions remained mixed about the likelihood of further rate
cuts across Europe. Earlier this week, the Dutch, Belgian and Danish
authorities followed the Bundesbank's monetary easing with rate cuts of
their own. Although one dealer claimed that 'the trend is now definitely
downwards,' another pointed out that political uncertainty over the
solidarity pact discussions in Germany could deter the Bundesbank from
cutting its rates next week.
'I think we've had all the rate cuts that we're going to get,' said another
dealer. He added that the Bank of Spain was unlikely to cut rates today.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

930312

