FT934-11630

FT  30 OCT 93 / Hackneyed cabbies versus rank outsiders: Fare deals in taxis
around the world


   By FT writers


Love them or hate them: taxis prompt strong reactions. The taxi driver is
often the first 'local' you meet in a strange city, and the treatment you
receive can set the tone for the whole visit.
Travellers like to think that someone in authority will have vetted the
person at the wheel. But as our international round-up shows, this is not
always the case. Friction between London's highly regulated black cabs and
its unregulated minicabs (outside London, minicabs do have to be licensed)
has persisted for at least 30 years. Black cab defenders argue that tough
regulation is essential. Minicab supporters say there are already enough
rules on the statute book to ensure, for example, that unsafe cars are not
allowed on the road. Deregulation would reduce prices and increase customer
choice, they claim.
To get at the truth, the UK government published a consultative paper on
Wednesday seeking the views of travellers, cabbies' organisations and the
like. If deregulation's supporters prevail, it could mean the end of the
road for that evocative symbol of London - the black cab.
NEW YORK: New York taxi drivers have a fearsome reputation for rudeness and
an inability to speak English, despite the fact that to drive a Yellow Cab
they must pass an English proficiency test. They must also complete taxi
driver school and pass a physical exam.
There are nearly 1,800 Yellow Cabs on the city streets, and more than 3,000
livery cabs whose drivers are not required to speak English since they serve
ethnic communities. Most of the Yellow Cabs are Chevrolets, but this is not
a requirement.
Fares are remarkably inexpensive. The meter starts at Dollars 1.50 (Pounds
1) when you get in (Dollars 2 after 8pm), and thereafter you pay 25 cents
for every half mile. New York cabbies are often compared with kamikaze
pilots - weaving in and out of traffic at high speed with little apparent
regard for life or limb. On Tuesday, thousands of cab drivers marched to
protest their lack of safety - 35 drivers have been killed in the city this
year.
PARIS: The Paris taxi is one of the unsung bargains of the City. They tend
to be far cheaper than their London counterparts - fares within the centre
of the city rarely run to more than FFr40-FFr50 (Pounds 4.60-Pounds 5.70) -
and cabbies tend to know where they are going. It is unusual for them to
refuse to take you anywhere in the city unless, of course, your destination
is on the other side of the Peripherique.
A trip in a Paris taxi also tends to be safe. The cabs are generally
well-kept Mercedes, with the occasional Renault Espace. The drivers are
prone to saving their tempers - and their impressive array of Gallic
obscenities - for anyone foolish enough to drive or, worse still, cycle into
their path, rather than for their passengers.
Tipping is not essential (although the drivers do their best to imply to
tourists that it is) but it is polite to add a few francs to the fare.
MOSCOW: Taxi driving in the former Soviet Union is not for the
faint-hearted: nor is being a passenger. Although state-registered cab
drivers are formally required to pass a test showing knowledge of their
city, entry on to the market of any driver willing to pick up a fare means
that taxi driving has ceased to require any kind of skill beyond the ability
to drive (and sometimes does not obviously include that).
It is very rare for a driver to put on the meter, assuming he has one:
inflation has made the tariff structure meaningless. In practice, all fares
are negotiations. Foreigners are expected to pay a premium.
Most unreasonable are the 'mafias' outside big airports and hard-currency
hotels: these enforce high prices on the mafia members (and thus on the
customers) with a ruthless ferocity. One distinguished visitor told of
hiring a car below the mafia price: the car was stopped as he left the
airport, and his driver was led away and told to hand over his fee to the
mafia leaders on pain of a beating.
Cars can be in any condition, often terminal.
LAGOS: The vital qualities for a Lagos cab driver are brinkmanship and
skilled use of the horn. Although both driver and car show signs of the
daily struggle, a good taxi driver will get through the traffic jams and
road blocks in safety if not in comfort, and still manage a smile.
The official Lagos taxi is a bright yellow saloon, usually a Peugeot 504.
The drivers must have an official certificate but are not examined on street
knowledge. Taxis have fixed fares, about USDollars 3 for 3km, but you
usually need to bargain.
Unlicensed operators, known as cabo-cabo, are to be avoided.
TOKYO: The average white-gloved Tokyo taxi driver is confused not by a lack
of street knowledge, but by a complex address system in which houses are
distinguished by a three-tier number that jumps erratically out of sequence.
This encourages the driver to leave passengers in the general vicinity of
their destination.
Drivers are generally courteous, though they tend to prefer listening to
baseball games or agony aunt-style radio programmes rather than their
customers. The fare starts at Y600 (Pounds 3.70), though the government has
suggested that fares be liberalised to encourage competition.
BUENOS AIRES: One of the few bargains on offer in an otherwise expensive
Buenos Aires are its taxis. A three-mile trip will set you back about Pounds
3 - the price of a (small) beer.
Drivers are occasionally drunk, but the greatest threat comes from their
disdain for the speed limit. They sometimes take offence at being told which
way to go and dump their passengers there and then.
The taxi driver's favourite car is the Ford Falcon, production of which
ended last year. Renault 12s are taking their place.
ROME: Italian taxi drivers are tested on their local knowledge and must
obtain a certificate of good behaviour from the local prefecture. Then comes
the hard part: would-be drivers must get a licence to operate.
For this he or she must wait for an existing driver to retire since the
number of taxis is restricted. Rome has roughly 5,500 taxis for 4m
inhabitants. A driver may unofficially lease a licence to someone else.
Local authorities fix standing minimal fares - in the case of Rome the metre
fare starts at L6,400 (Pounds 2.60). A 3km ride in average traffic would
cost about L12,000.
FRANKFURT: On the ride from Frankfurt airport, the taxi driver will do his
best to accelerate to 200kmph within as short a time as possible and will
invariably try to test the brake system by driving his Mercedes to within
centimetres of cars in front.
There are 1,700 taxis in Frankfurt and, while there is no rule specifying
the make of the cab, 70 per cent are Mercedes. The cars must be painted
light yellow. The driver must be at least 21, have had a driving licence for
a minimum of two years, and have passed a test on city knowledge.
A ride costs an initial DM3.80 (Pounds 1.50) plus DM2.15 or DM2.35 per
kilometre, depending on the time of day. Drivers range from the garrulous
and friendly to the taciturn and downright rude.
Reporting by Charles Batchelor in London, Karen Zagor in New York, Alice
Rawsthorn in Paris, John Lloyd in Moscow, Paul Adams in Lagos, Robert
Thomson in Tokyo, John Barham in Buenos Aires, Robert Graham in Rome and
David Waller in Frankfurt

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931030

