FT932-6865

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(2): Information technology: time to be bold - The future of the European
industry


   By ALAN CANE


EUROPE'S market for information technology, now the world's largest and
accounting for some 36 per cent of global consumption, is dominated by the
US and threatened by the Japanese.
'Will there be a European computer industry in the year 2000?' Mr Gavin
Kirkpatrick, chief executive of the British Computer Society, the UK
organisation for data processing professionals, has asked in a series of
international lectures.
That is a serious question which many industry observers are pondering.
Europe's large, indigenous IT suppliers - Siemens Nixdorf of Germany, Groupe
Bull of France and Olivetti of Italy are losing money and putting in place
strenuous restructuring measures.
So serious are the problems that Mr Carlo de Benedetti, Olivetti chairman,
has questioned publicly whether the Italian computer manufacturer - which
lost Pounds 276.3m last year - can survive. Naturally enough, he believes
the company's turnaround strategy will prove successful but it is an anxious
time, not helped by Italy's political difficulties.
Siemens Nixdorf (SNIS) is taking far longer to return to profits than its
managers predicted at the time of the merger of Germany's largest
electronics manufacturer and its best-known computer company. While Siemens'
senior executives defend SNIS's position in the group, there is no doubt it
is a heavy drag on Siemens' resources, raising speculation that the
electronics giant might welcome a partner or buyer for the computer company.
Groupe Bull, under Mr Bernard Pache, its new managing director, is
continuing the transformation started under Mr Francis Lorentz, his
predecessor, with further rounds of job cuts - 3,000 or 8 per cent of the
workforce this year alone. The group lost FF4.72bn (Dollars 863m) last year.
Mr Michel Carpentier, director-general for the IT industries at the European
Commission, believes the European industry is at a crossroads. Writing in
the European Information Technology Observatory, a new overview of the
market, he notes: 'Europe's competitive position has declined from 1985 to
1991 with its IT trade balance dropping from minus Ecu 9bn to minus Ecu
27.2bn and with high technology for less than one fifth of European exports
compared with 31 per cent and 27 per cent in the US and Japan respectively.'
Mr Carpentier says the key weakness in Europe is its inability to integrate
research and development and innovation in an overall strategy which both
exploits and orientates them.
To which must be added a cautious attitude on the part of its major
customers. European companies are less likely to spend heavily on IT without
obvious cost justification. While this protects them from the wasteful use
of IT seen in many US companies, it can also act as a dampener on
imaginative projects.
Europe's strength, on the other hand, is its ability to innovate, albeit in
a comparatively small number of industry sectors.
The value of the European market is considerable. In 1992, the IT business
in the 12 EC countries and the five European Free Trade Association partners
amounted to some Ecu 225bn, of which Ecu 128bn went on data processing and
office equipment - the traditional IT areas - and the rest on
telecommunications.
Europe's bid to maintain a separate identity in IT may be helped by the
profound structural changes which are transforming the industry.
Downsizing, moving from mainframe based operations to data processing based
on client-server systems, for example, may prove easier in Europe where
there are perhaps only a fifth as many very large mainframe sites as in the
US. The technical and managerial choices involved in downsizing are never
easy; European computing services companies capable of advising and
supporting a customer through a downsizing decision are equal to the best
and have the advantage of local knowledge.
Computers: very large and very small ones will characterise tomorrow's data
processing business. Europe has skills in building both.
Advanced Computer Research International, a new company set up in France
under the guidance of Mr Jacques Stern, former head of Groupe Bull, is
developing a commercial supercomputer based on Digital Equipment's Alpha
chip. DEC has agreed to take a stake in the new company.
Acorn Risk Machines, a joint venture between Acorn Computers (owned by
Olivetti but based in the UK), Apple Computers and VLSI of the US has
developed tiny, high-powered microprocessors which consume very little power
and are well suited to consumer products. Apple will use an ARM
microprocessor in its 'Newton' personal digital assistant.
Software: fast, effective and economical production remains a global
problem. Europe's computer companies are as advanced as any in software
development. Earlier this year a group of companies including Sema Group and
Logica of the UK, Groupe Bull and Cap Gemini Sogeti of France and Siemens
Nixdorf of Germany established a software research institute in Bilboa,
Spain, to seek better ways of writing computer software. The idea is not to
compete with packaged software suppliers such as Microsoft or Lotus, but to
develop better methods of creating very large pieces of bespoke software.
Mr Kirkpatrick of the BCS has no doubt there will be a European computer
industry at the end of the century but he questions what kind of an industry
it will be. Will it be dominated by software and services rather than
hardware development and manufacture? Will Europe's research initiatives be
pursued in isolation or in collaboration with with the rest of the world?
Who will be the majority shareholder in Europe's industry?
ICL of the UK points to answers to all three questions. Based in Europe, it
is owned by Fujitsu of Japan and now derives most of its revenues from
software and services. It collaborates with companies worldwide in research,
though most of its activities are European-based.
Mr Kirkpatrick emphasises that the future of the European industry depends
on a change of attitude rather than technological prowess. 'If we in Europe
want to be world leaders in this business, we have to be far more ambitious
for the business opportunities that informatics offers and rather less
interested in the abstract culture that is one of its endemic distractions.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

930526

