FT932-133

FT  30 JUN 93 / Leading Article: Back Nafta now or lose it


SUPPORTERS IN the US of the North American Free Trade Agreement are
belatedly waking up to the possibility that the accord may fail to pass
Congress. Unless they do something about it soon, the treaty may be lost.
The agreement's motley group of opponents has been allowed to dominate a
debate in which the soundbite has counted for more than cool assessment.
Americans have heard a lot of the 'sucking sound' of US jobs heading south
of the border if the agreement goes ahead but little about the jobs that are
being created by the development of Mexico as the fastest growing market for
US goods.
US exports to Mexico expanded to Dollars 44bn last year. If, as is commonly
supposed, each Dollars 1bn of US exports is worth 20,000 US jobs, the
Mexican market - growing in part because of the prospect of a free trade
agreement - has been responsible for the creation of nearly 500,000 US jobs
in the past few years.
There will, of course, be losers in the US jobs market as well as winners.
But rejecting the agreement will not save American jobs, it will simply
increase the chances of lower-skill jobs migrating to lower-wage economies
beyond Mexico, for example in Asia.
From the standpoint of the US economy, better those jobs move to Mexico than
to the hungry economies of east Asia: for every dollar Mexicans spend abroad
on foreign goods, 75 cents is spent in the US, a much higher ratio than any
Asian country.
Capital flows
Rejecting Nafta would sharply reduce capital flows into Mexico and probably
trigger a devaluation. This would disrupt Mexico's economic prospects and
reduce US exports to Mexico.
Worse, the impact of the treaty's rejection on the Mexican political system
would be regressive. While the administration of President Carlos Salinas
would probably not shoot itself in the foot by reverting to economic
populism, there would be little incentive to continue with political reform
and the US would have lost its influence in the process.
The US would be seen instead as having spurned the outstretched Mexican
hand. A nationalist backlash could follow. While the dinosaurs of the ruling
party would not be unopposed, they could emerge from the shadows, armed with
anti-gringo rhetoric, to lead the party into the August 1994 presidential
election.
The US would face once more a suspicious neighbour to the south and the
historic advances in US-Mexican relations over the past 10 years would be
damaged. Moreover, the Clinton administration would find it difficult to
forge a constructive foreign policy in Latin America. For the region's
governments, there would be no more potent symbol of US attitudes than a
rejection of Nafta.
Stumbling blocks
As many Nafta critics point out, Mexico is far from being an open democratic
society in which the rule of law is paramount. This is bound to lead to
tensions within Nafta. Yet if these critics sincerely desire an improvement
in the way Mexico is governed, then that is surely not to be achieved by
estranging Mexico from the US.
There is a further stumbling block: the supplementary accords now being
negotiated on labour and environmental standards. Because of the
implications of these understandings on US sovereignty, they are of largely
symbolic value. As such, they should not be allowed to block passage of the
treaty.
It will not be easy to persuade a Congress, with 110 new representatives and
24 new senators who above all desire re-election, to vote in favour of a
deal which, in the popular perception, will cost US jobs. Convincing them of
its advantages cannot be left to the Mexican government and a handful of US
politicians. Those US businesses and trade unions which stand to benefit
need to engage more vigorously in pressing the case for Nafta.
Mr Clinton and his cabinet have at last begun themselves to lobby publicly
for the agreement, but they should not wait until the supplementary accords
are completed before beginning the campaign in earnest. Many of President
Clinton's critics are looking for signs that he can decide on a course of
action and push it through to a conclusion. Nafta is an important test.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930630

