FT932-198

FT  30 JUN 93 / BSkyB to offer 20 pay-channels


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


BRITISH Sky Broadcasting, the satellite television venture, is planning to
offer a subscription package of up to 20 channels by the end of this year.
BSkyB intends to launch the package with 14 channels - more than had been
expected - on September 1. Further channels will then be added within a
matter of months.
The satellite venture has made it clear for some time that it plans to
scramble all its television channels so that only those who pay a monthly
subscription will be able to watch them.
At the moment channels such as Sky One and Sky News are freely available to
those with satellite dishes.
The charge for the new channel package will be Pounds 5.99 a month, although
the 2.4m homes already taking a subscription channel such as Sky Movies or
Sky Sport will not pay extra. The channels not owned by BSkyB will be paid a
proportion on a per-subscriber basis.
The new satellite package will mirror the economics of cable television,
where a basic tier of channels is offered for a set fee and viewers can then
choose to pay for other subscription services.
BSkyB, a consortium in which Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, has a
significant stake, plans to back the move to subscription with a big
promotion to try to prevent losing the custom of households that now watch
only the 'free' channels. BSkyB claims that its channels are available in
3.9m homes in the UK by all methods of distribution.
The new subscription package will include Sky One; Sky News; UK Gold - the
library channel that links Thames and the BBC; Children's Channel;
Nickelodeon - the US children's channel; TVC - the home shopping channel;
Discovery - the factual channel; Bravo - broadcasting classic films; Country
Music channel; The Family Channel; Nick at Night from the US; VH 1 - a US
music channel; and UK Living - a women's channel.
In addition BSkyB hopes that MTV, the pop-music channel, will join the
package by September.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930630

