FT932-41

FT  30 JUN 93 / Survey of Italy (10): Moves on Mafia may be costly -
Organised crime


   By CHRISTOPHER MATTHEWS


ITALIAN authorities have, in the past 12 months, registered an unprecedented
series of successes against the Mafia. Unprecedented because, in spite of
countless ritual declarations of war by successive Italian governments, no
real offensive against Cosa Nostra had ever before been launched.
If the war against the Mafia is now being fought in fact and not just in
words, there are two main reasons. One is the upsurge in popular feeling
following the assassinations of judges Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino
last summer. The other is the eclipse - in part the consequence of
elections, in part that of tangentopoli (corruption) - of the oligarchy that
has held power in Italy since the war.
The arrest this year of Toto Riina, head of Cosa Nostra, the umbrella
organisation of the Sicilian Mafia, of Benedetto (Nitto) Santapaola, second
in command, and the fact that dozens of other pezzi da novanta are now
behind bars, are all clear evidence of the profound change that has taken
place.
It would have been unthinkable and in effect impossible a year ago. Riina
and Santapaola, the two most wanted men in Italy, had, for more than a
decade, been leading outwardly normal lives close to their homes. Only
powerful political protection could have enabled them to do so.
Former premier Senator Giulio Andreotti, and former interior minister
Antonio Gava, are under investigation for collusion with the Mafia and the
Neapolitan Camorra respectively. Whether or not these two men face charges
is, of course, up to the prosecutors.
What is clear, however, is that the growth of organised crime in Italy to
the point where it effectively controlled the governments of four of the
country's regions, holding sway over the lives of 12m people in southern
Italy - and the simultaneous spread of the Mafia's tentacles over large
sectors of the national economy - would not have been possible without
political connivance.
The story of how this 'unholy alliance' operated largely remains to be told,
but the outlines are already apparent. It will tell of a super tangentopolis
involving not only corrupt politicians and businessmen but, in addition,
Mafiosi, Freemasons and spies.
Over the past 30 years, the Italian government has channeled L200,000bn to
promote the development of the country's backward south. How far, if at all,
this objective has in fact been achieved is a matter of some controversy. It
is estimated, however, that some 15 per cent of this has gone into the
Mafia's pockets. Says Pino Arlacchi, professor of sociology at Florence
university and one of the country's leading experts on organised crime:
'Italy's are the only criminal organisations in the world to be largely
financed by the government.'
The March 12, 1992, shooting of Salvo Lima, a prominent Sicilian Christian
Democrat close to Andreotti, signalled the breakdown of the shadowy links
between politicians and Mafiosi which grew up during the cold war. According
to Mafia justice collaborators the murder was retribution for the
politicians' failure to honour a promise that the supreme court would quash
a series of convictions against the bosses in the so-called maxitrial of
more than 700 Mafiosi.
This might have been feasible in the past - Italy's supreme court was, at
one point, almost routinely reversing anti-Mafia verdicts issued at assizes
and appeals level. But, with the wind of change already blowing strong,
there was no way it could be done in January last year.
The murders of Falcone and Borsellino followed, and, then the war that
should have been fought 20 years ago began in earnest. In the past 18
months, police have arrested 5,793 Mafiosi, including 70 ranking bosses.
Availing themselves of new laws on the seizure of assets, the authorities
have confiscated more than L4,500bn in property, bonds and cash. The
governing councils of more than 60 Italian towns have been disbanded after
being found heavily infiltrated by the Mafia.
Today, most of the Mafia's most fearsome bosses are behind bars, as are the
leaders of the Camorra and the Calabrian 'n'drangheta.
But the recent car bombs in Rome and Florence have also shown - as intended
 -that it still retains a dangerous capacity to plan and organise
terrorist-style operations.
With 17,000 'regulars' each of them flanked by roughly 30 sympathisers or
accomplices, the Mafia is a highly diversified organisation which can count
on a nationwide workforce of roughly 500,000 people. It will, according to
Luciano Violante, chairman of Italy's standing parliamentary committee on
the Mafia, take another six to seven years before it can be completely
destroyed.
Moreover, the Mafia's very considerable financial and economic interests
have, in spite of the seizure of billions of lira's worth of assets,
remained largely intact. According to the Italian National Statistics
institute, organised crime in this country grosses some L26,000 bn a year,
which would make it Italy's fifth largest corporation.
Just how much of the Mafia's illicit profits are invested in legal
activities is a matter of debate, especially as the dividing line between
investments and laundering or recycling is blurred. However, according to
Colonel Francesco Petracca, of the Guardia di Finanza, 60 per cent of the
Mafia's investments go into the financial sector, 17 per cent into real
estate, 11 per cent into the retail trade and 4 per cent into industry.
Despite the introduction of a series of safeguards against recycling, the
Italian banking system is still regarded as wide open to Mafia money.
Treasury bonds merit a chapter apart. According to Franco Piro, former
chairman of the parliamentary committee on finance, Mafiosi may be buying
some L10,000bn of government paper every year, significantly helping to
finance government spending and shore up the national debt.
All this poses an interesting question. The Italian government finally seems
determined to eliminate the Mafia. But can it really afford to?

The Financial Times


London Page 39

930630

