FT932-6858

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software & Services
(8): Small is beautiful - Memory card technology


   By GEOF WHEELWRIGHT


PERSONAL computer owners have been used to the idea of systems that seem to
get smaller, faster and more powerful every year - but recent advances in
hard disk drive and add-on memory card technology have accelerated the pace
of this development tremendously.
One example of this is a new device that is smaller than an average
matchbox, weighs less than two ounces and can store the equivalent of 14,389
typed pages. Developed by Hewlett- Packard last year, it is one of the
world's smallest hard disks - able to store 21.4 Megabytes of data in a card
that is only 2 inches long, 1.44 inches across and 0.4 inches high.
Known as the HP Kittyhawk Personal Storage Module (PSM), it is typical of
the growing number of computer add-ons that are only a little larger than
the average credit card. These peripherals are typically fast, slick,
expensive and small. The computer industry is so convinced that users want
these tiny devices that they are developing them in unprecedented numbers.
Over the past year these credit card-sized add-ons for palmtop and notebook
computers has been produced to conform with the Personal Computer Memory
Card Industry Association standard. They include cards that add hard disks,
network connections, modems and other crucial functions to tiny PCs. The
PCMCIA expansion slot is basically a 68-pin tiny replica of the AT expansion
bus used in most 386 and 486 desktop computers.
PCMCIA was formed in 1989 as a non-profit trade association aimed at
establishing a worldwide memory card standard for the PC industry. The
standard defines the size, pin assignments, electrical requirements,
protocols and file formats of credit card-sized add-on cards. More than 130
manufacturers, semiconductor companies, software suppliers and systems
integrators have joined the PCMCIA, which two years ago reached an agreement
with Japanese standards group JEIDA on adoption of the specifications.
The PCMCIA membership list is impressive. The group's executive members
include Fujitsu, Intel, IBM, Microsoft, Mitsubishi, Polaroid, Poqet, Sharp,
Texas Instruments and Toshiba. Associate and affiliate members include
Apple, Commodore, Compaq, Epson, Lotus Development, Motorola and
WordPerfect. The breadth of support the group appears to enjoy across the
industry could make it succeed where similar previous attempts have failed.
According to Mr Bruce Sinclair, Dell Computer vice-president for Northern
Europe, PCMCIA has been successful because it offers practical sense for the
computer industry while helping out computer users at the same time.
He says that producers of portable and hand-held computers no longer have to
're-invent the wheel' every time they want to add new capabilities to the
systems. With PCMCIA, chances are that a third party company has already
designed that part that is needed to make a new solution possible. 'It is
one of those solutions that makes sense for everyone - being able to add
specialist communications functions designed to a common standard is just
brilliant for everyone.'
Assuming that PCMCIA becomes established as a standard, the question arises
of what PCMCIA cards will be able to do. To start with, their abilities were
very modest - offering only 128K of storage. Within the past year, 1 and 2
Mb PCMCIA cards have become more common - and 4 Mb are now starting to be
offered.
But PCMCIA is not just a standard confined to defining silicon storage.
Slots conforming to the standard can be designed to be used as general
purpose expansion slots - using six spare pins on the interface that cater
for input/ output devices such as network adaptor cards and modems.
Despite having to do far more than just provide memory, these cards are the
same physical format as the current memory cards. The commitment to produce
such devices is demonstrated by the membership of Intel, Hayes (the modem
manufacturer) and 3Com in the PCMCIA group.
Release 2.01 of the PCMCIA specification, issued early this year, includes a
refined 'execute in place' facility - which allows software companies not
only to put their software onto PCMCIA cards, but also include on the card
the RAM needed for the application - so that on a PC-compatible handheld
machine, for example, you can run Lotus 1-2-3 without using up any of the
system RAM on your pocket PC.
Release 2.01 also offers better support for flash memory and improved low
voltage operation. Further definitions are provided for the input/output
capability of the cards - which, its developers say, is similar to that of
an extended industry architecture expansion bus on a PC. By 'multiplexing'
on the 68 pin connectors, you can now plug in cordless communications
systems (such as pagers), network cards, modems and other devices.
The final issue is a psychological one. How many users or corporations will
be willing to pay Dollars 500 to Dollars 1,000 for add-ons that bring
capabilities to handheld computers that they can get much more cheaply in
desktop systems? Also, there is likely to be resistance to expensive add-ons
that are so small they can easily be lost through a hole in a suit jacket -
or even left on the bus by accident.
The best advice for those buying PCMCIA cards is to think of them as you
would of any other add-on circuit board for your desktop system. Buy from
reputable dealers and get them to install your PCMCIA cards - just as you
would add-on cards for the inside of your existing personal computer. That
will ensure you treat the equipment with the respect it needs to survive
life in a pocket or notebook PC. By comparing the PCMCIA version of the
add-on with the same item for a desktop system, you get a good idea of the
price premium you'll pay for 'going portable'.

The Financial Times


London Page III

930526

