FT931-4086

FT  12 MAR 93 / Leading Article: The economic pain in Spain


ALMOST REGARDLESS of what happens in the general election this year, the
domination of Felipe Gonzalez over Spanish politics since 1982 is probably
ending. The question is what legacy that period will bequeath. Will Spain
emerge as a fully integrated and economically successful part of Europe, or
will it continue to be viewed as a laggard? For all the efforts of Mr
Gonzalez and close colleagues like Mr Carlos Solchaga, the finance minister,
this choice is yet to be made. Only now, in relatively bad economic times,
is it inescapable.
Spain is a very different country from Italy. But in one respect at least
its problems are similar. There is popular enthusiasm for full participation
in the European endeavour and a strong rhetorical commitment to that ideal
amongst the country's leaders. The question is whether the rhetoric will
match reality, now that painful choices have at last emerged between the
European commitment and short-term economic exigencies.
From the time of Spain's entry to the EC in 1986 until 1991, Spain enjoyed
dynamic economic expansion. Economic growth averaged some 4 per cent a year,
public spending expanded still faster, particularly on social services and
infrastructure. Even the current account deficit of between 3 and 4 per cent
of gross domestic product was readily financed.
Following entry of the peseta into the ERM in 1989, the principal problem
facing the authorities was not the need to keep interest rates up, but undue
pressure to push them down. With excessive monetary growth and inflation
stuck at over 5 per cent, their aim was tight monetary control. But the
consequence of relatively high interest rates was a persistently strong
currency. These perverse monetary consequences of ERM membership even became
known as the 'Spanish problem'.
Disinflationary policies
All this changed dramatically in 1992, as the European economic crisis hit
the country. It can even be argued that German unification and the Danish
referendum have, between them, given Spain the disinflationary policies it
had allegedly long been seeking.
Interest differentials vis-a-vis the D-Mark soared after the result of the
Danish referendum. Differentials on three-month money vis-a-vis Germany rose
to a peak of 12 per cent in October 1992 and have remained between 4 1/2 and
7 per cent for most of the subsequent period. Moreover, the central rate of
the peseta was devalued in September and again in November, by a cumulative
total of 11 per cent.
Rising unemployment
This monetary and exchange rate turbulence coincided with, but also greatly
exacerbated, the recession. Industrial production fell by 1 per cent in
1992, while the decline in the year to the third quarter of 1992 was close
to 2 per cent. Some forecast a decline in gross domestic product between
1992 and 1993, which would be the worst economic performance since the
second world war. Unemployment has risen to over 3m, while the unemployment
rate is moving up once more towards the nigh on incredible - and, to a
certain extent, misleading - level of 20 per cent.
It is no wonder that the Spanish public at large and Spanish business, in
particular, have clamoured for far lower interest rates and even a departure
from the ERM. While the government has made a few concessions, it has
resisted the pressure, rightly so. Provided German interest rates fall soon
and the credibility of the ERM improves, Spain should be able to reduce
interest rates enough to allow a recovery appropriate to an economy whose
rate of inflation, though falling, remains above the best European levels.
Spain's fundamental problems are on the real side of the economy. In the
good years the government allowed excessive growth of public spending, while
also failing to liberalise what must be amongst the most distorted labour
markets in the world.
Now would not seem to be the best time to tackle the problems which the good
years have left behind. But it is the only time available. The crisis may
even have been necessary. The question is whether the Spanish will rise to
the challenge or give up the battle, now that it has at last been truly
joined.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930312

