FT933-10242

FT  05 AUG 93 / Accountancy Column: Taxing season awaits many football clubs


   By RICHARD LAPPER


FOOTBALL CLUBS could be pushed to the brink of bankruptcy unless they take
immediate action to sort out their tax affairs, a report by Touche Ross has
warned.
Touche says that the Inland Revenue has embarked upon a comprehensive review
of professional and semi-professional football, in the wake of the
successful prosecution of Swindon Town FC three years ago, writes Richard
Lapper.
After Swindon was found guilty of defrauding the Revenue, clubs were sent
warning circulars and two specialist units were set up to help clubs with
problems.
'The limbering up is over and the Revenue team is now in action,' says Mr
Richard Baldwin, partner with Touche Ross and author of the report.
'The Revenue's recent activity, which has received widespread media
attention, clearly indicates that clubs who have not had the taxman knocking
at the door should get their PAYE systems into order immediately because
they could be next on the list,' says Mr Baldwin.
'This is a big issue for all clubs and some could face demands for back
taxes and fines for tens of thousands of pounds,' adds Mr Baldwin. 'Some
settlements already agreed in semi-professional clubs have been in excess of
Pounds 50,000 but League and Premier League clubs could face bills for
hundreds of thousands of pounds. Few clubs are going to escape a visit from
the taxman.'
Danger areas for clubs include:
Cash payments to players and managers from which tax and national insurance
have not been deducted.
Payment of 'termination payments' for premature ending of a player's
contract which may be regarded by the Revenue as a disguised 'signing-on
fee'.
Payment of tax and national insurance for employees including match stewards
and gate attendants.
Receipt of expenses and benefits such as complimentary tickets, interest
free loans and cars to players, staff and directors.
Signing-on fees which the player waives with a corresponding payment into a
pension scheme by the club.
The report says that clubs must collect and account PAYE and national
insurance, as well as complete all relevant paper-work.
'Problems frequently arise in relation to payments made to match day staff
who may be designated as 'casuals' by the club but who are viewed as
employees by the tax office,' warns Mr Baldwin.
'If the PAYE and NIC has not been deducted then clubs could face bills going
back over a six-year period,' he adds.
The Taxman Cometh ] - The importance of PAYE to football clubs. Touche Ross,
Hill House, 1 Little New Street, London EC4A 3TR.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930805

