FT934-10106

FT  06 NOV 93 / Private View: Shedding light on the paddy fields of art -
Four people are competing for this year's Pounds 20,000 Turner Prize. One of
the exhibits consists of seven tonnes of rice lit by neon. Christian Tyler
meets its creator


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


A VOICE behind me said: 'Is it Basmati or Uncle Ben's?' A group of
schoolchildren clustered round a teacher who was encouraging them to say
something about the work of art before them. 'It smells nice,' said one
girl, finally.
It did. But was it art or just a big rice pudding?
We were in the Tate Gallery, London, looking at seven tonnes of rice grains
arranged like a ploughed field along 20 metres of floor; in each of the six
furrows, a pinky-red neon light gleamed. Neon Rice Field is the latest work
of a Laotian refugee called Vong Phaophanit (pronounced 'powpa-neat').
In the next room stands a large cube of plaster blocks with the negative
impression of a door on one side and of a casement window on another. This
is a sculpture by Rachel Whiteread, actually the cast of a small room built
for the purpose. (Her concrete cast of an entire terrace house has just been
unveiled on a street in London's East End).
Next door hang three large abstract paintings by Sean Scully, arrangements
of broad, rough-painted bands with smaller striped panels inset. In the last
room are four outsize black and white photographs by Hannah Collins: a
rubber dinghy on cobbles, a derelict street, an arrangement of snails and
open oysters, and a female nude with hair tumbling down her back and through
the struts of a bentwood chair to the floor.
The four artists, of whom three are unknowns (the exception is Scully), are
this year's jury selection for the Pounds 20,000 Turner Prize to be awarded
on November 23.
The event has become a sort of national game, a gladiatorial contest of
aesthetes, professional and amateur. It swamps the pages of the press and is
beamed by television into every home in Britain. Each year there are cries
of 'Fix]' and complaints of a modernist conspiracy, commercial shenanigans
and political correctness. This year, to add spice and spite to the
proceedings, a pop group called KLF says it will make its own award of
Pounds 40,000 to the worst of the four Turner hopefuls.
I went to see the author of Neon Rice Field. He is a gentle man who looks
younger than his 33 years and lives in a large house in the
downwardly-mobile Montpelier district of Bristol. Tired from five days
sowing the floor of the Tate, he was courteous and a little wary.
Vong Phaophanit has resident status in Britain but no passport. He was born
in Laos and sent by his middle-class parents to study in France. When the
Americans pulled out of Vietnam they left Laos, too, and a communist
government was installed. The parents advised their son to stay away. He is
a painter by training - he studied at the Ecole des Beaux Arts in
Aix-en-Provence - and went through the conventional routines dictated by
western art history. Three years after leaving the college with an
upper-middling diploma, he dropped painting entirely.
Why? I asked. Was it too difficult? 'It's a very demanding discipline,' he
said in a soft French accent. 'And it's not easy when you share your life
with other people (he has an English wife and son). And there were other
problematics that I didn't resolve - about light, about the body, about the
texture, about depth . . .'
Mainly, though, it was because he could not afford a studio. 'I was
accumulating canvases and having to throw them away. I found the whole cycle
a little bit ridiculous. So, it's something I'm waiting with pleasure to go
back to one day.'
Painting and sculpture were primary arts, he conceded. Museum installations,
like his rice fields, were a fusion which helped the artist find other sorts
of answers. 'But what do you call an installation?' he continued. 'I can't
define it. Because, for me, when I look at a painting by Poussin, for
example, all the subject is a huge installation. He instals figures,
customs, colours, gestures. Renaissance fresco is for me a kind of
installation.'
I said that such objects required not only imagination but a lot of
technique and skill.
'We are talking about a medium which, first of all, is not about skill,' he
replied. 'OK, some people would do it with skill, and some would say I don't
care or would employ other people, just as Giotto employed his disciples.'
Is installation art a gimmick or fashion?
'I don't know. Compared to the whole history of art, it's just a foetus. It
has only 60 years' history.'
Is it a cul-de-sac, then?
'No, I still think there is a lot of potential with this medium. It has the
advantage for the public of a physical interraction, a combination of visual
and physical, the sound, the smell . . .'
It is also the subject of mockery.
'Well, that's up to the artist,' he said, quickly. 'You can't say, because
you've seen 4,000 paintings in your life, what is best and worst. You can't
say that installation is less perfect as an art form.'
I asked if it was a weakness of installations that they disappear - that
they last only as long as the gallery will house them.
'You have to accept that is one of the main natures of that art form. What
interests me is before and during. After that, you know, there's nothing
there. And I'm quite happy doing this.'
Can a man be an artist if he leaves nothing behind?
He laughed. 'Well, I doubt I will leave nothing.' There were always
photographic records and installations were sometimes sold, too. They are
converted into paper contracts in which the artist sells the collector the
right to recreate his idea.
Phaophanit plainly dislikes any attempt to pin traditional labels or
categories on his work. He said it was for triggering questions, not
supplying answers - questions about the Meaning of Art, the role of the
artist, the preconceptions of the viewer, the struggle of the creator.
Are these questions perhaps more interesting for you than for the public? 'I
hope the role of the artist is not to produce what the public wants to see,'
he replied, firmly.
But doesn't the public want to see something it can understand and enjoy?
'You do have people who only go and see exactly what they want to see. But
if we just limit ourselves to that criterion, you are going to censor a lot
of creative people.'
Phaophanit agrees with an earlier avant-gardiste that every person is an
artist. 'Everyone is an artist but probably not everyone can be: it depends
where you come from, what social class, what you want out of life.'
Some artists, I said, want to make a political statement - about elitism,
class, gender or race. Are you trying to say something with rice and neon?
'I never work with that direction in mind. I don't think art is always the
right tool for confronting specific subjects. There are other people with
other skills who could do it much better: writers, politicians, religion. It
doesn't mean that I am not questioning all these things.'
The best feminist art or 'black' art, he added, did not approach its subject
in an obvious way. That alienated people.
Is your work meant to be cross-cultural?
'Yes, but each person will have his or her interpretation. Neon Rice would
appeal to a Laotian but we have to see it as an individual experience,
appreciating not just from cultural point of view, not just an aesthetic
one. It's getting below preconception and culture to what we are made of.'
What do you think of Turner? 'I think he's probably one of the best painters
that England ever had.
'Probably one of the most complete painters, who managed not only to resolve
some kind of aesthetic programme but also who managed to question in a very
clear way about light and colour.'
One critic said recently that Turner would never have won the Turner Prize.
Do you agree?
Phaophanit laughed. 'You can't just turn back to the past in that way. It's
too easy to say something like that.
'It was the same thing with the Impressionists. They were refused into the
Salon de Paris - people like Cezanne, Manet. That doesn't mean in 400-500
years' time that we won't look at things in a different way.
'OK, it sounds very seducing, the idea that Turner wouldn't be nominated.
It's too easy.'
(The ridicule which greeted the Impressionists - and not only them - is
often cited by modernists in order to extol the avant-garde. Yet, the fact
that something is ridiculed does not mean it is not bad.)
Phaophanit said he gets both satisfaction and suffering out of his work.
'It's not easy to go out there and do something to convince people that what
you do is worthwhile, taking the risk that you never know what the work's
going to look like.'
Who, in the end, are you doing it for - yourself or the public?
'I am not doing it for myself and not doing for the public. I'm not doing it
for God.' He laughed. 'I think it's . . . I don't know.'
There was a long pause. 'I'm just trying to . . . create another opening in
what you may call the huge tunnel of art history.'
I thanked him and said I hoped he won the prize. I meant, of course, the
Pounds 20,000 - not the big one. I think.
House that Rachel built: Page XXI

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

931106

