FT931-4122

FT  12 MAR 93 / Management: The secret of T&N - A look at a company which
has defied City scepticism over its R&D spending


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


British manufacturing is crippled by short-termism. With rare exceptions
such as once-glamorous Glaxo, companies cannot invest and innovate their way
to greater international competitiveness because financial institutions and
the stock market are interested only in the level of short-term profits and
dividends.
That, in a wizened but remarkably resilient nutshell, is the complaint which
for a good 20 years has been hurled at the City of London by industrialists
and their supporters. At first they alleged capital investment was being
cramped. Then, when they discovered that it was easier to raise external
finance for major 'capex' projects than they thought, their concern shifted
to research and development.
Since 1990 their case on R&D has won growing support within Whitehall, and
last summer even obliquely from the Bank of England.
So how on earth has T&N, which was virtually bankrupt a decade ago because
of its previous dependence on asbestos, been able to use a steadily rising
R&D outlay of Japanese and German proportions to power it almost to the top
of the world league in the increasingly competitive market for automotive
components?
Since 1988 its annual R&D expenditure has doubled from Pounds 17m to Pounds
34m. In some of its businesses, R&D spending as a percentage of sales is now
about 8 per cent.
Rephrased in stock market language, why have almost all of T&N's
institutional shareholders remained patient for so long? Why is the same
true for some City analysts - although others remain sceptical? The company
has not only called on the market repeatedly for more capital, but its
profits were hit so hard by the recession they slid sharply from 1988 to
1991, before being wrenched up again by management action last year.
Yet somehow T&N has got away with all this: its relatively poor share price
performance from 1987 until recently was caused more by scares over asbestos
claims, and worries about the motor industry as a whole, than by its outlook
 -although there have also been recurrent brokers' scares about the
dividend.
So what is its secret? The explanation is not simply the cynical one that
T&N has maintained its pay-out for three years running.
There are at least six deeper factors. The first is the belief, of Colin
Hope, T&N's chairman and chief executive, that 'although there is some
short-termism in the City, most of it is self-made by company managers who
want macho profit increases'.
His partial exoneration of the City is linked with point two: that T&N has
spent untold time and trouble over the years educating analysts and
financial institutions that its strategy is sensible. 'We've tried to build
an awareness that our products and services are the things that will pull
the company forward - they'll provide more added value, and be better for
investors,' says Hope.
Echoing what he has told investors repeatedly, he stresses that 'product
development is a fundamental part of the marketing process. You can't turn
it on and off - it has to be continuous'. When, as with T&N, almost all the
competition is American, German or Japanese, 'you certainly don't chicken
out when you're overhauling your rivals in the marketplace'.
The company has certainly been doing that. During the past decade it has
climbed from fifth to close second in the global league of independent
makers of pistons, and from third to first in bearings. It has also managed
to hold its third position in the even more difficult market for 'friction
products' (brake linings).
Third, Hope and board colleagues such as Bill Everitt, head of the friction
products and engineering division, ram home constantly the message that
since T&N's products are almost all designed in response to the demands of
specific customer companies - from Ford to BMW, Nissan to Opel - its R&D
spend really is 'market-driven'.
Fourth, only about 5 per cent of T&N's so-called R&D is really research.
Though some of its development projects can easily take five years from
inception to generate a return, 'you can tell in two or three years whether
the money is being well-spent and will produce a benefit', says Rob Golding,
motor industry analyst at Warburg Securities.
Fifth, T&N has convinced investors it is as concerned with the productivity
of R&D as with its quantity. This contrasts strongly, Hope points out, with
the grossly inflated R&D spend of Goetze, the German piston rings company
which T&N is acquiring. 'Ratios of R&D-to-sales can be misleading: for half
Goetze's spend, we could get a lot more effectiveness,' Hope claims.
Sixth, this is by no means the only sense in which the company is now
conveying successfully the message that, in the chairman's words, 'we're
almost paranoiac about costs'. T&N has developed a deserved reputation for
being just as tough a short-term operator as it is a long-term player.
Since the onset of the recession, its squeeze on operating costs has become
vicious. Having cut 6,300 jobs since 1990, Hope now says that 'we need to
reduce our labour force (of 38,000) for a constant value of output by an
annual 5 per cent over the next three years'. Not only that, but 'there's an
enormous amount of money still to come out of the saving of scrap in
production'.
'T&N does a good job as a turnaround specialist,' confirms Golding. In
common with other analysts, after several years of scepticism he is
'reasonably convinced the Hope story is a good one'.
So he should be, for several strategic reasons. The short term will be
tough, but the world's main automotive assemblers are moving sharply towards
sub-contracting the design and manufacture of many more components, though
to fewer suppliers. This will benefit T&N. So will the tightening of fuel,
emission and performance requirements, which are stimulating demand for
higher-performance components.
So will the devaluation of sterling. But for T&N's ability to exploit these
trends, its shareholders must thank, above all, its long-term commitment to
technology.
A further article will examine how T&N manages technology.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930312

