FT934-11325

FT  02 NOV 93 / Dividends are on a roll for Japanese shareholders


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


FUND MANAGERS investing in Japanese stocks may find themselves with a pile
of manure and toilet paper. Forced to cut dividends as earnings are hit by
the country's prolonged economic slowdown, companies are starting to
compensate shareholders with produce instead.
With a majority of Japanese companies expecting an earnings decline for the
fourth successive year, more shareholders are being deprived of dividends.
Comson, a farming machinery maker listed on the Osaka stock exchange, says
that instead of dividends it sent its 1,900 shareholders bags of fertiliser
made from manure and sludge, while Nippon Pulp and Paper gave 24 rolls of
toilet paper to every stockholder. The move also helps reduce high
inventories.
Japanese workers are already sacrificing bonuses to help their employers.
Managers at NEC last year agreed to accept vouchers which can be swapped for
computers and television sets instead of year-end payments.
Some companies hope the gifts will help restore confidence, especially among
retail investors disheartened by stock market scandals and last year's
plunge of the Nikkei average to a six-year low.
The government had hoped that last week's flotation of East Japan Railway
(JR East), the partially privatised regional railway operator, would bring
retail investors back into the stock market. However, massive profit taking
in JR East shares clogged up the Tokyo stock exchange's computer system,
sending the market below the psychologically important 20,000 for the first
time in three months. The Nikkei fell 264.73 points yesterday to 19,438.24.
Since Japan's traditionally low payout levels have never been much of an
incentive for investors - the current average yield for the Tokyo market is
about 0.7 per cent - companies also hope to lure investors with products. In
the late 1980s, holders of Tokyo Electric Power shares were presented with
electric kettles.
Amid public anxiety surrounding a shortage of rice due to this year's bad
summer, Shinden, an electric appliance discounter based in Niigata, northern
Japan, has decided to send shareholders bags of premium brand rice.
And as for the products now on offer, 'I don't know what I'd do with the
manure, but I could do with the toilet paper,' says Mr Patrick Thompson at
Fleming Investment Management in London.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931102

