FT934-11277

FT  02 NOV 93 / World Trade News: Speed up talks, says Gatt director


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


MR Peter Sutherland, director-general of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, yesterday urged the 116 nations taking part in the Uruguay Round
of trade liberalising talks 'to speed up progress in the negotiations' in
order to conclude the round by the agreed deadline of December 15.
Pointing out that there were only 45 days left, he told the top-level trade
negotiations committee that he believed it was 'still within our grasp'.
However, he warned against leaving too many unresolved issues on the table
for the final phase of the negotiations.
Talks on improving access to markets for farm and industrial goods have made
slower progress than hoped.
Mr Sutherland said there had been some positive moves over the past month
but criticised the 'lamentable failure' of the Quad nations - the US, the
European Community, Japan and Canada - to nail down the details of the
tariff-cutting package agreed in principle in Tokyo last July.
He said the Quad, especially the US and EC, had a particular responsibility
to provide leadership in the market access negotiations.
'Mutual recrimination is neither useful nor helpful,' he added.
Trade officials present at the meeting said a number of delegations had also
lambasted the US for creating other difficulties in the negotiations.
They were particularly critical of Washington's intention to take a blanket
exemption for taxation under the proposed services accord, which would allow
it to discriminate against foreign companies in tax matters in breach of
fundamental Gatt principles.
The US also came under fire over financial services, where it plans to bar
Japan and developing countries from improved market access to its banking
and insurance markets, and over its opposition to a strong Multilateral
Trade Organisation to succeed Gatt.
Under the present negotiating schedule, the hope is still to have 'a
well-defined approximation of the content, size and final shape of the
overall market access package by November 15', alongside revised texts on
the MTO and disputes settlement.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

931102

