FT932-13288

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (9): Faith, hope and
cyclicals - Equities


   By TERRY BYLAND


THE UK equity market proved not too bad a bargain for investors in the first
three months of the year, though its performance does not bear too close
scrutiny.
Measured by the FT-A All-Share index, shares showed a total return of 4.6
per cent, outstripping the return on cash and comparing satisfactorily with
that on conventional UK government bonds. But this looks less impressive
when set against the 9.8 per cent return from the FT-World ex-UK index.
More significantly, the return on the All-Share was considerably better than
the 2.6 per cent on the FT-SE 100 stocks list, but was strongly outperformed
by returns on both the FT-SE Mid 250 (9.5 per cent) and the FT-SE SmallCap
(14.8 per cent).
What these statistics are saying is that faith in a recovery in the domestic
economy has proved justified in the cyclical stocks, which are often
relatively small businesses and can be expected to feel the upturn first.
But recovery has not so far proved strong enough, or fast enough, to support
the general optimism that was displayed around Christmas.
Best-performing sectors have been: capital goods, which have responded to
such signs as there have been of a wider economic recovery; and, perhaps
surprisingly, the financial group. Tumbling interest rates last autumn have
lifted some of the worst of the bad-debt worries from the banks. Merchant
banks benefited similarly, and were also helped by a rights issue flow of
nearly Pounds 3bn over the quarter.
But brewers, food retailers, stores and hotels have all seen prospects of a
revival in consumer and leisure spending repeatedly offered, and then
snatched away again.
While the last cut in base rates, on January 25, helped to revive the stock
market from a setback which had taken it to nearly 4 per cent below the
reading on New Year's Eve, it raised, but did not satisfy, hopes that John
Major's government was putting economic recovery top of its list of
priorities.
The outlook for corporate earnings and dividends has been clouded by the
Budget changes in advance corporation tax and in treatment of dividends
accorded to overseas earnings. These changes threaten a fall in equity
returns to domestic pension funds, which casts a cloud over current market
valuations.
Even the fund manager who read the UK market right has had to contend with
some vicious developments. The worst has been the savage under-performance
of the pharmaceuticals sector, notably Glaxo which, according to NatWest
Securities, reduced the FT-A All-Share performance by 1.2 per cent.
Problems started with doubts about the new healthcare policies likely to be
introduced by the Clinton administration, expanded into wider concern about
the future for Zantac, the group's wonder drug, and culminated in an
unexpected shake-up in the boardroom. By the end of the quarter, the health
and household (pharmaceutical) sector was showing a disastrous minus-14.6
per cent return, and matters have deteriorated as both Wellcome and Fisons
have hit trouble.
Unfortunately, these are all core stocks in most managed portfolios, which
is why not all, or perhaps not many, fund managers were able to match
overall market returns. The laurels seem to have gone in the first quarter
of 1993 to the private investors who, according to Sharelink, the Birmingham
stockbroker which dominates the private client business, have been buyers of
the smaller stocks that have led the market.
However, the second quarter has opened with better news on the domestic
housing market, generally agreed as a necessary primer for a wider recovery,
and also in car sales.
Forecasts for the UK stock market this year remain fairly restrained. Nomura
Research, the market's super-bull, still expects to see the FT-SE 100 index
at 3,500 within 12 months; but most forecasters stop short at 3,000, and
some a good way short of that.

The Financial Times


London Page X

930423

