FT931-3901

FT  13 MAR 93 / Australian poll too close to call


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


THE outcome of today's Australian federal election remained in doubt
yesterday with polls showing sharp regional variations in support for the
two main parties.
The Labor government is likely to lose seats to the conservative
Liberal/National coalition in Western Australia, South Australia and
Queensland, but could make gains in Victoria and Tasmania.
'It is too close to call. The different trends in different states mean the
final outcome could be very close,' said Mr Sol Lebovic, director of the
Newspoll organisation.
Mr Gary Morgan, another leading pollster, said support for the government
had increased substantially following attacks on the coalition's proposals
for a goods and services tax (GST).
'The issue is the economic mess the country is in, and the concern is the
GST. If there was no GST the coalition would walk in,' he said. 'Labor must
be the underdog but they still can win it.'
Mr Paul Keating, the prime minister, and Mr John Hewson, the conservative
leader, both forecast a narrow victory for their own side. However,
confidence appeared to be higher in the conservative camp.
The coalition was encouraged by a last-minute vote of confidence from all
but one of Australia's main newspapers, which have frequently criticised
opposition policies during the campaign.
The Australian, owned by Mr Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, said the
coalition was 'the best option' for economic reform, in spite of 'deep
reservations' about some policies.
The coalition needs a net gain of five seats to win a majority in the
147-seat House of Representatives, which would be achieved by a uniform
national swing of 0.9 per cent.
If the election is close, the result may not be known until next week
because of the time required to count second and subsequent preferences
under Australia's voting system.
A dead heat is also possible because of the postponement of the election in
the marginal Queensland constituency of Dickson, following the death of one
of the candidates. The Dickson poll will be held next month.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930313

