FT934-11734

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: BCE drops 57% on poor results at
telecom unit


   By ROBERT GIBBENS


   MONTREAL


BCE, Canada's biggest company, suffered a 57 per cent drop in third-quarter
profit because of poor results at Bell Canada, its fully-owned
telecommunications subsidiary and at Northern Telecom, the equipment
affiliate.
BCE said NT's recovery was under way and Bell Canada's results would improve
next year as a result of broad restructuring and cuts in capital spending.
Intense competition in the long-distance sector reduced Bell Canada's
earnings. Another factor was the federal regulator's decision to refuse its
request for higher local rates.
Traditionally, long distance traffic has subsidised local services, but
deregulation of long distance services and the entry of Unitel and numerous
resellers into the market has changed this.
BCE's third-quarter profit was CDollars 128m (Dollars 98.5m) or 42 cents a
share, down from CDollars 294m or 96 cents a year earlier, on revenues
steady at CDollars 5bn.
At the nine-month stage the groups suffered a loss of CDollars 218m or 71
cents a share, against a profit of CDollars 790m or CDollars 2.56, on little
changed at almost CDollars 15bn.
The latest period included BCE's share of nearly CDollars 1bn of NT special
charges. Excluding these, BCE earned CDollars 1.33 a share.
Bell Canada contributed 66 cents per BCE share in the third quarter and
CDollars 1.73 in the nine months, down from CDollars 2.33 a year earlier.
Local business is growing in volume, with more network access services but
more revenue is being lost to competitors. In addition, depreciation was
higher in the nine months.
NT made a negative contribution of 7 cents per BCE share in the third
quarter and CDollars 2.14 in the nine months, compared with a positive
contribution of 58 cents per BCE share a year earlier. NT's margins
contracted and it took heavy restructuring charges.
Mobile communications improved as did international telecommunications. But
Montreal Trust made a negative contribution. It posted a nine-months loss of
CDollars 32.6m or 79 cents a share after further provisions for doubtful
property loans.
BCE is trying to sell this unit and tackle the problem of BF Realty, its
insolvent property unit.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

931029

