FT934-8442

FT  16 NOV 93 / Inquiry ordered into New Jersey poll


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


A FEDERAL judge and the state attorney general yesterday ordered
investigations into the possible suppression of the black vote in the
governor's election in New Jersey two weeks ago.
It was not immediately clear if the investigations would call into question
the validity of the election, in which Mrs Christine Todd Whitman, the
Republican candidate, ousted Governor James Florio, the Democratic
incumbent, by a mere 2 percentage points.
But at least one prominent black civil rights organisation in the state has
urged the new governor not to take office in January as scheduled but to
wait until the results of the investigations are known.
The judge, sitting in Newark, yesterday ordered that Mr Ed Rollins, Mrs
Whitman's campaign manager, testify under oath about post-election
interviews in which he asserted that the campaign had paid up to Dollars
500,000 (Pounds 330,000) to assorted black ministers in implicit return for
their not exhorting their parishioners to vote for Mr Florio.
Under pressure from Mrs Whitman, Mr Rollins subsequently retracted his
statement and apologised for any offence. Later the Whitman campaign issued
figures showing that about Dollars 48,000 had been disbursed on election day
in what is known as 'street money' to poll watchers and others working to
get out the vote.
Mrs Whitman herself spent part of Sunday visiting black churches. Though she
spoke at none of them, her attendance was obviously designed to make amends.
At the very least, she would be starting her term under a cloud.
She beat Mr Florio by about 30,000 votes in a total turnout of around 2.5m,
the second closest governor's race in New Jersey history. The black
component amounted to about 8 per cent of the vote, down from the 12 per
cent of the 1989 election, a decline in numerical terms far greater than her
margin of victory given the usually overwhelming black preference for
Democratic candidates.
Mr Rollins, meanwhile, is in seclusion and, according to several reports, in
disgrace, with several lucrative TV contracts summarily withdrawn. Just 10
days ago this veteran Republican political consultant, who briefly defected
to Mr Ross Perot's independent presidential candidacy last year, appeared
thoroughly rehabilitated.
Not only had he directed Mrs Whitman to a come-from-behind victory but he
had in the process vanquished in head-to-head confrontation the hottest
manager in the business - Mr James Carville, campaign director for Mr Florio
and, last year, for Mr Bill Clinton.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931116

