FT934-11078

FT  02 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Xerox breakthrough worries
silver market


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


SILVER'S BIGGEST market could be threatened in the long term if Xerox
Corporation's claim to have developed a silver-free film process is
justified, analysts suggested yesterday.
Worries about the Xerox breakthrough forced silver's price in London down by
15 cents a troy ounce, or 3.4 per cent, to 423.5 cents by the close
yesterday. The sharp movement unnerved the rest of the precious metals
market and gold fell to Dollars 362.75. down by Dollars 6.05 an ounce.
Xerox announced its new product, VerdeFilm, at the weekend. It is aimed
solely at the graphic arts market and substitutes for the silver-halide
films used to make mastering plates for high-quality photography used in
many magazines, newspapers and commercial printing. Xerox said there seemed
to be no way yet for the process to be applied to consumer photography.
However, the US group claimed that in graphic arts applications its patented
technology 'surpasses traditional silver-halide in quality and costs and
addresses a pressing environmental concern' as VerdeFilm did not require any
toxic processing chemicals.
Graphic arts used about 1,300 tonnes of silver last year, or one-fifth of
the 5,800 tonnes used for photography and about 7 per cent of total silver
consumption - 18,300 tonnes in 1992 - according to the Silver Institute, a
Washington-based promotional organisation.
'This development could give silver a bad image,' said Mr Andy Smith,
analyst at Union Bank of Switzerland. He suggested Xerox's announcement
could have a depressing impact on sentiment in the silver market in the same
way as two other relatively recent revelations - news that Ford had
developed a non-platinum car catalyst and that some central banks had been
selling from their gold hoards - dented other precious metals markets.
'These are things that the market said would never happen. And now some of
the conventional wisdom in the silver market is being challenged.'
Mr Tony Warwick-Ching of the Commodity Research Unit consultancy group, like
Mr Smith, said he spoke without knowing the full details of Xerox's
technology or the costs of using it. But if the quality problems usually
associated with non-silver film had been overcome, 'this could threaten
silver in the long term'.
Mr Smith said the fall in the silver price towards Dollars 4 an ounce would
be a good test of demand in the Middle and Far East where 'they take no
notice of technological developments'. Demand there would probably prevent
the price falling much further.
Xerox said it would start commercial deliveries of its new product in the
second quarter of 1994. Its process uses selenium, produced mainly as a
by-product of electrolytic copper refining. About 30 per cent of the 2,000
tonnes of selenium produced each year goes to the electronic and photocopier
industries.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

931102

