FT932-6899

FT  26 MAY 93 / International Capital Markets: FFr40bn bond to finance
recovery


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


FRANCE'S prime minister, Mr Edouard Balladur, yesterday announced a record
FFr40bn bond issue to finance his economic recovery programme.
He said the new state loan would primarily be aimed at individuals who could
convert their bonds into shares of newly-privatised companies, or put them
into tax-exempt long-term savings plans.
He gave few details except to say that the issue would carry a 'market'
interest rate, and that it only represented a 'short-term' increase in
government borrowing before the proceeds from privatisation started to roll
in the autumn.
The bond issue will have a maturity of four years, Mr Edmund Althandery, the
economy minister, said last night. The coupon on two to five-year French
Treasury notes is around 6.5 per cent.
To attract retail investors, buyers of the issue will be given a preference
in buying shares in companies which the government plans to sell off. Later
today, the government is to list the companies it plans to sell from this
autumn.
The prime minister also said that purchasers of the special bond issue would
get the same tax breaks which, he announced on May 10, would be offered to
people switching their savings out of short-term money market funds into
long-term savings plans.
The Balladur bond 'will probably be treated as a special issue and managed
as a special fund,' Mr Potts said yesterday, like special issues in the past
in France and like the bonds currently issued by the German Treuhand agency.
The finance ministry last night announced a new overall borrowing programme
for 1993. It plans to issue FFr250bn worth of bonds and FFr230bn in two to
five-year notes.
Mr Christopher Potts, an analyst with Banque Indosuez, said that the market
had never coped with such an amount before, 'but there is a lot of money
stacked away in money market funds which could be tapped'.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930526

