FT932-267

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (27): Europe's unfinished business - Michael
Heseltine argues that the success of the single market will depend on the
determination of EC states to make it work / Guest Column


   By MICHAEL HESELTINE


IN SIX months the completion of the single market will provide an
opportunity to look at what we have really achieved and where we should be
going.
The framework has been established, the Community now needs to make the
single market work for European business and its consumers.
Within Europe, business needs the freedom to prosper in the way promised -
essentially in a deregulated environment; and it needs to win in overseas
markets. This objective is every bit as ambitious as the original programme,
and will require the same level of determination as was needed to reach the
'1992' deadline.
Community businesses thrive on international trade - between member states
and with the rest of the world. It needs free trade within itself and with
the rest of the world. Above all it needs to be competitive.
The single market has made a substantial contribution to international free
trade. It has demolished non-tariff barriers both within the community, and
in its trade relations with third countries.
When I look at some of the restrictive practices with which the community is
faced across the world, the concept that Europe has created for itself a
uniquely protectionist fortress is little more than propaganda. We want the
barriers down, wherever they exist, that is why the UK Government is so
committed to the successful conclusion of the Gatt Round.
Another important opportunity lies in the extension of the Single Market
through the European Economic Area and - before too long I hope  - in the
full community membership of Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden.
1992 was an important achievement. But in terms of genuine competitiveness,
our work has only just begun. Agreeing single market measures is one thing:
businesses and consumers want to get real, tangible benefits from them.
Community member states now have an excellent record in putting single
market measures into national legislation. The test now is to put them into
practice. Businesses are learning to make and to sell to community
standards. They expect this to be matched by open access to markets and fair
and even enforcement of single market measures across the community.
This does not mean 'Euro-inspectorates', nor increased bureaucracy. But it
does mean national enforcement authorities working together in applying and
enforcing the rules.
The aim is to achieve close working relationships, co-operation and trust
between the enforcers in all member states so that problems can be resolved
quickly, without the need to resort to legalistic procedures. I welcome the
European Commission's initiatives to help achieve this.
The single market needs to be dynamic. We have, between us, already built a
strong foundation, but there is much more to be done. There are some crucial
gaps in the structure: notably telecoms and energy. These are two of the
most important areas of trade in goods and services which have an impact on
nearly every community business and citizen.
The telecoms market is equivalent to two per cent of total community GDP -
in the region of Ecu 90bn. As we have seen in the UK, increased competition
should, in both cases, boost investment; keep prices in check; and spur
innovation.
A real breakthrough was achieved at this month's EC telecoms council. It was
agreed that liberalisation of telephone services would be completed by
January 1, 1998, except for Luxembourg which will complete two years later
and Spain, Portugal, Greece and Ireland no later than 2003.
The single market needs to provide the environment in which European
businesses can develop, and become increasingly competitive. Yesterday's
mainframe computer is today's desktop, and will be pocket-sized tomorrow. As
technologies change, so do marketing strategies and business needs.
Any changes should be conditioned by clearly identified business needs. They
need to recognise that the community needs us to compete against the world,
which will give us no quarter if we burden ourselves with costs and
inflexibilities they do not share, for example, legislation on works
councils.
Companies do not take important decisions affecting their businesses without
carefully assessing the costs, benefits, and downsides. So why should
governments, acting through the community, enforce decisions on businesses
without themselves undertaking the same analyses?
It is the job of business and governments to make sure this happens; and to
make sure that we get our priorities right. The UK will drive deregulation
forward throughout the community. Already the community has been fairly
receptive to our ideas for cost benefit analyses in relation to all new
proposals.
The single market is about creating a competitive Europe. Companies must be
encouraged, and allowed, to compete freely within the community, and to win
new business in the international market place.
The successful operation of the single market will mean that community
companies will regard Europe as their home market, giving them a more
competitive orientation for success internationally. The benefits at the
macro-economic level are to be had in terms of GDP growth; reduced public
sector budgets; and counter inflationary influences. It means greater
opportunity, which feeds through to create new jobs and improve training.
Europe has to become more competitive. We need to win back, and increase,
our share of world trade. We need to reverse deficits with other developed
countries.
The community needs to improve its manufacturing productivity. In the 1980s
the community average lagged badly behind the US and Japan - the average
annual increase in real value added in manufacturing per person employed in
the community was 2.5 per cent, US 3.5 per cent and Japan 4.6 per cent.
But we must resist the temptation to go for quick fixes. Massive injections
of state aid; protectionism; agricultural surpluses; bending competition
rules are all short-term and short-sighted. They have not worked in the
past, and they would not work now or in the future.
The community already has a higher proportion of its GDP going in taxes and
public expenditure than the US and Japan. Over the 1980s taxes as a
proportion of GDP in the community were 43 per cent, in the US and Japan
they were 31 per cent. The public expenditure figures were 48 per cent in
the community, 36 per cent in the US and 33 per cent in Japan. We need to
put that right, and some of our colleagues in Europe who have in the past
taken a different view are now coming round. There is now a wider acceptance
among member states and the Commission of the need to avoid excessive
regulation.
The completion of the single market represents - to my mind - one of the
greatest achievements of the community. We faced an immense work programme,
and set ourselves a tight timetable. By the end of last year we had achieved
both. This is the clearest possible evidence that the Community can work
together and can get things done.
But to state yesterday's achievements is not to divert attention from
tomorrow's challenges. The process of change engulfing the world's economies
is not yet reflected in the same imperatives for enhanced competitiveness in
Europe; for example there needs to be a greater awareness of the threat from
the Pacific Rim countries. Targets, strategies - even visions - for the
European opportunity in the early 1980s look limp and rather weary as we
confront the 1990s. Perhaps Britain's historic perspective as an island
people will give us the strength and determination to explain to our
European partners that in today's ever more competitive world there are few
islands left in the world's economies.
Michael Heseltine MP is UK secretary of state for trade and industry

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

930629

