FT934-11566

FT  30 OCT 93 / The Long View: Victims of the glut


   By BARRY RILEY


MY VERY first lesson in applied economics came on the day in April 1949 that
post-war sweets rationing of 4 ounces a week was ended. Alas, the Ministry
of Food had blundered: demand exceeded supply and rationing had to be
re-imposed until 1953.
Scarcity, in the experience of the generation in Britain with which I grew
up, was part of the natural order of things. There were waiting lists for
many goods, and rationing was imposed not just by the need for coupons but
through restrictions on capital flows and property development (which
persisted for decades after the Conservative government's 'bonfire of
controls' in 1951). We had a final taste of shortages in the 1970s with the
oil shocks and various other commodity crises, including the bizarre sugar
famine of 1974.
Now, we one-time ration book kids must cope with the economics of glut.
There is serious over-capacity in most of the western world's manufacturing
industry; meanwhile, in the commodity markets this week, oil slipped to
little more than Dollars 16 a barrel and aluminium crashed towards the
'disaster level' of 45c a pound. As for the other factors of production, the
number of unemployed people in the European Community is rising towards 20m
and surplus capital is sloshing around the globe, depressing real interest
rates and threatening to generate destabilising asset price bubbles.
Some of those post-war scarcities were fundamental, being caused largely by
the destruction of much of the capital stock of Europe. Rationing and
central planning were natural consequences and, because of the absence of
effective competition, the returns on capital often were very high. It was
natural for investors to put their money into the famous names of British
manufacturing industry. including high-tech wonders like Ferranti (which
last Tuesday, announced its willingness to be taken over for 1p a share).
Other shortages have resulted more from policy than from the fundamentals
and so have persisted longer.
The property market in the UK, for instance, did not finally reach its
confrontation with the age of glut until the end of the 1980s. But now, it
seems, even Somerset beauty spots are being opened up by planners to
Sainsbury's bulldozers. True, some of the old property market distortions
persist, notably through upwards-only leases, and the remaining backlog of
superstore permits means that the leaders in the food retailing industry are
still enjoying an artificial enhancement of margins through restriction of
competition (although these surplus profits will now crumble fast).
European airlines - the flag carriers, at least - have held out the longest
against liberalisation, and have been able to exploit their right to carve
up the profitable international routes between them. But Air France is at
last approaching its moment of truth, however unwillingly.
It is ironic that the airlines should be among the last to accept open
borders. Elsewhere, the globalisation of world trade has become a dominant
factor in generating production surpluses. A huge and cheap supply of most
manufactured goods (but not of services, with the important exception of
travel and tourism) has overwhelmed the economies of countries that allow
them in.
You can see this in the changing shape of the stock market. In the UK, for
instance, manufacturing of tradeable goods now probably accounts for only
about a fifth of the value of the market as a whole. Returns in the heavy
manufacturing sectors in Europe have been forced down by the influence of
state subsidies, and levels of profitability in basic industries such as
steel, chemicals or cars are grim.
Many of the traditional defences of manufacturers - such as control of
distribution, or the exploitation of technological superiority - are no
longer effective. Vast increases in productivity have benefited not the
manufacturer or the employees, as once they mainly would have done, but the
customer.
In recent years, too, a crisis has developed for the brand, the standard
means of adding perceived value to a consumer product. Too many brands have
allowed their pricing premiums to drift up in a period when the wider
diffusion of skills in production technology has actually been undermining
the advantages of market leaders.
In any case, some of today's big retailers have stronger brands than many of
the big consumer goods manufacturers. Who has the more powerful brand: a
retailer like Sainsbury or a food manufacturer like Brooke Bond or Tate &
Lyle?
In the stock market, value has shifted to those sectors where there is seen
to be protection against the gluts apparent elsewhere. There is obvious
appeal in regulated utilities which, through privatisation, have come from
nowhere to nearly 14 per cent of aggregate capitalisation inside 10 years;
and in drugs, which are defended by patents and the still crucial role of
technological skills. The same used to be true of defence, but the great
cost-plus days of this once-sheltered industry are well past.
Out there in the exposed sectors, the awful word 'commoditisation' has been
coined to represent the downgrading of premium products into mere standard
items, the price of which is set by increasingly fearsome competition
between efficient factories. In these circumstances, the profits in the
economy tend to percolate down towards niche providers of specialist goods
and services. Hence the higher activity in the stock market in the smaller
companies sector, where there may be some shelter from the intense pressure
of global competition, but where decent growth in the domestic economy is
essential.
Adjusting to the economics of glut can be tough indeed. Back in 1949, the
Riley family used to listen to the Home Service and the Light Programme on a
Ferranti wireless set. It seems a long, long time ago.

The Financial Times


London Page I

931030

