FT932-6575

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (9): Shake-out on the pampas - Farmers
are already financially stretched


   By JOHN BARHAM


ARGENTINA'S PAMPAS qualify as one of the world's richest farmlands, where
farmers using no artificial fertilisers or agrochemicals still have yields
comparable to, or better than, producers in other main farming nations.
Yet, for all their natural advantages, Argentina's farmers are being
squeezed by rising costs, falling commodity prices and a new domestic
economic scene that is forcing everybody - farmers, bankers, business people
 -to adjust sharply.
The problem is that most farmers are already financially overstretched or
are unable to find sufficient financing at the right terms to modernise
their operations. By one widely accepted estimate, about 150,000-200,000
mainly small and medium-sized farms are under great financial pressure and a
large number of them are facing bankruptcy.
However, the threat of shakeout on the pampas is more a social than an
economic problem. Nobody expects Argentina's grain and oilseed exports to
suffer. On the contrary, they are likely to benefit from the market's
unrelenting pressure to boost productivity.
Mr Hugo Krajnc, a manager at Cargill's Buenos Aires office, adds that
modernisation means not just adopting better farming techniques or buying
new tractors, but applying modern financial and management methods. Few
farmers use commodity markets to hedge their prices, and too many plan their
crops based on last year's market conditions, rather than looking ahead to
probable future market conditions, Mr Krajnc says.
Nobody likes the disruption and pain that shakeouts bring. Farmers have
reacted with protests, although none of them on the scale of French farmers'
demonstrations. However, countless one day strikes in which farmers suspend
deliveries to market, close roads and hold town meetings have done little to
soften the government's heart.
Until recently, that is. In May, the government announced that farmers will
be able to import tractors, trucks and agricultural machinery duty-free. It
has also instructed the state-owned Banco de la Nacion Argentina (BNA) to
lend farmers and small businesses USDollars 4.5bn this year at below market
interest rates.
Farmers still complain that BNA's terms are inadequate. Although BNA's rates
are lower than those of other banks, they are still a stiff 16-24 per cent a
year in real terms.
Argentina's farmers own about 200,000 tractors, but only 80,000 of them are
less than 15 years old. Replacing the most obsolete tractors would cost
about Dollars 3.7bn. yet holding on toobsolete machinery is also very
expensive. More than Dollars 500m a year - a sum roughly equivalent to
Argentina's annual wheat exports - are reckoned to be lost every year due to
waste caused by old machinery.
But no amount of special pleading by farmers or government intervention can
change distortions in the world grain market caused by the US-EC subsidies
war. According to the Argentine Rural Society (SRA), which groups together
the country's big farmers, international prices for Argentina's main export
crops - wheat, maize and soyabeans - are about 30-40 per cent below levels
of the mid-1980s, when the subsidies war first broke out.
There is little prospect of any in improvement prices in the near future.
In fact, prices this year have continued falling for most crops. Wheat
prices are now 10 per cent lower than a year ago; corn prices are 5 per cent
lower; soyabeans have recovered very slightly.
Reductions in local costs have done little to compensate for the
international price collapse. The government has lowered taxes and utility
charges and scrapped duties on imported farm machinery, but a tractor still
costs the equivalent of 256 tonnes of wheat, slightly more than a year ago.
The same applies for other key inputs such as fuel and fertiliser. Financial
charges, and other inputs, such as labour, electricity and taxes remain a
heavy burden.
The picture is not uniformly bleak. Although the SRA says wheat farmers are
struggling with negative net margins of 2 per cent, soyabean farmers now
have a 22 per cent positive net margin. Although experts say that farmers
are cutting costs, there is still room for further cuts.
It is hardly surprising, then, that wheat output last year fell 11 per cent
to 9.9m tonnes and is expected to fall another 6 per cent this year.
Soyabean production rose 14 per cent to 11.3m tonnes in 1992, but is
expected to fall slightly this year.
Signs are already emerging that these pressures are leading to consolidation
of land holdings, especially in the key farming region of Buenos Aires.
Many farms on the pampas are absurdly small by Argentine standards, often
measuring no more than a few hundred hectares. Coninagro, a farm
co-operative body, reckons that as many as 85 per cent of the farms in
Buenos Aires province, which covers most of the pampas, are too small to pay
their way. It says a wheat-producing farm must cover at least 625 hectares.
Most of the attention is focused on the plight of the pampas' farmers, but
farmers in distant provinces face evenmore dramatic conditions. Sheep
farmers in Patagonia, sugarcane and tobacco growers in the northwest and
cotton producers in the north all face far greater problems. However, their
impact on the economy and political clout are relatively small.
The focus is beginning to shift to the highly inefficient retail and
distribution network. The press has discovered for instance, that middlemen
boost retail prices by three to four times producer prices.
The effects of the government's privatisation programme is also being felt.
Privatised railways are lowering transport costs butprivatised energy
utilities no longer sell underpriced gas and electricity.
Farmers must become far more efficient in producing traditional bulk
commodity crops. Few analysts see much future in high margin produce such as
exotic fruit and vegetables. Chile's success in developing markets for these
goods in North American, Japan and Western Europe is often held up as an
example for Argentina.
Although Argentina could undoubtedly improve the quality and presentation of
its existing fruit and vegetables they are hardly likely to replace its
staple grain exports. After all, the Pampas are almost designer-made grain
and cattle-grazing land.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

930527

