FT931-4145

FT  12 MAR 93 / The Taurus Collapse: Stock Exchange chief failed to tame the
bull


   By ROBERT PESTON


MR PETER Rawlins, who resigned yesterday as chief executive of the exchange,
has said he subscribes to the General Custer management method: run fast
enough to stay ahead of the arrows. In the end he was trampled by Taurus the
bull.
'It is a good thing that he has resigned,' said the head of one of London's
biggest investment banking houses. 'He has lost credibility.'
Mr Rawlins was appointed to the exchange in 1989 partly because of his
computer expertise. There were already fears that Taurus was too ambitious
and critics say he should have abandoned the system earlier. But his
Achilles heel has been his knack of making enemies. A broker said: 'The
problem with Peter is that he always thinks he knows best.'
When he arrived at the exchange it was a huge, inward-looking and unwieldy
organisation, not sure whether it was a regulator, a trade lobby group, a
commercial business or a provider of market services. It employed about
3,000 bureaucrats and strategy was the preserve of some 90 committees and
sub-committees, typically made up of superannuated stockbrokers who had only
reluctantly acceded to government pressure to deregulate the market in the
Big Bang of 1986.
Mr Rawlins had little direct experience of the stock market. He trained as
an accountant at Arthur Andersen - and ironically it was a report on
Taurus's shortcomings by Andersen's consultancy arm at the end of last year
which precipitated yesterday's events. He had also worked for Sturge, the
insurance broker, and had been seconded to the Lloyd's insurance market in
the early 1980s as personal assistant to Mr Ian Hay Davison, then chief
executive.
He lived up to his reputation as a cost cutter. There are now just 16
exchange committees, while staff numbers were reduced to 1,400 - and
yesterday by a further 220.
He also tried to make the exchange more responsive to its customers by
inviting industrialists on to its main board.
Much of the City old guard and many exchange employees were incensed by
these actions. Those who ran the big securities houses were behind him but
many have now been alienated. One leading broker commented: 'In the
beginning he was definitely the right man. But he stopped listening to the
industry.'
He has since managed to alienate many supporters. One said: 'Often he does
not appear to listen to what the industry is telling him. He always thinks
he knows best.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930312

