FT932-3175

FT  15 JUN 93 / US urges rules on exploitation of cheap labour


   By DAVID GOODHART


   ZURICH


A SENIOR official in the Clinton administration yesterday called for
stronger international labour regulation 'so that businesses cannot play one
country against another in the search for ever lower wages'.
Mr Jack Otero, deputy under-secretary of labour, speaking at the
International Metalworkers' Federation congress in Zurich, also said that
the International Labour Organisation, whose conventions are meant to
establish minimum standards, needed 'strengthening'.
Many labour organisations in the developed world are hoping that the US
administration will play a more interventionist role in regulation, but Mr
Otero would not be drawn on whether a social clause was required in any Gatt
trade agreement. He did, however, emphasise that the US Labour Department
was keen to see greater pressure on Malaysia, to allow full union rights in
the electronics industry. Malaysia, where many multinationals now operate,
has become a test case for international regulation.
A Gatt social clause was strongly supported yesterday by Mr Marcello
Malentacchi, IMF general secretary, who said that workers in the Third World
should not be unfairly penalised by companies and governments as they
entered the world's trading system. He adds that the challenge facing
policy-makers is to increase the living standards of people in the globe's
South without destroying jobs and living standards in the North.
'We do not seek to lay down wages, which will vary according to the level of
development of the country concerned, but we do consider that all the
workers of a country have the right to form unions, to negotiate and to go
on strike. Labour standards must be established so that worker exploitation
is not the primary focus of economic competition,' he said.
Mr Malentacchi said that the ILO should be the obvious agency to draw up a
social clause for Gatt, but questioned whether the organisation had the
'vigour' to do so. 'It is, for example, the World Bank that is drawing up
labour codes for African countries such as Mali and Senegal. It is not a
banker's job to draft labour law any more than it is the ILO's task to write
banking laws.'
Mr Owen Bieber, president of the American United Auto Workers, warned that,
without a proper social clause, the pending North American Free Trade
Agreement (Nafta) would intensify pressures for downward harmonisation of
wages and working conditions - 'exactly the opposite of what should occur'.
The disparity in wages of US and Mexican auto workers is as much as 20:1.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

930615

