FT934-11535

FT  30 OCT 93 / Sport: Big boys come out to play - The US league starts
without its biggest star. Who will replace Michael Jordan? / Basketball


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


LAST MONTH, the day after Michael Jordan, professional basketball's biggest
star, unexpectedly retired from the game at the peak of his powers, the
former Boston Celtic player Kevin McHale said something shocking. He said
that within a year or two, basketball fans would be asking: 'Michael Who?'
The astute McHale did not mean to diminish Jordan's nine-year career, in
which the Chicago Bull's guard won three consecutive National Basketball
Association championships, three most valuable player awards, and seven
consecutive scoring titles.
McHale was pointing out that basketball would survive the loss of its
greatest star, that the memory of Jordan's greatness would soon be
superseded by the reality of younger players reaching heights of their own,
and that the memory of Chicago's three consecutive league titles would
quickly be dulled by the rise of other teams to the NBA championship.
Among the tidal wave of hype and hyperbole that accompanied Jordan's
retirement in October, McHale's remark was a refreshing dose of realism.
Yet, it was also a trifle hyperbolic itself.
Jordan was more than just the best player in basketball. To millions in the
US and around the globe, he was basketball. Although others began the game's
revival in the early 1980s, it was Jordan who helped make basketball the
fastest-growing, most glamorous and sexiest, professional team sport in the
world.
But, the league goes on without him, and his early retirement will make the
new NBA season (which opens this week) the most competitive in years.
Although Jordan was always ably assisted by his team mates (whom he cheekily
dubbed his 'supporting cast'), the Bulls would never have won one
championship, let alone three, without him. Now that he is gone, the few
teams that came close to matching Chicago and Jordan in the playoffs in
recent seasons - the Phoenix Suns, the New York Knicks, the Portland
Trailblazers, and the Cleveland Cavaliers - have the best shot at winning
the NBA title next spring.
Of those four, the first two will start as favourites to meet in the final,
assuming the Suns' unpredictable leader Charles Barkley, stays fit enough to
play and keeps out of trouble, and the Knicks' hot-headed heavyweights keep
their collective cool when big games are on the line. Both Portland and
Cleveland, however, look past their prime.
The Bulls themselves cannot be overlooked as contenders. They may have lost
their maestro, but in Scottie Pippen they have one of the best five players
in the NBA, and in Toni Kukoc, the recently signed 6 ft 11 in Croatian, they
have a versatile playmaker who dominated European basketball.
Then there are a handful of teams which have flirted with success in recent
years but which have struggled to progress in the playoffs, such as the Utah
Jazz, Seattle SuperSonics, Golden State Warriors and San Antonio Spurs.
Golden State could succeed, but only if their heralded new recruit from the
college game, Chris Webber, plays to his potential.
There are also some outsiders, most of them built around young, unproven
players. Teams such as the Charlotte Hornets, Orlando Magic, and New Jersey
Nets possess some of the most explosive raw talent in the game, and
represent the NBA's bright future. Yet, they remain works in progress, and
it will probably be two or three years before they join the elite.
The NBA, however, has always been more about individuals than teams, and the
most intriguing question this season is who will become the dominant
personality of the post-Jordan era?
Barkley would probably regard himself as heir to Jordan's throne.
Bull-shaped, bald-headed, and big-mouthed, the 30-year old Barkley is the
NBA's favourite anti-hero. Fans adore his aggressive, highly physical play,
but therein lies his weakness. Already struggling with recurrent back
problems, he is not sure how long he can last, and has already hinted that
he may retire at the end of this season.
No, the NBA will have to look to younger stars for its next Michael Jordan.
The Orlando Magic behemoth Shaquille O'Neal looks the obvious successor, not
least because his sponsors Reebok, the shoe manufacturers, have already
anointed him the world's newest sports phenomenon.
The 21-year old O'Neal (who will be playing an exhibition game in London
this weekend) is what basketball coaches like to call an 'impact' player. At
7 ft 1 in and 300 lbs, the Orlando centre made an impact as a rookie last
year, scoring 23.4 points-per-game and dominating the most important part of
the court - underneath the basket. O'Neal is quick, and very strong. So
strong that he has twice pulled the entire basket, backboard and supporting
rig to the floor during games with spectacular slam-dunks.
O'Neal was voted rookie of the year last season, but the player who came
second in the ballot, Charlotte's Alonzo Mourning, displayed as much
potential as his rival. Although smaller and lighter than O'Neal, Mourning
plays the same pivotal position of centre, and does so with great drive and
aggression. He is quicker than O'Neal, a better dribbler and passer and a
more accurate shooter. Aided by Larry Johnson, the rookie of the year in the
1991-92 season, Mourning is expected to lead Charlotte to a championship
sometime this decade.
Barring serious injury, O'Neal, Mourning and Johnson should be the game's
biggest stars (both in size and reputation) for some time to come. In fact,
the big men should dominate the NBA well into the 21st century, because this
season's top rookies, like Webber of Golden State and Jamal Mashburn of the
Dallas Mavericks, share the same attributes of strength and size that
distinguished last year's crop.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

931030

