FT934-8595

FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Harrogate (1): Bright spot's bubble burst - As
Britain recovers from recession, Harrogate's vital indicators are still
going the wrong way. Job losses from electricity privatisation,
rationalisation and defence cuts have shaken an area where there was full
employment only three years ago. Can Harrogate catch up?


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


   IT would be easy to go to Harrogate


as the leaders of the Confederation of British Industry are doing for their
annual conference this week - and mistakenly believe there is not much wrong
there.
An air of gentility pervades the town. The unemployment rate is only 7.2 per
cent. Fallen autumn leaves have laid a picturesque golden carpet on the many
acres of greensward that set off Harrogate's fine Victorian and Edwardian
buildings. Some of the best tourist sites in Britain are within an hour's
drive.
The town is in a sea of prime agricultural land. Local residents include
rich landowners with old wealth and many of the newly-rich progeny of the
Thatcher era. Shops and restaurants reflect people's almost emphatic ability
to pay top-notch prices for high quality goods and services.
Here is a bright spot of northern Britain. It is part of the county of North
Yorkshire, which - like Cheshire on the west side of the Pennines - is the
nearest thing the north has to the south in terms of look, feel, wealth and
culture.
'We have an upmarket appeal because Harrogate is an unashamedly upmarket
place,' says Mr Stuart Quin, economic development officer for the borough
council, guardedly: he is understandably concerned people might get the
wrong impression and not believe Harrogate is in trouble.
But it is.
In March 1990, Harrogate was a jewel in Thatcher's Britain. It was one of
the places above the north-south divide that had bubbled. Professor Mike
Campbell of Leeds Metropolitan University reckons about 8,000 new jobs were
created in the 1980s, with growth in banking, insurance and finance making
up for any decline in utilities and manufacturing.
'We were in full employment, with a jobless rate of around 2.5 per cent,' Mr
Quin says. 'There were labour shortages. We were one of the top performers
in the north of England and were cited as an example of what could be
achieved.'
The bubble burst. Harrogate's overall unemployment rate may well be only 7.2
per cent now, but the rate has trebled in three years, worsening more than
twice as rapidly as the UK average.
Moreover, the male rate in September was 11.1 per cent, indicating
substantial losses of most households' better-paid jobs.
To make matters worse, as the tide turns for the better elsewhere,
Harrogate's figures are still going the wrong way. Long-term unemployment -
previously hardly known - has risen 34 per cent since last year. A study by
Prof Campbell estimates an impending shortfall of 5,000 jobs as the
workforce grows in the 1990s.
The immediate cause of unemployment has been a series of shocks to the basic
economic structure. 'It's the rate of increase in unemployment that has hurt
us,' Mr Quin says.
'The most pessimistic outlook is that we shall soon be at 11 per cent
overall if we don't do something extensive. There is a sense of holding on
for grim life.'
Harrogate is surviving because a large part of its modern function is as a
middle-class professionals' commuter town, particularly for Leeds - 15 miles
away and in recent years Britain's fastest-growing regional centre for
financial and professional services; it is now the focal point for such
activities east of the Pennines.
'But we need to be able to survive in our own right,' Mr Quin insists.
Harrogate is not just a town, but a wide and diverse district covering 520
square miles from York in the east to the Dales national park in the west.
It has 150,000 people, including a growing workforce of more than 70,000.
Not all are highly qualified professionals able to work anywhere.
To maintain its dignity and avoid dependence on West Yorkshire to the south
or state hand-outs for many of its blue-collar workers, Harrogate has to be
able to generate more added value within its own borders.
The worry is over how much recent change can be reversed. For example, there
has been a run-down in agriculture, both in investment and jobs, which is
now affecting food processing, a staple local industry.
Ripon, part of the Harrogate district, last year lost its biggest employer,
Premier Poultry. The factory closed with the loss of 360 jobs after
Hillsdown, the parent group, bought Unilever's poultry plant at Scunthorpe
and moved production there. Ripon's female unemployment rate is now 6 per
cent and its overall rate 8.8 per cent.
Another blow has been the loss of several blue-chip corporate headquarters
through a combination of national recession, corporate restructuring, and
the end of the cold war.
ICI Fibres had its headquarters in Harrogate and once employed more than
2,000 in the town. Rationalisation meant the chemicals giant could not
sustain it. Mr Michael Walsh, Harrogate's chief executive, says an
unfortunate side-effect will arise because ICI was always first into
'partnership' activities with the public sector, particularly in seconding
staff to projects.
In Harrogate there were 1,000 employees of the Central Electricity
Generating Board who became part of National Power on privatisation. First,
about 750 jobs were lost. About 150 more will go soon, with what was once a
corporate headquarters now reduced to a small rump.
There is a similar story in defence industries. 'We were, in effect, where
the corporate headquarters of the RAF was located,' Mr Walsh says. Now 1,200
civilian jobs and 300 military ones are going to Huntingdon, in the prime
minister's constituency.
Recession also helped cause the loss of Octavius Atkinson, a fabricator of
structural steelwork and part of Taylor Woodrow. In 1990, it moved from the
town centre to a new site at the junction of the A59 and A1, but closed last
April. The 350 lost jobs were skilled manual ones which Harrogate's leaders
saw as part of the area's industrial stock-in-trade.
This is not the first time Harrogate has experienced sudden change. Forty
years ago the National Health Service decided to stop funding visits to
health spas. People 'taking the cure' were the mainstays of Harrogate's
hotel industry and the local economy faced a substantial loss of business.
The town successfully repositioned itself to stage conferences and
exhibitions, which is why the CBI is there this week. However, hotels,
catering, conferences and exhibitions comprise a mature sector offering only
marginal prospects of making up the latest lost ground.
And there will be little outside help. Although Harrogate is hoping for a
limited amount of EC funding - 'Konver' to compensate for defence industry
closures and 5b Status for some of its agricultural areas - there are
practically no incentives on offer.
Harrogate is not badly off enough to be helped, but is at least trying to
turn this into a virtue. Mr Quin says: 'What we have should be attractive to
businsses where skills are at a premium, and it is necessary to pay good
money for the right people. With no grants, companies come because of long
term business prospects.'
With large office users leaving, Harrogate can at least offer competitive
prices - Pounds 10 a sq ft rents for good space, compared with Pounds 12.50
and Pounds 18 in Bradford and Leeds. This appeals to back-office financial
operations, such as NatWest's Switch card, which moved in this year.
Modern manufacturing, finance and business services, the medical and health
care sector, and new small businesses are now the main targets. How
Harrogate fares could well be a lesson in incentiveless marketing for the
1990s. Economic development specialists everywhere will be watching closely.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931115

