FT932-3325

FT  15 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Treasury to brief Tory back benches


   By RALPH ATKINS


A CONCERTED Treasury operation to brief Tory MPs on the state of public
finances and to test views on how the spiralling deficit should be
controlled will be launched later this month by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor.
With debate on tax and spending policies threatening to cause fresh
divisions in Conservative ranks, Mr Clarke and Mr Michael Portillo, chief
secretary to the Treasury, are to hold a series of meetings with
Conservative MPs before the summer recess starts in late July.
The two cabinet ministers want to ensure that MPs understand the parameters
within which November's unified tax and expenditure Budget will have to be
set.
A bigger challenge, however, may be to find agreement among Conservative MPs
on measures to control the public sector borrowing requirement - or even
whether action is needed at all.
Sir Terence Higgins, the widely-respected former Treasury minister, has
warned that with most of the deficit caused by cyclical factors, action to
curb borrowing now would be 'inappropriate' and could impede economic
recovery.
But other MPs joined yesterday with Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, in saying that Tory manifesto commitments may have to be broken
in the effort to rein back the deficit to a sustainable level.
Lord Howe, the former chancellor, yesterday suggested that election pledges
could be put aside, perhaps temporarily, and that income tax may have to be
rise in order to tackle the deficit. He said on BBC radio: 'There is no
surer way of destroying the recovery than to run indefinitely into debt.'
Among Conservative MPs there is a small lobby calling for the abolition of
mortgage interest tax relief. Another senior Tory, Sir Peter Hordern, MP for
Horsham and executive member of the 1922 backbench committee, has suggested
abolishing the National Insurance upper earnings limit to ensure the state
insurance scheme is fully funded.
Tory MPs' protests after the March Budget over the imposition of VAT on
domestic fuel and power highlighted the importance of political skills at
the Treasury. Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, last night urged Mr
John Major to make clear his views on the future of the welfare state. He
was speaking ahead of a meeting today between Mr Major, Mr Portillo and Mr
Peter Lilley, social security secretary, to discuss the future of invalidity
benefit.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930615

