FT933-12825

FT  22 JUL 93 / Arts: Funding threat to Lieder contest


   By MAX LOPPERT


On Tuesday, in the Old Library of the City of London Guildhall, the Walter
Gruner Lieder Competition completed its sixth finale. This event, a biennial
feature of the annual City of London Festival, is the world's only musical
competition of any importance devoted to Lieder - the point was underlined
by the distinguished baritone Benjamin Luxon, the Gruner jury chairman, in a
pre-results-giving address.
It perhaps needs underlining the more because, as Luxon also made clear,
there seems to have arisen a question-mark over the competition's future
survival. A bequest left by Gruner (an admired Lieder pedagogue at the
Guildhall School) after his death in 1980 has been up to now the source of
funding (together with sponsorship from the festival itself). The Gruner
cash has now run out. Unless an alternative source can be found, the sixth
edition is in all likelihood the last.
This matters. Though in principle competitions are a wasteful way of
spotlighting the world's new and important musical talents, the Gruner
offers only a relatively small first prize (Pounds 5,000 plus a Wigmore Hall
recital); its spotlight is therefore not injuriously bright, and the
seriousness with which it has always been undertaken makes the competition
less of a strain on those young talents than many of similar stature. As
Luxon also suggested, in a world in which opera is currently the musical
'market leader', the value of an event in which the less showy artistic uses
of the singing voice are insisted upon grows ever greater.
A competition that began with Olaf Baer as its first winner, and that has
had Simon Keenlyside, Anna Steiger, Thomas Lander and Ruth Ziesak among
subsequent alumni at various levels, has surely justified its usefulness.
This year the first prize was withheld (as it was two years ago) - always a
let-down, but to my mind an entirely justifiable decision.
The de facto champion, the German tenor Christian Elsner, took second prize;
he was rumoured to have sung his final round suffering a heavy cold, but
clean, fresh tone, musical sensitivity and expressive blandness - hardly a
phrase explored for any dramatic implication - are features of his
performance that are probably preserved even when the voice is healthier.
The other finalists, the Canadian bass-baritone Nathan Berg and the Dutch
baritone Geert Smits, shared fourth prize (the third was also withheld);
this seemed rather a snub to Berg's lively, pinpoint powers of
communication, but at the same time an eminently arguable response to the
not-quite-finished vocal techniques of both young men.
So, a rather disappointing conclusion to a competition that is itself at the
crossroads. But that is no reason to hope for anything other than its
continued existence.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930722

