FT934-11639

FT  30 OCT 93 / Plugs plan prompts cost fears


   By ANDREW BAXTER


UK MANUFACTURERS of plugs and sockets are trying to kill a proposal for a
common European system, which they say could cost as much as Pounds 20bn to
introduce - about Pounds 1,000 for each UK household.
The proposed round-pin plugs would be unsafe if used in existing square-pin
sockets and could seriously damage the British manufacturing base,
threatening jobs and trade, they warn.
Mr David Dossett, director of the Electrical Installation Equipment
Manufacturers Association, said about half the Pounds 1.3bn of capital
employed by UK plug and socket manufacturers and subcontractors could be
made redundant if the system were introduced.
Smaller plug and socket manufacturers could be forced to cease trading, with
their place in the market taken by importers.
At issue is the future of both the British plug, with its three rectangular
pins, introduced in 1947, and the latest in a number of attempts over the
past 20 years to introduce a European-wide standard.
Supporters of standardisation say it would benefit travellers and create
economies of scale for plug and socket manufacturers, and for producers of
household appliances.
But the UK plug and socket industry - 20 companies employing 10,000 people
directly and a further 10,000 in support jobs - says the proposal does not
achieve genuine harmonisation, which it supports, and is unfair to the UK.
Under pressure from the European Commission, Cenelec, the European
electrical standards setting body, has produced unpublished proposals for a
system based on three types of round-pinned plug.
Mr Dossett said one of these - the existing 2.5 amp two-pin 'Europlug' -
fits many UK three-pin sockets. This is potentially lethal, he warned,
because it is possible to touch the live pins when inserting or removing it,
and because the plug is unfused. The UK ring-main system depends on fused
plugs.
The UK system would therefore have to be replaced, causing 'massive expense
with no obvious payback', according to the association. Mr Dossett said that
using adaptors for the 800m sockets in the UK would have aesthetic drawbacks
and possible safety implications because the number of electrical contacts
would be doubled.
Plug manufacturers, meanwhile, would have to invest heavily in lathes to
produce round pins, while European manufacturers would need to make only
modest changes.
One other option is for the UK to be granted a 'derogation', meaning that it
would not have to abide by the proposals. The Commons trade and industry
committee is due to consider the issue next month.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

931030

