FT932-3373

FT  15 JUN 93 / World Trade News: German fury at minister's telecoms line


   By ARIANE GENILLARD


   BONN


THE German telecoms industry yesterday sharply criticised the recent
announcement by Mr Gunter Rexrodt, federal economics minister, that Germany
and the US had agreed to sidestep sanctions and counter-sanctions over
government contracts affecting telecommunications.
'We are surprised and angered at the fact that the Economics Ministry is
breaking ranks with EC trade politics,' a source in the industry said.
'Germany will now become a platform for non-EC producers wanting to enter
the common market, and German companies will be the first to pay the price
for this increased competition.'
On the eve of his trip today to Washington, French Prime Minister Edouard
Balladur expressed disbelief that Germany could have struck a separate deal
with the US on telecommunications. Nonetheless, France has asked the
European Commission to verify the agreement.
The German Economics Ministry yesterday attempted to defuse the crisis,
which has thrown Germany into a bitter dispute with the Commission. However,
ministry officials kept an embarrassed silence when asked about ways in
which Bonn could mend its dispute with Brussels.
The ministry said no trade agreement lifting sanctions had been signed with
the US. 'Our trade representatives simply informed their US counterparts
that Germany was not discriminating against US companies, as do Spain,
Portugal and Greece,' a spokesman from the ministry said.
The row between Germany and Brussels broke out last Thursday when Mr Mickey
Kantor, US trade representative, told a US congressional committee that
Germany and the US had agreed to drop sanctions against companies importing
telecoms equipment.
On Friday Mr Rexrodt announced that Germany could not apply discriminatory
sanctions against US companies because of a 1954 bilateral trade agreement.
The announcement prompted the European Commission to ask for a
clarification.
The US recently erected barriers against EC telecoms suppliers seeking
government contracts in the US. This was in retaliation for Article 29 of
the EC's utilities directive, enacted in January and giving a price
preference to EC companies bidding for European government contracts.
But Mr Rexrodt said on Friday Germany would not apply Article 29's
restrictive provisions.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930615

