FT933-5132

FT  04 SEP 93 / Property: Thailand beckons


   By AUDREY POWELL


IF YOU VIEW Florida as too dangerous and Tuscany as yesterday's scene, then
Thailand could be the place for your holiday home. So says a British agency
which can arrange for you to have a house built there by a company* with a
British managing director. It has sites for two developments of six to eight
houses on the Thai island of Phuket. One, at Kamala Bay, is close to a
palm-fringed beach which is largely undeveloped and sweeps in an arc for
nearly a mile.
The design of the detached guideline house will be a modern adaptation of
Thai style with a steeply pitched roof, concrete frame, rendering or
plasterwork, ceramic tiling and a lot of teak. There will be three bedrooms
and balconies, living and dining rooms, a maid's room and a garden.
Specifications can be amended for individuals.
A foreigner cannot own land freehold in Thailand but he can lease it, and
any building on leased land can be sold separately. Leases can be up to 90
years (30 years plus two pre-paid 30-year extensions).
The total price of a house on Phuket, including 90-year lease and purchase
costs, is likely to be from Pounds 140,000 up and there is an annual lease
administration fee of about Pounds 400. To offset the costs, however, there
is a lot of foreign demand for renting.
Land prices in Thailand are low compared with other countries, says Jeremy
Adler of Villas Abroad (Properties) which is handling the Phuket project.
You can build at any time within three years after signing up.
Thailand (once Siam) is a constitutional monarchy about the size of France.
Phuket, about 30 miles long, is off a peninsula on the west coast near the
Malaysian border and is reached by a causeway. Apart from Patong, which is
lively and colourful, most of its resorts are small, but it does have its
own airport.
Many might see the 14 hours' flying time from London (including transfer at
Bangkok) as a deterrent, and return air fares can be anything from Pounds
500 to Pounds 1,500. But long-haul destinations have become popular with
some holiday-makers bored with resorts close to home and full of
fellow-Britons.
*The development company offering these properties is Phuket Land and its
British managing director is William Pinsent. Villas Abroad (Properties) can
be telephoned on 081-891 5444. Information about land-buying in Thailand can
also be obtained from the country's information service, tel. 071-584 5421.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

930904

