FT933-12673

FT  23 JUL 93 / Guerrillas in new offensive against Israel


   By ROGER MATTHEWS, Middle East Editor


THE danger of a big military confrontation in south Lebanon increased
sharply yesterday after Iranian-backed guerrillas launched a new offensive
against Israeli positions and those held by their local allies.
At least one Israeli soldier died in the attacks launched by Hizbollah, the
Lebanese Shia militia, and by the radical Palestinian faction, the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, headed by Ahmed
Jibril.
They attacked several positions within Israel's self-declared security zone
in south Lebanon using artillery, rockets and heavy machine gun fire.
Several members of the South Lebanon Army, financed and armed by Israel,
were also reported to have been wounded in the attacks.
Israel has reinforced its presence in the south of Lebanon during the past
10 days in response to Hizbollah attacks on July 8 and 9 which cost the
lives of five Israeli soldiers. Lt. Gen. Ehud Barak, the Israeli army chief
of staff, warned this week that an attempt to wipe out guerrilla bases would
be inevitable if the attacks did not cease.
Mr Mohsen Dalloul, Lebanon's defence minister, responded that the entire
country would be mobilised if it faced a large-scale invasion.
'We will not stand idly by in the face of aggression. We shall fight with
all means at our disposal,' he said in an interview on Voice of Lebanon.
Damascus radio has also warned that an attack on Lebanon would be considered
as aggression against Syria.
Israel hit back against yesterday's attacks with artillery fire and
helicopter gun - ships were in action against suspected guerrilla positions.
The fighting comes at a delicate moment in Middle East peace negotiations,
with Mr Warren Christopher, the US secretary of state, planning a visit to
the region later next week in an effort to persuade all parties to resume
negotiations in Washington next month.
Hizbollah and its Palestinian allies in south Lebanon are opposed to the
peace process which they believe will only result in a formal capitulation
to Israeli occupation of Arab territory.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930723

