FT933-12573

FT  23 JUL 93 / Management: Nothing to do with ability - Some of the
pitfalls of employee appraisals


   By ADRIAN FURNHAM


Customer satisfaction surveys and rating forms are, like traffic wardens,
ubiquitous. Hotels, airlines, restaurants, even churches provide cards and
forms asking customers to rate their services, products and personnel. But
few people offer feedback, so some institutions offer incentives such as a
free drink or a cheap calculator to encourage customers to comply and
improve the response rate.
Most managers also have to evaluate the performance of their subordinates by
completing an appraisal at least once a year. For some this is a bit like a
school report, with the most common comments being 'satisfactory' or
'adequate'.
Given the general loathing of unstructured report-writing, most
organisations devise appraisal forms where boxes are ticked to indicate the
quality of performance against various criteria.
Even so, rating others may be deeply counter-cultural to the British, though
popular in the US. British people prefer to fudge with pleasant but
meaningless phrases. Despite - or perhaps because of - the fact that Britons
have experienced the capriciousness of school or university grading, they
resist inflicting it on others.
Many managers dislike rating subordinates precisely because such evaluations
are supposed to be objective and impartial; they know all too well the
errors and injustices that can occur in the process.
Perhaps the most common error is the halo effect.
It is not unknown for female secretaries and personal assistants to be
selected more for their legs than their word-processing ability. All
interviewees know that appearance may be as - if not more - important than
ability in getting a job. Most attempt to create a positive halo by
emphasising their best qualities.
A second cause of error and lack of objectivity lies in being too lenient or
indeed too harsh.
The error is called central tendency. However long the rating form, and
whatever its contents, some managers routinely tick all the central boxes on
the rating form and avoid the extremes. They do so because they do not want
to over-praise an individual and thereby raise expectations of promotion or
salary increase. They also avoid the low scores because they want to avoid
controversy over the appraisal and dealing with the anger, sulking and
resentment of a poorly-rated subordinate.
The result is that everybody comes out as average and the whole exercise is
a waste of time.
A third problem is memory, also called recency bias. Managers rarely keep
detailed notes and do not always remember all the behaviours they have to
rate. It has been said that if workers score any significant success nobody
remembers, but if they make a big mistake nobody forgets. Certainly most
people base their appraisals on the recent past, no matter how
representative it is.
There is also the question of personal bias and prejudice. This may be overt
or covert, sophisticated or simple. We all have our preferences and
prejudices based on past experience, and it is often difficult to prevent
these influencing appraisal ratings.
Thus notwithstanding the quasi-scientific, and certainly numeric, feel of
evaluation and appraisal forms, many managers complain they are far from
objective. They argue there are so many sources of bias that appraisals are
not only worthless but dangerous.
However, people can be taught to use the forms effectively. Coffee tasters,
for example, are open to errors when rating beans, but they can learn to
overcome them. When it comes to managing people, it is crucial the staff are
appraised and given accurate, specific and comprehensive feedback. Filling
out forms encourages such feedback and can be most helpful. Most managers
would like their boss to provide them with detailed feedback - but they all
seem more hesitant about appraising their staff - often because they do not
know how to conduct progress reviews with subordinates.
The author is head of the business psychology unit at University College
London, and advises organisations on management appraisal systems.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930723

