FT932-7152

FT  25 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: High costs of producing nothing
 -Even those who sent in Domesday forms face an uncertain future / Farmers'
Viewpoint


   By DAVID RICHARDSON


After the form-filling, the public relations battle. It was, of course,
entirely predictable that the blame for the apparent nonsense incorporated
into the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy would rebound on farmers.
The proposed payment of EC taxpayers' funds to Community farmers in order to
persuade them not to grow crops was bound to attract derision from the antis
of both agriculture and the EC itself.
Indeed it is not so long ago that I was in the habit of deriding similar
policies in force for many years in the US. In after-dinner speeches I used
to quote a letter claimed to have been sent by an American farmer to his
senator.
It was based on the (inaccurate, but only slightly) premiss that US farmers
could get government grants 'for not raising hogs. So I am going into the
not raising hogs business next year,' the letter writer continued. 'What I
want to know is what is the best kind of farm not to raise hogs on and what
are the best kind of hogs not to raise?' And it went on to describe the
difficulty the fictitious writer ancitipated in 'keeping an inventory of how
many hogs I have not raised'. It ended with the following postscript: 'Can I
raise 10 or 12 hogs on the side while I am in the not raising hogs business
 -just enough to get a few sides of bacon to eat?'
A few years ago that 'letter' was guaranteed to raise a good laugh among a
British farming audience. But I have not used it recently because today we
too are in the not raising commodities businessand it might not go down so
well.
So, having spent much of the last month with cold towels wrapped around
their heads or queueing for expensive Ordnance Survey maps of their farms in
order to complete long and complicated forms to qualify for such aid under
The Integrated Administration and Control System (IACS), farmers should
hardly be surprised that attacks on them have already begun.
First in line, again predictably, is the softest landowning target of all,
the Royal Family. 'The queen and Prince Charles' thundered a popular Sunday
paper recently, 'are set to receive nearly Pounds 300,000 of taxpayers'
money this year.' Of that, alleged the Sunday Express, Pounds 60,000 is for
set-aside, the policy of paying farmers to grow nothing. The front page
article failed adequately to explain that the remainder must, if the figures
were accurate, be compensation for cuts in guaranteed prices which also
formed part of last year's CAP reform package.
As a reluctant participant in the same scheme I must avoid defending it. But
to criticise the queen, or any other farmer, for claiming compensation for
being forced to 'do nothing' on some of their land is equivalent to saying
that people who invest their savings in a building society should not
receive interest. The fact is that the owners of land are as entitled to
earn income from their asset as the owners of cash or shares and when that
entitlement is denied, or reduced, by government decree they should also be
entitled to compensation.
In any event it is hardly accurate to suggest that the cash will go to
farmers for doing nothing. Claimants are required to keep set-aside land
trimmed and free of harmful weeds. And when the time comes to plough and
plant another crop the costs of this preparation of the soil will be much
higher than if the land had been regularly cultivated.
It should also be understood that although the set-aside scheme is
advertised as voluntary, it is in fact virtually compulsory. For farmers who
do not participate deny themselves the right to compensation for commodity
prices which will be 30 per cent lower by 1995. Few could survive such a cut
in revenue - given that incomes have already fallen by more than 50 per cent
in real terms during the last decade - especially when they face significant
increases in the costs of imported inputs as last September's devaluation of
sterling begins to bite.
So, like the queen and her agents, most farmers concluded they had little
alternative to setting land aside and therefore attempted to complete the
so-called Domesday forms claiming compensation by the May 15 deadline.
But some have not done so. Of the 240,000 forms sent out, only 155,000 had
been returned by the due date. The rest probably includes some who have been
unable to obtain the necessary documentation, in the form of maps in
particular, in time. They risk reductions in entitlement to aid of 1 per
cent per working day after May 15, up to a maximum of 20 days, after which
they lose their rights altogether. The deficit in returned forms also
includes small farmers who, in spite of massive publicity, have not realised
what is at stake.
The other day I heard of a 150-acre neighbour who had not filled in his IACS
forms 'on principle'. At a rough guess he has lost the right to about Pounds
6,000 of aid this year which is probably more than the annual profit he has
made during the last few years. Even a small hobby farmer with six acres
near here stood to lose Pounds 300 for failing to complete his forms, in
spite of certain small farm exemptions.
The majority of British farmers who have done what was required, however,
can now ride their weed mowers and wait for the money to arrive. As they do
so they will contemplate with little pleasure the set-aside fields they are
trimming and which they would rather have seen growing crops; the
possibility that should there eventually be a Gatt agreement the area of
set-aside they will be forced to take out of production could be doubled;
and the very real risk that compensation for all this may not last.
For the irony is that the reformed CAP is likely to cost EC taxpayers
significantly more than the flawed original. It will take very good PR
indeed for the package to survive. Especially as farmers, the apparent
beneficiaries, don't like it either.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930525

