FT932-6861

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (5): EC linkage may be curbed -
Central banks: Five ways to avoid a repeat of last year's crisis


   By PETER MARSH


THE CENTRAL bankers of the leading European nations are not normally the
objects of pity. However, last year their world turned upside down.
One of the lessons from the crisis in the European exchange rate mechanism
was that the ability of central banks to keep currencies within prescribed
ranges - when faced with determined pressures from the foreign exchange
markets - is extremely limited.
As the consequences of the ERM turmoil sink in, the European Community's
central banks and their governments may be forced dramatically to scale back
their ambitions for linking exchange rates. That could place formidable
barriers to the Maastricht plan for creating a pan-EC currency union by the
end of the century.
The limits to the powers of central banks was spelled out in a report* by
the International Monetary Fund released last month. 'Until recently,' it
said, 'attacks on exchange rate regimes were treated as aberrant speculative
disturbances of otherwise well-functioning markets. It is now recognised,
however, that attacks can be the market's response to policy goals that are
perceived to be inconsistent with a given parity.'
The report added: 'The markets eventually decide on what are unsustainable
(economic) situations and, when they do, their size alone increasingly
allows them to force adjustments.'
Between last autumn and early this year hundreds, if not thousands, of
currency investors around the world collectively decided that the currencies
of the UK, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Ireland were over-valued in the
mechanism against the D-Mark.
All were forced to devalue, despite European central banks selling in the
final six months of last year an unprecedented DM284bn from their reserves
in a vain effort to prop up the weak currencies.
Behind the drama was investor sentiment that the fragile economies in the
countries concerned could not contend with the high interest rates needed
for their currencies to keep within their D-Mark parities.
As one central banker involved with the drama put it: 'It was a very
difficult situation. We were defending the indefensible.'
There are five main ways in which central banks and their governments can
try to ensure that a similar currency crisis within the EC does not take
place again.
One is to hone the array of tactical weapons at the disposal of central
banks to defend currencies, including changes in interest rates and
intervention on markets to raise or depress currencies' value.
There is a limit to the efficacy of such actions. In the case of
hypothetical increases in interest rates to defend a country's currency, the
financial markets may calculate that the tight borrowing conditions will be
unacceptable in a country hit by economic slowdown. Hence high interest
rates may create more turbulence, rather than reduce it.
This was accepted in a report on the currency strains published last month
by a group of international officials headed by Mr Lamberto Dini, director
general of the Bank of Italy. This concluded: 'The effectiveness of interest
rate adjustments may depend on whether market participants perceive that the
authorities are strongly committed, and politically able, to maintain
interest rates at the adjusted levels on a prolonged basis.'
The second way forward is to agree to adjust fixed-rate systems far more
speedily to take account of economic pressures. Mr Wim Duisenberg, chairman
of the EC committee of central bank governors and the head of the Dutch
central bank, says Europe should have decided to encapsulate all the
realignments during the six-month crisis 'into one long weekend'.
Such neat solutions may be difficult to achieve, on the grounds that
governments normally see devaluation as a big political and psychological
blow. They therefore submit to a devaluation only as a last resort and after
a great deal of argument that can be highly time consuming.
The third idea is to try to arrange that, within a specific geographical
region, the economies of individual countries which elect to peg exchange
rates are reasonably in harmony with each other.
In such a state of affairs, exchange-rate fluctuations should remain fairly
small. This can best be managed, according to the Dini report, 'in economies
with relatively flexible wages and prices, low structural rigidities and
countercyclical fiscal stabilisers that are relatively effective and well
disciplined.'
In Europe, the closest to a group of countries linked in this way is what
can loosely be called the west European currency bloc - centred on Germany,
the Netherlands, Belgium and Austria - where there is a relatively high
degree of economic convergence and interest rates are set largely according
to German monetary policy. There may be practical difficulties in achieving
economic convergence across a broader set of EC countries in the way
envisaged under the Maastricht treaty.
The fourth idea is to move rapidly to abolish all differences in exchange
rates; in other words, to a full currency union for the countries involved.
This option would probably be valid only for those nations which had already
agreed the necessary large degree of economic convergence. For other
countries such a move would involve an unacceptably high degree of economic
strains.
Fifthly, nations could decide that the strains of trying to stay in a fixed
exchange rate system are greater than the benefits , and give up on this
idea. For the moment Britain - and possibly Italy, too - is in this
position. All the signs are that Britain, at least, will be in no hurry to
return to the ERM, which reduces the possibility of Europe's fourth biggest
economy joining in a monetary union according to the agreed timetable.
*International Capital Markets; Exchange Rate Management and International
Capital Flows. Dollars 20, IMF, 700 19th St NW, Washington DC 20431

The Financial Times


London Page III

930526

