FT934-10118

FT  06 NOV 93 / Books: The job of being political


   By KIT MCMAHON


HONEST OPTIMISM by Peter Riddell Hamish Hamilton Pounds 15.99, 288 pages
PETER Riddell has been badly served by his publishers. They have given him a
dust-jacket from which it is hard to make out the title; and he has been
seriously under-edited. There is much repetition of points and facts, often
in the same words. More seriously, the whole structure of the book - the
relationship between its argument and its evidence - needs tightening.
The argument, deployed in the introduction and the conclusions, is simple:
politics has become a career, a profession of its own, practised for most of
the working life, rather than an occupation complementary to a 'real' job.
This would not perhaps be very surprising: most forms of activity have
become more specialised and professionalised over recent decades. And
Riddell is certainly able to show, at least comparing post-war with prewar
practice, that more MPs come from political jobs - advisers, members of
party think-tanks etc.  - now than then. Higher salaries and the greater use
of wives either as secretaries or independent income-earners make full-time
application possible. The number of hours per year during which the House is
sitting, has greatly increased, etc. etc.
The phenomenon is, then, fairly easily established. Having established it,
however, what follows? What, if any, are the consequences of this
development? If they are unsatisfactory what can be done about it? These
questions are raised by Riddell but he has relatively little to say on them.
He is uneasy about the phenomenon, but rightly sceptical of the most obvious
ways of combating it. The introduction of non-politicians straight into
government through created peerages has a very poor record of success. And
the evidence suggests (though with some exceptions) that late entrants to
Parliament have lower chances of making it to the Cabinet table.
In any case, despite Riddell's own unease, it is not clear that the present
situation is worse than the old one, at least in terms of the kind of
back-benchers it produces. He himself points out that care and trouble taken
over constituents is much greater than it used to be - as is the opportunity
for work in House Committees.
Between the introductory and concluding chapters lies the bulk of the book:
a mass of facts, anecdotes and statistics about politicians and their
careers. Some statistics are interesting - for example the relative security
of the average MP, once elected, for the rest of his life - and some
anecdotes enjoyable - such as Charles Kennedy's good luck and George
Younger's bad over entry to Parliament. But Riddell often reduces the
potential interest of his subject matter by his scrupulous fairness. He will
suggest a general rule only to follow it with enough exceptions to sink it.
Interesting or not, however, most of the facts he produces have little
bearing on his thesis. What you get is simply a strong flavour of the lives,
personalities and attitudes of those who have filled the House of Commons in
recent years. Not much of a wood, but some interesting trees.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

931106

