FT934-8504

FT  15 NOV 93 / UK Gilts: Little change seen before Budget


   By PETER MARSH


TRADERS will be watching out for a spate of economic data this week which
will affect demand for gilts. However, they are expecting only subdued price
movements ahead of the Budget on November 30.
Many investors are hoping for a further steady upward movement in gilt
prices after the market rally on Friday, which saw long-dated gilts gain
about 1 point on the back of favourable data about UK trade and theories
that inflation pressures were subdued.
This Wednesday sees publication of the retail prices index for the year to
last month, which City economists think will show a rise of 1.7 per cent,
compared with the 1.8 per cent increase in the year to September. The
consensus view on the underlying inflation rate - the year-on-year change in
the RPI excluding mortgage interest rates - is that it will turn out to be
3.2 per cent after 3.3 per cent in the previous month.
Also on Wednesday, traders will take in data for retail sales volumes. In
September, they rose by 0.5 per cent on the month to stand 3.5 per cent
higher than a year earlier, lending weight to evidence that consumer
spending is the driving force behind the recovery. The consensus forecast is
for a slightly smaller monthly increase in October of 0.3 per cent.
Last Friday's trade data - even with the doubts about the reliability of the
new European Union system for collecting import and export figures -
generally encouraged hopes that export growth was fairly strong while import
expansion appears to be slowing down.
UK export values were at record levels in August, continuing a strong trend
since the start of the year, while on the basis of the new figures,
underlying import volumes have barely increased since sterling's devaluation
14 months ago. That led to higher expectations that inflationary pressures
were likely to be fairly modest for some time, due to only weak demand.
Mr Simon Briscoe, UK economist at SG Warburg Securities, said: 'The data are
consistent with the recovery profile being biased towards exports and with
price pressures staying weak.'
Mr Nigel Richardson, an economist at Yamaichi, said the gilt market was also
cheered by news that - even though manufacturing output increased by a
seasonally adjusted 0.4 per cent in September - the recovery was
insufficient to prevent a 0.1 per cent decline in manufacturing output
between the second and third quarters.
That strengthened the view of many gilt investors that factory activity was
not about to weaken, but at the same time was still some way short of
picking up in a way that would generate inflation.
Helped by generally encouraging data on US inflation, long-dated gilt yields
fell on the week on a par basis while short-dated yields held roughly
constant. The 8.75 per cent Treasury bond due in 2017 had a yield of 7.13
per cent on Friday night, compared with 7.27 per cent the week before. The
yield of the shorter dated 7.25 per cent Treasury bond maturing in 1998 was
quoted at 6.08 per cent at the close of last week, down from 6.15 per cent
seven days previously.
Indications that the economy is continuing on a recovery path - and with
little sign that price pressures are increasing - may strengthen the chances
that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, will risk a fiscal tightening in the
Budget on November 30 without worrying that this will hold back the upturn.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

931115

