FT932-302

FT  29 JUN 93 / FT Exporter (1): Why exporting is in vogue - Governments
around the world perpetually exhort businessmen to export more. They are
right to do so, but not always for the right reasons / Comment


   By DAVID DODWELL


WHETHER a company is in the US, in Australia, in the Ukraine, or the UK, it
is being exhorted to export. Governments across the world appear to have
rediscovered exports as a kind of new panacea - the only route to
non-inflationary growth.
Governments have good reason for their exhortation, as economies across the
industrial world falter. Only weeks ago, the Paris-based Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development sharply reduced growth forecasts for
its 24 member nations to 1.2 per cent in 1993, down from 1.9 per cent
predicted just six months ago.
Of even greater concern is rising unemployment. The OECD expects
unemployment among its member nations to rise to 36m in 1994 from 35m this
year, climbing from an average of 7.9 per cent of the workforce last year to
8.6 per cent next year.
Even in the US, where there is every sign that companies are through the
worst of their recession, President Clinton has already voiced his concern
over 'jobless growth'. In Germany, with the economy expected to contract
this year by 1.9 per cent, unemployment is expected to rise sharply from 4m
this year to 4.5m in 1994 - about 11.4 per cent of the workforce.
Whatever economists say about 'jobless growth' being a good thing (it
suggests higher efficiency, and rising labour productivity), the politicians
are unanimous that the social and political dangers linked with rising
unemployment are too great to be dismissed so easily.
Fears remain strong that inflation has been held at bay rather than purged,
so the option of kick-starting the economy by stimulating domestic demand,
or by programmes of public spending, is a risky one. For governments in the
US, the UK or Germany, where public spending levels are already too high and
public debts have to be trimmed, domestic pump priming is not just risky -
it is untenable. At present, it is only Japan, with low inflation, and low
levels of public debt, that dares take the risk.
With problems so grave, and so many options effectively closed, it is not
surprising that exporting is in vogue: it can create new jobs; it can ease
balance of payments problems. At a more fundamental level, it can ensure
that companies remain competitive, by forcing them to be as efficient and
productive as exporters from other countries active in the same markets.
But it is naive to see exporting as so simple a panacea. First, most
exporters need to import many of the components they need for their
exportable products. This need not be a sign of weakness, as ministers often
suggest. Most of the world's large companies are now organised for
production on a global basis, with an international division of labour based
on a wide array of factors. For them, imports to and exports from a
subsidiary in any country are simply part of this process. Trade between
subsidiaries of the same parent company accounts for about 45 per cent of
all world trade.
Second, the obsession governments have with manufactured exports - with a
hint often that this is the only 'real' or virile trade - serves to suppress
the importance of trade in services. This deflects attention from the sector
that has grown most rapidly in recent years, both as an income earner and a
job creator.
Third, governments tend to forget that one country's exports are another
country's imports. Many in the US would argue that Japan's success as an
exporter has been at the expense of US companies, and that the imbalance
must be corrected as a matter of urgency if the international trading
environment nurtured over 45 years since the end of the second world war is
to remain stable.
It is notable, however, that it is in the fast-growing economies of east and
south east Asia, such as Malaysia, Hong Kong, Taiwan or Korea, that least is
said about balanced trade: 'I'm not interested in balancing trade in any
bilateral sense,' says Victor Fung, head of Hong Kong's Trade Development
Council. 'Our aim is just to increase the total volume of trade. In the long
term, it is the size of the pie, not our larger share in it, that we must
focus on.'
This Hong Kong mind set is important to understand. It has made a tiny
colony of 5.6m people the world's 10th most important trading power. Mr Fung
talks not of exports, but of trade. Even more frequently he talks of 'value
added' - because it is this slice in the production process retained by the
Hong Kong economy that generates its wealth, and ensures full employment.
Interestingly, full employment has been maintained in Hong Kong even after a
10-year process during which a large part of its manufacturing industry -
ranging from electronics to toys and textiles - has left Hong Kong to
capture lower costs in mainland China. Hong Kong retains company headquarter
operations, provides design, quality control and marketing. It has
unashamedly become a services economy, and become as rich as - and in some
cases richer than - many EC member states in the process.
Mr Michael Heseltine, Britain's minister for trade and industry, or his
counterparts in Germany, France, the US or Australia, are not wrong to focus
on exporting in its own right. But they should not be praising its virtues
as a quick fix for a balance of payments problem.
Instead, they should recognise the virtues of exporting as symptomatic of
companies that are ready and willing to compete with the best in the world,
to match competitors' levels of productivity and efficiency, and to invest
in the research and staff skills needed to stay in the vanguard. High
salaries and a good quality of life would be the reward of such export
success - and they are unlikely to be sustainable without it.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930629

