FT933-5145

FT  04 SEP 93 / How to Spend It: US mix to tempt the British palate - Lucia
van der Post enthuses over a new furnishing store


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


WHEN IT comes to home furnishings shops, Jeremy Sacher, chairman and chief
executive of Jerry's Home Store which opens on London's Fulham Road on
Monday, believes that size and proportion matter deeply.
'Too large and it is hard to retain a sense of identity and personality; too
small and you cannot give people enough choice. After much thought I have
come to the conclusion that the 5,500 sq ft we have here is just about
right.'
So there it is, 5,500 sq ft of brand new home furnishings, all on the site
of the old Paperchase shop which stood on the corner of the Fulham Road and
Pond Place.
Loosely based on US ideas and informality, Jeremy Sacher, who had spent
years working in the family business - Marks & Spencer, in case you wondered
 -had come to the conclusion that no-one in Britain had quite the mix that
stores such as the American operation, Crate & Barrel, were offering.
Anyone who has ever drooled over its products, as I did in its Houston
branch, and marvelled that so many simple, clean, well-designed goods could
be offered at such attractive prices, has to agree.
'What impressed me about Crate & Barrel,' says Jeremy Sacher, 'is its wide
appeal. Strolling through the aisles, filling up their baskets, you see some
of the best-heeled and some of the less well-heeled people in town.' In
other words they are united by an approach to life more than by income.
Not that Jerry's Home Store is another Crate & Barrel. 'What we have tried
to do is to choose things which will fit in existing homes. We are not
trying to do another Habitat.
'Habitat is still fundamentally about furniture whereas we are the reverse -
we will mainly be selling home furnishings, glass, tableware, accessories
and cookware along with some furniture.
'We aim to be moderately priced where we can be - and I believe in our
glassware and tableware our prices are second to none - but where we have to
be more expensive, as in the furniture, we prefer to charge more and sell
quality, rather than lower our standards.'
The result is a store with a clean, airy slightly transatlantic feel -
'Nantucket, rather than West Coast' - and a mass of really attractive
merchandise that ought to appeal not just to first-time home owners
(although it will, I think) but also to those whose homes and tables need a
little freshening up.
The glassware is outstanding - tumblers at Pounds 1.95 each, champagne
flutes at Pounds 5.95 which look like versions selling at Pounds 25 a time
elsewhere, blue tumblers at Pounds 3.95 each, large white wine ones at
Pounds 11.95 each. Tableware ranges from the fine East Hampton porcelain
photographed here to inexpensive sponge-ware at Pounds 2.95 a plate and even
less expensive earthenware at Pounds 1.95 a plate.
A 20-piece set of a particularly charming blue and white vine and grape
design sells for just Pounds 35. The cutlery, for those whose families have
failed to supply them with heirloom silver, is charming - ivory-coloured
resinated plastic handles and soft, rounded shapes and at just Pounds 4.50 a
time for the main pieces, Pounds 3.50 a time for the teaspoons.
The kitchen section is outstanding - really sturdy sieves and colanders, a
small but beautifully chosen range of saucepans, a collection of maple wood
products from Vermont (carving boards, bread-boards, salad bowls) and some
enticing foods.
Look out for pots of dipping chocolate (white or dark), for Running Deer
Ranch marmalade, for Sarabeth's preserves, for dips from Texas, for
Kousmichoff's of Paris fragrant teas and for the Williams-Sonoma range of
cookbooks on a theme (pasta, chicken, pizza etc).
Then there is the furniture. Here, it has to be admitted the prices do not
bring such a lift to the heart, but on the other hand the quality and
desirability levels are high.
The huge, squashy, slightly over-sized furniture exudes exactly the air of
inviting comfort that upholstered furniture should. They come covered in a
selection of Waverly Fabrics which range from the sweet prettiness of gentle
chintzes and toile de jouy to cool checks and stripes. Sofas range from
Pounds 875 to Pounds 1,350 (without the covering fabric), chairs from Pounds
525.
The rest of the furniture consists of two main collections. There are some
simple maple wood pieces - a sturdy rectangular table, either for the
kitchen or dining-room, some good chairs and side tables.
Adding charm and a touch of nostalgia to the whole is a sweetly traditional
range of French pieces from Provence - here are the buffet deux corps
(because it comes in two parts), the armoires de Luberon, the vaiselliers,
the chairs and tables and side-boards which grace the homes of the
bourgeoisie with breeding and taste.
h The furniture is stained in a range of gentle colours - soft green, grey,
blue and terracotta - and can only be bought to order. Prices it has to be
said are high, but then these are really craft pieces. All are beautifully
finished and the length finishing process involves four different
treatments. The vaisellier is Pounds 1,250, the armoire Luberon, Pounds
1,450, the buffet deux corps, Pounds 1,895.
The overall look of the store is eclectic and undidactic. Things have been
chosen because they please the buyer's eye and have a use and a place in the
modern home, not to fit some given design ethic.
There are things that are cool, streamlined and unaggressively modern but
then too there is the old-fashioned charm of the stained French furniture
and the easy comfort of the over-sized upholstery.
Somewhere in there is something for almost everybody. Only the most
determined traditionalist or aggressively fetishist design groupie would
come away from a visit empty-handed.
Jerry's Home Store opens on Monday at 163-167 Fulham Road, London SW3.

The Financial Times


London Page X

930904

