FT932-3316

FT  15 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: SIB chairman supports life
insurance proposals


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


MR ANDREW Large, chairman of the Securities and Investments Board, the
City's chief watchdog, yesterday backed the lenient disclosure proposals for
the life industry put forward by his predecessor, Sir David Walker.
The proposals have been criticised by the Office of Fair Trading and
consumer groups.
The Treasury is considering a report from the OFT which found that key
elements of the proposals unfairly restrict competition in the industry and
give consumers too little information to help them choose products wisely.
If the Treasury agrees with the OFT it may order the SIB to draft new
proposals.
Meanwhile, in response to questioning from MPs on the Treasury and Civil
Service committee, Mr Large said the SIB may have to consider forcing life
insurance sales agents to tell prospective customers how much commission
they earn on each sale.
The OFT had urged only that independent financial advisers should disclose
such information, while 'tied' agents, selling the products of only one
provider, would be exempt.
Mr Large said: 'If the Treasury were to decide that disclosure of commission
were desirable, we would need to find some equitable form of disclosure for
tied agents.'
Separately, he said that he expected the proposed new self-regulatory body
for retail financial services, the Personal Investment Authority, to be
operational early next year.
Mr Large said the SIB was drafting criteria for use of its powers under
section 59 of the Financial Services Act which give it authority to ban
individuals from practising. The rules are expected within eight weeks but
Mr Large declined to say whether they could apply to previous breaches.
It has been suggested that the SIB would use these powers in respect of
officials at Invesco MIM, the fund management group, which earlier this
month was fined Pounds 750,000 for 55 separate rule breaches.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930615

