FT932-6570

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (14): Trick is finding something to
offer - George Philip examines recent reforms in the context of Latin
America


   By GEORGE PHILIP


PRESIDENT MENEM has done much to change the way in which we think about
Latin American politics. It used to be so much simpler.
On the left were the populists. They made growth and the redistribution of
income their top priorities. They resorted to unorthodox financial policies
and heavy state intervention. The result was a short-lived boom followed by
rising inflation, popular discontent and - not infrequently- military
intervention.
On the right were the economic liberals. These deflated the economy,
repressed those who resisted, and encouraged private investment. The result
was to restore economic growth, but at a high social price. Because the
price was so high, successful right-wing policies were associated with
authoritarian governments - Pinochet in Chile, or the PRI in Mexico.
Democratically elected governments adopting such policies - Collor in
Brazil, or Perez in Venezuela - risked real disaster. Because they were so
unpopular, policies of liberal capitalism were consistently rejected by
democratic electorates.
At the beginning, Menem was seen as a populist. In some ways he still is. He
is, at any rate, still reasonably popular. For an Argentine president well
into his fourth year in office,that is an achievement in itself. Yet, his
economic policies are, in some respects, clearly liberal. Orthodox finance,
the abandonment of Third World causes, radical privatisation and serious
efforts to collect taxes have not until recently ranked high on the list of
policies calculated to increase the popularity of Latin American presidents.
So what has Menem done, and why has he got away with it?
The trick has been to find something to offer people at most levels of
Argentina society within a policy context acceptable to the most
strategically-important sector, which is the Argentinian business class.
Menem started with an advantage not so readily available to the presidents
of genuinely poor (as opposed to poorly-managed) countries.
A lot of money was in 1989 held abroad by Argentinians, and Argentina still
had a large national private sector. If he could win business confidence,
Menem could bring a large inflow of capital into Argentina without risking
the accusation that he was handing over the country to foreign ownership.
His method of attracting the return of capital was by radical privatisation.
It helped that he had television channels to privatise. The buyers were not
likely to evaluate Menem's policies. Of greater economic importance was the
sheer magnitude of the sell-off. From 1991 to 1994 inclusive, privatisation
receipts are on course to total around Dollars 16bn. This amounts to some
Dollars 4bn. a year. By way of comparison, the total Argentine import bill
in 1990 was just over Dollars 4bn.
The point about privatisation on this scale is that it is not merely a way
for the government to raise money or to improve the performance of some
specific sectors of the economy. There are macroeconomic consequences as
well. Inflows of capital of this amount will raise the exchange rate and
allow an increase in imports. Argentine imports have trebled since 1990.
Economists may regard rising imports with alarm, but from a political point
of view they are very helpful. Middle class Argentinians can afford whisky
and designer clothes. Poorer Argentinians can make a living by marketing
them. Meanwhile a rising real exchange rate has helped the government to
bring the rate of inflation down dramatically while inflicting little real
pain. Since 1990 sharply falling inflation has been associated with steadily
growing GDP and rising standards generally.
Nor are these benefits necessarily for the short term only. The buyers of
privatised assets have had to agree to invest heavily and they are now
beginning to do so. Most state-owned assets have in fact suffered from
neglected over a long period, in addition to being poorly run. The potential
for increases in efficiency and therefore profitability is considerable.
In some cases there are also direct balance of payments advantages. For
example, Argentinian oil production is rising steadily and there are stories
of private sector companies earning huge and easy returns from introducing
secondary recovery techniques for the first time into newly privatised
oilfields. Meanwhile the government is disembarrassed of loss-making stated
companies and it can concentrate its budget on providing benefits and
necessary services for poorer Argentinians.
These reforms are very important, but Menem is only a free market liberal up
to a certain point. There has been no attempt, as was the case with
Pinochet's Chile, to reorganise the whole society around market principles.
Labour laws still make dismissal difficult, and state companies wishing to
reduce their staff - YPF for example - have spent fortunes on compensation
packages. Some foreign buyers of state assets, thinking that they could hire
and fire at will, have at times been rudely surprised. Tight labour laws
have also helped real wages to rise since 1990, since economic restructuring
has not led to serious unemployment.
Neither has Menem ended a particularly Argentinian practice, according to
which the main trade unions actively administer very large social welfare
budgets. Instead proposals exist to allow these unions to participate more
actively in the capital market, in association with the local financial
sector. In Argentina at least, pension funds may be much more secure in the
private sector than in the hands of the state. In 1989 an Argentinian
minister revealed that some Dollars 65bn. of pension funds had disappeared
from state coffers without trace.
Menem therefore retains good contacts within the CGT and within the Peronist
organisation. Unlike Perez in Venezuela he retains the confidence of most of
his own party. He can still get crucial laws through Congress. He is, in
short, still very much a Peronist with a belief in national unity who
retains the confidence of people who voted for him.
There is in Argentina, as in much of Latin America, a considerable popular
attachment to corporatist institutions co-existing with disrespect for the
public sector itself. Menem has dismantled much of the public sector, but
has shown no hostility to corporatist ideas as such. This is an interesting
combination which may be more appropriate in Latin America today than either
pure populism or dogmatic economic liberalism.
Dr George Philip is Reader in Latin American Politics at the London School
of Economics

The Financial Times


London Page 40

930527

