FT934-8714

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (6):
From the Poles to the pistes - The explorer/adventurer Sir Ranulph Fiennes
explains his lifelong passion for skiing


   By Sir RANULPH FIENNES


FOR SOME years I have specialised in leading unsupported expeditions in the
Polar regions. The rules of the unsupported Pole traveller are simple: carry
whatever high-tec gizmos you wish, but accept no external support other than
your own leg-power aided by natural resources such as gravity. The greatest
technological support that is permitted within these self-imposed parameters
is, of course, the ski. Using skis, my expeditions have reached the South
Pole and also hold the existing world record for ski travel towards the
North Pole.
I learned to ski when I was in my teens with my mother and sisters in Arosa,
Switzerland. With the possible exception of windsurfing, free-fall
parachuting on to glaciers and being driven in London by my wife, I know of
no more exhilarating and satisfying a feeling than skiing downhill on fine
pistes in good weather with a bunch of speedy amateurs.
For expedition work I can truly say that I love skiing. Without skis,
man-hauling on snow and ice, north or south, is a doubly unsavoury
experience, to be avoided at all costs. With artificial skins glued to the
under-surface of our skis last March, we towed 485lb sledge-loads over
Antarctica's frozen surface despite weighing a mere third of that weight
ourselves.
Without skis we would have sunk into deep snow at every step and would have
plunged the more easily into the myriad crevasses which plagued our 97-day
journey. Light-weight, tough Norwegian langlauf skis with simple plastic
bindings are best for man-hauling in temperatures of - 50`C and below
because they enable a pliant and bulky boot to be worn - vital for the
avoidance of frost-bitten feet.
Unfortunately, in Antarctica last spring - for the first time in 20 years of
polar journeys - bulky boots proved inadequate for man-hauling loads of
nigh-on 500lb per man. So we switched to standard plastic downhill ski boots
which were rigid and allowed us enough foot purchase, when used with
'skinned' skis, to haul the mammoth loads. They also reduced my feet to
poisoned, frostbitten and lacerated pain-centres.
On returning to Britain I had to miss our annual skiing holiday because my
feet were too swollen after our Antarctica trip, when I and my colleague Dr
Mike Stroud, completed the longest ski journey in history. But in March, all
being well, my wife Ginny and I will again enjoy our favourite activity
(with comfortable boots and no sledge-loads) in one or other of Europe's two
best all-round resorts, Zermatt or Courchevel, where we have been taking
chalet holidays for 12 years now.
I love these resorts equally. In Courchevel I like to get as high as
possible, above 1850. I particularly enjoy the runs down from the Col de
Chanrosse and the Signal area. Ginny and I usually spend half an hour or so
before lunch bombing down Les Creux or towards Mont Bel Air.
Zermatt has such a wide range of skiing, with some very long runs and
endless permutations. My personal favourite is Triftji. The resort also has
great mountain restaurants to visit at dusk after a day's skiing. Many of
the instructors are of the old generation - after all, they breed Olympic
medallists here. I like the way they keep the difficult runs open in bad
weather for keen skiers instead of just closing them automatically - they
are not safety conscious, at least not to a ridiculous degree.
I love the fact that Zermatt has no cars. I hate resorts where your hotel is
in a narrow street and exhaust fumes pollute the atmosphere. It spoils the
whole effect of being in the mountains.
We sometimes holiday with other couples who cannot ski and it doesn't matter
a jot because Zermatt is great for good skiers, beginners and people who
don't want to ski at all. There is so much else to do.
Nevertheless, people can get on each other's nerves during a week's chalet
party just as much as on a six-month Polar ordeal. After some experimenting,
we have found the easiest group number to be around 10 - whether made up of
five couples or a married/singles melee.
It seems best to have at least four people who ski poorly or slowly
('carefully' being the adjective we use for politeness) with the balance
being made up of faster types. Occasionally we find ourselves landed with a
'real' skier or 'whizzer' but this is unusual, since our group is (by
chance, not choice) usually all British.
On one occasion we ended up with an ox-like young friend, a purveyor of
high-quality handkerchiefs and director of 'Magnificent Mouchoirs' who
outskied every (non-Olympic) Brit I have ever met. None of us could keep up
with him, whatever our sex, but we all tried - the males from jealousy and
the females because he was dashing and handsome.
Our chalet girls were both excellent skiers, and both lusted after our Hanky
Man. On Day Three one of them tried too hard and twisted an ankle. He
carried her down from the Klein Matterhorn run on his shoulders. Her cooking
standards never recovered.
On Day Six, the second chalet girl,trying to take advantage of her
colleague's incapacity, ended up with her entire leg in plaster. On Day
Seven, when our maestro's week was up, both girls hobbled down to the
station to see their hero off.
The only satisfactory outcome of that week of being enormously outclassed by
the Hanky Man was when, on his penultimate evening, all 10 of us raced 4km
on toboggans by night and - fuelled by gluhwein and Drambuie - reached the
centre of Zermatt by a circuitous route through deep snow. Heaving his
toboggan over a pointed snow-fence, our maestro's feet suddenly broke
through the snow crust, impaling him astride the fence stakes.
Having to ski his last few hours in a highly tender condition enabled the
rest of us to score heavily and with enormous satisfaction, under the
principle that he who laughs last, laughs longest - and not in a high
soprano.
A week's skiing is quite the best way I know of consolidating old
friendships, making new ones and having a great many healthy laughs at each
other's expense.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

931113

