FT933-12584

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (1): All quiet
on the sites - Companies face a tough year as the economic climate remains
dull. Governments are turning to the private sector for infrastructure and
building projects, but the removal of Community trade barriers has so far
had little impact


   By ANDREW TAYLOR


THE European construction industry, like the economy of the region, is in
retreat. Building output is faltering in almost every European market. Even
in Germany, construction growth is expected to halve this year.
Economic recession, high interest rates and mounting unemployment have hit
exports and undermined consumer confidence. Instead of spending, Europeans
are worrying about their future job prospects and are saving or repaying
earlier debts.
Private investment in homes and by manufacturers and service industries,
accounting for about 60 per cent of European construction, has declined as
demand for these products has fallen.
New car sales in western Europe declined by 1 per cent in the first six
months of this year and by 5.3 per cent in June compared with June last
year. German car sales in June fell by 17.4 per cent.
Companies are unlikely to invest in improved premises or new buildings while
their own sales remain weak. Public sector spending on construc- tion is
unlikely to see much improvement, either.
Governments faced with declining tax receipts and struggling to contain
mounting budget deficits are poorly placed to make up a shortfall in private
investment.
Over-development of offices in the late 1980s has left too many empty
buildings chasing too few tenants in many European cities. Financial
services, which had expanded rapidly during the 1980s, have been hit
particularly hard by the recession, leading to large job losses in the
sector and decreasing demand for office space.
Olympia & York, the Canadian-based property devel- opers owned by the
Reichmann family, was brought to its knees, and with it several construction
sub-contractors, by the failure of its Canary Wharf office development in
London's former Docklands which had been expected to rival the City of
London as a new financial centre.
Other European cities have also been left with large amounts of unsold and
unlet office premises. This will continue to inhibit rents and sale prices
even when other areas of construction start to recover.
Paris is estimated to have at least four years' supply of offices either
built or in the process of construction.
French building and civil engineering markets have declined rapidly since
the second half of last year, as the steep recession in construction which
overtook Britain and Scandinavian countries several years earlier, spread to
other European nations.
The French government has forecast that total construction output will
decline by between 2 and 3 per cent this year. Contractors and building
material producers, however, believe the fall will be greater.
Bouygues, one of the country's biggest builders and civil engineers, has
forecast a 6 per cent fall this year in its French construction turnover,
including road building. Lafarge Coppee, one of the world's biggest building
materials companies, says that French cement sales fell by more than 10 per
cent during the first six months of this year.
It forecasts that French cement sales will fall by about 8 per cent during
the year as a whole.
Construction orders in Italy, which rely heavily on public patronage, have
fallen sharply as the financial and political scandals that rocked the coun-
try have paralysed central and local government decision- making.
Many of the scandals involve construction and building material companies,
several of which are being investigated for alleged illegal funding of
political parties.
Spain, Europe's fastest growing construction market during the 1980s, has
also gone into reverse as the national economy has declined and big building
projects for the Barcelona Olympics and last year's World Trade Fair in
Seville have ended.
The Netherlands, which sells about a third of its exports to a declining
German economy, is expected this year to endure a modest fall of about 3 per
cent in construction output, as is Belgium.
Other European countries likely to experience a decline in construction
activity include Switzerland, Norway, Sweden and Finland which is forecast
to see the biggest fall in construction output in 1993 of approaching a
fifth.
The disintegration of the Soviet Union, previously Fin- land's most
important trading partner, has severely reduced export opportunities for the
Finnish construction and building materials industries.
The severe economic and pol- itical problems facing some for- mer communist
eastern Euro- pean countries has meant that construction opportunities,
despite the high demand for new and improved infrastructure in these
markets, have failed to materialise in the way that had been hoped.
Political uncertainty in many of these countries has made it very difficult
to raise finance from the developed world for much needed civil engineering,
industrial and housing projects.
The exception is in eastern Germany where the house construction and
renovation, in particular, is growing rapidly according to Lafarge Coppee.
Redland, Europe's biggest roof tile manufacturer, RMC, Europe's biggest
conc- rete producer and a large cem- ent producer in eastern Germany, and
BPB Industries, Europe's biggest plasterboard manufacturer, have all
reported strong German sales during the first six months of this year,
particularly in the eastern region.
Overall growth in German construction is forecast to halve this year to 4
per cent, following a 9 per cent rise in output last year. In spite of
slower growth, the industry remains strong, outperforming the rest of a
German economy struggling to meet the cost of integrating the former east
German republic.
By comparison, Britain which, like some Scandinavian countries, entered the
reces- sion earlier than many of its other European rivals, is still
struggling to get over the decline in activity.
A revival in UK house sales has slowed since the spring, although these are
still likely to be higher this year than last. Other areas of construction
remain severely depressed with investment in private industrial and
commercial premises not expected to improve until there is a more sustained
recovery in the rest of the UK economy.
Even when construction output starts to pick up in European markets, the
recovery may be laboured and is likely to lag general economic recovery.
EuroConstruct, representing construction research agencies and economic
forecasting bodies in 15 European countries, expects output in the region to
fall by 1.9 per cent this year with only a 0.2 per cent rise expected next
year.
The downturn, although dep- ressing, is not as bad as the construction
decline in the early 1980s, says EuroConstruct. The exceptions are in
Finland where the fall in building and civil engineering orders is the worst
since the 1930s; and in the UK where falling construction output has been
compounded - unlike in previous recessions - by falling commercial and
residential property prices.
The German housing market provides the brightest perspective in an otherwise
depressing European construction outlook. The number of housing units
completed by builders in western Germany is expected to rise from 375,000 to
420,000 this year. The last time this was achieved was in 1977. Housing
investment in eastern Germany is expected to rise by 25 per cent this year
with the number of units completed rising to 30,000.
The sluggishness of Euro- pean construction markets means that the removal
of trade barriers between European Community countries has so far had little
impact on international contractors, which have fared better in the booming
construction markets of southern Asia. That situation seems unlikely to
change much over the next 18 months.
European Construction Forecasts 1993/94; EuroConstruct, Princes House, 39
Kingsway, London WC2B 6TP; Pounds 390.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930723

