FT934-8300

FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Canadian brothers still lured by
big property deals


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


MR Paul Reichmann still occupies the same elegantly furnished corner office
in Toronto's Exchange Tower from which he looked over Olympia & York until
the world's biggest real estate developer collapsed in May 1992, writes
Bernard Simon in Toronto.
As the announcement of three big projects in Mexico City shows, the man
behind New York's World Financial Centre and London's Canary Wharf is
determined to re-establish his reputation for eye-catching property deals.
'He's really eager to get back by 1997 to where he was in 1987,' says Mr
Andrew Sarlos, a Toronto investment manager who knows Mr Reichmann well.
O&Y has been in the hands of creditors since earlier this year. Only its US
subsidiary, in which the Reichmann family retains a 20 per cent stake, has
avoided bankruptcy protection procedure. The US unit is still trying to
negotiate a debt restructuring plan with its lenders.
The Reichmanns are moving on. Mr Paul Reichmann's nephew Philip and his
son-in-law Mr Frank Hauer are building a new property management company,
Olympia & York Properties.
Mr Reichmann earlier this year set up Reichmann International (RI), which
combines his experience in large real estate projects with the financial
resources and acumen of Mr George Soros, the New York-based investor.
The two are partners in the Quantum Realty Fund, an investment fund set up
last March. It recently paid Dollars 634m for a package of commercial and
residential properties owned by Travelers Corp, the US insurance group.
RI is a modestly sized company, employing only a few dozen people. Besides
its Toronto base, it has offices in New York and Mexico City.
Mr Reichmann's ambitions are mirrored in his new employees, several of whom
had links with O&Y. Mr Leonard Chazen, head of the New York office and RI's
co-chief executive, worked as a legal adviser to O&Y before becoming a
partner in Tishman Speyer Properties, a large US property owner and manager.
Mr Reichmann has also re-hired Mr Ronald Soskolne, a South African-born
architect who led the design team for Canary Wharf and New York's World
Financial Centre. Mr Peter Anderson, finance specialist, spearheaded the
abortive attempt by Canary Wharf to raise money through an Enterprise Zone
unit trust.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

931116

