FT931-4228

FT  11 MAR 93 / International Company News: Klockner-Werke unveils
debt-relief plan


   By ARIANE GENILLARD


   DUISBURG


KLOCKNER-WERKE, the German steel and engineering group, yesterday revealed
the conditions it is offering creditors under a debt-relief scheme.
Creditors would receive profit-entitlement warrants which would grant them
one-third of the distributable profits of the company, including those from
its non-steel divisions.
The company had earlier said that the 'composition' procedure filed against
creditors last December, a legal move which is one step short of bankruptcy
proceedings, would not affect its non-steel division, which makes plastics
and engineering products.
Under the plan, one-third of profits made by the whole company would be
distributed to creditors for eight years. Creditors would receive only up to
50 per cent of the debt which they had agreed to cancel.
However, creditors would be entitled to only 30 per cent of the debt they
had agreed to cancel if a capital increase occurred over the next eight
years. Mr Hans Christoph von Rohr, chief executive of Klockner Werke, said
that a capital increase was 'an open possibility' for 1994, depending on
market conditions.
Creditors would also be entitled to receive 75 per cent of any extraordinary
income raised from the restructuring of the steel divisions.
Such income could come from the sale of steel assets. The company is
negotiating the sale of its Georgsmarienhutte plant, but no details were
revealed yesterday.
Mr von Rohr added that the debt-relief plan would save the steel
subsidiaries DM150m a year in interest payments. He added that the scheme
called for the closure of the Bremer blast furnace in Bremen, reducing the
the company's steel production by 20 per cent
The debt-relief scheme was presented to local courts in Duisburg, where the
company is based.
Mr von Rohr said yesterday creditors would meet at the end of May to review
the plan. He added he was confident the plan would get the required 80 per
cent approval from creditors. Talks with Deutsche Bank, the company's
principal creditor, and WestLB, the state bank in North Rhine-Westphalia,
are continuing.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930311

