FT934-10058

FT  08 NOV 93 / NZ election hits shares and currency


   By NIKKI TAIT


   WELLINGTON


THE New Zealand dollar and share prices came under strong selling pressure
this morning, after Saturday's general election produced a 'hung'
parliament, with no party holding a majority of seats in the 99-member,
single-chamber institution.
Shares were down nearly 6 per cent at mid-session, rallying after sharp
falls in the opening minutes of trading. The New Zealand dollar initially
fell almost two US cents to USDollars 0.5390 but later recovered some
ground.
Ms Ruth Richardson, finance minister, said there was no reason for the
result greatly to affect the markets. 'The economic fundamentals which have
brought about a substantially improved performance from the New Zealand
economy remain in place, and should give confidence to investors,' she said.
But the election result surprised pundits and politicians alike, and ran
contrary to opinion polls published in the final week of campaigning. These
suggested that the ruling National party would be returned with a much
reduced but safe majority of 5-10 seats.
In the event, National secured only 49 seats, with the opposition Labour
party garnering 46. The two main minority parties - the Alliance, which is a
coalition of five left-leaning, Green and Maori parties, and New Zealand
First - won two seats each. New Zealanders also voted to change their
electoral system, replacing the current 'first-past-the-post' arrangement by
a form of proportional representation.
Mr Jim Bolger, National party leader, quickly declared there was 'no
constitutional crisis' and said that if the results were confirmed, he would
form a goverment. But by last night, Mr Mike Moore, Labour party leader, was
still refusing to concede defeat and had circulated a five-point plan to
leaders of the two minority parties suggesting areas of policy where the
three groups might have a common interest.
The election result is only tentative at present, as 'special votes' cast by
New Zealanders who were outside their own electorates on Saturday, have yet
to be added in. These traditionally account for about 10 per cent of all
votes cast. Since some seats are held on slim margins, the composition of
parliament could yet change. The final result will not be calculated for at
least 10 days.
Politicians from all four parties sought to soothe market nerves. 'We will
not frustrate the party that has the most votes from governing,' Mr Jim
Anderton, Alliance leader, said last night. His party might, instead, vote
on measures on a case-by-case basis.
'Much of the debate is premature,' commented Mr Winston Peters, head of New
Zealand First, adding that strategies would depend on final results, after
the special votes had been added.
On proportional representation, most opinion polls had indicated that the
decision would be extremely close. But it won soundly, with 54 per cent of
the electorate in favour of this system and 46 per cent against.
The new electoral system was due to come into effect in 1996, when the next
general election would normally be held. But the current uncertainties raise
the question of whether New Zealanders will return to the polls before then
 -and if so, under what system.
Turning the tables, Page 32

The Financial Times


London Page 6

931108

