FT934-10270

FT  06 NOV 93 / EC agreement on formula to protect European culture under
Uruguay Round


   By DAVID GARDNER


THE European Commission and a majority of the 12 EC member states yesterday
said they had agreed on a negotiating formula to protect Europe's cinema and
broadcasting industries from being overwhelmed by the US, if they were
included in the Uruguay Round of world trade liberalisation talks.
The formula would allow EC countries to continue and even increase
subsidising the audiovisual sector, to reserve screening time for indigenous
production of films and television programmes, and to regulate not only
transmission but technology in the sector.
This is 'not only the position of the Commission but of the majority of the
member states', said Mr Joao de Deus Pinheiro, EC commissioner for culture,
after the 12 culture ministers met in Brussels yesterday.
At yesterday's meeting, France, Ireland and Spain maintained their vigorous
insistence that cinema and broadcasting be exempted altogether from any Gatt
settlement, to protect European culture from being swamped by products from
Hollywood. Last year, within a total world market for audiovisual services
worth Dollars 156bn (Pounds 103bn), the US exported Dollars 3.7bn to the EC,
against a mere Dollars 288m going the other way. Almost three quarters of
films screened in Europe were American.
France has mobilised its cultural elite to defend a 'cultural exception' for
the sector. A majority of EC states and Brussels believe, however, more
effective protection can be had by getting cultural output inside the
protection afforded by Gatt rules, under a regime of 'cultural specificity'
the Commission has yet to define precisely.
An aide to Sir Leon Brittan, the EC's chief trade negotiator, said yesterday
Brussels was still collating member states' views on exactly what they want
protected. Mr Pinheiro told ministers the US - which until now has refused
to countenance any restrictions on its audiovisual access to Europe - was
now prepared to accept the EC's 'Television without Frontiers' directive.
This licenses EC broadcasters to reserve most TV screening time for European
work, but is merely a recommendation. Washington has set its face against
any further protection by Europe.
France yesterday insisted protection was legitimate because of the public
service nature of the audiovisual sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931106

