FT933-5261

FT  04 SEP 93 / Peres joins direct talks with PLO


   By JULIAN OZANNE and MARK NICHOLSON


   JERUSALEM, CAIRO


MR Shimon Peres, Israel's foreign minister, yesterday held talks with the
Palestine Liberation Organisation aimed at finalising the wording of a PLO
statement paving the way to mutual recognition.
Israeli and PLO officials said Mr Peres and his aides, assisted by three
Norwegian mediators led by Mr Johan Joergen Holst, the foreign minister,
were talking to the PLO directly in Paris and by telephone to PLO
headquarters in Tunis. There was speculation that Mr Peres and the
Norwegians, who were staying in the same hotel, were in contact with Mr
Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), the PLO moderate who initialled last week's draft
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement in Norway.
In Jerusalem Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister, stopping short of
publicly uttering the words 'PLO', said he was ready to make 'painful
compromises' for peace with the former revolutionary organisation.
'In general peace is not made with friends. Peace is made with enemies, some
of whom - and I won't name names - I loathe very much.'
But in Tunis Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman, was battling against stiff
opposition to convince his colleagues to accept the wording of a statement
in which the PLO would suspend its charter, renounce violence and recognise
Israel's right to exist.
PLO officials said Mr Arafat was delaying approval of the peace agreement on
interim self-rule for Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip
until he gets mutual recognition so he can deflect mounting criticism within
Palestinian ranks. Mr Arafat hopes Israeli-PLO recognition will be followed
shortly afterwards by US recognition of the PLO. Palestinian extremists both
inside and outside the occupied territories have denounced Mr Arafat's plan.
Hamas, the fundamentalist group which rejects negotiations with Israel,
admitted shooting an Israeli soldier near Hebron on Thursday. Hamas said the
attack was part of a campaign against Israel and the US which it accused of
'trying to humiliate and intimidate our people' and 'liquidate our cause'.
In southern Lebanon hundreds of Palestinian refugees demonstrated,
describing Mr Arafat's acceptance of the deal as 'treason, humiliation and
shame'.
Israeli troops shot and wounded four Arabs in the occupied Gaza Strip
yesterday, three of them at a Moslem fundamentalist rally. Soldiers in the
Jabalya refugee camp fired on an Islamic Jihad procession of more than 1,000
demonstrators chanting, 'Death to Israel, death to America'. Mr Boutros
Boutros Ghali, United Nations secretary general, yesterday offered to send
peacekeeping troops to the Gaza Strip and Jericho following an Israeli
military withdrawal under the peace agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930904

