FT933-12672

FT  23 JUL 93 / Bank governor expects recovery to be weak


   By ROBERT THOMSON


MR YASUSHI MIENO, governor of the Bank of Japan, yesterday forecast a weak
economic recovery late in the year, toning down the bank's previous
forecasts of a 'mild' recovery in coming months and stirring expectations of
a cut in official interest rates.
The Bank of Japan has yet to concede that the weakening economy has hit
bottom, but the more optimistic Economic Planning Agency yesterday suggested
that 'signs of recovery' were already emerging, based on an increase in
public spending from a stimulatory package in April.
Officials at the bank and the EPA admit that the package has done little to
stimulate personal consumption and capital spending, cited as causes of the
unexpectedly long downturn and of the bank's increasingly gloomy outlook for
recovery.
A spate of indicators this week suggests that the economy turned down again
in May after appearing to have touched bottom. For the first time in four
months, the EPA's index of leading indicators fell below the 50 per cent
line between 'boom and bust,' while household spending was down 1.8 per
cent.
Japanese government officials are concerned that the yen's rapid
appreciation and political instability are undermining prospects for
recovery.
There are doubts about the ability of the Liberal Democratic party, which
has lost its parliamentary majority, to push through measures such as income
tax cuts.
Political instability has prompted Japanese businesses to turn to the Bank
of Japan, which is resisting calls for the official discount rate to be cut
from 2.5 per cent to 2 per cent, arguing that the present level is not a
barrier to economic recovery.
Meanwhile, Mr Mieno told a conference of regional bankers they must continue
to confront their growing pile of non-performing loans and attempt to
improve asset quality.
He has encouraged banks to deal with the problem more quickly than the
Finance Ministry, which again yesterday suggested that the loans be written
off in the 'longer term'.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930723

