FT934-11322

FT  02 NOV 93 / Major pledges detailed peace plan for Ulster: Non-violent
political parties told to agree to fresh talks as condition for deal


   By KEVIN BROWN and DAVID OWEN


THE British government promised yesterday to table a comprehensive peace
plan for Northern Ireland if the province's four non-violent political
parties agree to a fresh round of peace talks.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, told the Commons that the proposals would
give 'focus and direction' to the so-called three-strand talks, which
collapsed last year when the Unionist parties walked out.
Mr Major gave no details of the peace plan, but Downing Street said it was
an attempt to bring about a permanent settlement of the Northern Ireland
conflict.
The plan is believed to focus on the establishment of a Northern Ireland
assembly and the revitalisation of local government, which has been moribund
since the imposition of direct rule in 1974. It also builds on the agreement
between the British and Irish governments in Brussels last week, which set
out a framework for talks with all Northern Ireland parties except Sinn
Fein, the political wing of the IRA.
The plan is aimed largely at the Ulster Unionists, who have long pressed for
devolution from Westminster to remove control of the province from the
Northern Ireland Office.
Initial reaction from Unionists suggested that the government may have to
offer further concessions to tempt the parties back to the negotiating
table.
The Rev Ian Paisley, leader of the hardline Democratic Unionist party, last
night warned the prime minister that further talks with the Irish
government, due to take place tomorrow in Belfast, could 'bring yet further
outrages'. In a letter to Mr Major, Mr Paisley says: 'I implore you to hold
it elsewhere.' He believes further talks with the Irish government would
inflame the Protestant community.
He said that he would agree to talks with the Irish government only if it
gave up its constitutional claim to a united Ireland. Mr Paisley said Mr
Major had agreed to meet him soon.
Mr John Taylor, Europe spokesman for the Ulster Unionist party, the biggest
Unionist grouping, welcomed the prospect of fresh proposals but dismissed
the round-table format as 'flawed'. He called for the plan to be discussed
in a series of bilateral meetings between the government and the
constitutional parties.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, appeared willing to go
along with that approach last night.
Sir Patrick said the peace process could resume with 'bilateral private
discussions to clear things out of the way, bank what is bankable from last
time, and to see what ultimately is a really serious obstacle. Then may be
the time to sit round the table'.
Ministers were also drawing comfort from the measured response of Mr James
Molyneaux, the UUP leader, who plans to take wide soundings among UUP
members before commenting later this week.
Mr Major's decision to offer a fresh incentive to the Unionists to reopen
round-table talks marks the end of any prospects for progress on the joint
proposals produced by Mr John Hume, leader of the constitutional nationalist
SDLP, and Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein.
Mr Major yesterday accepted a request from Mr Hume for a meeting at Downing
Street to discuss the proposals, but the government has ruled out even
indirect contact with Sinn Fein until the IRA declares an unconditional
ceasefire.
In Belfast, Mr Adams attempted to resuscitate the Hume-Adams proposals by
issuing a statement asserting that 'the leadership of the IRA welcomed the
initiative and pointed out that it could provide the basis for peace'.
Unionist party welcomes peace moves, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931102

