FT934-8845

FT  13 NOV 93 / Puerto Rico split on union with US


   By JAMES CANUTE


   SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO


PUERTO RICANS go to the polls tomorrow to decide whether to remain a
possession of the United States, become the 51st state of the union, or
become independent.
After a campaign dominated by a debate about the economic merits of
independence or union, polls this week indicated little support for
independence in this Caribbean island of 3.7m people.
Support is evenly divided for the other two options - retaining the current
'commonwealth' relationship with the US or becoming a fully fledged state of
the union.
However, the decision will be only a first step, since the result will not
be binding on the US Congress and legislators in Washington will have to
approve or reject any change in the island's status.
President Bill Clinton has said he will accept any decision made by Puerto
Ricans, but congressmen are unlikely to welcome the prospect of a new, poor,
mainly Spanish speaking state.
The island is officially described as having a 'freely associated'
relationship with the US. Puerto Ricans are US citizens, but cannot vote for
a president. The island has a commissioner in Washington who has no vote to
influence legislation.
But Puerto Rico's 'commonwealth' status has allowed the island a significant
economic advantage under section 936 of the US revenue code which has
encouraged mainland companies with subsidiaries in Puerto Rico to deposit
their profits, tax free, in local banks. The deposits have become a pillar
of the Puerto Rican economy.
Puerto Rico's current political status has also given it federal welfare
funds of about Dollars 4bn per year from Washington, and hundreds of
millions more from rebates of federal excise taxes and duties.
A change to statehood is being supported by the incumbent New Progressive
Party of Mr Pedro Rossello, the governor, while the opposition Popular
Democratic Party wants to retain the current status.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931113

