FT932-6860

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (6): An insurance or a threat to
stability - Rising interest in products that allow currency exposure to be
hedged


   By JAMES BLITZ


THERE ARE many reasons for the dramatic growth of the foreign exchange
market in recent years. But no technical development is as important as the
invention of currency-based products which allow investors to hedge their
underlying assets against exchange rate risks.
In the 1980s, fund mangers initially diversified their portfolios because of
the reduction of capital controls and a need to find new sources of income.
But the factor clinching their strategic decision to invest abroad was that
they could buy special financial instruments like forward contracts and
options to hedge themselves against risk.
More recently, the crisis in the exchange rate mechanism has sponsored a new
wave of interest in these derivative products among corporates who want to
hedge their currency exposure in a more volatile environment. Foreign
exchange managers in London report a huge increase in demand for these
products in the past 12 months.
As a result, the outlook for these markets appears healthy. According to the
International Monetary Fund, spot transactions in FX accounted for 73 per
cent of turnover in the UK market in 1986, and 50 per cent in 1989. But the
share of turnover in forwards and swaps increased from 27 per cent to 47 per
cent.
However, while these instruments seem like insurance premiums to some
investors, they are being seen as a threat to the stability of the foreign
exchange market.
In particular, serious concerns are being expressed about the development of
the market in options, which allow investors to buy or sell a currency if it
strikes a certain price.
As with so much else in the foreign exchange market these days, the concern
over options arise from recent changes in the industry. In the early 1980s,
the trade in currency options was in its infancy and supply-led. But, more
recently, new and more sophisticated ways have been thought up, by which
corporate and institutional customers can hedge themselves against risks.
There is a particularly strong interest in over-the-counter options (OTCs),
which a bank sells to an individual customer, and can be tailor-made to meet
customer requirements in considerable detail.
Mr Patrick Allaway, managing director of global foreign exchange sales at
Swiss Bank Corporation, says there are now 15 variations of the 'plain
vanilla' option. Customers, these days, can buy exotic products called
'barrier options,' or 'basket options,' which allow them to reduce their
cost of hedging.
The development of these options has made them extremely attractive to
investors and turned the derivatives business into a lucrative one.
But in an age of volatile exchange rates, the security which the customer
receives from buying the option may create problems for the bank which is
writing it.
In the last six months, several options-writing institutions have incurred
severe losses, because they assumed that the ERM set fixed floors and
ceilings for excessive movements in exchange rates.
Nobody talks openly about the casualties in this market. But a commonly-held
view is that several French institutions, which had particularly well
developed options businesses, were severely burned in the crisis.
There were also indications earlier this month that the Bank of Spain lost
billions of dollars by using options to defend the peseta's exchange rate.
The central bank in Madrid has denied the allegations. But dealers say that
the Bank of Spain wrote call options allowing investors to buy D-Marks at
exchange rates between Pta72 up to Pta80, in the belief that there would be
no devaluation to these levels.
Amid higher volatility in European exchange rates, there has been a general
rise in the cost of premiums. But foreign exchange managers believe that,
where casualties occur, it is because senior executives do not understand
the risks being taken by their staff.
Mr Martin Jaskell, head of global sales at NatWest Markets, says: 'If there
is not a proper understanding of the risks in this business there is a
potential for almost unlimited losses. That is why proper control is
absolutely essential.'
Central banks have also raised concern about the prospect of credit default
in this industry. Last month, the Bank for International Settlements said
that it might extend the amount of cash cover that commercial banks had to
set against the risks that were being taken in currency and futures markets.
But concerns remain that the growth of the derivatives market could help to
intensify currency flows which are directed against fixed exchange rates.
Again, last year's currency crisis provided a case study in the nature of
this market. In September, when both the lira and sterling were pushed close
to their ERM floors against the D-Mark, banks which had written options to
sell the currency below the ERM floor had to hurriedly hedge their
underlying (or delta) positions to ensure they could pay customers at the
new rate.
As the IMF puts it in its recent report on capital flows: 'Standard option
pricing formulas do not allow for the possibility of jumps in exchange
rates, for example during a realignment of ERM central parities. A surprise
realignment could greatly increase the delta leaving the bank underhedged.'
For the moment, the options business, which accounts for only 3 per cent of
total turnover in foreign exchange, is not big enough to concern regulators
too much.
But one leading currency manager in London said recently that if the share
of turnover grew much more, the impact of these products on the market would
be worrying to central bankers
'If you got to the stage where 10 per cent of all turnover were options
related, then the underlying moves would effectively account for half of all
FX turnover,' he said. 'And once you get to those levels, the more risk
there is that you would get extreme moves in the major currencies as a
result of derivatives.'

The Financial Times


London Page III

930526

