FT932-3224

FT  15 JUN 93 / International Company News: Carmakers' prophet shows the
road ahead - Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez shares his vision for Europe


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


ACCORDING to the prophet Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the European
car industry will go the same way as steel and shipbuilding unless the third
industrial revolution gets under way soon.
According to Mr Lopez, the engineer, the seeds of revolution number three -
the successor to the steam-powered loom and the moving production line -
have already been sown in the vast factory halls of Volkswagen's German
works.
And if Mr Lopez the long-sighted manager has his way, a second crop of
radical changes in manufacturing methods will soon be sprouting on a new
green-field site in northern Spain.
Adeptly swapping all three hats in his first full-scale outing yesterday, Mr
Lopez totted up the components of the impending crunch. International
investment plans in motor manufacture, most notably Korea's proposals to
raise output from 2m to 7m cars a year, would burden the world with more
than 10m cars' worth of excess capacity by the end of the 1990s, he said.
In Europe, all the trends, especially cost structures and imports from Japan
and Japanese transplants in the US and England, were going in the wrong
direction.
Mr Lopez flashed up a graph showing all German motor makers' input costs
rising dramatically - except for one. The line for Adam Opel, his former
employer, clearly demonstrated his ability to reduce costs and keep them
moving down.
If the battle for the motor industry were lost, European manufacturers were
fated to become second-class citizens, he said.
Not to fear though; VW had chosen to fight and to win. Promising quantum
leaps, powered by a concept dubbed Continuous Improvement Programme Squared
(KVP2), Mr Lopez unveiled a graph showing VW's future performance bouncing
in a series of dramatic loops way above the steadily-rising trend line
established by the Japanese. The time-scale axis was void of numbers.
To clear any doubts, he flashed up more charts and figures. Since he joined
VW in mid-March he and his team have set up and completed 114 one-week
workshops in which teams of freshly-inspired workers had already unleashed
part of the power of KVP2.
Average results from these projects have so far shown a 30 per cent
improvement in quality. Productivity was up an average 28 per cent. Lead
times have been reduced by 37 per cent, stock requirements by 34 per cent,
and the necessary working space by 29 per cent.
As a prize example, he selected the piston pre-assembly shop in the
Salzgitter works, where productivity was already up 67 per cent and the
workforce was operating in 60 per cent less space. Even as he spoke, 41
further workshops were under way and 53 were planned for next week.
However, apart from some generalities about 'spirit, ascendant values,
protagonism', he divulged few details. He was giving little away which might
benefit competitors. He was, rather, sharing his vision of himself as a
committed European, en mission searching restlessly for new inefficiencies
to be rooted out, while bidding to soften some of the harsher impressions of
his manner and methods disseminated by the media.
It was naive to believe that a 30 per cent improvement in productivity could
lead to 30 per cent fewer jobs, he claimed.
His whole concept was founded on the principle that if VW offered customers
cars stuffed with enhanced value, at prices the market could bear, they
would buy more cars and the company could employ more people.
Similarly, the man known as the 'strangler' out of respect for his rigorous
ways with component makers, claimed that far from reducing the number of the
group's outside suppliers, their numbers might even grow from around 10,000
now to as many as 30,000 under the beneficient impact of KVP2.
While this appeared to be at odds with other official statements from within
the VW hierarchy, Mr Lopez showed himself to be a man unafraid of a little
fudge.
On the issue of his bizarre defection from GM this spring, he claimed Mr
Ferdinand Piech, group chairman, and he had been brought together before
Christmas by 'a supplier'.
Earlier statements from Mr Piech to the effect that he had been approached
directly by Mr Lopez were 'a misunderstanding', a spokesman explained.
But he was quite clear on the reasons for his arrival at VW: on March 8 at
Adam Opel, he discovered that GM had different ideas for his ultra-lean
dream plant for a dream car in the dream location of his Basque homeland.
'I lost my enthusiasm and willingness when I realised they would not make it
in the way I would like,' he said.
'Mr Piech promised me nothing, but he believes manufacturing can be improved
by my ideas. I am confident we will have this plant.'

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930615

