FT933-5148

FT  04 SEP 93 / An insider looking out: Elon Salmon, a refugee from London,
adjusts to country life


   By ELON SALMON


COTHERSTONE is one of those villages in the north of England that postcard
photographers favour, and guidebooks tend to describe as 'quintessentially
English.' The fast-flowing River Tees marks the village's northern boundary.
To the south and west there are the moors - wild, vast and dotted with
isolated farmsteads. Barely five miles to the east is Barnard Castle, a
charming market town.
A refugee from London, I came to Cotherstone three years ago. I liked it so
much that I made a vow: no more wandering. From here it is straight to the
crematorium, when the time comes. I re-affirm the vow on my frequent walks,
when I am moved by the rural beauty.
A friend had warned me that villages were clannish and gossipy. To my
relief, I found Cotherstone to be neither. From early time the village has
provided a point of contact for the hill sheep farmers of the dales,
artisans, traders and professional people who have migrated there in
increasing numbers. As a result, evolving social heterogeneity probably
accounts for Cotherstone's welcoming character.
My own roots have been pulled out as many times as there are decades in my
life. Yet here I feel at home as much as I am capable of feeling at home
anywhere. It pleases me that a letter, however imperfectly addressed, would
reach me so long as 'Cotherstone' was legible on the envelope. I enjoy being
greeted with familiarity as I walk through the village. My ego is pleasantly
massaged by the thought that I am on chatting terms with farmers on the
village's outskirts.
On a summer evening the village looks its best: hay-stacks in the fields,
children playing, a mare grazing with her foal in a meadow. In the near
distance, the spire of St Cuthbert's church pokes the sky.
I see a neighbour approaching with his dog, someone I had assumed was a
native villager. But no, he tells me he is an incomer. 'I've lived here for
over 20 years and I'm still considered an outsider,' he says. I recall an
earlier chat with a woman who could boast of local antecedence from the
beginning of recorded time. She had made a point of distinguishing herself
from 'outsiders.' Were they trying to tell me something?
The question of identity has become blurred at village level, no less than
nationally. 'Quintessentially English' is now more evocative than
descriptive. Like Britain as a whole, villages have changed; in many,
outsiders often outnumber insiders.
My own credentials are modest but sound: I came down to the village from the
high fell of Baldersdale where I lived through two annual cycles of sheep
farming. I made friends among the farmers of the dale. Such credit as I have
earned filtered ahead of my arrival in the village.
The late William Golding, to my mind the greatest and most English novelist
of our time, wrote in an essay about Wiltshire: 'To be English  - and more
specifically, Wiltshire - is to speak English and be used to English ways,
nothing more.'
English ways? A very amiable gentleman-farmer whom I have befriended once
took me for an afternoon of rough shooting on his land. I missed a rabbit.
Fortunately, so did he. A ferret he brought along wandered off, heading for
the brush. 'Elon', he called, 'get that ferret, will you.' The nasty
creature lunged, missing my hand by a whisker.
The farmer invited me to a dinner party. I parked my X-registration banger
where I should not have; I brought a bottle of wine, an unstylish, misplaced
gesture (not the right wine at that); I wore an unsuitable suit because it
was the only one I had; and, after afters, I nearly tailed off with the
ladies when I was meant to stay behind with the men to smoke and discuss the
state of the world.
Not so long ago, the wisdom of the countryside had it that if you saw BMW,
Mercedes or Jaguar cars lining the village green, it meant that the true
village character was dying. Like many villages in the area, Cotherstone can
field a modest motley of luxury vehicles. But, far from malignant, the
phenomenon simply underscores the on-going change in British rural life.
I keep wondering by whom would my outsider neighbour of 20 years' probation,
who presumably owns an up-market car, be considered an incomer when a good
many of Cotherstone's present inhabitants have not lived here for nearly
that long.
By what authority are the boundaries of the 'outside' determined? Who will
measure the pupation period it takes for an outsider to become an insider?
In so far as these questions have significance, they surely touch upon the
complex and universal business of assimilation - which, as Golding suggests,
comes down to a voluntary act of will and individual temperament. In this
spirit I would happily submit to learning Cotherstone's ways; some of them,
anyway.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

930904

