FT934-8350

FT  16 NOV 93 / GM plans Dollars 5.7bn move on pension deficit


   By RICHARD WATERS


   NEW YORK


GENERAL Motors plans to transfer its interest in the future earnings of its
Electronic Data Systems subsidiary to its pension plan in a Dollars 5.7bn
deal aimed at holding down its pension fund deficit.
In a briefing of financial analysts yesterday, the company also revealed
that its pension deficit is expected to reach Dollars 24bn by the end of
this year, up from Dollars 14bn at the end of 1992.
GM, which has the largest unfunded pension liability of any US company, said
it had formulated the plan after discussions with the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation, which covers private sector pension fund shortfalls.
Under the plan, GM would transfer 185m of its class E shares to the pension
plan. The dividend on these shares is based on the earnings of EDS, a
company founded by Mr Ross Perot.
The carmaker said it would retain full ownership of the systems company. It
will also continue to hold 45m of the class E shares in reserve to satisfy
the possible conversion of a separate class of stock it issued earlier this
year. The shares transferred to the fund will be managed by a separate
trustee and eventually sold in instalments on the stock market. It added
that it expected to maintain an orderly and liquid market in the shares.
The plan, which needs the approval of tax and regulatory agencies as well as
GM's board, received initial support from analysts, who welcomed it as a
creative partial solution to GM's pension difficulties.
GM's pension deficit has grown largely because of falling US bond rates,
which are used to calculate the company's future pension fund liability.
Each 1 percentage point fall in bond rates adds Dollars 5bn-6bn to pension
liabilities, said Mr Richard Wagoner, chief financial officer.
Of the Dollars 10bn increase in the deficit this year, Dollars 8bn resulted
from lower US rates, he said. A further Dollars 1bn was due to lower
interest rates elsewhere in the world, while the remaining Dollars 1bn
increase in the deficit resulted from improvements in benefits and early
retirements.
The increase in the deficit comes in spite of Dollars 4.4bn of contributions
made to the plan so far this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931116

