FT933-10053

FT  06 AUG 93 / Farmers reap the gains of land laws: The market reforms
transforming Vietnamese agriculture


   By IAIN SIMPSON


VIETNAM'S programme of economic reforms is having a big effect on the lives
of the country's 55m peasant farmers. With increasing rights over the land
they farm, they are now free to make commercial decisions, but a growing
number are finding that market reform means lower incomes.
A new land law passed by the National Assembly on the final day of its
latest session last month allows private ownership of land in all but name.
Under the law, peasants can lease, mortgage, inherit and 'transfer' (a more
acceptable term than 'sell') the land they farm.
The Assembly also passed a law cutting agricultural taxes from 10 to 5 per
cent, giving farmers a greater incentive to increase their output.
According to the country's 1992 constitution, all land officially belongs to
the people - in other words, to the state. Under the new land law, however,
farmers will be guaranteed the use of their land for between 20 and 50
years.
The law is a logical step in a process that started in 1989 when Vietnam
officially abandoned its policy of collectivisation of land.
The programme had been pursued in north Vietnam since 1954, when the country
gained its independence from French rule. However, the Communist party's
attempt to introduce the same policy in southern Vietnam after reunifying
the country in 1975 met fierce resistance and was quietly abandoned.
The government hopes the new laws providing security of tenure and lower
taxes will encourage the country's farmers to invest in the land and to
become less dependent on state investment in the sector.
With the growth of a free- market economy in Vietnam, farmers are finding
that their traditional three rice crops a year are earning less and less.
Vietnam is one of the largest exporters of rice in the world and the price
at home has dropped sharply.
Vietnam derives nearly half of its income from agriculture, which is
dominated by rice.
Farming accounts for nearly three-quarters of the country's employment, and
about a third of its exports.
Many farmers say they want to diversify and grow at least one cash crop a
year. The problem is that Vietnam's banking system has not adapted quickly
to the new economic system. Credit is scarce and farmers who have no gold
hidden under the floor are finding it hard to raise the money to modernise.
The new land law appears to be popular with farmers. One man working in the
rice fields rice just outside Hanoi says that he and his family have been
farming the same land for nearly 30 years but, with the land collectivised,
he has enjoyed little personal reward for his efforts. Now, he observes with
a grin, he will be able to increase his yield and keep the proceeds.
Ideologically, private ownership of land is very hard for the ruling
Communist party to accept. It goes against the basic tenets of their
philosophy: Marxism-Leninism-Ho Chi Minh Thought. One delegate to the
National Assembly said that the land law and the lower agricultural tax were
designed to promote the Vietnamese concept of 'market reform with socialist
characteristics'.
As a compromise, the new law allows almost total freedom in the use and
transfer of land, which will have the same effect but will cause fewer
problems to the hard-working theorists at the Institute of Marxism-Leninism.
There has been some debate in the National Assembly over the details of the
law, including what should happen to land when the lease expires. However,
the direction of policy and the contents of new laws are decided at a plenum
of the party's Central Committee before the National Assembly opens and
there was general agreement on the basic principles of the law.
Although land ownership is difficult for the party to swallow, there seems
to be a general acceptance that it is an essential part of Vietnam's market
reforms.
As one party official put it, 'There's no way for Vietnam but to continue
with reform and to improve the general efficiency of the economy.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930806

