FT933-10205

FT  05 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Nuclear decision


THE SECOND round of public consultation on the Pounds 2.8bn Thorp nuclear
reprocessing plant offers a chance for full consideration of this enormous
and controversial project, which has taken nearly 10 years to build.
Unfortunately, the government's statement yesterday suggests that this
opportunity may be missed.
There are two areas which need to be addressed: environmental and economic.
Ministers say that environmental considerations were adequately covered by
the first public consultation which ended in January and that they are now
'minded to grant' authorisation. Although the second public consultation
calls for comments on economic and diplomatic factors, the government adds
that these are 'not relevant' to its eventual decision.
This narrow interpretation of ministers' remit is not satisfactory. If
British Nuclear Fuels, the plant's owner, makes a loss, the taxpayer will
foot the bill; if reprocessing saddles its main UK customers, Nuclear
Electric and Scottish Nuclear, with unnecessarily high costs, the
electricity consumer may face higher charges. The economic case must be
explored without prejudice.
The consultation documents issued yesterday make an unpromising start. They
contain only part of a key report by Touche Ross which is the basis of BNF's
profit projections, and the government has not endorsed or separately
audited BNF's figures.
Nor do they include enough to permit a judgment to be made about BNF's claim
that cancellation would cost the UK Pounds 900m in cash flow - a figure
which is partly dependent on BNF meeting its cost targets. Furthermore,
important details of BNF's contracts with its main overseas customers,
German and Japanese utilities, are withheld. Ministers recently suggested
that if Thorp were cancelled, compensation to customers could run to Pounds
5bn. However, the report puts the maximum at Pounds 4bn and adds that the
contracts provide BNF with 'robust legal protection' against this event.
An independent examination of the economic case is the minimum needed to
answer these uncertainties. But the government should also address the
question of whether the UK and Thorp's customers might collectively benefit
from cancelling the plant. This possibility, known as the 'win-win' option,
has been diplomatically inaccessible because all sides fear they might be
liable for penalties if they initiated cancellation.
Taken to one extreme, this option might even encompass sending Thorp's key
components to Japanese utilities, who make up a third of the plant's order
book and who have funded much of its construction. The Japanese government,
which is planning its own reprocessing plant, is concerned about the
prospect of shipping reprocessed plutonium back from Thorp. If the second
public consultation is not to be a rubber stamp, the government should
consider these issues fully.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930805

