FT932-3349

FT  15 JUN 93 / Li Peng in public eye after 7 weeks


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


MR LI PENG, China's prime minister, yesterday made his first public
appearance in seven weeks and struck an active pose in an apparent attempt
to counter speculation that a lingering illness had left him politically
weakened.
But western officials and Chinese observers said it was too soon to judge
whether Mr Li would be able to resume a full workload. Mr Li, who had last
been sighted in public in late April, received Dr Mahathir Mohammed, the
visiting Malaysian prime minister, at a ceremonial welcome yesterday in the
Great Hall of the People, before adjourning for talks.
He showed no obvious sign of recent serious illness but, according to
reporters present, he stiffened without responding directly when Dr
Mahathir, a medical practitioner, enquired about his health during
pleasantries that preceded their talks.
Chinese officials had initially explained Mr Li's disappearance from public
view by saying that he was suffering from a bad cold. But reports have
circulated widely that he suffered at least one, and possibly two, heart
attacks.
Mr Li, accompanied by his wife Mrs Zhu Lin, walked fairly briskly as he
escorted Dr Mahathir. He also posed smilingly for photographers, as if to
reinforce the point that he had recovered.
Later, he conducted 80 minutes of formal talks with the Malaysian leader, in
which the two shared similar views on human rights. 'For a developing
nation, human rights are in the first place the rights to independence,
existence and development,' Mr Li was quoted as saying.
Dr Mahathir is said to have replied: 'Foreign forces always seek to impose
their social systems and concepts of values upon us, so as to disrupt our
countries and control us.'
A western official said that some weeks would have to pass before it was
clear whether Mr Li could fully resume his responsibilities. 'If he has had
a heart attack, even a mild one, he should avoid stress and long working
hours,' she said. 'If he is only able to manage one or two meetings a week,
it is unlikely he would be able to continue as premier for very long.'
Mr Wu Jianmin, foreign ministry spokesman, told reporters that Mr Li's
recovery was 'very good' and that he was resuming all his duties. 'As
Premier Li Peng is getting better and better with his health, he will
certainly have more diplomatic duties to perform,' Mr Wu said.
Mr Li's illness became public on April 26, when he suddenly cancelled a
meeting with Philippine President Fidel Ramos. He was subsequently obliged
to postpone a five-nation tour of central Asia.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

930615

