FT932-6855

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (7): New anxieties for the banks
 -Market turmoil brought huge profits. James Blitz considers the
implications


   By JAMES BLITZ


IN DEALING rooms across London, foreign exchange managers are trying to
restrain their euphoria.
Twelve months ago, the outlook for currency trading as a business was bleak.
The prospect of European Monetary Union prompted talk of declining
volatility in European currencies. The yen's exchange rate was dormant as
Japan failed to counter its economic downturn with a fiscal stimulus. And
dealers talked about the need to find returns in exotic currencies amid
decreasing volatility in the major currency pairs.
And then there was Black Wednesday - the apogee of the greatest crisis to
hit the currency markets since the collapse of the Bretton Woods agreement
in the early 1970s.
Last autumn's turmoil in the exchange rate mechanism unleashed huge flows of
funds through the world's dealing rooms - and the major banks made large
profits managing the flows against a background of gyrating exchange rates.
'It was, quite simply, the most outstanding year the foreign exchange market
has ever had in terms of profits,' says Mr David Clark, treasurer for Europe
at Midland Global Markets.
Banks never reveal their net profits in foreign exchange, and last year's
real returns can only be guessed at by looking at the banks' annual reports.
At NatWest bank, for example, gross profits in foreign exchange were up
around 150 per cent between 1991 and 1992, from Pounds 103m to Pounds 253m.
An official at another commercial banks claimed that, in a good year like
the last one, net FX profits at a UK clearing bank would be 20 per cent of
the profits of the group's entire treasury operation. At US investment
banks, which are more dedicated to trading in international capital markets,
the profits would be even greater.
The profits were reflected in pay packets, too. One chief dealer at a London
bank, who must remain nameless, recently admitted that he had taken home a
gross salary of nearly Pounds 250,000 in 1992.
With returns like that, foreign exchange managers ought to be boasting of
success all over London. But they are not. One reason is that the banks are
all too aware of the contempt that the public has for what are deemed to be
the profits of speculation. The danger is that central banks might harness
the angry public mood to try and regulate the market.
A more immediate concern for FX managers is that, even in plentiful times
like the present, they must study the market hard if they want to stay ahead
of their rivals in a highly competitive business.
These days, a commercial bank cannot just buy and sell currencies and hope
to make a profit. A bank's size, its geographical position and the range of
products it supplies to customers are all critical to success in currency
dealing.
The fundamental goal of every FX operation today is to 'capture' the
currency flows. The more turnover that a dealing room does, the greater the
returns that it can make by playing the short-term movements in exchange
rates.
At the same time, the more a bank can see what its major customers - like
corporates and pension funds - are doing, the more intelligence it has about
how to trade its own currency portfolio for profit.
It has become increasingly clear in the past year that an FX manager who
wants to maintain his bank's share of overall currency turnover must keep
several issues at the forefront of his mind if he wants to increase
turnover. First, he must be aware of the increasing concentration of
business in the major financial centres, especially London and New York. The
Bank for International Settlements reported recently that London increased
its share of the world's FX turnover from 25 per cent in 1989 to nearly 30
per cent in 1992.
These days, the prime movers of capital around the world are pension and
investment funds, and the quantity of a single transaction can sometimes run
to billions of dollars. Only the major centres can manage the huge pools of
liquidity in the main currency pairs like dollar/D-Mark and dollar/yen.
Another critical issue is a bank's size in the market. There is an
increasing concentration of business among a decreasing number of the major
commercial and investment banks.
The Bank of England reported last year that the 10 most active banks in the
City of London had 43 per cent of FX turnover, up from 36 per cent in 1989.
Only the biggest banks can convince fund managers that they have the
financial muscle and creditworthiness that these investors seek.
The most important decision that an FX manager must make is exactly what
kind of operation he is running and what services he is offering to clients
and other banks.
In recent years, the major commercial banks have expanded their FX
operations from straightforward transactions in the spot market into the
more sophisticated operations that tend to be dominated by more specialised
investment banks.
Many commercial banks now offer sophisticated products to their clients,
like tailor-made over-the-counter options for corporates, or advice on asset
allocation. The trend is scurrilously described as 'balance sheets trying to
acquire brains'.
Mr Martin Jaskell, head of global sales at NatWest Markets in London, says
that his bank has put a lot of effort into developing its customer and
derivatives side in recent years. 'Nobody in this business wants to just
make a price. They want to know why they are being asked to make a price.
And I am always training my people to ask the question 'why?''
Despite this, the major investment banks remain confident that they will be
able to keep their customers, even though they must use the major interbank
counterparties as a clearing house for their clients' operations.
Mr Dirk Morris, of JP Morgan Investments, in London, believes the banks are
hindered by their inability to take large open positions under the Basle
agreements. 'The banks are not in a position to take on risk,' he says. He
admits, however, that, if the banks are able to improve their balance sheets
over the next few years, they may provide more competition.
That competition will seem insignificant if governments and central banks
introduce capital controls or taxes over the next few years to contain short
term currency flows.
But, for the moment, the main question preoccupying currency managers is how
they can get the biggest slice of what is becoming one of the richest cakes
in financial markets.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
NET FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET TURNOVER (DOLLARS BN A DAY)
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                               March            April            April
                                1986             1989             1992
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
United Kingdom                    90              187              300
United States                     59              129              192
Japan                             48              115              128
Singapore                          -               55               74
Switzerland                        -               57               68
Hong Kong                          -               49               61
Germany                            -                -               57
France                             -               26               35
Australia                          -               30               30
Canada                             9               15               22
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Sources: Bank of Canada; Bank of England; Bank of Japan; Banque de
France; Deutsche Bundesbank; Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Monetary
Affairs Branch, Hong Kong; Monetary Authority of Singapore; Reserve Bank
of Australia; and Swiss National Bank (IMF Survey of International
Capital Markets).
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930526

