FT932-293

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (6): Tower of Babel can be
surmounted - Interoperability, a new and inelegant word in the lexicon


   By PAUL TAYLOR


OVER the past few years a new and rather inelegant word has entered the
lexicon of network computing - 'interoperability'.
Interoperability is a practical solution to the problem of ensuring that
different computer hardware and software components can work together across
a distributed network or interconnected networks.
If the computer industry had grown up in accordance with some monolithic
master plan, there probably would have been no need for any user to specify
interoperability; it could be taken for granted.
In reality, however, computer development has been driven by competing and
often incompatible technologies vying for customer acceptance. This has
resulted in a proliferation of rival computer architectures, operating
systems and software.
Within some segments of the industry, de facto standards have emerged. For
example Intel's chip architecture and Microsoft's MS/DOS have come to
dominate the personal computer market.
Even where no standards have emerged, there were relatively few problems,
provided machines based on different technologies functioned in isolation
from each other.
But today's end users want network systems which link together all their
information resources - regardless of the types of machine and technology or
their geographic location.
They want to squeeze more productivity out of their investment in IT by
hooking together desktop personal computers, high-power workstations,
departmental minicomputers and corporate mainframes locally, nationally and
internationally - and have them work in seamless harmony.
Since the 1970s, when networks first started to appear, there has been a
burst of activity as computers have been linked together to form local area
networks (Lans) and wide area networks (Wans). These in turn are being wired
together in a process called internetworking.
But this has led to technical headaches for many large customers whose
diverse IT operations have often grown up without any co-ordinated plan,
resulting in a wide range of often incompatible hardware systems and
architectures.
Indeed, the network hardware itself, including wires, connectors and
communications circuitry, coupled with the different ways of packaging and
transmitting data across Lans using various communications protocols, has
added another bewildering level of complexity and possible conflict.
The result has been described by some as 'an electronic Tower of Babel'.
There are, however, a number of possible solutions to these problems - steps
designed to ensure interoperability.
Perhaps the most obvious solution is to establish new hardware and operating
system standards. This is essentially what the various 'open systems'
standards, developed by the X/Open Group, the International Standards
Organisation (ISO) and others bodies, attempt to achieve.
Open systems work to a common specification and therefore achieve
interoperability by definition.
Equipment that complies with open systems standards can easily be connected
into communications networks and has the capacity to run operating software
and applications from any supplier obeying the open systems rules, rather
than manufacturers' proprietary ones.
Open systems standards are now widely accepted across the industry, although
some hardware manufacturers are still less than wholeheartedly enthusiastic
about implementing them because of heavy investment in their own designs.
But there is another important reason why even if open systems standards are
the long-term solution to securing interoperability, shorter-term
alternatives are also needed.
Many corporate customers cannot switch over all of their IT operations in
one jump, Even if they could, they probably would not want to. Such a move
would entail the unacceptable costs of abandoning proprietary computer
systems and expensive software.
For this reason, it is often suggested that open systems are most suited to
new applications, and that computer systems based on proprietary designs
will still be required to support current applications.
Even so, in the age of computer networking, these systems must at least be
able to work with others. Therefore manufacturers have adopted a number of
other approaches to make their proprietary systems interoperate with others.
Some vendors such as DEC, Groupe Bull and Hewlett-Packard have been pushing
their systems increasingly towards 'open systems' by changing their
operating software to conform more closely to the standards.
Similarly, the main network management software products, such as IBM's
Netview and similar packages from HP and Sun Microsystems, are moving
gradually towards Open Systems Interconnection while the SNMP (Simple
Network Management protocol), supported by the Internet organisation, has
become a de facto standard used by those wanting to integrate their Lans.
Other equipment manufacturers, including Apple, have accommodated other
systems within their own proprietary designs. As Apple's current UK
advertising campaign emphasises, Macintosh computers can now exchange data
files with MS/DOS personal computers, run MS/DOS programmes using 'Soft PC'
software and connect with PCs over a network.
Meanwhile IBM's strategy for delivering 'interoperability' has necessarily
been more complex. By the 1980s it was making seven incompatible computer
families but has since taken a number of steps to help its own, and other
vendors,' machines interoperate.
Among these, IBM in 1987 announced a plan called System Applications
Architecture (SAA) to enable its PS/2 personal computers, System/38-AS/400
minicomputers and its System/370 mainframes to be linked together more
easily.
All used IBM's long established Systems Network Architecture (SNA) for their
communications infrastructure. But each of the three used different
operating systems, different command and control interfaces and different
programming languages for their applications software.
Since SAA was launched in 1987 IBM has extended its specifications to
include many open and de facto industry standards in order help its systems
interoperate with others.
Last year, IBM announced its new Blueprint for Networking, which redefined
SNA to include many open systems specifications. Meanwhile, many IBM SNA
features have become de facto standards with the open systems stamp on them.
Although there are still problems in linking together proprietary systems,
Mr David Taylor, senior industry analyst with Dataquest, says most
manufacturers 'have worked hard to test their systems with competitors'.
Novell, which dominates the Lan software market, began shipping NetWare SNA
Links last year, a program designed to enable International Business
Machines customers to connect geographically dispersed PC networks via
existing mainframe computer links.
Other software houses such as Borland International have also been working
to enhance interoperability by making complex client-server based networks
easier to manage and use.
For example, Integrated Database Application Programming Interface software
provides a standards-based method for integrating, manipulating and managing
data from different databases and on different operating platforms.
The growing need to hook together Lans has also spawned a booming business
for the manufacturers of the internetworking products such as 'routers',
'hubs', 'bridges' and 'communications servers' which also help provide
interoperability.
These are used to divide computer information into 'packets', regardless of
the data communications protocols, find the most efficient and economical
route to deliver the packets to their destination on the network, and assign
priorities to different packets, delivering the most urgent ones first.
Such companies as Cisco, 3Com and Wellfleet which manufacture routers, and
Synoptics, a leading vendor of internetwork hub products, have all been
growing rapidly in recent years as a result of the increasing demand for
internetworking.
The age of isolated proprietary systems is over and as the trend towards
net- working accelerates, the need for inter- operability will grow. This
will mostly be satisfied by the continued shift towards open systems
hardware and software standards.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

930629

