FT932-143

FT  30 JUN 93 / Arts: David Bedford's 'Touristen Dachau' - Spitalfields
Festival


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


Although it makes much of its setting among the remains of a Georgian area
of London, the Spitalfields Festival supports 20th-century music as well as
period. There is something ironic about going to hear the newest of new
music in Hawksmoor's Christ Church, which looks more elderly and in more
desperate need of repair every year.
The main new work this time was David Bedford's Touristen Dachau, a festival
commission. It is described as a chamber opera, but solo cantata might come
closer. One singer and a group of chanting schoolboys (hidden behind pillars
here, not really audible) are the only performers, supported by a small
instrumental group of three strings, three wind and percussion. There is no
acting as such, no plot; if there is any drama, it is in the mind.
The central character is a tourist at the concentration camp at Dachau -
presumably a woman, as the part was taken by Jane Manning, accompanied by
her group, Jane's Minstrels. In the text, however, the sex becomes
interchangeable. The tourist assumes the identities of various people
associated with the place, past and present, a student, a Jewish prisoner, a
nun (a Catholic convent was built at the Dachau site) and so on.
Bedford's aim is less to characterise them than to create the general
atmosphere. By choosing a present-day tourist as its mouthpiece, Michael
White's text invites its quota of naive observations, which may be fair
enough, but the final scene (woman contemplates God himself as a tourist to
sanctimonious hymn-like accompaniment) is surely too mawkish. One comes away
missing the pain, the ethical grit, the strident sounds, with which
composers usually load this subject to excess.
The Bedford work lasted barely half an hour, so there was room for more on
the programme. Unfortunately the infirmity of the soprano's voice in its
present state sank the other vocal works without trace. In different
circumstances Arne Nordheim's Tre voci might prove a potent short cycle of
Italian settings. Of the instrumental pieces, Thea Musgrave's Impromptu No.
2 for wind trio was welcome for its bubbling energy and glistening textures.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930630

