FT934-11296

FT  02 NOV 93 / Corruption probe jeopardises Kenya aid


   By LESLIE CRAWFORD


   NAIROBI


KENYA'S donors are investigating financial mismanagement and allegations of
corruption involving more than Dollars 125m (Pounds 82.7m) at the
state-owned Kenya Post and Telecommunications Company.
Further irregularities have been revealed by a former manager of KPTC, now
living abroad, who told the Financial Times that an inventory check last
year on stock worth Dollars 250m on paper produced 'huge discrepancies'.
Donor officials believe that some of the funds were channelled to a group of
local banks which lent the money on to government officials or supporters of
the ruling Kanu party.
These banks are already under investigation by the government, acting with
the encouragement of donors.
Negotiations for a new International Monetary Fund agreement and plans for a
donor conference in Paris this month could be jeopardised unless the
government of President Daniel arap Moi takes urgent steps to overhaul KPTC,
one of Kenya's largest state-owned companies. Without the IMF endorsement of
economic policy, donors are unlikely to resume financial aid frozen since
November 1991. And without the renewal of aid, Kenya faces a balance of
payments crisis. It is Dollars 700m in arrears to its foreign creditors.
Donors are seeking an explanation of KPTC's failure to remit to the Treasury
the 18 per cent value added tax it charges on telephone bills. The
information is disclosed in an auditor general's report which also reveals
that the company has not paid corporation tax since 1988.
The report shows that KPTC has accumulated arrears on its own foreign debt,
on its contributions to the National Social Security Fund, and on a special
telecommunications tax.
The monies owed are said by western officials to total more than Dollars
125m, an amount equivalent to about half the company's annual turnover.
KPTC deposited hundreds of millions of shillings in scandal-tainted domestic
banks. According to a western official investigating the KPTC management,
these funds were on-lent to government supporters.
Although four of these banks were closed earlier this year, auditors are
still trying to trace the deposits of KPTC and the company pension fund held
at another, Transnational Bank. The bank has fended off closure by promising
to inject fresh capital to cover bad loans, but one of Transnational Bank's
main shareholders, Mr Jared Kagwana, has fled the country after being
questioned by police over alleged embezzlement.
A former manager at KPTC has also accused company executives of faking the
theft of millions of dollars of equipment so that it could be resold to KPTC
for instant self-enrichment.
Mr Stanley Bell, KPTC's chief general manager until October 1992, says he
was fired for refusing to authorise a Dollars 20m procurement order for
spare parts. According to him, thefts of stocks were being reported to
justify the purchase of the same goods.
He ordered an inventory check and encountered 'huge discrepancies'.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931102

