FT933-5116

FT  04 SEP 93 / Arts: Violence for every taste - Videos


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


SCREEN violence, especially for video viewers, has still not gone away even
this late in the year. Is the world winding itself up, we wonder, for the
last years of the century? 1998, one notes with alarm, is the Devil's number
(666) times three; 1999 contains the Devil's number upside down; and 2000
marks a new millennium, with all the devilish apocalypses that that
traditionally entails.
We who have been brought up on Gothic movies are sensitive to such matters.
We look at a video month boasting Bram Stoker's Dracula, Fritz Lang's
reissued M, Leonard Kastle's reissued cult murder film The Honeymoon Killers
and two new but already notorious movies in Man Bites Dog and One False Move
and we sense a pattern. The main motif is a fascination with murder as
compulsion.
Director Francis Coppola in his visually spectacular Bram Stoker's Dracula
(20:20 Vision) gives us the grand old Gothic forebear himself. The Count is
played by Gary Oldman as a helpless predator given to Protean shape-changes,
from an old man in a beetling wig to a young seducer in frockcoat and
Victorian Ray-Bans. This is the killer as chameleon, as much a victim of
nature and cosmic determinism as the lizard that in one guise he
gigantically resembles.
The killers in M (Redemption) and The Honeymoon Killers (Tartan), both in
black-and-white, are more mundane, de-romanticised. Lang's 1931 masterpiece,
based on the story of a true mass murderer, pushes its humdrum psychopath
(Peter Lorre) through a mazy, dim-lit Germany almost palpable with
foreboding. This human insect seems as much a creature of his time as the
banal, deranged suburban couple in The Honeymoon Killers who murder
lonelyheart victims in a sickly America (1969) trapped between the
sentimentality of the Flower Power era and the nightmare of Vietnam.
Today's modern-dress movies of violence are neither romantic a la
Coppola-Stoker nor psycho-sociological like Lang or Kastle. In One False
Move (20:20) the drug-dealing crooks who viciously murder a group of guests
at a party before escaping to cue the film's chase story are self-made
psychos as driven and reasonless as Shakespeare's Iago. And Man Bites Dog
(Tartan) does not finger 'society' as the corrupter of its young anti-hero:
only the man himself as he bounds from one 'snuff' murder to the next,
showing off for his camcorder-wielding friends. Made by Belgian students on
half a shoestring, the film is funny and horrific in equal measure. Even
this year's Hollywood Oscar-sweeper contributes to the 1993 violence
symposium. Clint Eastwood's Unforgiven (Warner) takes the Western, hangs it
up and thwacks it with a carpet-beater until all the elegiac fluff flies
out. There are no balletic deaths here, no chess-game gunfights. The film
shows how the West was really won. When men die, they do so slowly,
agonizingly, uncomprehendingly. The more bullets the 'hero' spits the more
we see him turn into a grey, implacable, inhuman automaton.
But take comfort: even in Bloody September there are gore-free videos.
Especially recommended: two golden-oldie comedies and one sparkling modern
bio-pic. This last is Derek Jarman's Wittgenstein (Connoisseur): absurdist,
playful, witty in its account of the philosopher and his social and cerebral
frolickings with the Bloomsbury crowd (B. Russell, JM Keynes). The oldies
are both from director Howard Hawks. Only Angels Have Wings (Columbia
TriStar) is Cary Grant, Jean Arthur and Rita Hayworth doing what a man (and
two women) gotta do in the tropics while mail aircraft fly and hearts are
broken. And Twentieth Century (Columbia TriStar) has glorious Carole Lombard
and more glorious John Barrymore boarding the titular express to cross
swords and wits for two hours of high - no, highest - Hollywood comedy.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

930904

