FT933-9985

FT  06 AUG 93 / Letter: Equalisation of pensions at 60 is an affordable
alternative


   From Mr NORMAN WILLIS


Sir, I agree with Howard Davies ('CBI Backs Pensions for all at 65', July
29) that the government must 'stop dithering' about when they are going to
equalise the state pension age. The TUC firmly believes equality in this
fundamental area is long overdue. Legislation must be brought forward
without delay, recommending equalisation at 60.
But Mr Davies contends that equalisation at 60 is unaffordable. This is
simply not the case. It is an argument being used by the government and
employers to frighten people into accepting they will have to work for an
extra five years. The TUC has produced figures to show that equalising at 60
could be cheaper than equalising at 65 - Pounds 0.07bn, a far cry from the
Pounds 3.5bn which the the government maintains equalising at the lower age
would cost. This is because of the knock-on effects on unemployment among
younger workers and consequential savings on social security spending.
Contrary to Mr Davies's assertions, equalising will not place unnecessary
burdens on employers. Large numbers of schemes, and many of Mr Davies's
members, have already equalised occupational scheme pension ages at 60 and
will be paying full pensions to former male and female employees. Many
others will pay early retirement pensions to men aged between 60-65, the
majority of whom do not work.
Second, the CBI's figures appear somewhat exaggerated. Separate actuarial
data put the costs to employers of equalising at 60 between Pounds
4bn-Pounds 8bn - two-thirds of the costs predicted by William M Mercer. What
is more, when considering the costs to employers, large numbers of schemes
are presently over-funded. These surpluses, which have been calculated to
run to between Pounds 15bn-Pounds 25bn, could be used to equalise
occupational scheme pension ages. This would certainly reduce the financial
burden on employers which Mr Davies complains about.
Men and women want to retire at 60, and to make them work on to 65 would be
quite unfair. This is not just the evidence of opinion polls, but can be
seen from people's current retirement patterns. We must eradicate this
discrimination in a progressive manner, by equalising at age 60. This is
fair, it is what people want and is affordable.
Norman Willis,
general secretary,
TUC,
Congress House,
Great Russell Street,
London WC1B 3LS

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930806

