FT932-6756

FT  27 MAY 93 / Dealing practices on shares defended


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


CRITICISMS OF limits on the transparency of stock market dealings are
unfounded or redundant, says the chief economist of the London Stock
Exchange.
Mr Stephen Wells, writing in the spring issue of the Stock Exchange
Quarterly, published yesterday, addresses the questions of whether and when
details of stock trades should be published.
Details of large trades are at present published after a 90-minute delay.
Discussions about changing the rules are under way between the
market-makers, the exchange and the regulators, with a compromise
announcement expected early next month. The compromise is thought to involve
a greater delay in the publication of very large trades.
Mr Wells argues that for very large trades 'the current 90-minute delay
before publication is often insufficient'. For the normal
institutional-sized trade, he says, there is a case for limited transparency
in a market, like London's, in which marketmakers quote firm two-way prices.
'Unless marketmakers are able to maintain some form of temporary information
advantage by delaying publication they will be picked off by astute
institutional investors.'
Mr Wells concludes: 'The undoubted strength of London's markets is the
commitment to provide liquidity. This commitment could not continue if the
positions of market-makers were effectively on display - which is what total
transparency means . . . Markets which fail to meet the needs of users will
lose business to markets that do.'
Nearly half the shares traded on the London Stock Exchange in the first
three months of 1993 were from overseas, according to figures released by
the exchange yesterday.
Turnover in international equities rose 34 per cent to a record level of
Pounds 116bn in the first quarter. This compared with Pounds 138bn - up 18
per cent - for English and Irish equities. International equities made up 46
per cent of total equity turnover. Gilt turnover was also up sharply, rising
24 per cent to Pounds 395bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930527

