FT934-8686

FT  13 NOV 93 / Books: Tragedy on the grandest scale


   By AC GRAYLING


MARIE-ANTOINETTE
by Ian Dunlop
Sinclair-Stevenson Pounds 20, 411 pages
WHILE waiting for death in his prison cell, a victim of the Revolution he
had taken part in creating, Camille Desmoulins wrote to his wife, 'I had
dreamed of a republic all would adore. I could not believe how ferocious and
unjust men could be.' The Terror unleashed by France's revolution horrified
all witnesses by its extremity. Deep festers of gangrene had been ruptured
by the overthrow of the Ancien Regime, and the poison flowed. Tumbrils
rolled to the guillotine, and crowds intoxicated by events roared every time
the blade fell, murdering alike the overthrown and those who had overthrown
them.
It is the way of mankind, when circumstances conspire, to fasten on some one
thing as a focus for hatred or blame. In a bankrupt France where hungry
peasants and angry artisans groaned under crippling taxes, but where the
extravagant life of aristocrats and clergy continued, public resentment came
to concentrate on one person especially, as emblematic of France's ills: its
Queen, the 'Austrian whore', Marie-Antoinette. Public memory is the memory
of victors; Marie-Antoinette is she whom legend says advised the hungry that
if they had no bread they should eat cake. Perceived as rapacious,
expensive, frivolous, an Austrian spy, sexually promiscuous under the nose
of her impotent husband Louis XVI, she became the subject of pornographic
ballads and bitter hatred. Among many accusations at her trial were
allegations of incest with her small son. The sans culottes believed her
capable of anything.
Ian Dunlop's new biography of Marie-Antoinette sets out to rescue her from
this slough of calumny. Skilfully evocative of the times, the palaces, the
intricacies of court life and the history of Louis XVI's family and circle,
Dunlop's account is frankly partisan. He is an admirer of the sweet-faced
princess who, married by proxy to the Dauphin of France at 14, had to assume
the role of consort in the world's most glittering monarchy. His portrayal
of her is seductive; he makes excellent use of the many contemporary letters
and journals which convey the affection and respect nourished for her by
those who knew her well. Even her gaolers came to love her, and wept when
the tumbril carried her away.
Against the legend of the royal family's callous frivolity and indifference
to France's suffering, Dunlop gives us a picture of an anxious but largely
ineffectual Louis XVI trying to practice economies in the running of his
many huge and decaying palaces, and a Marie-Antoinette writing to her
mother, Marie-Therese of Austria, to tell her of the touching affection of
the peasantry for their King, despite their hunger and taxes.
Dunlop brings Versailles and Fontainebleu vividly to life, along with the
ceremonial and intrigues of court. The history of 18th-century France flows
turbulently behind, giving one a sense of the inevitability of disaster.
Around the figure of Marie-Antoinette accumulate the incidents,
miscalculations and unlucky accidents as in the case of the Diamond Necklace
scandal, in which she was the victim of a criminal conspiracy that in the
public mind metamorphosed a fairytale Queen of France into 'that Austrian
bitch'.
France's story in Louis XVI's reign is one of hubris, vainglory and
stupidity. Neither the royal pair nor their ministers were unaware of
France's ruinous finances and the people's suffering. But the clergy and
aristocracy vetoed all demands to pay taxes. Those who were to die under the
guillotine paved their own path thither with their cupidity and
short-sightedness. The system's inflexibilities meant that France's
government behaved as if Louis XIV still reigned. But time, credit and the
people's patience had run out.
Seen from the broader view, France's King and Queen forged their own fate.
But theirs is an intensely moving story nevertheless, so skilfully told by
Dunlop that one has to force oneself periodically to remember that this
piercing tragedy is itself merely the peak of a mountain of injustice. a And
that is why a charming but after all self-indulgent young woman came to be
murdered to satisfy the rage of an entire people. Where the degree of
tragedy is measured by the height from which its sufferer falls,
Marie-Antoinette's life is a tragedy on the grandest and most instructive of
scales.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

931113

