FT934-11448

FT  01 NOV 93 / Jewish riots over murder of settler


   By DAVID HOROVITZ


   JERUSALEM


THOUSANDS of Jewish settlers set Arab homes alight, stoned Arab cars,
blocked roads and burnt tyres at the weekend in response to the murder of a
Jewish settler by Islamic militants on Friday. It was the worst violence in
the occupied territories since Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organisation signed their autonomy accord in September.
Spokesmen for the 130,000 Jewish settlers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip
declared 'a Jewish intifada' - an ongoing effort to disrupt Palestinian
daily life throughout the occupied territories.
At a meeting in Jerusalem, settlement leaders agreed to continue blocking
West Bank roads and disrupting Palestinian traffic. They also demanded an
apology from Mr Yitzhak Rabin, prime minister, over remarks in which he
implied a comparison between the opponents of the autonomy accords on both
sides - Hamas and the settlers. Mr Rabin had stressed the need to stand firm
against the 'enemies among the Palestinians . . . and the opponents among
the Jews'.
Mr Benjamin Netanyahu, leader of the main opposition Likud party, called the
implied comparison 'scandalous' and urged Mr Rabin to resign if his
government could not properly protect the settlers. There were similar calls
at yesterday afternoon's funeral of Mr Haim Mizrahi, the settler who was
abducted and stabbed to death by Hamas militants.
Mourners carried signs saying 'Death to Hamas', condemned the government
over last week's release of hundreds of Palestinian prisoners, and called
for the scrapping of the autonomy programme.
Yesterday Israelis killed two Palestinians. A 21-year-old Palestinian was
shot dead by an Israeli in the Gaza Strip after the Palestinian stabbed him
in the hand and back. Soldiers shot dead a Palestinian labourer from Gaza
when he failed to stop at a roadblock.
On Friday, Palestinian gunmen shot dead a West Bank Palestinian land dealer
who was said to have been selling Arab land to Jewish settlers.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931101

