FT933-9991

FT  06 AUG 93 / Arts: Second-hand images of the human body - Lynn MacRitchie
reviews the work of Marlene Dumas at the ICA gallery


   By LYNN MACRITCHIE


The chimera that artists, especially younger ones, no longer paint, or if
they do they certainly do not paint people, hovers over much current chatter
about the visual arts. It is, of course, so much nonsense. The human figure
is still the chosen subject of many young painters, although they may not
approach it in the traditional manner of, say, Lucien Freud, whose lifetime
contemplation of the model in the studio will be celebrated at the
Whitechapel Gallery this autumn.
A considerable group of young artists in the US such as Raymond Pettibon or
Mike Kelley (some of whom were represented at the excellent 'Irony &
Ecstasy' show at the Salama Caro Gallery in London earlier this summer) are
using drawing and painting to explore the representation of the figure.
Their source material, however, is much more likely to be found in the
detritus of contemporary media images of the body, porn magazines, comic
books and advertisements, than in the life class.
In Europe, the leading exponent of this school of figuration is Marlene
Dumas, whose powerful and disturbing work can now be seen at the ICA.
Like many painters of the human form before her (Degas or Manet to name but
two), Dumas chooses to work from photographs. Unlike them, she works
exclusively from photographic images, either taken by herself with a
Polaroid camera or found in the pages of books, newspapers or magazines.
These make up a store of images from which she selects, exploring their
possibilities in series of oil paintings and watercolour drawings. 'It is
not the relationship between painting and photography that is the most
prominent question today,' she explains. 'The fact is that the photographic,
not photography as a specific medium but as a particular mode of signifying,
is affecting all the arts at the moment.'
Her subjects, even before she begins to work on them, have already been
through one process of transformation, leaving her free to remake them anew
in paint, or, as she expresses it, 'My people were all shot by a camera,
framed, before I painted them. They didn't know I'd do this to them . . .'
The earliest works in the show are portrait heads, of family, friends and
strangers, painted in light washes of intense colour. Titles are important.
'Evil is banal,' 1984, shows a young woman whose orange gold hair stands out
in Bonnard-like contrast against a pale pink cheek and purple shadowed
shoulder. A large nude of 1987 titled 'The Particularity of Nakedness' is
the only male example in a series of studies of a horizontal, naked figure,
and the only one to function as a portrait, whose subject, echoing, Manet's
'Olympia', returns the viewer's stare.
Others show a naked woman, lying prone across a table in 'Waiting for
Meaning' 1988, or, in 'Snowhite and the broken arm' representing the artist,
prone, helpless, polaroids scattered on the floor, camera clutched in her
useless hand, unable to shoot back at the greedy gaze of seven small boys.
The next series is scenes of children, photographed at school, in obedient
lines or groups. 'The Dance', 1992, shows four little girls, seen from the
back, hand in hand before an empty, threatening space. Little girls remain a
dominant theme in her later work, while 'The First Humans' 1991, portrays
four new born babies in studies the size of full length adult portraits. Her
latest works are based on photographs from porn magazines.
At Documenta 9 in Kassel last year, Dumas filled a tiny turret room with
monochrome watercolour sketches of young girls, a series based on the story
of Salome. After the wide installation filled spaces below, their intimacy
was a shock, like finding oneself suddenly naked in front of strangers, a
state which although inadvertent may provoke harm. That is the condition of
Dumas' subjects. Caught first by the camera, then by the painter, something
indeed has been 'done' to them. In the process of their double
objectification, they have been transformed. These babies are not innocent,
but redolent with the possibility of evil. These children line up smiling in
the playground and we see gas chambers. The stained sheet held out labelled
'Evidence of Virtue' signifies its opposite, innocence betrayed. The 'Peer
Group' child exposed naked by her playmates horrifies us with our own
thoughts of abuse.
All this is done with the simplest of means - naked bodies suggested by a
swift wash of watercolour in a manner which recalls the grace and economy of
Beuys, a use of oil paint in which sombre strokes of grey and blue are
pulled into meaning by vibrant details - the scarlet slippers in 'The
Window', 1991, or the shocking pink mouth of 'Girl with Lipstick', 1992.
Dumas' painterly exploration of these second-hand images of the body reminds
us that all human horrors have already been committed, recorded and wait
only to be repeated, by people just like ourselves. Only the porno
performers seem innocent, the watercolour sketches of their endless,
wearying display finally returning their bodies to the mystery of the
unknowable.
Marlene Dumas, 'Miss Interpreted', July 28- September 19. Institute of
Contemporary Arts, The Mall, London, SW1Y 5AH.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930806

