FT931-4188

FT  12 MAR 93 / Milosevic denies full backing to peace plan


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER


   PARIS


PRESIDENT Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia yesterday refused to give a clear
endorsement to the peace settlement for Bosnia-Hercegovina proposed by
international mediators.
However he did apparently agree to try and persuade his Serb allies in
Bosnia to attend talks in New York early next week on the Vance-Owen peace
plan.
'We cannot say whether the peace accord should be adopted in its present
form. It is up to the three (Bosnian) communities to decide,' he said after
talks with Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, hosted by France's President
Francois Mitterrand in Paris.
Lord Owen said at a joint press conference with Mr Vance after the first
round of talks that it was 'too early to say whether President Milosevic
will put pressure on Mr (Radovan) Karadzic (the leader of the Bosnian
Serbs).'
The mediators rejected a suggestion by the Serbian president that
implementation of the peace settlement should start with the application of
the military agreement, notably a ceasefire.
Mr Milosevic said he thought the Bosnian Serbs would respect a ceasefire.
However, Lord Owen said it would be inappropriate for a ceasefire to be
implemented separately from a constitutional agreement and the map of the 10
provinces into which it has been proposed that Bosnia should be divided.
He said that if a ceasefire came into effect without the other elements, the
Bosnian Serbs would hold on to the 70 per cent of Bosnian territory which
they presently occupied. The map provides for a division of territory which
would give the Bosnian Serbs only 43 per cent.
Mr Vance said they had discussed with Mr Milosevic the prospect of more
draconian sanctions against Serbia if the Bosnian Serbs blocked the peace
plan.
The US and Britain have drafted tougher sanctions which they want the
Security Council to impose if the Serbs obstruct the negotiations.
Mr Milosevic said the time had come for the UN to lift sanctions against
Serbia.
Lord Owen quoted Mr Mitterrand as telling Mr Milosevic: 'Whatever the rights
or wrongs (of sanctions), if there is no settlement, the world will take
action.'
According to Lord Owen, Mr Milosevic had told them that he had only limited
influence over the Bosnian Serbs, but the mediators believe that in fact he
has substantial influence over Mr Karadzic.
The meeting, hosted at the Elysee Palace, was undermined even before it
started by statements by both the Bosnian Moslems and Serbs that they would
not endorse the peace plan in its present form.
Mr Vance and Lord Owen had hoped to isolate Mr Karadzic. But they were
thwarted when President Alija Izetbegovic, the Moslem Bosnian president,
said on Wednesday he would not return to the peace talks in New York at the
end of this week to sign the mediators' map, as he had previously intimated.
Mr Izetbegovic has delayed his return to New York until the middle of next
week at the earliest, pending further consultations in Bosnia.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930312

