FT934-10169

FT  06 NOV 93 / Markets: Rise in bond yields rattles equity investors - Wall
Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


US STOCK markets were unable this week to ignore the possibility that the
rally in government securities may be over. For the best part of a year they
have risen on the coat-tails of buoyant bond prices and low long-term
interest rates.
Two weeks ago, long-term interest rates, as measured by the yield on the
benchmark 30-year Treasury bond, stood at just over 5.8 per cent. At midday
yesterday, after more than a week of sustained selling, occasionally nearing
panic proportions, the yield stood at 6.25 per cent. It has not been this
high since August.
Declines in the price of intermediate and shorter-dated government
securities have also sent yields tumbling at the short end of the maturity
range. The two-year note, which was yielding under 3.9 per cent a fortnight
ago, now yields more than 4.1 per cent. The yield on the seven-year note has
risen from 4.8 per cent to 5.2 per cent over the same period.
This sharp increase in bond market yields has rattled Wall Street, and
equity investors in particular. For the past year, since the bond market
began its remarkable rally (a rally that dates back to the election of
President Clinton in November 1992), the stock markets have been luxuriating
in declining interest rates.
Equity investors like falling rates because they lower the cost of capital
for corporations, thus encouraging spending on expansion and supporting
profits growth, and they make stocks look more attractive than alternative
investments, thus encouraging money to flow out of bank certificates of
deposit and short-term money market funds and into equities.
Now, however, rates are heading higher, and with a vengeance. The turnaround
in rates has been prompted by the firmest evidence yet that the US economy
is picking up steam. Recent reports on industrial activity, gross domestic
product, house sales, and employment trends have all pointed to a
strengthening in economic growth.
The sight of an improving economy has spooked bond investors, who fear that
rising growth will eventually lead to a resurgence in inflation, and tighter
monetary policy in the form of higher short-term rates. There has been a
growing feeling among bond analysts that the market's year-long rally, which
brought long-term interest rates down from 7.5 per cent to a record low of
5.8 per cent, may be spent.
The rally in bond prices was primarily inspired by expectations that
President Clinton's tax-raising, deficit-reducing budget would
simultaneously restrain the federal deficit and slow future economic growth,
thus keeping inflation in check. Prices were also supported by the
government's decision to cut its long bond issue in an attempt to lower the
cost of financing the federal deficit.
It now looks, however, as if the market underestimated the resilience of the
economy. Although growth remains relatively modest - output is currently
increasing by about 3 per cent on an annualised basis - it is still stronger
than bond investors expected. Witness yesterday's monthly employment report,
which showed that non-farm payrolls rose by 177,000 in October, about 20,000
more than analysts had forecast.
In more normal times, all this evidence of improving economic growth would
be a positive influence on stock markets. These are not normal times,
however. Not only does concern about rising interest rates outweigh
encouraging news, but equity investors, like their fixed-income
counterparts, are increasingly worried that their market has overreached
itself.
Share prices are, by most measures, looking expensive. Stocks in the
Standard & Poor's 500 index, the broadest measure of market performance, are
trading at more than 22 times latest earnings. The stocks of smaller
capitalised companies are also pricy, which explains why they have suffered
the most in the recent sell-off. While the S&P 500 fell about 3 per cent
this week, the Nasdaq composite index, which includes many small
growth-oriented companies, dropped 4.6 per cent in just 2 1/2 days.
Smaller company stocks have been hit hard because in recent weeks they have
primarily been supported by speculative demand, often a sign that a buying
trend may be peaking. Consequently, as soon as broader market sentiment
turned around, investors bailed out of small-cap stocks.
This week's selling in stock markets may not be the last of any correction.
Bond prices probably have further to fall, although they may be low enough
next week to attract some bargain hunters. Equities, however, do not look as
if they have fallen far enough to become attractive to non-speculative
investors.
Monday    3692.61  +  12.02
Tuesday   3697.64  +  05.03
Wednesday 3661.87  -  35.77
Thursday  3624.98  -  36.89
Friday    3643.43  +  18.45

The Financial Times


London Page II

931106

