FT934-10034

FT  08 NOV 93 / Cardiff Bay deals brought closer


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM, Wales and West Correspondent


THE Cardiff Bay Development Corporation believes the go-ahead for the
controversial barrage that was given royal assent on Friday will enable
several deals which have hung fire to be concluded soon.
These include negotiations with a Norwegian company to build Cardiff's first
five-star hotel, a financial services company seeking to relocate, and a US
media company planning a European headquarters.
The corporation's economic appraisal calculates that the bay can eventually
result in Pounds 1.2bn of private-sector investment, 4.7m sq ft of business
space and 23,000 jobs. Without the barrage, these figures would be halved.
Next week a design competition will be launched for a 2,000-seat home for
the Welsh National Opera. In September, the Pounds 3.5m main contract was
awarded to build National Techniquest, a science centre described as the
biggest of its kind in the UK. Mr Michael Boyce, corporation chairman, talks
of 'an arc of entertainment' along the waterfront.
Since it was set up in 1987, the corporation, with a current annual budget
of Pounds 34m, has concentrated on infrastructure which includes a
distributor road giving access to the M4 motorway. The road, costing more
than Pounds 100m and part of it tunnelled, should be completed in about nine
months. As part of the bay's landscaping, 15,000 trees have been planted.
So far, the biggest retail deal has been for a Tesco superstore. Of the
office relocations, the first was by South Glamorgan County Council in 1988.
Prudential Assurance has established a regional headquarters and there have
been two large pre-lets: Welsh Health Common Services Authority moved this
year into a 150,000 sq ft headquarters, and construction has started on a
Pounds 16m UK headquarters for the Dutch credit insurance company NCM. The
developer for that is Grosvenor Waterside, part of Associated British Ports,
which owns the surviving Cardiff docks.
Design work for the barrage has been carried out and the main contract,
worth about Pounds 100m, will be awarded within six weeks. Seven contractors
have been invited to tender: Balfour Beatty, Bouygues, Laing, Tarmac, and
joint ventures of Kier/Christiani & Nielson/Hochtief; Trafalgar
House/Ballast Nedam; and Taylor Woodrow/Sir Robert McAlpine.
Work will start early next year and should be completed within four years.
Despite the pressures on public spending, Mr John Redwood, Welsh secretary,
indicated on Friday that the necessary funding would be provided.
A design team led by Ove Arup was appointed in July for the next big chunk
of infrastructure - a mile-long, tree-lined boulevard to link the waterfront
with the city centre. The corporation, never short of superlatives, said:
'We are looking for an avenue on the grand scale, equivalent of the Champs
Elysees.'
The barrage, which with associated works will cost Pounds 152m, is described
by Cardiff Bay Development Corporation as 'one of the biggest construction
projects in Europe'. It is seen as the catalyst for the regeneration of
2,700 acres of derelict docklands which Mr Boyce sees becoming a 'Covent
Garden by the sea'.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931108

