FT932-3191

FT  15 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Gold destined to remain asset
of last resort - The central banks deny their actions will disrupt the
market


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


CENTRAL banks are unlikely to change their basic attitude of considering
gold as a reserve asset of last resort, delegates to the Financial Times
World Gold Conference were told yesterday.
Mrs Agnes Van den Berge, head of foreign exchange at the Banque Nationale de
Belgique, also ruled out the possibility of the central banks disrupting the
gold market by their actions.
Last year, Belgium sold 202 tonnes of gold, raising BFR61.5bn, (Pounds
1.2bn) and lifting its foreign currency reserves by 30 per cent, and also
cutting the share of gold in its total reserves to about 50 per cent.
'This level corresponds to the proportion of gold in the total reserves of
the principal neighbouring countries, and this change in the composition of
the reserves will facilitate the participation of the Bank in the process of
European monetary unification,' said Mrs Van den Berge.
Gold accounts for about one quarter of total international reserves compared
with 58 per cent in 1980. Holdings, however, have been stable but their
dollar value has fallen considerably.
At the same time, foreign exchange reserves have increased.
Mrs Van den Berge said that in addition to the traditional role as a last
resort, gold would be increasingly be used as collateral against borrowing:
'Because credit and counter-party risk is becoming a major concern in
financial markets,' she said.
Gold was also seen as a means of diversifying reserves. By lending it out in
the form of gold instruments, such as swaps, it had become a potential
interest-earning asset.
Mrs Van den Berge could not foresee a big change in official gold holdings:
'I do not rule out, however, that the uneven distribution between central
banks will become more equal. Furthermore, central banks will manage their
stocks more actively in order to earn a return on it.'
Dr Ercan Kumcu, vice-governor of the Turkish central bank, said Turkey had
no plans to buy or sell from its reserves, which stand at 126 tonnes.
'We think that the present volume of gold reserves is the right size, not
more and not less than the amount that should be kept when compared to the
total foreign exchange reserves of the country,' he said in a speech to the
conference.
The increasing uncertainties facing the mining industry in North America
were highlighted by Mr Neil Westoll, a senior vice-president of Lac
Minerals, of Canada: 'In many ways, the governments in North America have
turned their backs on natural resources because of pressure from
environmental and land-use groups,' he said.
Over the last decade, environmental costs had risen significantly. A recent
survey of 10 of the 16 biggest mining groups in Canada showed that
reclamation costs had risen from CDollars 1m (Pounds 500,000) in 1986 to
CDollars 250m in 1991. Prosecutions for environmental offences were also
sharply up.
While the industry had increased productivity per-man-shift by 45 per cent
since 1989, and cut costs 16 per cent, it was worried by the prospect of
continually-changing legislation. In the US, for example, royalty and tax
proposals could drop the rate of return on a mine below acceptable limits.
South Africa, still the biggest gold producer in the world, had benefited
from the lower gold prices of recent years by developing a leaner and fitter
industry, said Mr Bobby Godsell, president of the South African Chamber of
Mines and an executive director of Anglo American.
His positive assessment of South Africa's political future was shared by Mr
Richard Menell, finance manager at Anglovaal. But Mr Menell believed it
would take several years of stability under any new government, plus high
gold prices, to attract the finance for major new deep goldmines.
Development of such a mine involved capital costs of up to USDollars 1bn,
and a lead time of five to 10 years before a positive cash flow emerged, he
said. The political risks and the risk of a lower gold price were too high
to attract long-term investors at the moment.
South African production would fall from 620 tonnes to 500 tonnes by the end
of the century, he predicted. This level could be maintained for some years
but very few mines had secure lives beyond 2010.
'Therefore, in order to maintain long-term gold output, new projects must
commence development by the year 2000,' he said.
Gold production from the Pacific Rim would rise to 470 tonnes by the year
2000 from 400 tonnes last year, said Mr David Tyrwhitt, consulting geologist
and a director of Normandy-Anglo-Asian.
The main growth would come in Indonesia from 44 tonnes to 78 tonnes and
Papua New Guinea, which could reach 120 tonnes if the Lihir project went
ahead and Bougainville re-opened. Last year, Papua New Guinea produced 74
tonnes.
THE FT Gold Mines Index is to be relaunched in an improved form later this
year, it was announced yesterday.
Whereas the existing index, started in 1955, is based on London Stock
Exchange dealings in 21 South African gold mine shares, its replacement will
include many of the important US, Canadian and Australian groups and will
not be restricted to London dealings.
It is expected to represent just over half the western world's gold mine
output.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

930615

