FT933-5227

FT  04 SEP 93 / Few prizes from the politicians: Robert Peston questions
former ministers' value to business


   By ROBERT PESTON


The Labour party this week made its ritualised complaints when Mr Norman
Lamont, former chancellor of the exchequer, joined merchant bank NM
Rothschild, following the well-trodden path taken by former ministers to the
private sector.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, wants former ministers banned from
private sector jobs for at least two years after leaving office. The
implication is that companies derive an unfair benefit from the expertise
and contacts of former ministers.
However, hard evidence that former ministers boost profits of the companies
they join is patchy, prompting one headhunter to remark, only half in jest:
'If Labour remained committed to the overthrow of capitalism, it should be
encouraging companies to employ ex-politicians.'
Another headhunter, Mr Nicholas Cobbold, of Knight Wendling, concurs: 'I can
hardly remember a politician making a success of business. . . I can't tell
you how many of them ring me up for help (in getting jobs).'
Sir Evelyn de Rothschild, who controls the bank Mr Lamont is joining, says
the benefits the former chancellor brings include his knowledge of interest
rate movements.
But those comments did not assuage the fears of one Rothschild executive
worried about Mr Lamont's record in office.
Nonetheless, so many ex-ministers have been taken on by companies and City
firms, that some must be of value to their new employers. Many of those who
succeed seem to do so in large part despite - rather than because of - their
ministerial experience.
Mr Michael Marks, chief executive Smith New Court, the securities house,
says that Lord Walker, who served in the 1980's as secretary of state for
energy and later for Wales, has been a tremendous help to his firm as a
non-executive director.
But he says it is Lord Walker's business expertise, not his government
experience, which has been most valuable. 'He started Slater Walker (and
left that banking group before it collapsed in 1974),' says Mr Marks.
'He knows how to make a profit.'
Lord Walker showed his commercial acumen when he had a last minute change of
heart in mid 1991 about becoming chairman of Maxwell Communications
Corporation, only month's before MCC's founder Mr Robert Maxwell died and
his business empire collaps-ed.
Lord Young, who as chairman of Cable & Wireless, the telecommunications
group, has more executive responsibilities than most other
politicians-turned-businessmen, says the four years he spent as employment
secretary and then as trade and industry secretary taught him nothing about
how to run a company. He regards his period in office as a brief interlude
in his long-running business career - he used to be a property developer.
Mr Dick Taverne, one of a handful of former Labour ministers to have picked
up directorships (for the past 18 years he has been a director of industrial
group BOC and of insurer Equity & Law) says ministerial experience is not in
the least bit relevant to taking an executive post: 'Ministers do not run
their departments,' he says. 'Their permanent secretaries do that.'
Politicians who cross over into commerce fall into two broad groups: those
like Lord Tebbit, Sir Norman Fowler (who resigned this week as a director of
security company Group 4) and Lord Walker who have each accumulated a hatful
of non-executive directorships and a small group, including Sir John Nott
and Lords Young, Younger and Prior who take on greater responsibilities as
chairmen of big companies.
The main role of any non-executive director is to monitor the performance of
executives on behalf of shareholders. Mr Taverne says: 'Politicians can be
good monitors, but the best monitors are more likely to be former merchant
bankers, or management consultants.'
On the other hand, non-executives can sometimes be poor overseers, no matter
what their background. The non-executive directors of Barclays, who include
Lord Lawson, the former Chancellor, and also some of the UK's most powerful
businessmen, such as Sir Denys Henderson, the ICI chairman, have been widely
criticised for the clumsy way in which they managed the process of finding a
replacement for Barclays' former chairman, Sir John Quinton, over the past
year.
Ministerial experience may, however, be appropriate training for chairmen.
Lord Younger, former defence secretary and now chairman of Royal Bank of
Scotland, has 'a remarkable ability to defuse difficult situations',
according to Dr George Mathewson, RBS's chief executive.
What the Labour Party gets exercised about is the notion that former
ministers exploit their political friendships to win valuable state
business. There is evidence that companies with international interests can
benefit from a former minister's contacts.
Lord Prior has been helpful to GEC, where he is chairman, in opening doors
outside the UK.
'In certain parts of the world he is very useful,' says a GEC adviser.
'When I go to Egypt and Pakistan, they (the officials and ministers) know me
from my time in government,' Lord Young says. 'It is helpful if you are
dealing with issues such as getting an overseas licence.'
He says that Mr Francis Maude, former financial secretary, is the best
example of a politician profiting from his ability to deal directly with
senior foreign politicians. Mr Maude is paid an estimated Pounds 500,000 a
year to head up the team at US investment bank Morgan Stanley working on
international privatisations.
Lord Young is adamant, however, that there is nothing sinister about using
business contacts in that way. 'It is quite legitimate', he says.
Closer to the UK, Smith New Court has won Welsh clients as a result of the
connections Lord Walker made as Welsh Secretary.
The Labour party is most outraged when former ministers join the boards of
companies they may have regulated or privatised as ministers (examples
include Lord Walker at British Gas, Lord Tebbit at British Telecom, and Lord
Young at Cable & Wireless).
But a company's relationship with UK officials and ministers can be strained
by having a former minister as a director. Lord Young says: 'Civil servants
get very nervous when an ex-minister comes in.' He says they are so keen not
to show favour to a former minister that they may discriminate against him
and his com-pany.
Lazard Brothers, the UK merchant bank, was acutely aware of this danger when
Sir John Nott, the former defence minister, was its chairman, and he rarely
tried to exploit his contacts.
Similarly Salomon Brothers insisted that Lord Young, who is a director of
the US investment bank, should stay as far away as possible from its attempt
to secure a role in the government's sales of BT shares in the spring. The
sad truth for shareholders in companies which employ ex ministers is that
Labour's conspiracy theories are not watertight.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930904

