FT933-12456

FT  23 JUL 93 / Money Markets: French rates soar


   By STEPHANIE FLANDERS


FRENCH money market rates climbed sharply yesterday amid renewed currency
excitement, although the Bank of France stopped short of lifting official
rates to support the franc, writes Stephanie Flanders.
The French rates rose as speculative fears spread through foreign exchange
markets. One-month bid rates were pushed up to 9 per cent, compared to the
previous day's 7.8 per cent, while one-week money finished 2 percentage
points higher at 10.5 per cent.
Speculative selling of the franc had been on the wane on Monday and Tuesday,
with the currency recovering much of the previous week's losses. The franc's
recent resilience led many to think that the Bank of France could see off
the speculators, at least until a possible reduction in German interest
rates at the Bundesbank council meeting next Thursday.
But the chances of such a cut fell sharply with news that German monetary
growth had again outstripped its target range of 4.5 to 6.5 per cent,
growing by 7.1 per cent in June. As a result, the market's focus shifted
yesterday to how the Bank of France would react.
There was a spate of rumours towards the end of the day that the central
bank was going to announce a rise in overnight lending rates to defend the
French currency's position in the European exchange rate mechanism, but
these were strongly denied.
Earlier in the day, the French authorities had suspended their five to
10-day lending facility, the first official change in French lending
conditions since the current tensions began. But the overnight lending
window which the bank offered instead was no higher than before, at 7.75 per
cent.
The Bank of France last withdrew the 5 to 10-day window at the height of
January's speculation against the franc. But then the bank raised the
overnight lending rate at the same time, from 10 to 12 per cent. Many market
participants thought the French action not particularly dramatic, by the
standards of previous ERM battles.
'The Bank of France has taken one step in setting up more defences for the
franc,' said Mr Christian Dunis, international economist at Chemical Bank in
London. 'But leaving the rate unchanged limits its impact. The Bundesbank
might well think that the French could have done more to help its own
currency.'
Futures trading reacted to the tensions, with the September Pibor contract
losing 4 basis points to close at 92.65.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930723

