FT931-4095

FT  12 MAR 93 / Not such a super Mario: The departure of Glaxo's chief
executive reflects a conflict over management style


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS and TONY JACKSON


The abrupt departure of Glaxo's chief executive yesterday is final
confirmation that one of the world's most successful drug companies has lost
its glamour. Even now, most other companies would regard Glaxo's position
with pure envy: double-digit earnings growth, a market value of Pounds 20bn
and Pounds 1.5bn of spare cash in the bank. But even Glaxo, it seems, is
groping for direction in a changing world.
The fall of Dr Ernest Mario can be seen on different levels. At the most
superficial, the picture emerges of a manager who had lost the confidence
not just of his immensely powerful chairman, Sir Paul Girolami, but of the
other executive directors.
Dr Mario, it is said, had an excessively hands-on style in dealing with
Glaxo's overseas territories. The older Glaxo tradition was to allow
regional directors considerable freedom, subject to stringent financial
targets. Dr Mario, a manager with an impressive grasp of detail, seems to
have practised a more interventionist style with his fellow directors.
He was also occasionally given to ill-judged public statements. Last March,
he told the press that Immigran, Glaxo's crucially important new migraine
drug, would be licensed imminently in the US; in fact it took until
December. Last month, he caused a stir by advocating a means test for
prescriptions in the UK: or, as the London Daily Express put it, 'Drop free
drugs says Pounds 1m boss'.
Perhaps there was a more fundamental issue. In the past, Sir Paul was
responsible for focusing Glaxo entirely on the manufacture of prescription
drugs. Dr Mario has been thought to lean towards a different option: that of
over-the-counter (OTC) non-prescription medicines. Glaxo's ulcer treatment
Zantac, for instance, the world's best-selling drug, could be sold without
prescription as an antacid.
In recent weeks, there have been recurrent rumours of a giant rights issue
from Glaxo to buy a big OTC producer such as Warner Lambert of the US. Was
this the reason for the bust-up?
Not at all, Sir Paul said yesterday. 'Nobody, either Ernie (Mario) or the
board, has ever said that we're going to be an OTC company. Not at all.
We're looking for ways and means of marketing our research-based products in
the OTC market if there is a proper place for them. Ernie was more
open-minded on implementing that, but that's not a policy difference.
As for a rights issue, Sir Paul says, that is 'barmy'. What on earth would
Glaxo want a rights issue for? To buy something really big, is the obvious
answer. But that, says Sir Paul, has never crossed his mind. 'In the
process, you would change your policy. To buy, say, Procter and Gamble just
to enable us to sell our research-based products in the OTC market would be
absurd. And there was no conflict between us on that policy. Never, never,
never.'
The real policy issue, according to Sir Paul, goes deeper still. Glaxo needs
to change its organisational structure to cope with change. Dr Mario did not
fit in.
As to what these changes are, Sir Paul is reluctant to specify. Though he
does not say so, part of the problem clearly is that Glaxo has become too
big. The board structure has to be broadened and those at the top of the
company must be freed to deal with strategic issues at the operating level
around the world.
'Running all these markets is a big job. I did it myself when I was chief
executive 12 years ago, but it was possible then because we were much
smaller. Take India, which isn't very profitable. Who's got time to look
after that? It's a big company, with four or five thousand people in it. You
might say that's not important. It is absolutely vital for the future of
that company that it gets the support and the attention and the direction it
needs.
'The mistakes I'm trying to forecast are not mistakes in the market. We must
be making hundreds of them. It's mistakes in direction and development.
We're a lot better than we were, but even now there are major companies in
the group which are not major profit earners, and are not getting the
attention they deserve.'
The new structure, says Sir Paul, involves him being less involved in the
hands-on running of the company than before. But one individual, the former
research director Dr Richard Sykes, is to assume extraordinary powers. He is
the new chief executive and deputy chairman, while retaining responsibility
for a research department which last year spent Pounds 595m.
But the point, says Sir Paul, is that the running of the operations has been
delegated to another director, Dr Franz Humer. Not entirely, though: the US,
much the largest of Glaxo's markets, will still report to Dr Sykes.
There is also the perplexing question of succession. Sir Paul is to retire
in two and a half years, on reaching 70. Dr Mario was widely accepted as the
heir apparent. But talk about personal succession, says Sir Paul, is crazy.
'You can do that with prime ministers, you can do it with bureaucratic
institutions, you might even do it with newspapers. Not with a company like
ours.'
It is 'extremely unlikely', he says, that Dr Mario would have succeeded him.
So does the change in board structure mean the succession is now more open?
Not necessarily: Dr Sykes, says Sir Paul, must have first claim, though
there are three or four other candidates.
In the end, it appears, Dr Mario had to go because he was not the right man
for the new structure. 'The issue is his fitness, in the next 10 years, to
run an organisation in the way we intend. I don't think there's much beyond
that. Even if it had been true that we had disagreed over the OTC question,
it's incredible that it would have been a leaving issue. Eventually I would
just have said to him: 'Where does the buck stop? And in two and a half
years, with a bit of luck you can do what you like.'
'But these issues are much deeper and more general than that. At that level,
you're talking about a very important job: so important that, unfortunately,
it's black and white. You can't say: 'Look Ernie, we're not going to get on,
but you had a wonderful job at Glaxo Inc - go back.' You just can't do it.'
In the end, the explanation is not wholly satisfactory. But Glaxo is a
deeply secretive company, which has been forced by yesterday's drama to lift
a corner of the veil. Whatever really lies behind it, the company will never
project quite the same image again.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930312

