FT932-13307

FT  23 APR 93 / Money Markets: A day of surprises


   By JAMES BLITZ


EXPECTATIONS of lower int-erest rates across Europe increased sharply
yesterday after the Bundesbank surprised dealers by cutting its discount
rate by 25 basis points, writes James Blitz.
The cut in the discount rate to 7.25 per cent was hailed as having strong
implications for future Bundesbank policy, implying concern about the state
of the German economy.
Dealers started the European day believing Wednesday's figures for M3
monetary supply growth in Germany - which were far higher than the market
had expected - had made an easing in monetary policy unlikely.
One clue to the Bundes-bank's change of heart, however, was the dramatic
fall in German call money at the start of yesterday's trading. The overnight
rate of interest dropped from about 8.10 per cent to 7.80 per cent because
of the high liquidity in the market.
Unbeknown to dealers, Wednesday's injection of a net DM5.8bn of liquidity
may have been part of a Bundesbank strategy to ease officially posted rates:
the proximity of call money to the interest rate floor made a cut in the
discount rate more likely.
The Bundesbank did not announce a fixed rate repo for next week. However,
there were strong expectations that the repo rate - whether variable or
fixed - would come down to reflect the new structure of market rates.
The Bundesbank's cut was followed by a sharp climb in Euromark futures. The
June contract rose 16 basis points on the day to close at 92.78. The June
French franc con-tract gained 16 basis points, ending at 91.97. One-month
French francs dropped more than 40 basis points from their peak of the day
to around 8.80 per cent.
Expectations of another reduction in UK base rates diminished sharply
yesterday after the unemployment figures for March registered a net drop on
the month for the second time running.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment declined by 26,000. The June short sterling
contract fell 16 basis points to a low of 93.80. However, the news from
Germany lifted it back up to a close of 93.91.
Sterling cash markets were more muted. Three-month money finished unchanged
at 6 per cent. A shortage of Pounds 1.3bn in the discount market pushed the
overnight lending rate up to 7.5 per cent at one stage.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930423

