FT932-13286

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (11): US investors
fear higher interest rates and the return of inflation - Equities


   From PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


US STOCK markets put in a solid performance during the first quarter. Daily
trading volume hit record levels, as did the main stock indices at one stage
or another. By the end of the three months, the Dow Jones Industrial Average
had gained 3.8 per cent to stand at 3,435.11 - about 40 points short of its
all-time high, set in mid-March.
The Standard & Poor's 500 index tracked the Dow closely, rising 3.7 per cent
in the quarter, to end at 451.67. The disappointment was in secondary
stocks, with the Nasdaq composite posting a gain of only 1.9 per cent,
ending the period at 690.13.
It was low interest rates that provided the fuel for the markets' advance.
Although gross domestic product had grown by a surprisingly strong 4.8 per
cent in the final three months of 1992, economic growth for early 1993 was
expected to be modest, and relatively inflation-free. These expectations,
coupled with surprise at President Clinton's willingness to tackle the
budget deficit, pushed US interest rates to historic lows.
Over the three months, the yield on the benchmark 30-year bond dropped from
an early-January high of just under 7.5 per cent to around 6.7 per cent -
the lowest yield in the issue's history. Short-term market rates also fell
sharply.
It was low rates that forced so many investors to move their money out of
poor-yielding short-term financial instruments, like bank certificates of
deposit and money-market funds, and put them into equities, either directly,
or through mutual funds, which attracted record amounts of cash during the
quarter.
Earnings, however, did play a part in the markets' progress. Generally,
companies reported solid, and sometimes better-than-expected profits for the
final quarter of 1992, including the big three auto manufacturers, whose
fortunes continued to improve steadily.
But some big names ran into trouble. The most notable was IBM, which had a
miserable quarter after losing billions of dollars and announcing the first
round of genuinely compulsory layoffs in its history. At least the
appointment of a new chairman, former RJR Nabisco chief Louis Gerstner,
meant that the period ended on an upbeat note. Several other beleagured
blue-chip companies also brought in new management during the quarter,
including American Express and Westinghouse Electric.
As always, share prices did not move upward in a straight line. The biggest
reversal came in mid-February, when President Clinton's pre-budget warning
of tax increases spooked investors, who feared the hikes would hurt the
economy. They were also unhappy at the lack of spending cuts in the
administration's economic plan. In two days, the Dow fell more than 100
points.
Equities quickly recovered their composure, thanks primarily to the
sustained rally in the bond market, which was pushing yields to record lows.
The quarter ended, however, with the markets in a subdued mood. Investors
are worried that interest rates may soon be heading up, that inflation may
pick up again soon (because of rising commodity prices and the weak dollar);
and they are confused about the state of the economic recovery, which seemed
to slowing - quite possibly under the weight of the Clinton tax increases.
Canada: The index of 300 leading issues on the Toronto Stock Exchange rose
7.5 per cent in the quarter. Growing confidence in the outlook for the
economy, heavy demand for forestry stocks (plus the fact that Canadian
shares fell so far during the recent recession and therefore had more ground
to recover), explained the strong
G259
performance. The news that prime minister Brian Mulroney would step down
this summer had little impact on the market.
Mexico: share prices barely moved, with the Prices and Quotations Index
gaining less than 1 per cent in the quarter to end at 1,771.71. Concern
about the economic and trade policies of the new US administration, coupled
with higher domestic interest rates and disappointing economic growth, held
the market back.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

930423

