FT932-300

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (2): Radio links may spur
identity crisis - Local area networks are commonplace. But they are
challenging and can be costly


   By MICHAEL DEMPSEY


THE Local Area Network (Lan) is a fact of life in any organisation faced
with the need to tie PC users together. But while the Lan has become
commonplace, it still throws up technical and business challenges.
The very fact that computer networking is now taken for granted contributes
to the growing cost of keeping Lans up and running.
One recent study com- missioned by Computervision Services suggests that as
much as 17 per cent of IT expenditure is now swallowed up in supporting Lans
after installation. But the same survey found that forward planning of Lans
has a low priority. Fellow networking contractor 3Com investigated its
market and concluded that the happy vision of a global computing environment
with companies linked through a series of seamless networks remains a
high-tech myth.
The manufacturing and finance sectors have come to rely heavily on Lans. But
3Com's research indicates that while some 70 per cent of Lan users in those
sectors planned to increase data communic- ations, only one quarter of large
organisations are foll- owing a clear networking strategy.
Naturally, contractors in the field are keen to highlight the benefits of
hiring their services. But confusion over the future of networking is due to
more than inadequate strategic thinking. The fact is that the Lan itself may
soon face an identity crisis.
For a decade, a Lan has consisted of physical connections between PCs and
software governing the exchange of data. With the emergence of multimedia
technology, the Lan is suddenly required to transmit sound and video images.
The Lan standards of token-ring and Ethernet are not at their best in this
environment.
Of course, IT manufacturers with an investment in multi- media have an
answer. They propose abolishing the kilo- metres of wiring that charac-
terise building-wide Lans and introducing radio links. If binding PCs
together via radio waves seems obvious, the reason it has taken so long to
arrive is mired in radio frequency regulations. With the liberalisation of
telecoms, previously restricted frequen- cies are being made available.
NCR, owned by US telecoms giant AT&T, has pitched in with Wavelan. This is a
net- working scheme using spread spectrum, a microwave type radio
transmission favoured by military raiding parties behind enemy lines. The
attraction is that PCs can be held centrally, dispensed for a particular
project and used in a Lan without planning out and installing wiring. Mr
Simon Goodwin, NCR's architecture consultant, calls it 'deliver and drop
technology'.
With a Wavelan card fitted into a standard PC, the service costs Pounds 675
a connection. Mr Goodwin concedes that the delivery rate of data cannot
compare with Ethernet but says the difference becomes apparent only with
intensive work by a large user com- munity.
Olivetti's foray into wireless Lans is termed Net3, a mathematical reference
to three-dimensional, cubed space. This relies on Digital European Cordless
Telecom- munications. Radio relay points act as Lan hubs, joining up systems
over a 50-100m radius. Net3 costs Pounds 1,000 per user.
Mr Wynne Davies, product marketing manager, agrees that intensive use
creates problems, but says this can be overcome by installing more external
radio points. 'The advantage of Dect is that it will support voice. It's
very much a multimedia protocol.' Mr Goodwin claims this is Net3's weakness.
'Dect was developed for voice, not data.' Whatever their differences over
protocols, both companies recognise retail sites and institutions that
frequently reconfigure office space as potential converts to radio- based
Lans.
The European Space Agency has tried out Net3 to back up computers outdoors
and at temporary sites.
Mr Adrian Ridley-Jones, a senior consultant at systems house Logica, has
assessed both systems. He stresses that for intensive processing a
conventional Lan configured to cope with masses of data is still the best
route. 'For something like credit card processing you need the equiv- alent
of a big fat pipe, not the narrow bandwidth of radio.'
Mr Ridley-Jones identifies the hidden costs of keeping conventional Lans up
and running as a more immediate issue. Best-selling Lan products from
suppliers such as market leader Novell can lead to difficulties as the
system expands to cope with more use and users. 'These networks can be
incredibly expensive and difficult to manage when you start taking on
support staff.'
Mr Peter Steggall is head of IT strategy and planning at NatWest Life.
Launched on January 4 as a life insurance, pensions and unit trust operation
within the NatWest group, this organisation has formidable networking
requirement. NatWest Life has already spent Pounds 40m on com- puter
systems. A Unisys main- frame is tied via commun- ications processors to a
central data-processing Lan that can talk in turn to PC workstations
configured in a series of Lans.
Network growth is a big issue, Mr Steggall concedes. 'We've got servers all
over the place and no one is looking after them. We need very sophisticated
network management software to keep the whole system running.' With the
decline of the all-powerful data-processing centre and rise of decentralised
computing, some drawbacks have emerged. 'The environ- ment is not as
reliable as the old DP centre set-up.'
NatWest Life has called in consultants Hoskyns to cope with network
maintenance on a Pounds 500,000 a year contract. The effort of keeping up
with technical developments was not worth doing inhouse. Hoskyns is under
strict orders. 'The criterion is not just to deliver the service but to
improve it over the years as new Lan techniques emerge.'
Radio-based Lans are a possibility, says Mr Steggall. He forecasts the need
to incor- porate yet more capacity into Lans to cope with multimedia images.
But after the furious spread of Lans over the last decade, he is wise to be
cautious, preferring to learn from other's mistakes. 'We're not going to be
on the bleeding edge of technology.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

930629

