FT934-8736

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: The Week Ahead


Shares in British Steel shares have more than doubled this year, reflecting
relief that the group has been able to make price increases stick in the
slowly recovering UK market.
On Monday analysts expect pre-tax profits of about Pounds 10m in the six
months to October, compared with a loss of Pounds 51m last time, and
resumption of an interim dividend of 0.5p.
Most interest will focus on the progress of restructuring the European steel
industry, with the company anxious to maintain maximum pressure on the UK
government to seek the closure through the European Commission of less
efficient capacity.
The City will be looking for confirmation from British Airways on Tuesday
that the airline is riding out the recession better than its main
competitors. Pre-tax profits for the second quarter should be close to
Pounds 170m, compared with Pounds 136m last year.
Interim results the same day from BAA, which operates the UK's biggest
airports, should see pre-tax profits rise beyond Pounds 240m, compared with
Pounds 220m last time, with the dividend rising to almost 7p from 6.25p.
Analysts will be keen to see how the company's retailing interests are
faring. That part of its business is taking on an increasingly important
role as parking and landing fees aid by airlines are tightly controlled by
regulatory rules.
Commercial Union and General Accident are both expected to report
substantial increases in profits when they post their results for the first
nine months of 1993 next week.
Analysts expect GA to record pre-tax profits on Tuesday of between Pounds
195m and Pounds 230m compared to a loss of Pounds 37m at the same stage last
year.
CU on Wednesday is expected to register an increase to between Pounds 128m
and Pounds 151m, compared to Pounds 6m last year. Increases in premium
rates, especially in the UK and improved claims experience are the main
reasons.
Cable and Wireless interim pre-tax profits forecasts are in the range Pounds
490m to Pounds 520m. At Pounds 500m, C&W would be 32 per cent ahead of last
year (Pounds 378m), with earnings per share up to 10.9p from 9p (adjusted).
However, most of the increased profit is attributable to currency gains on
its business in Hong Kong and the Caribbean. Currency neutral, earnings
growth is projected at slightly under 10 per cent, with UK subsidiary
Mercury performing less well than the overseas businesses.
Land Securities, the UK's biggest property company, is expected to report
flat interim figures on Thursday. Analysts are looking for pre-tax profits
of around Pounds 117m - half the Pounds 234m for the year ended March. A
small increase in the dividend for the full-year is expected, but there
might not be a rise in the interim, which was 6.3p last time.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

931113

