FT933-5329

FT  03 SEP 93 / International Capital Markets: Thai groups rush to tap
Eurobond and warrant sectors - Victor Mallet writes from Bangkok on the
latest vogues in debt issuance


   By VICTOR MALLET


THIS year has seen a string of dollar-denominated convertible Eurobonds and
baht debentures with warrants announced by Thai companies.
The trigger for the wave of issues was last year's Securities and Exchange
Commission act, which established Thailand's SEC, allowed public companies
to issue baht debt and removed some of the legal and fiscal obstacles to the
issuing of Eurobonds.
Demand for the new instruments was ensured by the relatively high rates of
interest charged by Thai banks for baht loans and by the buoyant state of
the local stock exchange.
Among those raising cash through Eurobonds convertible into their shares -
typical amounts are between Dollars 40m and Dollars 80m - are finance
houses, chemical companies and property groups such as Land and House and
Hemaraj Land.
More than 20 companies have made plans to raise money through baht
debentures, usually with warrants and terms of about five years.
Mr Korn Chatikavanij, managing director of Jardine Fleming Thanakom
Securities, which is lead-managing several new issues, says Thai companies
could raise the equivalent of about Bt10bn (Dollars 398m) this year through
Euroconvertibles, and almost as much again through baht debentures.
'Thailand is catching on to tradeable debt paper,' says Mr Chris Drake, a
director of Standard Chartered Thailand. SCT is advising General Finance and
Securities on a Bt1bn debenture and warrant issue.
Thai companies are tapping the Eurobond market because of the wide
differential between Thai and US interest rates which exists in spite of the
Thai baht closely tracking the US dollar; the dollar is believed to account
for about 80 per cent of the currency basket used by the Thai authorities to
fix baht exchange rates.
Instead of paying 12 or 13 per cent interest to a Thai bank, companies can
pay perhaps 6 per cent via a Eurobond; in some cases they have made the bond
redeemable at a fixed baht-dollar exchange rate, eliminating what little
exchange risk there is. The only drawback is the prospect of earnings per
share dilution when the bonds are converted.
For investors, convertible bonds are a bet on the growing Thai economy and
the Thai stock exchange. 'It's a booming business,' says Mr Ong Soon Teik of
SCT. 'It's going to be attractive as long as there's this wide spread
between Thai and US interest rates.'
Debentures are also attractive cost-savers for Thai companies, especially
those without the standing to issue Eurobonds, because the speculative value
of warrants allows them to pay lower interest rates than those available
from banks, and to pay a fixed rate over several years if they wish.
'A lot of listed companies are going to bypass the bankers for funds,' says
Mr Ong.
Some stockbrokers are cautious about the enthusiasm for debentures and warn
of a lack of liquidity and inadequate regulation. The debenture fad, they
say, is a classic sign of a market approaching its peak.
Although some prospective borrowers are blue chip companies, others have a
less than impressive track record.
There is no trustee system for bonds in Thailand, and the regulations for
the secondary debt market and for debt rating agencies have not yet been
firmly established or clarified, although one such agency - Thai Rating and
Information Services or Tris - has started operations. 'It's very
dangerous,' says one foreign stockbroker. 'Debt markets require a lot of
regulation.'
Others are not so gloomy. 'The market can really develop properly if there
is liquidity,' says Mr Korn of Jardine Fleming Thanakom. 'All the major
finance houses are gearing themselves to be active market makers.'

The Financial Times


London Page 24

930903

