FT934-11741

FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: Ericsson a political outsider,
says chief


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   STOCKHOLM


MR LARS Ramqvist, chief executive of Ericsson, said yesterday the Swedish
telecommunications group was losing orders around the world because it
lacked the political connections of its American, Japanese and European
rivals.
'We could easily double our revenues today if we had the same political and
financial muscle as our competitors,' he said.
He said Ericsson, which holds about 40 per cent of the world mobile
telephone market, was having to spend about Dollars 2bn a year, or 22 per
cent of its sales, on research and development to keep up with fast-changing
telecommunications technologies and markets.
'Frankly, 22 per cent is too high a number,' he said. 'We are gambling that
we can expand the business enough to keep spending levels where they are.'
Ericsson has grown rapidly this year on the back of soaring mobile telephone
sales. It says it will double 1992 profits of SKr1.3bn (Dollars 160m). Its
share price has risen from SKr186 at the end of 1992 to more than SKr440,
greatly strengthening the group's financial position.
Ericsson also swallows more than half of Sweden's export credit support.
However, Mr Ramqvist warned that this was dwarfed by the financial and
political support its rivals had access to.
He said Ericsson emerged recently as the lowest bidder for a large public
fixed-telephone system in Saudi Arabia. Its bid of Dollars 1.7bn was below
those of AT&T of the US, Northern Telecom of Canada, Germany's Siemens, and
Alcatel of France.
However, Mr Ramqvist said other factors such as political influence could
swing the contract away from Ericsson.
He complained that outsiders still did not have free access in many markets,
and were at a disadvantage in deals such as the Saudi contract, which
involved heavy offset conditions. Agreement in the Uruguay Round of talks
within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was essential to Ericsson.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931029

