FT934-11672

FT  30 OCT 93 / French jobless at record level


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


FRENCH unemployment hit a record in September, rising to 11.8 per cent of
the workforce from 11.7 per cent in August, according to figures announced
yesterday by the labour ministry. The number of unemployed rose by 26,400 to
3.24m.
The rise in unemployment, which is forecast to breach 12 per cent by the end
of the year, is the biggest problem facing the government of Mr Edouard
Balladur. It has prompted demands for a more expansionary economic policy
and has weakened the government's ability to implement restructuring of
public sector industry.
The weak state of the French economy was confirmed by trade figures released
yesterday which showed a surplus of FFr10.44bn (Pounds 1.19bn) in July,
reflecting the low level of demand for imports. But the statistics also
brought encouragement for Mr Balladur's government, demonstrating that
French industry remains competitive in international markets.
The seasonally adjusted trade figures included a surplus of FFr1.6bn with
Germany and were within a shadow of the record FFr10.6bn surplus recorded
last May.
The unemployment and trade statistics come amid a series of indicators which
suggest that the economy is stabilising and heading towards recovery from
the recession which it has suffered since the end of 1992.
'The number of favourable signs are increasing,' said Mr Alphandery, the
economy minister, referring to a 0.7 per cent rise in consumption in
September and a 1.3 per cent rise in industrial production in July and
August compared with June. But Mr Alphandery remained cautious about the
prospect for the economy. 'The situation is moving in the right direction
but we have not yet had lift-off,' he said.
Such caution was justified by the composition of the trade figures. The
total value of imports in July was FFr86.3bn, a fall of about 15 per cent on
the same period in 1992. Imports of capital goods had been particularly
weak.
Exports, however, continued their upward trend of the past few months,
rising from FFr94.9bn in June to FFr96.8bn in July. 'The trade figures show
that the external sector is doing much better than the rest of the economy
and that French industry is competitive,' said Mr Jean-Francois Mercier,
economist at Salomon Bros. Mr Mercier forecast a surplus in excess of
FFr45bn for the full year.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931030

