FT932-3289

FT  15 JUN 93 / Arts: Springboards Festival - 'Syme' / Theatre


   By ANDREW ST GEORGE


The National Theatre's Springboards Festival of new work in Leicester,
Liverpool, London and Salisbury continues at the Birmingham Rep Studio with
Syme, a curious, quirky play about dissent in the police force.
Inspector John Syme (1875-1945) joined the Metropolitan Police in 1894, was
suspended in 1909 and dismissed in 1910 over an incident which set his own
liberal practice against the dictates of discipline and duty within the
establishment. Syme saw the police force as a civil organisation, and his
dismissal as a worrying gain for officialdom. He wrote in 1925: 'in the
future . . . no Civil Servant will be safe if, in the performance of his or
her duty to the Community, he or she expresses an opinion contrary to some
one in authority over them.' That is the issue.
Between 1910 and 1931, Syme conducted a blazing public relations campaign
for his innocence. It included 10,000 pamphlets to opinion-formers, and a
deluge of fruit and veg pelted at the Home Office, rather like a hustings
scene from Smollett. Syme was imprisoned 27 times on various grounds,
including lunacy. On each occasion he staged a hunger strike, as if the
sentence were little more than a spell at Champneys. In 1931 he was
retroactively pardoned and reinstated. During this time, this apparently
inveterate convict founded the National Union of Police and Prison Officers.
This makes engaging if not dramatic theatre, well directed by Anthony Clark,
who gets versatile performances from all seven cast. Claude Close as
Churchill, Peter Macqueen as Syme and Maria Gough as his tireless wife are
particularly attuned to the times. The fine encounter between Syme and Home
Secretary Churchill, standing at the top end of a sloping desk, manages a
visual metaphor for social and political power. Elsewhere, the barge-footed
policemen are just jolly coppers on parade: 'Rules is rules, Inspector Syme,
and the law is the law.'
The play's 31 scenes march briskly forward to music hall and military bands.
The tunes are so like de Souza's Liberty Bell and the designs (Ruari
Muchison) so redolent of Terry Gillam, that the show has an air of Monty
Python.
In fact, Syme (written by Michael Bourdages) is in praise of wronged
eccentricity. Syme's sad history proves that the English love to revert to
rules. And where traditions or customs are the rule of conduct rather than
individual character, both individual happiness and social progress are
jeopardised.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930615

