FT934-11300

FT  02 NOV 93 / Australia to let Tiananmen exiles stay


   By NIKKI TAIT


   SYDNEY


AUSTRALIA is to allow about 19,000 Chinese citizens, who were living in
Australia at the time of the Tiananmen Square massacre, to apply for
permanent residence, the federal government announced yesterday.
They had previously been granted only temporary residence.
Yesterday, announcing a number of changes in Australian immigration policy,
Senator Nick Bolkus, the immigration minister, said Chinese nationals who
were in the country at the time of the 1989 upheavals, and families who had
joined them subsequently, would be granted permanent residence provided they
met certain health and character criteria.
He estimated that about 28,000 Chinese could become permanent residents
under the scheme. 'We will basically give formal legal recognition to
(their) status here by this decision,' Mr Bolkus told a press conference in
Canberra.
He said the treatment of these individuals would be outside the 'normal'
migration programme, but the cost to the country would be limited. 'Those
people are here, they're working here, they have very low dependence on
social security.
'The cost of them coming into the community, the further integration of
them, is minimal, if anything at all.'
Meanwhile, asylum-seekers who arrive in Australia before applying for
refugee status will also be entitled to permanent residence rather than the
temporary residence they are now offered if their applications are
successful, the government announced. Since 1990, people granted refugee
status after they arrived in Australia, such as the Cambodian boat people,
have been given only temporary residence permits.
And a third new measure, also announced yesterday, will create a new onshore
permanent residence category for Chinese nationals who arrived in Australia
after Tiananmen, and for Sri Lankans and nationals of the former Yugoslavia
who live in Australia under special humanitarian concessions. To be eligible
for this category, applicants must satisfy certain age, educational and visa
conditions.
Immigration to Australia dropped sharply last year, from 107,391 in 1991-92
to 76,330 in the following 12 months.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

931102

