FT934-10168

FT  06 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Profiting from CGT - Capital gains
is the great unexploited tax break. Scheherazade Daneshkhu tells how to make
the most of it


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


CAPITAL gains is the great unexploited tax break. The annual CGT exemption
entitles everyone to a slice of tax-free gains when they come to sell
assets. In the present tax year, individuals are allowed to make Pounds
5,800 of capital gains before having to pay CGT.
Most people do not use up their exemption. Only 85,000 faced a bill for CGT
in the 1992/93 tax year, compared with 1.6m who paid higher-rate income tax.
That leaves plenty of scope for tax planning, particularly by converting
interest income into capital gains. And since husbands and wives each have
their own allowance, this allows further planning opportunities.
Investors also are entitled to an indexation allowance which gives
protection from the effects of post-1982 inflation, and they can also offset
losses against gains. Unlike gains, losses can be carried forward
indefinitely to be set off against future gains. But the losses of one
spouse cannot be set off against the gains of the other.
Since gains cannot be carried forward, it is worthwhile trying to make use
of the CGT exemption every year. Large investors can do this by reviewing
their equity portfolio annually and realising gains - by selling shares and
buying them back, or bed and breakfasting in the jargon - in order to
increase their base price.
The process does, however, involve such costs as commission and stamp duty
and carries the risk that prices might move against you while you are out of
the market. But if you own shares which have become negligible in value -
perhaps as a result of a company going into liquidation - they do not have
to be sold in order to realise a loss. Instead, you can claim to make use of
the unrealised losses, which can be offset against any gains made in the
year of the claim.
You should never construct a portfolio around the sole aim of saving tax,
since it is the performance of the investments which matters in the long
run. By being aware of the opportunities for exploiting the CGT exemption,
though, you could find that some fit in with your investment strategy.
Converting income into capital gain
A higher-rate taxpayer who does not use his CGT allowance could save up to
Pounds 2,320 a year by ensuring that profit normally taken as income is
taken as capital gain instead. If all higher-rate taxpayers managed to use
up their CGT allowance in this way, they would collectively save Pounds
3.7bn a year in tax (assuming that income tax thresholds and the CGT
allowance did not change).
Earlier this year, Ivory & Sime, the fund management group, launched an
investment trust based on exploiting the annual CGT exemption to give
investors an annual tax-free income of 7 per cent, paid monthly.
The ISIS trust does this by selling 7 per cent of an investor's holding
every year in order to use up the CGT exemption. The trust's launch was not,
however, particularly successful, raising just Pounds 26.6m.
Private investors can do much the same thing by constructing a portfolio of
zero dividend preference shares. These are one class of share in a
split-level investment trust and do not pay income. Instead, all the return
comes in the form of capital growth - which means that, for tax purposes,
the profit counts as capital gains rather than income.
An investor can sell zeros steadily to generate gains which can be taken as
income; tax will not be payable as long as the gains do not exceed Pounds
5,800. Zeros now yield around 7-8 per cent gross, which is more attractive
than the returns from building societies.
Richard Boyton, of Boyton Financial Services, suggests that those who want a
balanced portfolio of zeros can opt for the Exeter Zero Preference fund.
This is a unit trust run by Exeter Fund Managers which invests specifically
in zeros and has grown by 37.7 per cent in the two years to November 1,
according to the Hardwick Stafford Wright 'stats pack'. The trust has an
initial charge of 5 per cent and an annual charge of 1.2 per cent.
Zeros are a particularly suitable share to use, but investors wanting to
make use of their CGT exemption can also invest in low-yielding shares which
have the aim of capital growth.
Other investments which do not pay income, but are liable to capital gains
tax are qualifying second-hand endowment policies.
If you have a lump sum but do not want to start a long-term endowment
policy, it could be an idea to invest in one (or even a series) of
second-hand endowments maturing in different years so as to take profits
(which will be taxed as capital gains). You will, however, have to keep up
the premiums.
BZW and Kleinwort Benson both offer funds which group togther endowment
policies and save investors the administrative bother of paying the
premiums.
Lowering the amount of CGT payable
David Harris, of Chantrey Financial Services, says it is possible to make
maximum use of the indexation allowance through careful planning. 'If a
purchase of shares were made on August 1 1992, and subsequent disposal took
place on June 30 1993, the indexation allowance would be based on increases
in the retail price index from August 1992 to June 1993.'
Harris points out, however, that by buying the shares one day earlier and
delaying selling them by a day, the indexation allowance would be based on
RPI changes from July 1992 to July 1993. 'Provided the RPI increases, a
greater indexation allowance will have accrued,' he adds.
Such precise timing might not always be possible but you should find it
relatively easy to involve your spouse in CGT planning. If the spouse has
not made use of their exemption, shares should be transferred to them before
being sold. Even if CGT is payable, it is a good idea to do this - provided
they are on a lower tax rate.
Boyton says investors also often overlook the fact that children have a CGT
exemption. Shares placed in a child's name should, ideally, not produce
income, since this is taxed at the donor's rate. But this is not the case
with CGT.
John Battersby, personal tax partner in KPMG Peat Marwick, says people who
work in a company in which they hold shares with at least 5 per cent of the
voting rights can get CGT relief. The relief was extended in March to
include all full-time officers and employees who hold the minimum number of
shares.
'Although known as retirement relief, paradoxically it does not require
retirement,' says Battersby. 'If the shareholder has reached 55 and sells
the shares, the first Pounds 150,000 of gains and half of the next Pounds
450,000 of gains can be tax-free.'
The investor will get the maximum relief if he has satisfied the conditions
for at least 10 years before making the sale. 'If there is no ready market
in the shares, a sale back to the company could qualify for the relief,
especially if the shareholder were disposing of his or her shares,'
Battersby adds.
In cases where an investor sells rights to shares and the proceeds are less
than 5 per cent of the value of the shares held in the company, Peter Rayney
and David Pooler, of accountant Moores Rowland, point out that it is
possible to make a claim to defer CGT liability. 'Effectively, the proceeds
realised are deducted from the allowable cost of the shares,' they say.
If a portfolio is constructed with the aim of exploiting the CGT exemption,
it is advisable to include within it assets which are not liable to CGT so
as to decrease the amount of taxable gains.
National Savings certificates, personal equity plans and the business
expansion scheme are all investments which are free of both income and
capital gains tax. Index-linked gilts earn most of their return in the form
of tax-free capital gain.

The Financial Times


London Page III

931106

