FT934-8733

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (4):
Wilson skis the globe - FT Round the World expedition


THE Financial Times is embarking on a unique fact-finding mission (and a
little fun): to boldly ski where few - if any, in some resorts - have skied
before. In 1994, Arnie Wilson, the FT's ski correspondent since 1986, and
his French-born companion Lucy Dicker will attempt to spend the entire year
skiing, without missing a day - except on August 20 which will pass them by
as they cross the date-line in Tahiti.
Their odyssey will take them to more than 300 resorts in 13 countries. Along
the way they will compile a monthly report for the Weekend FT on their
progress and adventures - for better or worse.
En route, readers who catch a glimpse of them in their FT pink ski suits as
they flash by - or perhaps totter past - will be entitled to enter a monthly
competition to win a magnum of Mercier pink champagne. In addition, another
competition is planned with skiing holidays and ski clothing and equipment
as prizes.
In January, the Financial Times Round The World Ski Expedition begins among
the Teton mountains at Jackson Hole, Wyoming and then moves on through
Idaho, Oregon, Lake Tahoe in California, Washington, and the spectacular
Canadian Rockies in British Columbia and Alberta.
In February they will press on through Montana, South Dakota, Iowa,
Minnesota, Wisconsin - where Wilson will celebrate his 50th birthday -
Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Tennessee, Georgia and even Alabama. March
finds them in North Carolina, West Virginia, Virginia, Maryland, Maryland,
Pennsylvania and New York before moving on to more conventional terrain in
Austria, Italy and Germany.
April is dominated by resorts in Switzerland and France. Then in May, Wilson
and Dicker will seek out the late snows of the Austrian glaciers before
moving on to the Himalayas, the Japan Alps and California before heading
south to the Andes resorts of Chile in mid-June. In mid-July they will be in
Argentina, and in mid-August they head for New Zealand and Australia.
The final two months will be spent back in the US, skiing through Vermont,
New York again, Maine and New Hampshire, Colorado and Utah. The expedition
finishes on December 31 1994 at its original starting point of Jackson Hole.
Sponsors include Hewlett Packard, Avis, American Airlines, Clarins, Air New
Zealand and Snow & Rock, which is providing equipment. The first expedition
report appears in January.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

931113

