FT932-13399

FT  23 APR 93 / Observer: Over-ride on economy


It seems Jacques Attali is not alone in his fondness for the good life. John
Major's vision of a classless society and his determination to save
taxpayers' money have fallen victim to an unseemly squabble over government
perks among his ministers.
The row centres on that most precious of perks: the 24-hour-a-day
ministerial car replete with chauffeur.
Taking the prime minister's vision to heart, the Department of Environment
decided the government car service could save money by standardising the
models. After all, each and every one of the 100 cars provided for ministers
in the Commons and the Lords costs the taxpayer more than Pounds 50,000 a
year to run.
No longer would junior ministers make do with workaday Montegos or Sierras
while their cabinet superiors luxuriated in Rover Sterlings and Jaguars.
Instead, all ranks would be assigned a middle-range Rover 800. The savings
on leasing and servicing costs would run into tens of thousands.
Junior ministers were understandably thrilled at the idea of some extra
leg-room. But Observer learns that a revolt by their seniors quashed the
plan.
What horrified ministers around cabinet level was not just the thought of
losing their leather upholstery. Even worse was the fear of being mistaken
for mere parliamentary under-secretaries on those long and arduous journeys
from their Whitehall offices to Westminster.
Sir Robin Butler, the cabinet secretary, was called on to defend their
privileges. The idea was quietly dropped.
Naively, trade and industry ministers then came up with an even better idea.
Since the prime minister was committed to shrinking the size of the public
sector, the car service should be privatised. Hundreds of thousands if not
millions of pounds would be saved by obliging all but the most senior
members of the cabinet to swap their individually assigned vehicles and
drivers for access to a central pool.
That was more than even the most junior minister could stomach. The idea has
been filed in the bin.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930423

