FT934-8464

FT  16 NOV 93 / Belgian strike campaign launched


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


BELGIAN unions yesterday fired a warning shot across the bows of the
country's government with the first of a planned series of strikes to
protest against proposals to cut wage costs and improve industrial
competitiveness.
Ministers from Belgium's centre-left coalition were last night said to be
entering the final stages of talks on measures which should cut social
security payments and increase indirect taxes.
Foreign investors and currency markets are watching the negotiations
closely. Analysts believe that if the government does not attack Belgium's
central problem of a looming budget and social security deficit, the Belgian
franc will come under renewed speculative pressure. During September and
October, the Belgian central bank had to fight hard to maintain its strict
policy of shadowing the D-Mark.
Some market analysts said yesterday they feared Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene,
Belgium's Christian Democrat prime minister, might have to water down his
strict line on government spending, to avoid a schism with his Socialist
coalition partners.
Yesterday's industrial action was particularly successful in Wallonia, the
French-speaking southern part of Belgium, paralysing the region's industry.
That only emphasised the difficulties for the government, because the
French-speaking Socialist members of the coalition are the most uneasy about
the government's plans.
Public transport in the cities was also hit by the action, although the
state railway, and Sabena, the national airline, were almost unaffected.
However, Socialist and Christian unions have promised a series of strikes
over the next few weeks, targeted on different regions of Belgium. The
unions say their action will culminate, 'if necessary', in a general strike,
to coincide with the summit of European Union leaders in Brussels on
December 10.
The French-speaking and Dutch-speaking Socialist parties are keen that
reductions in social expenditure should be offset by increases in property
and withholding tax. Christian Democrats are calling for savings of BFr75bn
(Pounds 1.4bn) on social security expenditure, while the Socialist parties
want to raise at least BFr30bn through indirect taxes on investment.
The unions yesterday attacked Belgian industry for hiding behind the
government's proposals. The employers' federation said the industrial action
was negative for industry as well as for the majority of Belgian citizens.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931116

