FT932-13549

FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (9):
Sharpened wits ensure success - Motivating people at the cutting edge of
science


   By CLAIRE WILKINSON


ONLY ONE in 5,000 compounds investigated by pharmaceutical companies reaches
the market place in the UK, and it takes at least 10 years for a new
medicine to be launched.
How to motivate scientists to continue their search for a cure with the odds
so stacked against them is a problem for drug companies. At the same time,
adequate rewards and recognition are necessary to keep modern-day
researchers from wandering away from the bench.
According to Dr John Taylor, senior vice-president, central research at
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, the peculiar nature of research breeds a positive
attitude in scientists. 'By definition, 99.9 per cent of research is
failure. It takes 10 years for the researcher to see the results of his
efforts, but research people are the ultimate optimists - they always
believe they are going to succeed.'
Like the inventor then, the researcher thinks his ideas are the best and
that they will work. But of the 10 new potential medicines proposed each
year within RPR's total research group, only one will eventually make it
through the development phase.
RPR points to two principal reasons why projects are cut. The first, says Dr
Taylor, is when a compound lacks clinical efficacy. 'There's a good idea,
the mechanism is nice, but it doesn't work when you use it in man.' The
second, he adds, is toxicology. 'It does work, but all the long-term safety
testing turns up a toxicity in an animal species that you have to drop.'
When an R&D project is stopped, particularly at a late stage, companies have
to deal with the disappointment felt by their drug research teams. As Dr Jim
Wright, director and vice-president, human resources, for R&D at SmithKline
Beecham, says, 'It's never easy. By that time, people have got a real
personal commitment to the outcome of that project.'
One answer is to fully integrate the R&D function with the rest of the
business, so it is not a sudden surprise when a project is shelved. Then,
'it's not as if you've given away your little baby to the midwife and she
has come back and said 'I'm sorry, I've dropped your baby on its head and
it's died',' says Dr Wright.
Research at SB covers five main therapeutic areas. These are:
cardiopulmonary; anti-infectives; inflammation and tissue repair;
neurosciences; and vaccines. Review committees comprising commercial and
scientific people meet regularly to discuss the development process. 'If you
can get that integration then there is much less disappointment,' says Dr
Wright, because 'we are working as a team towards a common end point.'
Team work though, is an expensive business and companies are increasingly
aware that their scientists expect to be well rewarded, competitively within
the market. 'You're employing a group of people who need to be motivated by
money like everyone else. They are highly skilled and their salaries have to
reflect that,' said Dr Taylor.
Scientists working for Glaxo, SB and RPR are rewarded according to a
sensible merits system, which allows them to get right to the top of the
scientific ladder. Benefits include: a salary increase based on individual
performance; a bonus system linked to the business results; and longer term
incentives based on stock options.
In addition to these financial incentives, most companies support their
scientists' attendance at conferences and publication of their papers. Dr
Frank-Joachim Morich, director of pharmaceuticals R&D at Bayer, says: 'We
encourage our researchers to be part of the scientific community.'
Even with scientific recognition, and all the material and financial rewards
that go with it, scientists may not feel sufficiently motivated to stay in
research for their working life. 'You well recognise that they can't
perhaps, or won't stay all their lives at the front of research,' said Dr
Taylor, 'Few people can be at the cutting edge of science all their lives
and not get burnt or wounded or cut.'
First-aid treatment in this instance takes the form of annual career
reviews, generating a dialogue for scientists who may wish to move away from
the front end of research. For example, at RPR and SB it is quite common for
a discovery chemist to develop into process chemistry after 10 years, and
then perhaps into manufacturing. 'People tend to evolve through an
organisation. They've got tremendous qualities and potential to give to the
group, which is why we develop them into other areas,' says Dr Taylor.
With about 100 people working on any one particular research project, man
management is a crucial part of science. Companies have to address the needs
of top-quality scientists, but management of these scientists is equally
important. Dr Taylor explains: 'All the best scientists are not necessarily
the best managers. You're looking for a very special breed of scientific
management to manage your top quality scientists.'
However, he points out that scientists often do have good human resource
qualities, and these should be developed. 'We have a plan for high potential
people. We look at where they could and should be in five years' time, and
their career would be plotted to develop their management skills,' he said.
Like other global companies, RPR has three attractive locations, where its
most talented scientists could end up during their careers (Philadelphia,
Paris and London). So-called 'ex-pat' moves can be transitional or permanent
according to individual development, but such experiences come at a price.
RPR sends only the top 5-10 per cent of its scientists abroad.
Competition, the need to be more cost-effective and efficient, and the rate
of improvement of science means scientists have to meet tougher targets each
year. In this climate, scientists encouraged to progress up the scientific
ladder will in turn propel drug companies towards success.
'If the company is successful it is innovative, because all new medicines
are innovative,' said Dr Taylor. 'We want to keep the very best people
motivated and stimulated at the bench as long as we can. If they want to do
it all their lives, then they're rare animals, and we want to provide a
career path for those.'
Claire Wilkinson is editorial assistant Pharmaceutical Business News

The Financial Times


London Page 41

930422

