FT934-8345

FT  16 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Scottish bus-maker en route to new stage of
life - Walter Alexander


   By JAMES BUXTON


THE UK bus building industry has been a turbulent place in the past decade.
But Walter Alexander, the privately-owned Scottish bus maker, is one of the
survivors.
Its sales should rise by 55 per cent this year to Pounds 47m and profits are
growing.
Alexander, one of the familiar names in UK bus building, is based at a large
plant on the outskirts of Falkirk in central Scotland, where it was founded
in 1924. It also has a plant in Belfast.
In 1990 the Alexander family pulled out and the Walter Alexander group, then
a mini-conglomerate, ceased to be quoted on the Stock Exchange. It was sold
for Pounds 32m to Spotlaunch, a syndicate formed by Granville, the venture
capital group. Mr Ian Galloway, an experienced manager in large engineering
companies, came in to run the bus building subsidiary.
At the time he believed the task was just a matter of improving the
company's efficiency and waiting for the market to improve. But the bus
market fell by 21 per cent between 1990 and 1991 because of recession and Mr
Galloway had to cut Alexander's Falkirk workforce from 763 to 525, many of
whom were put on a three or four day week. The possibility of closure
loomed.
The bus market had been devastated in the mid-1980s by the government's
deregulation of bus services and the privatisation of bus companies.
Orders for single and double deck buses collapsed as bus operators extended
the working life of their vehicles and ordered new mini- and midi-buses,
which Alexander was slow to start making. In 1990 recession came just as
orders were beginning to recover.
Alexander's recovery began when the company launched a new midi-bus in 1991
and won an order for the first 255 vehicles from Stagecoach, the Perth-based
company which is one of the biggest groups in the privatised bus industry.
The order enabled Alexander to end short time working. Since then staff
numbers have risen to over 700, plus 220 in Belfast.
The group rebuilt its export sales with orders for large buses from Hong
Kong and last year gained an order for 200 double deck bus kits from
Singapore.
Exports now account for about half its Pounds 50m order book and most are in
the form of kits for local assembly.
In April 1992 Mr Galloway led a Pounds 7.4m management buy-out of Alexander
from Spotlaunch, backed by Standard Life and other institutions, including
Granville. But profits are still small, with pre-interest profit of Pounds
925,000 last year, expected to reach Pounds 1.6m this year. A Pounds 2m
profit is expected for 1994.
Alexander now claims to be the UK market leader with a 32 per cent share of
the domestic bus market, as well as being the only UK bus manufacturer to
export. Mr Galloway feels things will improve for surviving British makers.
Although the tail end of privatisation may cause further disruption to the
market, the new private operators are becoming more mature and are following
consistent ordering policies.
Stagecoach was floated on the Stock Exchange in the spring and Badgerline is
now coming to the market. They have been the two biggest purchasers of
Alexander buses in the past two years.
Mr Brian Souter, chairman of Stagecoach, has said that for every new bus the
company buys its operating costs go down by Pounds 6,700 a year because of
greater fuel and maintenance efficiencies.
Having had three years of organic growth Alexander would like to expand in
continental Europe by acquisition.
'We would like to get a little bigger before we move to the next stage of
our gameplan, which is a Stock Exchange flotation,' says Mr Galloway. The
company is aiming at a float in late 1994 or early 1995.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931116

