FT934-11553

FT  30 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: What Clarke's Budget could hold for
Britain


   By PHILIP COGGAN


WHATEVER its content, the November 30 Budget will be radically different in
form from those before it. Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, will deal with
both the revenue-raising and the spending elements of the government's
finances - making it a 'Budget' in the true sense of the word.
While this change seems sensible, it does mean the Budget will be even less
digestible than usual. Furthermore, the chancellor must walk a fine line;
taking action to control the government deficit without endangering the
recovery.
The chancellor has already been committed to a number of measures by his
predecessor, Norman Lamont. The most infamous of these is the imposition of
VAT on domestic fuel, at 8 per cent in April 1994 and at 17.5 per cent a
year later.
Also in April, mortgage interest relief will be limited to 20 per cent, as
will tax relief on the married couple's allowance. Employees' national
insurance contributions will rise by 1 per cent (effectively, an increase in
income tax). One of the few pieces of good news is that the 20 per cent tax
band will be increased from Pounds 2,500 to Pounds 3,000.
As is usual before a Budget, rumours of policy changes have abounded. Often
these are kite-flying exercises; if the public reacts badly to a proposal,
it can be dropped with no harm done.
Income tax
It is widely assumed that, after years of making a virtue out of
tax-cutting, the Conservatives would not dare to increase either the basic
or higher rates of tax. Nevertheless, there is still plenty of scope for
bills to rise.
One easy option is to freeze personal tax allowances at their present
levels, rather than increase them in line with inflation. Since inflation is
only 1.8 per cent, such a move would hardly be noticed by most taxpayers -
but would still raise Pounds 670m. A more radical option would be to
restrict the tax relief on the personal allowance to 20 per cent.
This possibility is discussed at some length in the Green Budget book
produced by the Institute of Fiscal Studies. Other reliefs are being limited
to 20 per cent, so there is a precedent. In practice, the change would
probably be achieved by taxing individuals on all their income and giving
them back a tax credit of Pounds 689 (20 per cent of the personal
allowance).
This would cost top-rate taxpayers a maximum of Pounds 689 a year, and a
maximum of Pounds 172.25 for those on the basic rate. If Clarke did make
such a change, he would raise Pounds 5.7bn, according to the IFS.
Accordingly, he could afford to give back some of the money (and reduce the
resulting outcry) by perhaps increasing the 20 per cent tax band to, say,
Pounds 5,250. Such a move, the IFS points out, could be presented as a
further step towards a basic rate of 20 per cent, a long term Conservative
promise.
Price Waterhouse thinks the chancellor will be much gentler, increasing
personal allowances and widening the 20 per cent tax band even further.
National insurance contributions.
The separate systems for national insurance and income tax are something of
an anomaly. The ceiling for employees' NI contributions is Pounds 21,840;
the starting level for higher-rate tax is Pounds 27,145. So, the marginal
tax rate of those who earn just over Pounds 21,840 suddenly drops from 34 to
25 per cent - only to increase again to 40 per cent after Pounds 27,145.
Accountant Chantrey Vellacott thinks the government could bring the NI
ceiling and the start of the top-rate band in line. It also believes the
chancellor could bring all fringe benefits within the NI net and impose a
heavier NI burden on the self-employed.
Value-added tax
The furore over VAT on fuel could prompt Clarke to act. Some think he might
impose the 17.5 per cent rate in one go (to get the fuss over with now);
others, such as Price Waterhouse, that he might limit it to 8 per cent.
New products, such as books and newspapers, could be brought into the VAT
net. A more daring suggestion from Price Waterhouse is a general increase in
VAT, possibly to 20 per cent; the argument against this is the effect on
inflation, which the government is attempting to keep within a 1-4 per cent
band.
Inheritance tax
The 1980s' house price boom brought many Tory voters into the IHT net. Price
Waterhouse suggests the government might abolish the tax completely while
re-introducing some form of capital gains tax charge on assets held on
death.
Tax allowances
Despite my suggestions in Serious Money on page II, the chancellor is
unlikely to do anything as radical as combining Peps and Tessas. Indeed,
Price Waterhouse thinks he could extend Peps to include gilts, perhaps
renaming them Pips (personal income plans).
Pensions
The present system gives very generous treatment to pensions. Contributions
are tax-deductible; the fund itself rolls up tax-free; and the pensioner can
take a tax-free lump sum on retirement. The government's dilemma is that it
wants to encourage private pension provision (and reduce the burden on the
state). Accordingly, it might want to chip away at the tax privileges of
pensions rather than make a frontal assault.
Chantrey Vellacott thinks the chancellor might tax the lump sum but phase in
the change, so as not to be unfair to people about to retire. The accountant
also thinks tax relief on pension contributions could be limited to the
basic rate. More radically, it suggests higher-earning employees could be
taxed on their employer's contributions to the pension fund.
Advance corporation tax
The last Budget's changes in ACT - cutting the tax credit from 25 to 20 per
cent - managed to raise Pounds 1bn of revenue a year with little protest.
Further cuts in the credit are possible. A more likely change is a crackdown
on 'enhanced scrip dividend' schemes, where companies arrange for those who
take extra shares to sell them immediately for cash at little cost.

The Financial Times


London Page III

931030

