FT932-6547

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (7): Struggle to unbundle the monolith -
The 'near abroad' / Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States


   By ANDREW GOWERS


LAST MONTH, political leaders from one of Russia's volatile and ethnically
diverse southern border regions met to discuss forming an economic
association. They swiftly got into an acrimonious row. The subject? The
varying sums different areas were charging for deposits on re-useable
bottles, which had caused an increasingly disruptive bottle arbitrage trade
around the region.
Mr Sergei Shakhrai, a top adviser to President Boris Yeltsin, tells this
anecdote to underline the potential for friction among the multifarious
population groups of the former Soviet Union - 'you start with a difference
over bottle deposits,' he says. 'But in that you have a potential ethnic
conflict waiting to erupt.'
The pattern repeats itself in different forms throughout what Russians call
the 'near abroad,' and to an extent in Russia itself, as peoples long
condemned to uneasy cohabitation seek to redefine their relations and in
some cases to redraw the map.
On the southern periphery, in the Trans-Caucasian and central Asian
republics, ethnic and religious wars have claimed thousands of lives,
uprooted thousands more from their homes, and embroiled Russian forces in
controversial peace-making or peace-keeping exercises. In the Baltic states,
tensions run ever higher over the political rights of their substantial
Russian minorities, raising a lingering question-mark over the complete
withdrawal of Russian forces.
Most difficult of all, Moscow is engaged in a highly-charged and
interrelated set of disputes over assets, trade, military forces and
territory with the second biggest former Soviet republic, Ukraine, as the
latter gropes for full independence from Russia.
Disentangling the affairs of the Russian and Soviet empires was always going
to be a nightmare. The 15 successor states are not merely grappling with the
legacy of centuries of more or less repressive rule from the centre. They
are faced with the task of unbundling the most monolithic economic and
political system in the history of the world. An economy in which central
planning distorted all price relationships, and frequently dictated that
production of one item be mainly concentrated in one place, finds its
nervous system collapsing.
Inter-republican trade has all but broken down, for want of the means of
payment: several countries, including Ukraine, have left the rouble zone and
set out to print their own monies, only to find them collapsing in value
more rapidly even than the Russian currency.
Disputes over the military and other spoils are only slowly being resolved.
The scope and structure of the Commonwealth of Independent States, supposed
to provide a framework for a looser form of association between the former
Soviet republics, remain in contention. The potential for conflict is
immense: indeed, the surprise is perhaps the extent to which the leaders of
Russia and the other republics have thus far managed to keep it under
control.
For Russia, by far the largest of the successor states, these issues pose a
number of difficulties that require especially sensitive handling.
The conflicts to its south are a constant worry, threatening either to spill
over into Russia proper or otherwise to destabilise it through a growing
exodus of refugees. The worst and longest-running of these is the war
between Azerbaijan and Armenia over the Armenian enclave of
Nagorno-Karabakh, in which Moscow has studiously sought to remain neutral
but has made sporadic attempts to mediate.
In several cases, however, Russian troops stationed outside Russia's borders
are now directly involved:
In the central Asian republic of Tajikistan, scene of a violent struggle
between Moslem and ex-communist forces last year, they are deployed to
police the border with Afghanistan, source of support for the Islamic
fundamentalists.
In northern Moldova, the Russian 14th army is now keeping a fragile peace
between regular Moldovan forces and the ethnic Russian minority of
Trans-Dnestr, after intervening on the latter's side in fighting last year.
In the fractious and disintegrating republic of Georgia, Russian forces are
trying to hold the line in one civil conflict - that between the government
of Mr Eduard Shevardnadze and south Ossetian separatists demanding
unification with their kin the other side of the Russian border - and are
frequently accused (so far without evidence) of involvement in another,
between Georgia and separatist rebels in Abkhazia. In all these cases, there
is a potentially dangerous ambiguity about Russia's role. Moscow insists
that the aim is purely to keep the peace and mediate, but many in the
republics concerned suspect that more partisan motives.
Moreover, an effort by President Yeltsin to clarify the position earlier
this year arguably made matters worse. In a speech to the centrist Civic
Union grouping at the end of February, he said that, given its 'heartfelt
interest' in suppressing conflicts around its borders, Russia should be
granted 'special powers' by the United Nations to guarantee peace and
stability in the former Soviet Union. No amount of subsequent explanation by
the foreign ministry that he was simply talking about the need for UN
political or financial support for specific, mutually agreed peacekeeping
operations could quite dispel the impression that he was asking the world to
give Russia a free hand to intervene beyond its borders.
This is a question of acute sensitivity, not least because of the large
number of ethnic Russians - 25m - who live outside Russia. Such minorities
in other republics - in Kazakhstan, they constitute nearly half the
population - could easily become the object of nationalist passions and a
cause celebre in Russia itself. Some even murmur of the risk of
Yugoslav-style 'ethnic cleansing.'
Mr Yeltsin's answer to this danger has been to attempt to hasten integration
efforts within the CIS. An emerging 'hard core' of Commonwealth members -
Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and the central Asian republics - have signed a
defence treaty with this end in mind.
But that does not ease the worries of those new republics that have chosen
to stay outside the CIS framework. Take the Baltic states. In Latvia and
Estonia in particular, efforts by legislators to deprive Russian residents
of some of their political or civil rights have drawn a series of
increasingly blunt warnings from Moscow, with President Yeltsin vowing to
halt the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Baltic region. Although
foreign ministry officials insist troop withdrawals are proceeding to plan,
it remains uncertain whether they will all be out by the previously
announced deadline of mid-1993.
It is the continuing struggle between Russia and Ukraine - which belongs to
the CIS but has no interest in signing the collective defence treaty - that
provides the greatest cause for concern. Since the collapse of communism,
the two states have been in contention over a range of issues, from the
division of the USSR's assets and external debt (though the latter question
has now been resolved, removing one obstacle to a Russian debt rescheduling
deal) to energy supplies, with Russia demanding that Ukraine in future pay
world prices for its oil and gas.
The two most serious, however, concern ownership of the Soviet Black Sea
Fleet, stationed in the port of Sebastopol in the disputed Crimea region,
and nuclear weapons. On both questions, the climate between Moscow and Kiev
appears to be worsening. Ukraine accuses Russia of seeking to use the Black
Sea Fleet issue to press its old claim to Crimea, and of refusing to
recognise its borders in a comprehensive treaty. Russia growls in response.
And in its insecurity, Ukraine seems increasingly tempted to hang on to at
least some of the former Soviet nuclear missiles and nuclear-armed strategic
bombers still on its territory.
Few believe that the two rivals are likely to come to blows over any of
these issues, at least under their current leaders. But the long list of
unresolved matters between them should worry western governments all the
same. For one thing, with the Russian parliament refusing to ratify the
Start 2 strategic arms limitation treaty with the US until its Ukrainian
counterpart agrees to go non-nuclear, it could seriously disrupt the
international arms-control process.
In the longer term, there are deeper underlying strains which, under changed
political circumstances in either Russia or Ukraine, could flare up into
something much worse. Given the long history of Russian rule and the fact
that Russian nationhood was born in what is now Ukraine, has Moscow
genuinely accepted Ukrainian independence? Will it be prepared to allow the
CIS to develop into the loose association focused mainly on economic
relations that Kiev seems to want?
How Russia decides to handle its biggest former Soviet bedfellow will have
an important bearing on its relations with the others - and with the wider
world.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

930527

