FT933-12785

FT  22 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Hanson warns of mine closures


   By ANDREW BOLGER


HANSON, the Anglo-American conglomerate, said the US miners' strike had cost
its Peabody subsidiary Pounds 29m in the three months to June 30 and warned
of permanent closures of certain mines and a 'noticeable effect on Peabody's
profit'.
Lord Hanson, chairman, said Pounds 15m of the loss occurred in June when a
total of 15 Peabody locations were on strike for part of the month and
extensive sabotage to equipment occurred. There were also slowdowns by union
workers at the mines that operated during the period.
He said that despite repeated requests, the United Mine Workers of America
refused to resume bargaining with the official multi-company bargaining
group, and appeared to be heading for a long confrontation.
'This will not only bring disastrous consequences for the employees involved
and possible permanent closures of certain mines, but, as already disclosed
at the recent Hanson EGM, will have a noticeable effect on Peabody's
profit.'
The strike at St Louis-based Peabody is part of a larger walk-out at mines
operated by a number of big US coal companies. The union said about 16,000
miners were on strike. The UMWA is trying to obtain guarantees that its
members can have jobs at new mines opened by Peabody and others when
existing mines run out of coal.
Lord Hanson said: 'The number of Peabody mines on strike, governed by the
labour contract with the UMWA, has now increased to 18 out of 22. Seven
other US mines, however, involving approximately half of Peabody's
production, are not affected and remain profitable.
'This strike is entirely a matter for the management of Peabody and the UMWA
to negotiate and settle, but unless the UMWA is prepared to start
negotiations immediately, Peabody's results for the three months ended
September 30 1993, could be affected at a similar rate.
'The UMWA is attempting to coerce Hanson into forcing Peabody to submit to
totally unacceptable terms, something we shall never do. Were a settlement
to be made on the terms demanded by the UMWA, Peabody's future
competitiveness and profit would be permanently blighted. Hanson is prepared
to accept the short-term costs to its shareholders to ensure Peabody's
long-term competitiveness.'
Hanson's shares closed 1 1/2 p lower at 232 1/2 p.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930722

