FT933-12734

FT  22 JUL 93 / Government Bonds: German M3 data send European sector
tumbling


   By PETER JOHN and KAREN ZAGOR


   LONDON, NEW YORK


HIGHER-than-expected German money supply data sent European government bond
markets tumbling yesterday as hopes for general interest rate cuts took a
knock.
Speculation that Germany's M3 figure for June would come in above 7 per cent
filtered into the market on Tuesday, and half an hour before the data were
released there was a wave of sell orders throughout Europe.
The actual headline figure of 7.1 per cent was distorted by a surge in
repatriation of international assets, which often represents a correction
following earlier central bank intervention. Once that was removed, there
were few signs of inflationary pressure.
However, the details were preceded by comments from Mr Johann Wilhelm
Gaddum, the vice-president designate of the Bundesbank, who said that if M3
was outside the target range of between 4.5 and 6.5 per cent there was no
justification for a rate cut.
The chain of events dented confidence that the Bundesbank would cut official
rates next Thursday. Ms Alison Cottrell, international economist at Midland
Global Markets, said: 'Mr Gaddum's comments on the importance of the M3
target will not have been a coincidence. If the foreign exchange figure
(between France and Germany) is not too appalling this points to the council
sitting tight.'
One of the three senior economists at SG Warburg said: 'Beforehand, we were
two-to-one in favour of a cut. Now we are all in favour of not cutting.'
Earlier in the day, the German central bank carried out its weekly repo
operation at 7.15 per cent, allocating DM66.6bn against expiring funds of
DM75.6bn. Some economists took heart from the willingness to ease in the
face of the money supply figures, but others said the central bank had no
choice because the commercial banks were cash heavy following the recent
speculation against the French franc and had very little need of funds.
German bund futures for September traded on Liffe fell from 96.09 to 95.83.
THE Bundesbank's perceived unwillingness to ease further in the face of high
money supply added to the pressure on the French franc and spilled over to
the French debt market yesterday.
French government bond futures traded on the Matif broke through a key
support level and fell more than half a point to 119.74.
The argument was that if Germany does not cut, France might have to raise
rates to relieve speculative pressure on the currency. If rates go higher
for any length of time the bond market - which has remained attractive
because of low inflation - will begin to look expensive.
One dealer said yesterday: 'We have seen the seeds of a shift in the bullish
sentiment. The big question is whether the domestic investors will remain
faithful.'
UK government bonds largely survived the impact of supposedly booming high
street sales, but the added pressure of high German M3 data was too much and
gilts ended weaker along the yield curve.
The rise in retail sales hit short-dated maturities which anticipate base
rate forecasts, but the impact was muted as economists said the boost merely
reflected price cutting and not a rise in consumer spending.
LONGER-dated US Treasuries fell steeply as the market continued to register
fears that the Federal Reserve may tighten monetary policy. The prospect of
greater supply of Treasuries and corporate paper also depressed prices.
The benchmark 30-year government bond lost  3/4 of a point during the day,
and was trading late in the afternoon at 106 19/32 , yielding 6.612 per
cent. The short end of the market held up better, with the two-year note
down  3/16 , to yield 4.107 per cent.
Sentiment was bearish in the wake of Mr Alan Greenspan's testimony before
Congress on Tuesday. The chairman of the Federal Reserve had predicted that
the economy would continue to firm through the rest of this year and into
1994. He also forecast GDP growth of more than 3 per cent for the second
half of this year.
Mr Greenspan's remarks about 'disappointing' inflation prompted speculation
that the Federal Reserve might tighten monetary policy to check inflation.
The prospect of new calls on investors' cash also depressed the market.
During the afternoon the Treasury said it would auction Dollars 16bn of
two-year notes and Dollars 11bn of five-year notes next week. New corporate
bond issues and the prospect of an estimated Dollars 4bn of bonds from
municipal borrowers added to the fears that heavy supply would push yields
higher.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930722

