FT931-4003

FT  12 MAR 93 / Government Bonds: Profit-taking starts sharp slide of
European prices


   By TRACY CORRIGAN and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


EUROPEAN government bond prices slid sharply yesterday, as markets suffered
from a bout of profit-taking, following strong gains posted by most markets
earlier this week.
Worries about the political situation in Russia, as President Boris
Yeltsin's leadership came under further pressure yesterday, fed through into
Europe's bond markets.
'The gut reaction of traders to political instability in Russia is to buy
the dollar. A strong dollar is seen as capping the potential of the bund
market,' said one trader.
Bund prices slid about  3/8 point yesterday, following recent gains, but
dealers said underlying confidence in the market remained strong, with
expectations of further easing of rates still intact.
The bund future on Liffe ended at 96.61, down from a closing price of 96.85
on Wednesday.
French bond prices also lost ground, in line with the German market,
reversing most of Wednesday's gains.
THE UK gilts market performed particularly poorly yesterday, as nervousness
ahead of next Tuesday's budget compounded broader worries.
Dealers reported switching out of long-dated gilts in favour of the short
end of the market, resulting in a steepening of the yield curve.
Dealers said investors were also taking profits, following the market's
strong run. 'Investors are still reasonably bullish on the market, but they
want to take a more defensive position ahead of the budget,' according to
one analyst.
The latest CBI survey, seen by some analysts as showing that cost increases
are starting to filter through into prices, helped depress the market.
The long gilt future on Liffe ended at 105 21/32 , down from Wednesday's
close of 106 7/32 .
SCANDINAVIAN markets were helped by some positive news yesterday. Sweden was
cheered by news that the chances of an early election had lessened when the
minority government won backing for its economic policy.
In Norway, the central bank cut its key overnight lending rate by  1/4 point
to 8 3/4 per cent, after a  1/4 point cut last week. The overnight rate had
reached 25 per cent in November.
US TREASURY prices remained trapped in a narrow trading range yesterday in
the wake of a mixed set of fresh economic data.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  1/32 at 104
25/32 , yielding 6.748 per cent. At the short end of the market, the
two-year note was up  1/32 at 99 25/32 , to yield 3.979 per cent.
The day's main economic news concerned the labour market and retail sales.
The latest measure of weekly jobless claims showed that the number of people
claiming state unemployment insurance jumped 25,000 in the final week of
February, a much larger increase than expect-ed.
The implication of the claims figures (which immediately cast doubt on the
recent strong February employment report) was that the jobs market remains
depressed in spite of a growing economy. Yet any boost to Treasury prices
from the data was offset by the news that retail sales last month rose a
stronger-than-forecast 0.3 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

930312

