FT932-6990

FT  26 MAY 93 / Leading Article: Job creation in France


WITHIN THE limits allowed by its adherence to a firm exchange rate, the new
Paris government of Mr Edouard Balladur is at least trying to coax life into
the recession-bound French economy. Mr Balladur's first two months in office
has coincided with disturbing signs of deterioration in the real economy,
but a strengthening of financial market confidence.
Mr Balladur is trying to use modest fiscal means to prepare the way for
recovery, in a year expected to show the first economic contraction since
1975. But budgetary tinkering is likely to have a minimal impact on the
outlook for growth and employment. He must also tackle deeper-seated
impediments to job creation in the French economy.
The scale of the French employment problem is widely recognised. As the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has pointed out,
France's unemployment record since the first oil shock in 1973 has been the
worst of any large OECD country. Employment expansion during the period of
economic buoyancy of the 1980s was less than in any other member of the
Group of Seven leading industrial countries. French civilian employment
regained its 1974 level only in 1988. Unemployment has been on the rise
since the end of 1990. Furthermore, the country's record in long-term
unemployment and youth and female employment is comparatively poor.
Bond issue
Despite France's success in reducing growth in domestic unit labour costs,
French companies now face a fresh squeeze on competitiveness caused by the
European devaluations since last autumn. The government believes that the
unemployment total, currently 3.1m, could rise by a further 350,000 by the
end of the year.
In an attempt to limit the political costs of unemployment, the government
on Monday announced a FFr40bn bond issue to help finance extra
infrastructure spending and work schemes. The amount is relatively small,
however, especially compared with the overall 1993 budget deficit of
FFr410bn (including the social security and unemployment funds), to which Mr
Balladur recently claimed France was heading. Nevertheless, the move softens
the effect of deficit-cutting measures outlined two weeks ago. It was
pounced upon yesterday by the Socialist opposition as evidence that the
government was backing away from earlier promises of rigueur.
Monetary policy
On the monetary front, the Banque de France has this week managed to achieve
a further downward nudge in short-term French interest rates, to slightly
below the level in Germany. If the foreign exchange market's new-found
scepticism about the D-Mark's stability proves durable, the Banque de France
may be able to widen this gap in its favour. The new French base rate of 8.8
per cent is, none the less, nearly 7 points above the inflation rate - a
heavy burden on enterprises, especially while Europe remains in the doldrums
and demand for French exports remains depressed.
Mr Balladur needs to go beyond the monetary and fiscal steps so far
announced. The exceptional burden on employers created by direct finance of
the welfare state through large social security contributions gives French
companies a particular financial incentive to minimise employment. Mr
Balladur has already proposed reducing this tax on employment by shifting
some financing of social security and unemployment funds away from payroll
contributions towards general taxation. The initial move, however, is
modest, with the planned shift limited to only FFr4.5bn this year.
If he decides to accelerate changes in this direction, Mr Balladur can rely
on support from the EC. The European Commission's 'framework for
employment', expected to be adopted today, sets out a path which it hopes
will lead to higher employment by cutting employers' social security
contributions and promoting part-time employment.
Mr Balladur's manoeuvering room is painfully small. By indicating his
interest in reforming the country's system of payroll taxes, he has made a
start towards putting job creation on to the agenda. But he needs to go
further. Most of the EC needs to accompany him.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930526

