FT934-8823

FT  13 NOV 93 / Receivers hold out hope for Swans: The future of the yard as
a further 510 job losses were announced


   By CHRIS TIGHE


SWAN HUNTER, the Tyneside shipbuilder, is to shed a further 510 jobs because
work on the Type 23 frigate HMS Westminster will be completed this weekend,
receivers Price Waterhouse said yesterday.
The new round of cuts, which will reduce the company's workforce to 1,040,
brings to 1,400 the number of jobs lost since the receivers were called in
six months ago today.
Union leaders and local Labour MPs said the redundancies were another
devastating blow, particularly for riverside areas of Tyneside where male
unemployment is more than 40 per cent.
Swans' only substantial remaining work is to complete sister frigates
Northumberland and Richmond, due for delivery in May and November 1994.
But union leaders said they had not given up hope that a buyer would emerge
for the company. 'There's still hope for Swan Hunter, we aren't dead yet,'
said Mr Tommy Brennan, Tyne chairman of the Confederation of Shipbuilding
and Engineering Unions.
The receivers, who are talking to four parties interested in acquiring Swans
for shipbuilding, said they remained determined to retain the 'golden
nugget' of skilled employees, in the hope the company can be sold as a going
concern.
Mr Gordon Horsfield, one of the receivers, disclosed yesterday that two of
the potential bidders were interested primarily in warship building. The
others would also wish to build merchant vessels. The four include foreign
companies.
The receivers have also approached companies potentially interested in Swans
to see whether they would consider forming a consortium.
He said the potential buyers, none of which had submitted a concrete bid,
were waiting to see what the November 30 Budget said on defence spending.
They were also interested in whether Swans would be granted eligibility for
European Union intervention funding, which would provide a 9 per cent
subsidy for merchant orders. The receivers expect an answer within five
weeks.
Swan Hunter went into receivership on May 13, two days after it lost the
fight for a Navy helicopter carrier to rival VSEL, based Barrow-in-Furness,
Cumbria.
Mr Mark Homan, Price Waterhouse's UK corporate recovery partner, Mr
Horsfield, responsible for corporate recovery practice in the UK regions and
Mr Ed James, Newcastle-based corporate recovery partner, the receivers, were
appointed by Lloyds Bank. At the time the company had net debts of Pounds
40m, of which Pounds 12.1m was owed to Lloyds.
The receivership, one of the biggest in Britain this year, has involved
about 40 Price Waterhouse staff, including eight full-time at Swans. The
firm has spent about 10,000 hours on Swans and its bill has exceeded Pounds
800,000.
Shipbuilding has made a powerful impression on some of the team. 'One or two
of our managers have got so enthused they'd be happy to stay there for
ever,' said Mr Horsfield. 'One of the team's gone native - he wears a hard
hat a lot,' said Mr James.
Worldwide advertising of the yard brought 76 inquiries, whittled down by the
receivers to 22 involving shipbuilding. These were reduced to a hard core
with track records which would reassure the Ministry of Defence and other
potential Swans customers. 'They don't want accidents like this to happen
again,' said Mr Horsfield.
Because of the receivership, the yard has found it difficult to win
substantial work, apart from the MoD's agreement to let Swans complete the
three frigates.
Unusually, the receivers tried to form a stand-alone vehicle, Swan Hunter
Neptune, involving local authorities and the Department of Trade and
Industry, to carry out the Omani patrol boats order that Swans was near to
clinching in May. This proved impossible because of the long-term commitment
required.
Without selling any shipbuilding assets, the receivers have raised Pounds
7m, mainly by claiming shipbuilders relief from Customs and Excise and
chasing trade debtors. Some of this money has provided working capital and
some has gone to Lloyds Bank.
In spite of the bruising job losses the receivers have maintained good
relationships with Swans unions, who share the objective of finding a buyer
for the company. Mr Horsfield said they were the most commercially astute
trade unionists he had come across.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931113

