FT933-12486

FT  23 JUL 93 / International Company News: Loan leak dampens Barito
flotation hopes - The struggle to go public facing Indonesia's largest
timber group


   By WILLIAM KEELING


BARITO Pacific Timber may rue the day it decided to go public. In the last
month, the company has suffered a spate of poor publicity, culminating in
the withdrawal this week of Salomon Brothers, the US securities house, as
the issue's lead foreign co-ordinator.
Looking to raise about Dollars 250m, its flotation - planned for October -
would make Barito the second largest company on the Jakarta Stock Exchange,
with a market value of about Dollars 2.5bn. It would allow investors a share
in Indonesia's largest integrated timber processor, accounting for 16 per
cent of the world market in plywood.
The company says it made a gross profit of Rp231bn (Dollars 112m) last year
on net sales of Rp769bn and forecasts a Rp547bn gross profit this year on
substantially higher sales of Rp1,157bn. Its timber concessions, at over 5m
hectares, make up an area greater than Switzerland.
Despite such bullish forecasts, the company has been forced on to the
defensive following the leaking of a document, published in the local press
and allegedly compiled by the government, listing its parent Barito Pacific
Group as a large borrower from the state banks.
The Barito Pacific Group contains over 100 subsidiaries - ranging from
timber to palm oil, petrochemicals to banking - in which Mr Prajogo
Pangestu, chairman, is a shareholder. Executives estimate the group's 1992
turnover at about Dollars 2.5bn.
Mr Pangestu denies the group carries any unserviced loans and says the state
banks have written letters confirming it is current on all debt. Colleagues
of Mr Pangestu express disappointment that government officials have refused
to deny the leaked document's authenticity.
However, poor publicity continued last week when Mr Pangestu was summoned to
parliament. He was asked to explain a deal, announced on July 7 but signed
in February, in which Taspen, a state pension fund, took a 20 per cent stake
in Barito Pacific Timber for Rp375bn.
The deal valued the company at Rp3,000 a share, compared to the anticipated
Rp7,200 price at which the planned flotation is to be set. Barito says all
procedures were correctly followed but the government has announced a review
of the transaction.
The withdrawal of Salomon Brothers on Monday at the start of a two-week
international roadshow has further hindered the company's ability to market
its flotation.
Brokers say Indonesian regulations limiting disclosure - including details
of Mr Pangestu's majority shareholding in the company - may have resulted in
Salomon having insufficient information to satisfy US regulatory
authorities.
The flotation will proceed, stress officials close to Barito, who say Crosby
Securities, which specialises in Asian markets, and Schroders, the UK
investment bank, will replace Salomon as co-ordinator of the foreign
placement.
Brokers say Bank Bumi Daya and Bapindo, two Indonesian state-owned banks,
will back the issue and Barito's supporters argue that the company is coming
to the market at an auspicious time, just as world timber prices are rising.
The world price of plywood and blockboard, Barito's main products, has risen
from about Dollars 320 per cubic metre in January to Dollars 520 in the
August spot market.
The company says 55 per cent of the funds raised by the flotation will be
invested in a 500,000 tonnes a year pulp and paper mill in South Sumatra to
be owned by Tanjung Enin Lestari, in which Barito has a 40 per cent stake.
Tanjung Enin Lestari is a joint-venture with Citra Lamtoro Gung, led by
President Suharto's eldest daughter. The remaining funds will be split
between developing industrial forest concessions and paying down Barito
debt.
Barito's critics, however, say it will struggle to attract foreign investors
and that the backing of international financial institutions is not secure.
As one potential financial backer explained yesterday: 'Items still need to
be disclosed by Barito. We . . . do not feel comfortable with the
information provided on affiliated companies and the debt positions.'
Barito Pacific Timber's debt was Dollars 584m at the end of 1992 but Mr
Pangestu has declined to reveal the parent group's total borrowings on the
grounds of banking secrecy. 'I know exactly how big our loan exposure is but
I cannot disclose this to the public,' he said.
Some potential investors are concerned about Mr Pangestu's management style.
Barito directors say they will provide prudent management. Mr Pangestu 'has
been in business long enough to know the importance of his management team
and their opinions count', noted one executive.
The board, however, supported Mr Pangestu's request in January for a Rp150bn
loan from Barito Pacific Timber to buy a stake in Astra International,
Indonesia's largest automotive company.
Mr Pangestu has pledged his Astra shares as collateral and made a personal
guarantee of repayment. The loan was 'just like any other transaction that
we have', explained a Barito director.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930723

