FT932-13277

FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (19): A modest lift
for cash funds - Reduction in tax credit means that basic-rate payers will
earn more / Unit Trusts


   By PHILIP COGGAN


IT WAS not a great Budget for unit trusts. They hoped that the Chancellor
would allow gilts and gilt funds to qualify for personal equity plan status.
Instead, they saw a cut in the tax credit on dividends which reduced the
attractions of equities to higher-rate taxpayers and of Peps to everyone.
At least, cash unit trusts received a modest boost from the changes. They
earn interest in the money markets, which they receive gross, and then pay
out a net rate after deduction of corporation tax.
The Budget reduced this corporation tax in two steps: from 25 per cent to
22.5 per cent, in 1993-94; and to 20 per cent in 1994-95. This corporation
tax payment is regarded as having met the tax liability of a basic-rate
taxpayer.
So the effect is that basic-rate taxpayers will suffer lower tax deductions
on their cash unit trust holdings than they will on their other
interest-bearing deposits, which will still be taxed at 25 per cent.
Higher-rate taxpayers will not benefit from the change, and will suffer
slightly in 1993-94.
For basic-rate taxpayers, the net yield on a cash trust currently yielding 6
per cent gross will rise from 4.5 per cent to 4.65 per cent in 1993-94, and
to 4.8 per cent in 1994-95.
Utilities plus bonds for a 7 per cent yield
CAZENOVE's Utility and Bond fund, launched in February, offers a low-cost
way for investors to get income.
The fund will have the majority of its investments in utility stocks, such
as telecoms, gas and water; and the minority in bonds. The result will be a
yield of 7 per cent, after a low annual charge of 0.5 per cent.
The initial charge is also low, at 0.2 per cent, which means the bid-offer
spread on the trust is just 2 per cent, well below the industry average. The
fund can be held in personal equity plan form, for a further initial charge
of Pounds 35, equivalent to a total initial charge of 0.8 per cent for Pep
investors. Dividends are payable twice a year.
Although sold by few independent financial advisers (the charges were too
low to permit payment of commission), the Cazenove funds raised an
encouraging Pounds 25m on launch. It may herald a new era of good value
funds for the private investor.
Two rival funds, from Fidelity & M&G, also offering bond-equity mixes were
launched at the same time.
The Budget's ACT change gave a slight boost to bond-equity funds, because of
the more favourable tax treatment of bonds vis-a-vis equities for basic-rate
taxpayers. Fidelity says the yield on its fund was slightly enhanced by the
change.
Options will help to deliver a high income
HYPO FOREIGN & Colonial has launched a new unit trust which was so unusual
that it may need a year or two before it can be shown to work. The trust
offers to pay investors an income of 10 per cent if held in a personal
equity plan.
The income is so high because, in addition to holding shares and cash
deposits, the trust will sell options against its holdings. The premiums
earned by selling the options are the key to the trust's high income.
By selling options, the trust is effectively giving up its right to benefit
from much of the stock market's growth. What remains to be seen is whether
the trust can deliver its income without losing any capital at all.
Certainly, one cannot expect much in the way of income growth; premiums will
not rise in the way that dividends do.
Having said all that, if the fund can deliver what it promises without
capital losses, then many investors may find the prospect of 10 per cent
income highly attractive.
Institutions still hold the biggest stake
THE UNIT trust industry is breaking records, as buoyant stock markets and
declining interest rates have boosted sales and pushed up funds under
management.
By end February, the total of funds invested was Pounds 69.2bn. Gross sales
in February were Pounds 1.3bn, the highest since February 1987. Net
investment (after allowing for repurchases from investors) was Pounds
590.7m.
However, institutional investment still provides the bulk of net sales.
There is some question over whether this will continue. The Budget changes
to ACT made it less tax-efficient for life companies to invest in unit
trusts.
Such is the level of institutional investment that an increase in private
investor interest could not take up the slack. However, retail buying will
continue to be strong while there is little difference between returns on
building society accounts and equity dividend yields.
One of the most encouraging signs for the industry is that the number of
unitholder accounts, which had been falling steadily since 1987, has started
to rise again.
Substantial payment likely as Wessex is wound up
THE WESSEX UK Growth Trust is being wound up by the trustees, Royal Bank of
Scotland. The trust was originally suspended in February when the regulators
detected financial strains at the manager Wessex Asset Management.
The trustees were unable to find a replacement manager, and the Securities
and Investments Board accordingly agreed to the winding up of the scheme.
Wessex was a small trust, with just Pounds 500,000 in assets. In early
April, the Royal Bank anticipated making a substantial interim payment to
investors, with the balance on completion of the winding-up.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

930423

