FT931-4211

FT  12 MAR 93 / Chief executive ousted in Glaxo board reshuffle: Departure
follows a series of public disputes with regulatory and government
authorities


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


DR ERNEST MARIO, chief executive and deputy chairman of Glaxo Holdings,
Europe's biggest drugs group, has been ousted as part of a boardroom
reshuffle.
Sir Paul Girolami, chairman, said Dr Mario had not been removed for any
single reason. 'It was far more complicated than that. He was not the right
man for the future,' he said.
He insisted that the prime purpose of the reorganisation was to strengthen
the group's central organisation and to extend responsibility at the top of
a broader team.
Dr Mario, 54, said he had resigned because of differences of opinion over
the running of the business.
Glaxo's shares dropped 19p to 668p.
Dr Richard Sykes, research and development director, has been appointed in
Dr Mario's place, but retains his R&D responsibilities.
Dr Franz Humer, director in charge of commercial policy and eastern Europe,
Africa and the Middle East, has been appointed to a new position, chief
operating officer. Sir John Cuckney, a non-executive, has been appointed as
non-executive vice-chairman.
Analysts were unsure whether the cause of Dr Mario's departure was his
aggressive American management style which sat uneasily within a
conservative British company. In the past 18 months, Glaxo has had a series
of public disputes with regulatory and government authorities in Europe and
the US.
Another possible cause of dispute, analysts believed, was the strategic
direction of the company. Dr Mario was thought to have wanted to make a
substantial rights issue for an acquisition. This would have allowed Glaxo
to re-enter the over the counter (OTC) non-prescription drug market.
However, Sir Paul denied there had been any difference of opinion over
Glaxo's OTC intentions.
'Even if it had been true that we had disagreed over the OTC question, it's
incredible that it would have been a leaving issue,' he said.
Sir Paul said when Dr Mario been appointed as chief executive in 1989, the
board had been aware of four drawbacks.
These included the fact he had no tremendous feel for an extremely sensitive
industry; he was new to the group; he was not basically a prescription
medicines man, given his background in pharmacy; he had not been a member of
the board of a publicly-quoted company for long; and he had never operated
outside the US.
'If you take that into account, the fact that we still appointed him shows
the respect and esteem we held him in,' he said.
'All those factors played a role (in his departure at) the end.' Dr Mario
received a salary last year, including bonuses, of Pounds 975,000.
The reorganisation would also help the issue of his successor, said Sir
Paul, who will be 68 in January and is due to retire when he reaches 70.
Not so super, Page 18
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930312

