FT934-11546

FT  30 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: The Japanese fund that takes its cue
from Edinburgh - Unit trusts


   By BETHAN HUTTON


IT IS A LONG way from Scotland to Japan, but the physical and cultural
distance has not hampered the performance of the Dunedin Japanese Smaller
Companies trust - which is managed by a team based in Edinburgh and
separated by nine hours and several thousand miles from the market it
studies.
The Pounds 42m fund is top of 86 in the Japanese unit trust sector over the
year to October 1, with growth of 84 per cent (offer to bid, with net income
reinvested, source: Micropal); second over five years, with growth of 161
per cent; and eighth over three years.
Nigel Barry took over management of the fund in 1987, a year after its
launch. He also manages Dunedin's Japan Growth unit trust, and the recently
launched Dunedin Japan investment trust. He has a team of co-managers in
Edinburgh, assisted by a researcher in Tokyo since 1990. The UK team members
regularly visit Japan, seeing about 200 companies a year between them.
The investment approach is based on stock-picking, searching for good value
among the smaller companies - mostly from the second section of the stock
market and the over-the-counter market. 'Smaller' is a relative term: the
largest stock in Dunedin's portfolio has a market capitalisation of about
Pounds 3bn; the smallest, about Pounds 50m. The fund generally aims to buy
reasonably large stakes, expecting holdings to form at least 1 per cent of
the fund, so very small companies are not always suitable targets.
Share turnover is on the low side, at 30-40 per cent a year. 'I wouldn't say
the portfolio has changed a great deal in the past year,' says Barry. 'We
tend to sell a stock when we think its earnings outlook has changed, or it
becomes too expensive.'
The strength of the yen has contributed to the fund's strong performance
over the past year, but does not explain it entirely. Over the year from
October 1 1992 to October 1 1993, the fund grew by 96 per cent (offer to
offer) in sterling terms; but even in yen terms it put on a good show, with
growth of 46 per cent.
Since the fund was launched, the Japanese stock market has had something of
a roller-coaster ride, ranging from the late 1980s' boom to the early 1990s'
bursting of the bubble and on to the latest tentative signs of recovery.
Barry's strategy has had to adapt to carry the fund successfully through the
ups and downs.
Between 1988 and 1990, favoured areas included machinery and robotics
companies, as large manufacturers were increasing capacity. But in 1990,
when the market began to fall quite sharply, Barry adopted a more defensive
posture, moving into public works and housing related stocks: utilities,
road repair companies, and a few food stocks and manufacturing companies.
'We were not exactly looking for great growth, just safety,' he says.
Now that the market is starting to improve, Barry is picking a few more
economically sensitive stocks. One successful find recently was Kansai
Sekiwa, a real estate company dealing in low-price condominiums, where sales
volume is starting to increase.
The fund holds about 60 stocks. The top 10, which account for just over a
quarter of the fund, are: Sansei Yusoki (leisure and storage equipment),
Rinnai (kitchen and heating equipment), Katokichi (frozen food), Senshukai
(catalogue sales), Nissho Corp (medical equipment), Eidensha (electrical
retailer), Chofu Seisakusho (kitchen and heating equipment), Shimachu (DIY
and furniture retailer), Max (house building equipment), and Mabuchi
(electrical micromotor manufacturer).
'Dunedin are basically value investors. We don't tend to get wrapped up in
the theme of the day,' says Barry. But economic and market trends are among
the factors involved in the decision-making process. Japanese consumers, for
example, have long had the reputation of being less price-sensitive, and
more likely to buy expensive brand-name goods, than their counterparts
elsewhere in the world.
The recession appears to be changing that. Growing consumer awareness of
prices has been illustrated by the success of companies such as Aoyama, the
discount suit retailer, and other well-positioned or adaptable companies
could also benefit.
In the medium term, Barry is enthusiastic about the prospect of
deregulation, in the construction industry as well as international trade.
He is interested in companies which could benefit from trade deregulation,
such as specialist discount alcohol retailers which could import
lower-priced stock.
Other companies such as dairy product companies and bakers could do well
from buying cheaper raw materials on the international market, where prices
can be several times lower than for domestic products.
Charges. The trust has an initial charge of 5 per cent and an annual charge
of 1.5; the bid-offer spread is around 6 per cent. The minimum investment is
Pounds 1,000, or Pounds 30 a month with a savings plan. There is no Pep
attached to the trust.

The Financial Times


London Page V

931030

