FT932-3126

FT  16 JUN 93 / Bankruptcy rate falls in Japan


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


THE FIRST fall in Japanese corporate bankruptcies for almost three years
yesterday added weight to claims that the Japanese economy is nearing the
bottom of its two-year downturn.
Corporate bankruptcies in May fell by 3.9 per cent from the same month last
year to 1,113, according to a monthly report by the Teikoku Data Bank, a
private research group. The report said the decline in the bankruptcy rate,
the first for 32 months, was a tentative indicator of a moderate pick-up in
the economy.
If May's decline in bankruptcies does mark the bottom of the recession it
means Japanese business will have escaped with far fewer failures than
during the mid-1980s.
During the weak economic patch of the mid-1980s caused by the yen's sudden
appreciation against the dollar, the business failure rate rose to about
20,000 a year. During this downturn the failure rate has not risen above
14,000 a year.
The Teikoku report will fuel the debate within Japan about whether the
recession is bottoming out. The government's Economic Planning Agency last
week announced the economy had hit the bottom, a claim which the Industry
Ministry has fiercely disputed and the Bank of Japan failed to support in
its quarterly economic survey published last week.
However, the fall in the overall rate of bankruptcies masks important
changes in the causes of business failures. The number of bankruptcies
caused by the recession rose by 33 per cent to to 676, while bankruptcies
caused by financial factors linked to the collapse of the bubble economy
fell markedly.
An ominous sign was the first appearance since 1987 of bankruptcies caused
by the yen's appreciation against the dollar, which is hitting Japanese
exporters. There were three bankruptcies in May caused by the yen's rise.
The recession is increasingly claiming larger companies, such as Hanix
Kogyo, the construction equipment maker which failed recently. The combined
liabilities of bankrupt companies rose by 15.7 per cent in May to Y661.2bn
(Pounds 4.1bn) compared with the same month last year. The average debts of
bankrupt companies were Y594m, about 21 per cent up on the previous year.
Other economic indicators published yesterday supported the Bank of Japan's
caution about the economy as long as private consumption and corporate
investment remains subdued. Sales at Tokyo department stores were 9.3 per
cent down in May compared with the same month last year, the 15th
consecutive monthly fall.
Private sector machinery orders in April fell 26.8 per cent from the
previous month to Y786.9bn, a fall of 18.5 per cent from April last year.
This brings to an end a brief revival in machinery orders in the early
months of the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930616

