FT934-10286

FT  06 NOV 93 / Vorwarts, marchons, advance] Eurocorps set to go


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


FRANCE, Germany and Belgium yesterday inaugurated the Strasbourg
headquarters of the Eurocorps, designed to have 35-40,000 troops at its
disposal by 1995 and to form the possible nucleus of a future European army.
The defence ministers of Germany, Belgium and even France stressed that the
Eurocorps's aim was not to weaken the Nato alliance, but to strengthen its
European component.
The force will be at Nato commanders' disposal - though France has insisted
they must use it as a single unit - as well as providing forces for the
Western European Union, the intended defence arm of the newly-created
European Union.
Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, hailed the Eurocorps as 'the
central building stone' of a European defence, while saying: 'We do not want
to act separately from our American friends.'
But one difficulty quickly emerged yesterday when General Helmut Willman,
the Eurocorps' first commander, rebuffed the Belgian defence minister's
request that Dutch should be added to the corps' working languages of
French, German and English (which is used in Nato). 'Three languages is the
absolute maximum,' he said. The Belgian army operates bilingually in French
and Dutch.
The language problem has dogged the creation of the Eurocorps, whose kernel
is the 4,200-strong Franco-German brigade. When it was first set up in 1989,
the brigade tried speaking French and German on alternate days. When this
speedily proved impractical, soldiers in its tightly integrated units were
instructed to speak the language of the person they were addressing - in
other words, a French soldier is supposed to speak to a German colleague in
German, and vice versa.
The new joint force may prompt changes in the armaments industry.
In an interview with the Financial Times this week, Mr Henri Conze,
responsible for arms procurement in the French Defence Ministry, suggested a
joint Franco-German arms agency to help produce standardised equipment for
the Eurocorps.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931106

