FT933-12535

FT  23 JUL 93 / Nationwide board seat for redundant regional manager


   By JOHN GAPPER


A REGIONAL manager of Nationwide Building Society who lost his job last year
was yesterday elected to its board against the wishes of the society's
chairman.
Mr David English, made redundant as northern region sales director a year
ago, beat Sir Leonard Peach, IBM's former UK personnel director and chairman
of the Police Complaints Authority, in a postal ballot of 3.5m investors.
Mr English, who managed 150 branches in the north of England, was one of
three former employees who stood for election. The society made 650 staff
redundant last year in an attempt to cut costs. He lost his job when the
society abolished two of its four regions after working for Nationwide for
25 years.
Mr English told members that he understood the occasional frustration of
customers and would work to ensure the society was beyond reproach.
Mr Brian Davis, operations director, Mr Alistair Dales, finance director,
and Mr David Beety, another non-executive director, were re-elected. Savers
holding more than Pounds 100 in investment accounts were eligible to vote.
Although 3.5m of Nationwide's 7m savers received ballot papers, only 103,000
were returned. Mr English received 53,361 votes, while Sir Leonard received
only 42,779 votes.
Mr Tim Melville-Ross, chief executive, said there had been less controversy
than at past meetings. He said Mr English's election would not cause
problems and he expected that he would contribute knowledgeably to
discussions. However, Mr Melville-Ross said Mr English's election raised
serious issues. Nationwide had a legal duty under the 1986 Building
Societies Act to ensure it had a balanced board that was capable of
reviewing strategy.
He said the society was now likely to consider incentives to its members to
vote, such as offering those who returned ballot papers the chance to win
lottery prizes.
Members voted after receiving election addresses from all the candidates and
a recommendation from the chairman, Sir Colin Corness, to re-elect the four
existing directors in the ballot.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930723

