FT934-10150

FT  06 NOV 93 / Briefcase, Q&A: Claiming for expenses


I PAY TAX on the Paye system. Additionally, I have income from a furnished
home which I let to students for most of the year, and as holiday
accommodation during the summer.
What expenses can I claim against the income (apart from loan interest)? Are
there any advantages in being classified as a 'trade?'
Can I claim expenses up to the value of my wife's personal allowance for
caretaking duties (both of us spend considerable time at the property and
she is not otherwise employed).
Furthermore, if I declare a loss, is there a limit on the number of years I
can carry this forward until I make a profit against which to offset it?
Your profits (or losses) will fall within case VI of Schedule D, since your
activities cannot be regarded as a trade under tax law.
Case VI losses can be carried forward against case VI income (from any
source) indefinitely, provided that a claim is made within six years of the
end of the tax year in which each loss is incurred.
It is possible to elect for the rents to be assessed partly under schedule A
and partly under schedule D case VI, but that seems unlikely to be an
attractive option, so far as we can deduce from the bare facts given. Ask
your tax office for the free explanatory pamphlet IR87 (Rooms to let: income
from letting property).
One way of avoiding national insurance problems for your wife would be to
give her a half share in the property, either as a tenant-in-common or as a
joint tenant with yourself. Your solicitor can guide you on these points, of
course.
If the property is mortgaged, the transfer into joint names could attract
stamp duty.
It is possible for you to offer your wife a contract of employment as
bookkeeper etc in relation to the property, but bear in mind your national
insurance obligations as her employer. Leaflets are obtainable from the
Contributions Agency of the DSS.
If you ever contemplate selling the property, consult your solicitor well in
advance about the possibility of reducing the prospective CGT bill by living
in it for a short time and giving judiciously timed joint main-residence
notices, under section 222(6) (a) of the Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act
1992, as outlined in the free leaflet CGT4 (Capital gains tax: owner
occupied houses).
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All enquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

931106

