FT934-11400

FT  01 NOV 93 / People: Nine month search puts Pow into Aquascutum


Aquascutum, the upmarket clothing group famous as Baroness Thatcher's
favourite outfitter, has appointed James Pow as managing director and
charged him with both reorganising the company and repositioning the brand.
First priority is to bring the company's different divisions in Canada, the
US, Europe and the Far East together under one headquarters in London, and
centralise functions such as buying wherever possible.
That may sound ambitious, but Pow, 42, believes his experience fits him well
for the task. 'My background has been in fairly rapid reorganisations of
premium businesses,' he explains. Most recently, he was at Dunhill, where he
was managing director of Hackett, the menswear group it acquired in 1991
with a view to turning it into a global brand. Pow was responsible for
opening Hackett's flagship store at Sloane Square last year.
Before that he was international sales and marketing director at Mulberry,
the fashion designer.
His experience in promoting both those brands will equip him for what he
sees as his second important task at Aquascutum: repositioning a brand which
is losing its identity.
'We need to focus on what the consumer of the 1990s perceives the Aquascutum
brand to be,' he says. Even premium brands are not immune from change in
consumer attitudes from the high-spending culture of the 1980s towards
demanding value. 'Young people today identify with brands that deliver
quality and value for money.'
Pow plans a wide-ranging programme of market research to determine how
Aquascutum should be positioned for the 1990s. He is aware that he could
face resistance to change but says feedback to his ideas since he arrived at
the company last month has been 'very positive'.
Aquascutum will certainly be hoping it has the right man, after an executive
search which lasted some nine months. Pow succeeds James Stokes, who moved
up from deputy chairman and joint managing director to succeed Paul Bennett
when he retired as chairman in August.
Pow was educated at Broxburn Academy, West Lothian, before completing a
degree course in business studies, production and design at the Scottish
College of Textiles, Galashiels. In addition to his time at Dunhill and
Mulberry, he is a former assistant MD of Ballantyne Cashmere.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

931101

