FT934-11274

FT  02 NOV 93 / Joint bids for rail franchises allowed


   By ROLAND RUDD


THE GOVERNMENT is to allow British Rail management buy-outs to bid for
franchises in co-operation with private sector companies, Mr Roger Freeman,
transport minister, announced yesterday.
He said priority would be given to bids where railway employees had a
substantial interest. 'We are talking about the management and staff of BR,
either alone or in conjunction with other private sector companies, joining
to bid for franchises.'
Some of the proposed franchises cover large parts of the BR network. Some
critics of the railways bill, which returned to the Commons yesterday after
its passage through the House of Lords, believe buy-out teams will only be
interested in bidding for smaller rail franchises.
The government also plans to bolster buy-outs by weakening a Lords'
amendment to the bill which seeks to allow BR itself to bid for franchises.
The government's change would require the franchise director to veto a BR
bid if there was a 'credible alternative'.
Mr Freeman believes subsidies would make loss-making Regional Railways and
Network SouthEast attractive to bidders. Almost half their operating costs
would be met by the government over seven years.
The government has now said bidders could be awarded franchises that last as
long as 15 years, more than twice the length previously expected. This may
attract more private bidders.
However, it emerged yesterday that British Rail's advisers fear the Treasury
may not allow the Department of Transport to transfer subsidies over the
long term to franchises running loss-making services.
The government yesterday denied that short-term franchises would make it
difficult for bidders to finance operations.
Ministers believe franchises would not need large amounts of working capital
because they would have revenues from operations or a government subsidy if
the ventures were loss making.
Mr Nick Harvey, Liberal Democrat transport spokesman, said 'virtually
nobody' was showing any interest in bidding for franchises.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931102

