FT933-10238

FT  05 AUG 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Profitable tune from
commercial radio - As stations win more listeners the task now is to woo
advertisers


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Douglas McArthur, a former brand manager at Procter & Gamble, has been given
the task of reversing a marketing disaster of classic proportions.
The problem is that the brand has been getting 'better' all the time - 50
per cent in the past 10 years according to McArthur - yet its market share
had scarcely increased at all.
The 'brand' is commercial radio in the UK and McArthur is managing director
of the Radio Advertising Bureau, the biggest effort made so far by the
commercial radio industry - now 20 years old - to promote itself as an
advertising medium.
The challenge he faces is to try to translate the growth in listening as new
stations have come on air into extra advertising revenue.
There are now more than 100 individual commercial radio services in the UK
and two national stations, Classic FM and Virgin. In addition, Atlantic 252,
the
pop station based in Ireland, reaches 60 per cent of the UK population.
McArthur's 'marketing disaster' is that commercial radio is still stuck at
around 2 per cent mark of total advertising revenue. The causes are partly
historical. Commercial radio followed commercial television in the UK and
has remained in its shadow.
Many national advertisers have simply ignored the medium, a process not
helped by squabbling stations concentrating on short-term advantage and
giving little thought to the longer-term promotion of their medium.
'We have discovered an immense amount of valuable, persuasive data for
radio. The duty is on the industry to tell people. Advertisers just don't
know about the benefits of radio,' says McArthur. 'Advertisers views on
radio are rooted in guesses made many years ago and the industry has never
made the time to tell them.'
This week the Radio Advertising Bureau, which is funded by a group of major
stations, went on the offensive using the latest official listening figures
as ammunition.
At a press conference McArthur was able to announce that for the first time
commercial radio had taken a 40 per cent share of the audience in its battle
with the long-entrenched and substantially funded local, regional and
national radio services of the BBC.
It was a symbolic moment even though to get to the 40 per cent mark in the
three months from March to June, McArthur had to add in the 2.2 per cent
share of listening won by Virgin 1215, the new national pop station, which
had only been on air for seven weeks of the research period.
McArthur was also able to point out that the reach of commercial radio, the
number of people who listen at least once a week, had climbed to a record 60
per cent including Virgin.
In London, where the choice ranges from easy listening and jazz to various
tones of pop plus news and talk, commercial radio took a 58 per cent share
of the audience.
While RAB claims that the commercial stations now have a stranglehold on the
BBC go a little too far, McArthur was able to point to information about BBC
listeners who hear their radio uninterrupted by advertising.
Some 41 per cent of the those who listen to the Today programme on BBC Radio
4 also listen to commercial radio and fans of The Archers (also on Radio 4)
behave in a similar way.
Radio, at least in the morning, can compete effectively against television.
At 8am, RAB points out, two and a half times more people are listening to
commercial radio than are watching commercial television.
Despite the good news, McArthur believes there is only a brief window of
opportunity for the radio industry to 'really go for bust' and persuade
advertisers to re-assess commercial radio in the wake of publicity
surrounding the launch of the new national stations Classic and Virgin.
Apart from trumpeting the latest audience numbers during its first year, RAB
has set up specialist teams to advise new advertisers to radio and assembled
research including more than 200 case studies of successful use of radio as
an advertising medium.
Within three years McArthur would like to add Pounds 50m in revenue to
current commercial radio revenues of Pounds 150m. In a largely fixed-cost
business that would mean Pounds 40m straight to the bottom line.
'Radio will not be a huge medium in three years. It will have a 3 per cent
share of advertising. But stations will be immensely profitable and none of
the other media will have noticed because an extra 1 per cent is a tiny
share of anything,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930805

