FT934-11335

FT  01 NOV 93 / California dream put on hold


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


The depth of California's recession has taken most local forecasters by
surprise and remains under-reported on the east coast, which is two years
into an economic recovery. Californians are not exaggerating when they claim
to be still ensnared in the worst downturn since the Great Depression.
The figures are strikingly bad. With an unemployment rate of 9.4 per cent,
against 6.7 per cent in the US as a whole, the state faces a jobs challenge
of European rather than American dimensions. Manufacturing employment is
down 14 per cent from its peak in 1990 and is still falling. Retail sales
are down about 12 per cent in real terms, three times the fall in personal
incomes, suggesting a crushing of consumer confidence. In Los Angeles
county, which has suffered 70 per cent of the state's job losses, the
property market has suffered a London-style meltdown. A typical home in an
affluent area is selling for about Dollars 480,000 against Dollars 670,000
in 1990, and prices may go still lower. For the first time in memory,
workers are heading east for jobs.
'If you want a job this century, leave California,' warns Mr Larry Kimbell,
head of the business forecasting unit at the University of California at Los
Angeles. He does not expect the recession to bottom out until late next year
and predicts the state will not regain its pre-1990 growth trend until after
the turn of the century.
The outlook for Los Angeles is worse still, according to Mr Jack Kyser,
chief economist at the privately funded Economic Development Corporation,
based in Hollywood. In spite of an upturn in movie studios and signs of a
revival in tourism as memories of the LA riot fade, he does not expect
sustained job growth until 1995. In Palo Alto, a region much less affected
by defence cuts, Mr Steve Levy of the usually upbeat Centre for Continuing
Study of the Californian Economy is almost as pessimistic. Although activity
may have stopped declining, 'there is no sign of an upturn', he says.
The grim figures are provoking an intense debate within the state. One camp
sees the problems as essentially temporary: a reflection of the combined
impact of several short-term shocks. The most serious is obviously the 20
per cent decline in federal defence spending in California, which has led to
a drop in aerospace employment, for example, of about a third since 1990.
But this was exacerbated by the bursting of the real estate bubble, the
cessation of inward investment from Japan and the weakness of foreign trade:
California accounts for about a fifth of US exports.
The other, gloomier view is that the difficulties, while partly cyclical,
also reflect structural problems: a complacency that took root during the
long years of effortless prosperity. Mr Lew Coleman, vice-chairman of
BankAmerica in San Francisco, says about half the state's economic base (not
just defence-related industries) is restructuring in an effort to improve
productivity.
'This cycle is probably several years from being completed but it should
produce a more competitive state economy,' he says. The restructuring thesis
helps explain the puzzling short-term weakness of service industries:
instead of taking up the slack as in previous recessions, non-manufacturing
jobs contracted in both 1991 and 1992 and will probably fall again this
year.
The state government is wrestling with big increases in social spending that
partly reflect the short-term burden of rapid immigration. (California, with
12 per cent of the population, absorbs a third of legal immigrants to the US
and about 50 per cent of illegal immigrants.) But even allowing for this,
its performance until recently was poor: a steady increase in the tax and
regulatory burden co-existed with a deterioration in infrastructure,
educational standards and public safety. For business and individuals alike,
this has made California a 'bad buy'.
Some pundits are defiantly optimistic. Mr Joel Kotkin, a Los Angeles TV
reporter and author, claims the state is going through a healthy
Schumpeterian process of 'creative destruction'. He translates every
negative into a positive: cuts in defence jobs, for example, are good
because they increase the availability of skilled manpower for rapidly
growing small, high-technology companies; the fall in housing prices makes
Los Angeles more affordable for the young people still flocking to the
region. The public gloom reflects the influence of the industries that are
dying - and thus clamouring for state or federal assistance.
Mr Kotkin may overstate his case. But why be too gloomy about the long-term
prospects of a state that boasts both Silicon Valley and Hollywood, crucial
players in many industries of the future such as 'information
superhighways'? In general California is strong in precisely the sectors -
enter tainment, high-tech manufacturing, professional services and foreign
trade - that are likely to enjoy above-average growth in coming decades.
With the passage of a budget on time this year and enactment of important
tax reforms, there are signs that Sacramento, at last, is getting its act
together. Add to this the state's vast consumer market and its favourable
position on the Pacific Rim (and as a gateway to Latin America) and there is
surely reason to believe that the Californian dream is on hold rather than
cancelled.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

931101

