FT932-3432

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (5): Inward investment drive is being
stepped up / Examining how the country is selling itself to the world


   By MARK NICHOLSON


NOTHING is more vital to Tunisia's economic ambitions than substantially
raising levels of direct foreign investment.
In this respect, Tunisia is being ambitious. To succeed in keeping GDP
growth at a real 6 per cent a year until 1996, the end of the present
development plan, the government has set itself the target of tripling
inward investment, outside the hydrocarbons sector, from around Dollars 70m
disbursed a year to at least Dollars 200m.
Only growth at that pace will create the additional 5,000 to 10,000 jobs a
year needed to accommodate annual entrants to the workforce. And, in the
view of many bankers, only foreign investment in export industries can
generate this.
There is nothing new about Tunisia's investment drive, which began in
earnest during the early 1970s when a previous government encouraged the
creation of 'non-resident' exporting companies through tax incentives and
foreign exchange privileges.
But with the arrival of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and the post-1987
changement, with its attendant flurry of liberalising economic reforms, came
a change of gear.
Import, tariff and price controls have been dropped or relaxed. Investment
licensing has been abandoned. A ministry of co-operation and foreign
investment has been created to centralise the government's sales pitch. And
early this year the government took the first steps towards making the dinar
convertible, introducing current account convertibility for imports and
exports.
The government's next, imminent, step will be to produce a unified
investment code to replace separate sectoral codes covering manufacturing,
services, tourism and agriculture - 'at the moment we're confronted by a
library of texts,' says one Tunis banker. The code covering hydrocarbons,
which is substantially the biggest draw for foreign investors, will remain
in place.
'We are producing a consistent and coherent institutional environment,' says
Mr Mustapha Nabli, planning and regional development minister. 'We want to
end changes in the environment. We're saying, with this code - that's it.'
The new code, which Mr Nabli says should be finished and in place by July,
also aims to cover areas, like transport and education, not previously
covered by any sectoral code. It should also encourage regional development
and, particularly, add incentives for investment bringing technology
transfer.
However, the new code is unlikely in itself to offer a particular incentive
in a country which foreign investors say has always offered a clear,
efficient and systematic institutional framework for investment. Tunisia's
main selling points will remain its political stability, its proximity and
good access to the EC market, and its cheap labour costs.
This combination has been rewarded by a steady flow of Italian, French,
German and Belgian investment, notably in tourism, textiles, leather goods,
and electrical and mechanical products. The resulting growth in tourism and
textiles is particularly marked. There are, for instance, now more than 160
separate German manufacturing investments in Tunisia, covering companies
employing 22,000 people. Exports of textiles and leather products to Europe
alone, to illustrate further, made up 41 per cent of Tunisia's total exports
in 1992.
The textile sector could receive a further, considerable boost should the
board of Sara Lee, the US clothing and foods group, decide this month to
proceed with a possible Dollars 60m investment in a spinning and weaving
plant in Tunisia. The chief rival for the proposed investment appears to be
Morocco, which has been lobbying hard to bring the US group to its corner of
North Africa.
Indeed, all such major commitments from multinationals are likely to be
increasingly hard won. Moreover, Tunisia's retention of keen competitive
advantages against its immediate neighbours, the countries of eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union and the Asian 'tigers', is likely to pose the
greatest challenge to the government over the next few years, committed, as
it is, to increasing, at the same time, a politically vital set of social
policies.
On sheer wage costs, Tunisia remains competitive. A recent report by the
Tunisian-French Chamber of Commerce quoted findings that Tunisia was a
substantially cheaper place to make some garments than Poland, Portugal,
Turkey and Hong Kong.
Nevertheless, unlike many of its rivals, Tunisia maintains a minimum
guaranteed industrial wage which is subject to increases in line with
prospective inflation. 'Tunisia is still competitive,' says one German
industrialist. 'But they have to pay attention.'
Some foreign investment agencies are watching closely, for instance, the
development of the new investment code. Among the measures under discussion
is the granting of a 10-year tax holiday for new manufacturing enterprises -
but this would, in fact, be something of a disincentive given that most
present investments are granted an indefinite tax holiday.
'We can understand that the government wants to make the code as
economically beneficial as possible for the country,' says a German
investor. 'But it has to remain as profitable as possible for us.'
The Tunisian government is hoping, however, to move beyond the simple appeal
of low wages and emphasise instead the relatively high education of
Tunisians. 'Workers are not just productive here, they have shown they can
also produce high quality,' says one diplomat.
While the country is scarcely going to turn down further investment in, for
instance, textiles, it would rather see companies look to Tunisia to develop
higher technology products, service industries or computing and software.
'Tunisia cannot count on remaining a low-wage economy,' says Mr Nabli. 'The
level of living here is continually rising and our competitive strengths
changing. We need above all for our economy to absorb more sophisticated
technology.'

The Financial Times


London Page III

930614

