FT932-13501

FT  23 APR 93 / EBRD Annual Report: Attali pledges to triple rate of
investment - Anthony Robinson takes stock of the bank's successes and
failures in stimulating private enterprise / Investment track record
criticised


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


'IT IS not fair to judge a new aeroplane by its altitude just after the
take-off,' Mr Jacques Attali, president of European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, protested yesterday as he summed up the first full year's
operation of what he called this 'unique' institution with its mandate to
focus exclusively on helping the former Soviet bloc develop democracy and
private enterprise.
Particularly, he might have added, as it was taking off with a newly
recruited multinational crew from 40 countries and heading for the
turbulence of unprecedented problems demanding innovative solutions.
Take for example the case of Balkancar, the Bulgarian fork-lift truck maker,
which used to work round the clock on a three-shift basis supplying cheap,
rugged forklifts to the entire Comecon market.
Its plants now work two or three hours a day, hundreds of workers face
layoffs, the plant faces bankruptcy - but throughout the former Soviet
Union, forklifts are being scrapped because of the lack of elementary spare
parts.
Hungary's Ikarus bus factory, the Czech republic's CKD tram factory and
Skoda's locomotive plant, which used to supply the Soviet railways, face a
similar dilemma.
The EBRD, according to Mr Ron Freeman, the head of merchant banking, is
currently looking for ways of helping Russia finance the import of spare
parts from Balkancar to keep Russian factories and warehouses in operation
and provide a breathing space until Balkancar itself can be reorganised and
eventually privatised.
Searching for imaginative ways of keeping state-owned behemoths afloat is
not strictly speaking part of the EBRD's mandate.
It is expected to allocate 60 per cent of its funds to private enterprise.
Unfortunately, privatisation has hardly started in Bulgaria, bank reform is
incomplete, and thus far less than Dollars 100m (Pounds 65m) of private
investment has flowed into this Balkan neighbour of warring Serbia.
Mr Alexander Bozhov, head of the Bulgarian privatisation agency, says: 'We
are disappointed with the EBRD because it has not yet finalised any projects
here. But I have to admit that's largely our fault because we have not
prepared any concrete proposals either.'
The list of EBRD projects approved last year, as detailed in the annual
report, reflects the wider experience of the World Bank, the IMF and private
investors who have all concentrated their first efforts on those countries
which have stabilised their currencies and have introduced privatisation,
banking and bankruptcy laws and reformed their tax systems.
The bulk of approved EBRD projects are in the Czech republic, Hungary and
Poland. Private investors have put Dollars 7bn into these three states - but
little elsewhere in the 22 countries in which the EBRD operates, except for
a few potentially big, capital-intensive projects in resource-rich,
private-investment-welcoming new republics like Kazakhstan.
Mr Attali pledged that the rate of disbursement of EBRD financing would
triple this year as projects in the pipeline came to fruition and key
reforms, especially banking sector modernisation and the cleaning-up of
enterprise balance sheets, fall into place.
The exponential growth in private sector enterprise - it already accounts
for well over half the GDP in Poland and is rising throughout the region -
should also make it easier to raise the proportion of funds going to local
entre - preneurs.
Until now, however, the figures show that it has proved easier to make
co-financing deals with the existing international institutions, banks and
private companies than to lend to fledgling local entrepreneurs with no real
track record and little chance of attracting funds from private banks or
other sources than their own.
The classic deal of this kind was EBRD's modest Ecu102m (Pounds 80m)
contribution to Volkswagen's eventual Ecu3.49bn commitment to Skoda in the
Czech republic, followed by its part financing of Air France's investment in
Czechoslovenska Airlines.
In Poland the EBRD contributed Ecu5.5m to AAB's Ecu15.4m extension to its
ABB Dolmel venture in Poland, and has co-financed the Pilkington glass
project in Huta Sandomierz and Lucchini of Italy's modernisation and
acquisition of the Huta Warszawa steel works.
The EBRD's initial emphasis on co-financing western projects, on financing
endless technical studies, pilot privatisation projects and its cautious,
commercial approach to lending to fledgling local entrepreneurs has its
critics in eastern Europe as well as London.
'The EBRD promised to be innovative but in practice it's very conventional,'
complained a Polish businessman frustrated by lengthy correspondence and
meticulous procedures.
The hope in eastern Europe is that the bank will be better able to
accomplish its primary purpose of helping to foster local private initiative
and enterprise once bank reform, bankruptcy and property laws are in place.
The concern is that the bank will get too involved in long-term
infrastructure, energy and environmental projects, including the new nuclear
safety facility.
Significantly however, two of the latest EBRD initiatives are directed at
helping the growth of private banking in eastern Europe.
It has just subscribed to 20 per cent of the shares of Ion Tiriac bank, the
leading privately-owned bank in Romania, and a 28 per cent stake in Poland's
Wielkpolski Bank Kreditowy.
The bank is also involved in a complex Polish scheme involving 180 companies
which figure as bad loans on the books of Polish banks about to be
privatised.
In these cases the EBRD stepped in where private western banks have thus far
been reluctant to tread. Eastern Europe is a risky part of the world for
pioneers.
Given the banks' cost structure and organisation it is not able profitably
to make loans smaller than around Ecu5m.
But by lending to fledgling local banks which are equipped to exercise due
diligence and assess the creditworthiness of small to medium-sized private
companies the EBRD hopes to be better able to fulfil its mandate to help the
emerging private sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930423

