FT934-8561

FT  15 NOV 93 / Arts: Stunning work despite recession - FT Architecture
Award


   By COLIN AMERY


The FT Architecture Award has had a particularly splendid year. There was a
record number of entries - 154 - and the quality was extremely high. The
Award will be presented at a luncheon in London when Sir Simon Hornby, the
official lay member of the Financial Times Architectural Award jury, and
himself a considerable patron of new buildings as chairman of WH Smith, will
be the main speaker. As the new chairman of the Royal Horticultural Society
and a former chairman of the Design Council, he is well qualified to
consider the whole question of architecture and business.
What emerged clearly from the travels of the jury - and it is an important
feature of the FT award that the jury visits all the short listed buildings
 -is that the very best British architects have produced some stunning
recent work, the recession notwithstanding. One of the following has won
this year's coveted FT Architecture Award, but in the true spirit of
competition the winning building and architect will not be named until the
luncheon.
The shortlist begins with an excellent small building by Sir Norman Foster.
His new library for the Cranfield management school is an elegant,
classically proportioned small temple of learning, the more impressive since
it was achieved on the relatively low budget allocated.
Norman Foster and Partners' much grander and deceptively simple new airport
at Stansted is also on the short list. Many think it the most beautiful new
airport in the world and certainly the level clarity of the design is quite
brilliant. I have always been particularly impressed by the way it sits in
the landscape, but perhaps the most beautiful feature is the ingenious
system of natural lighting. Structurally it has a rare purity.
The Queen's Stand at Epsom by Richard Horden is a very unusual type of
building which has brought out the best from this practice. An extremely
enjoyable place to visit, it proves that contemporary places of pleasure do
not have to be sterile or concrete. It has the elegance of a modern yacht.
Michael Hopkins has a triumvirate of buildings in this year's short list.
Just outside Cambridge he has added to the Schlumberger research centre (an
earlier FT winner). These simple wings on each side of a modest atrium are
very controlled and restrained. What is particularly exciting here is
Hopkins's adventure in 'gothic' with his geometric concrete laboratory
ceilings.
Anyone associated with the FT has a soft spot for its old home, Bracken
House by St Paul's cathedral, which was sold to a Japanese company and
turned into a bank. The original building was put up in the 1950s to designs
by Sir Albert Richardson. The fine quality of the design, workmanship and
materials led to its being listed. Hopkins had a difficult task convert a
former newspaper offices and printing works into a bank. Retaining the north
and south blocks as bookends, he has inserted a brilliantly designed new
central block with all the muscle and strength of the original without a
hint of imitation.
Out near Heathrow Airport are the business parks. Stockley Park is the most
outstanding but a more recent one, Bedfont Lakes, is fascinating, if a
little schizophrenic. Two architects designed the two main ranges of office
buildings and the results are like chalk and cheese. Ted Cullinan built
large, vernacularesque blocks while Michael Hopkins followed a more
orthodox, almost Miesian line, in his buildings for IBM. These are solemn
and austere, with all the attention to detail that one has come to expect
both from the Hopkins and IBM, which is probably the most serious business
patron of design and architecture in the world.
The two remaining entries on the short list are quite unlike each other and
quite unlike the rest of the list. The local authority offices in Winchester
by Colin Stansfield Smith are a serious attempt to be modern in an old
context. In roof line and at street level the shapes and materials are
contextual, but in between it is a braver new world with large areas of
glass.
In Chichester is the final building on this year's short list - a remarkable
multi-storey car park by architects Birds Portchmouth and Russum. This is a
controversial addition to a historic town which tackles the problems of car
parking head on and with considerable style.
The decision on the winner will be a hard one to make.
The result will be announced at the luncheon on Monday 29 November, at the
BAFTA Centre, 195, Piccadilly, London, W1 and this year it would be a
pleasure to see some of our FT readers. Ten places will be available and
readers should apply for their invitation to Mrs Vicki Harvey-Piper, The
Financial Times, Number One Southwark Bridge, London, SE1 9HL. Places will
be given to the first ten applicants received in the post.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931115

