FT933-12578

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (9): Dams
lessen the drought - Spain: Apart from government plans, the outlook is
bleak


   By TOM BURNS


SPAIN'S construction industry can thank its lucky stars that it rains less
and less on the domestic plain. A state of sustained semi-drought in the
past years has prompted the government into unveiling major dam building
projects.
The sector is fortunate also that the government, which is obsessed with
raising Spain's competitiveness and with narrowing the gap with the European
Community through the ambitious convergence programme it has mapped out for
itself, has made road building a priority.
All in all, the government has pledged Pta18,000bn over the next 15 years,
an accumulated total of Pta1,200bn a year, for civil engineering works. 'The
promises and the programmes of those in charge of economic policy in the
coming years guarantee continuity (for the sector)' Seopan, the construction
industry federation, noted in its newsletter last month.
Outside the government's plans, the outlook is bleak. The number employed in
construction was down to just 1.1m at the end of the first quarter of this
year, 7 per cent below the sector's total labour force at the same stage
last year.
Inevitably, the industry has been an early victim of the accelerated
slowdown of the Spanish economy, which is now officially in recession. The
GDP recorded 0.7 per cent negative growth in the last quarter of 1992 and
shrank by 1.1 per cent in the first quarter of this year.
Last year, 104,100 construction jobs were lost, most of them in the second
half of 1992, and a further 40,000 jobs vanished in the first quarter of
this year. Cement consumption fell by 16 per cent in the first three month
of this year.
However, Seopan sees signs of a silver lining. In April the rapid decline of
jobs in the sector braked sharply as unemployment rose by just 2,200. Cement
consumption in April fell by only 11 per cent, bringing the accumulated loss
over the January-April period down to 14 per cent.
The chief reason, virtually the sole one, for the silver lining was a
recovery in official tenders. Provisional figures for contracts through to
the end of April rose to Pta529bn, which was more than double the total over
the same period last year in constant pesetas.
The official tenders came from right across the administrative board.
Contracts by the central government were up by 41 per cent, those tendered
by the regional authorities increased by 52 per cent and those by local
authorities were up by 61 per cent.
The lion's share of the increased contracts originated from the Public Works
ministry with a 387 per cent rise in tenders. This department is providing a
lifeblood to the sector with the 15-year long infrastructure programme.
The major road building projects that are already under way include an
east-west motorway along Spain's northern coast, a north-south one that will
run alongside Spain's western border with Portugal and a third, originating
in Valencia on the Mediterranean, that opens a new route into France via a
tunnel system midway along the Pyrenees mountain range.
The ministry has also earmarked major improvements to secondary road systems
and to big city ring roads.
The national hydraulic plan is still in the blueprint stage but it involves
considerable dam building activity to transfer water resources from the
wetlands in the north of the country to reservoirs in the dry central area.
If the full infrastructure programme is implemented, then the construction
sector can look forward, in the very worst of scenarios, to a prolonged
period of stability based on the 1992 levels. The sector underwent a
shake-out last year when growth stopped short in its tracks but, thanks to
the onset of the infrastructure programme, that drop may have marked the
industry's nadir.
The 'if' is however very much an operative word. 'We will lean towards
pessimism until we see what the 1994 budget looks like,' says Mr Victor
Martinez, a construction industry analyst at Madrid brokers AB Asesores.
Analysts fear that the ministry's spending spree could be trimmed by
budgetary constraints.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930723

