FT933-5144

FT  04 SEP 93 / How to Spend It: Fashion at first-hand - Lucia van der Post
knows how to find fresh, unsullied design


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


THOSE OF us who are privileged to see the work that many of our young
fashion designers produce are accustomed to the praise, the accolades, the
excitement that surrounds their college shows but are inured to the fact
that what we have seen on the catwalk seldom sees the light of day.
Somewhere along the line the ideas are watered down, the manufacturers fail
to follow up the fine words with solid orders and the students in question
usually disappear into foreign workshops or the large industrial combines.
If you have ever wanted to buy fresh, unsullied designs, straight from a
student's portfolio, now is your chance. Simpson of Piccadilly, which starts
a Best of British promotion on Monday, until September 25, will be showing
(and selling) the work of four young graduate designers throughout the
promotion.
In February Simpson invited colleges all over the country to submit the work
of their best students. A panel of fashion experts then sifted through the
entries looking for collections that would interest, inspire and, of course,
be wearable and thus sell.
The four students eventually chosen were overwhelmingly the most popular
choice. Two came from the Royal College of Art - Pearl Walton, with a
wonderfully romantic collection for women in velvet and suede, and Tim
Voegele with a chunkily masculine collection of tweeds and checks for men.
Karen Heverin studied at Ravensbourne College where and created a Red Indian
inspired collection for women - all lean,long lines in brown, navy blue,
rust and white.
Hema Mandalia studied at Nottingham Trent University and has produced a
collection of soft, tailored menswear in (mainly) gentle neutral shades,
although if there are any men out there who have been longing for a winter
coat in powder blue now is their chance - Hema Mandalia has made one.
Sifting through portfolios is relatively easy. Getting the clothes to the
shop-floor quite another. Simpson had to organise the manufacturing and the
students remained involved with manufacturers.
The results are there to be seen in Simpson and very colourful and desirable
they are, too. Pearl Walton's collection has been built around the theme of
the 'Butterfly Ball' - the 'Butterfly' design appearing on velour bodies,
silk shirts, scarves, suede jean and some marvellously sassy high-heeled
ankle boots. Pearl Walton's father, Steve Walton, an expert in photograph
printing, photographed peacock feathers and butterflies which were then
screen printed on to fabric. The result is a rich and colourful collection.
The men's collections are well worth a serious look. Tim Voegele has
mastered that difficult art of making men's clothes that are interesting and
innovative and yet are indubitably for real men. They exude a highly
attractive chunky masculinity.
While it is well worth visiting Simpson for the fashion alone, there will be
lots more to see. In conjunction with Country Living magazine there is a
range of British craftwork to look at - rocking horses, hand-knitted
jumpers, hand-painted furniture and the like - while on the ground floor
there will be designers and craftsmen from The Princes Youth Business Trust
selling and showing their wares.

The Financial Times


London Page X

930904

