FT933-9951

FT  06 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Dowty buy helps TI rise 25%


   By ROLAND RUDD


THE ACQUISITION of Dowty, the aerospace group, enabled TI, the specialist
engineering company, to report a 25 per cent increase in pre-tax profits for
the half year to June 30.
Profits rose to Pounds 62.8m (Pounds 50.2m) on increased sales of Pounds
736.7m (Pounds 471.4m). However, earnings per share fell from 10.2p to 9p.
Sir Christopher Lewinton, chairman and chief executive, said the takeover of
Dowty had diluted earnings more that expected because of the softness in the
aerospace industry, which he expects to improve over the year.
'I am always asked every time I do an acquisition whether I paid too much at
the wrong time. I believe the Pounds 500m paid for Dowty last year was the
right price at the right time.'
The group is in negotiations to sell a number of non-core businesses, a move
expected to raise some Pounds 100m. About half of this should be completed
before the year-end, significantly reducing debt.
Borrowings for the half year rose to Pounds 241m, representing gearing of 86
per cent. An interest charge of Pounds 5m compared with a credit of Pounds
8m last year.
Rationalisation at Dowty led to the closure of 2 of its headquarters, two
layers of management and the loss of 1,500 jobs over the past year, reducing
the workforce to 5,000.
In the last six months 800 employees lost their jobs, most of them at Dowty.
Redundancy costs were part of a Pounds 9m (Pounds 3m)reorganisation charge.
Sir Christopher described the planned joint venture of Dowty's landing gear
business with Snecma's landing gear company, Messier-Bugatti, as a 'merger
for growth'.
The two other core businesses continued to perform strongly. John Crane,
producing engineered seals, lifted operating profits to Pounds 25.6m (Pounds
22.3m). Bundy, making specialised tubes, saw operating profits rise to
Pounds 23m (Pounds 19.7m).
Sir Christopher said: 'People forget that 70 per cent of our business is
generated by John Crane and Bundy, neither of which are exposed to the
aerospace industry.'
The interim dividend is raised to 3.85p (3.7p).
COMMENT
Two of TI's legs have always looked solid, which is why the management has
been so keen to remind the City that they generate more than two thirds of
revenue. It was the third, Dowty, which looked worrying. The downturn in the
aerospace industry has been worse than TI expected. The acquisition could
prove more dilutive in the full year than first envisaged, although the
company said it should not prove material. The joint venture with
Messier-Bugatti should firm up Dowty when it is completed next year. By then
investors will have a clearer idea as to whether Dowty is as good a buy as
TI says it is. Debt remains high, but the disposal programme should, to a
large extent, remedy that by the year end. With forecast pre-tax profits of
Pounds 130m, the shares - up 7p to 358p - look fairly priced on a
prospective multiple of 18.8.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930806

