FT932-3337

FT  15 JUN 93 / Raw material prices remain steady


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


INFLATIONARY pressures at factories remained subdued last month as
sterling's relatively strong performance in May kept raw material prices
from rising.
Provisional figures from the Central Statistical Office yesterday showed
that the prices of raw materials and fuel purchased by manufacturing
industry fell 0.3 per cent on a non-seasonally adjusted basis between April
and May. That compared with a 0.7 per cent decline the month before.
Seasonally adjusted figures showed a slight upward trend of 0.2 per cent
between April and May, however, after a 0.8 per cent decline the previous
month.
Compared with the previous year, input prices rose 7.3 per cent in May after
a year-on-year increase of 7.1 per cent in April. But last month's rate of
input-price inflation was lower than in March, when raw material prices were
8.4 per cent higher than the year before.
The latest data covering manufacturing industry's output prices showed a
similarly mixed pattern. The index for home sales of all manufactured
products rose 0.2 per cent on a non-seasonally adjusted basis between April
and May after a 0.6 per cent rise between March and April.
The increase in the index was 4 per cent in the 12 months to May, slightly
higher than April's 3.8 per cent rate of output-price inflation and the
highest rate of inflation in prices of goods at the factory gate since March
last year.
The output-price index for manufactured-goods sales, excluding food, drink
and tobacco, increased only 0.1 per cent, seasonally adjusted, between April
and May after an increase of 0.2 per cent between March and April. That
index, which is considered by many analysts to be a good measure of
underlying trends, rose 2.6 per cent in the 12 months to May compared with
2.7 per cent in the year to April and lows of 2.4 per cent at the end of
last year.
Yesterday's figures were broadly in line with City expectations and had
little impact on financial markets. The Treasury expressed general
satisfaction with the producer-price figures, although a spokesman said it
was important to maintain downward pressure on unit wage costs so that
output prices remained under control.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930615

