FT932-6867

FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (3): Fund managers flex their
muscles - How new players are curbing central bankers' joy


   By JAMES BLITZ


AFTER MONTHS of turmoil on the currency markets, this ought to have been a
time of celebration for the world's central bankers.
The pressures inside the European exchange rate mechanism have eased.
Germany has cut its short-term interest rates, reducing the pressure on
Europe's recession-hit economies. And the French franc appears to have
finally shaken off numerous speculative attacks against it.
But celebration is far from being the order of the day. For central banks
and governments are becoming increasingly concerned about the acute
structural changes in the nature of foreign exchange dealing. And, in
particular, there is increasing discussion of how a powerful new group of
players - the pension funds and the US hedge funds - are dominating this
market, and overwhelming the power of governments to control exchange rate
movements through market intervention.
Until a few years ago, international currency dealing was dominated by
commercial banks making markets in foreign exchange off the back of trade
flows.
But in the last four years, fund managers in the non-banking sector have
become the prime movers of capital, with the power to shift sums vastly in
excess of the reserves of central banks and governments.
These institutions are the most important players in the foreign currency
market today, because of the international diversification of their asset
portfolios in the late 1980s.
The liberalisation of cross-border financial flows and the reduction of
national capital controls in recent years has encouraged fund managers to
invest in overseas assets. The declining level of US interest rates has also
forced major American investors to look abroad for higher returns.
That quest for overseas returns has been intense. In its recent report on
capital flows*, the International Monetary Fund stated that cross-border
equity holdings in the US, Europe and Japan increased from Dollars 800bn in
1986 to Dollars 1,300bn in 1991. European institutions now invest about 20
per cent of their assets abroad, while foreign investments of US and
Japanese institutions generally range between 5 and 7 per cent.
One result of this internationalisation of assets was to increase foreign
currency turnover to levels that dwarf the reserves of the central banks.
Net daily foreign exchange turnover last year was about Dollars 1,000bn,
compared with central bank reserves of Dollars 555.6bn in April 1992.
But the critical point about these funds is not just that they move capital
in huge sizes. Instead, the methods by which each of these types of fund
operates threatens to make exchange rate movements more volatile in future.
The US hedge funds are the most notorious of the new players. Their star
performer is Mr George Soros, who claims that his Quantum Fund broke the
pound on Black Wednesday and forced its exit from the ERM.
Other well-known hedge fund managers in the US include Mr Paul Tudor-Jones,
the Caxton fund and Mr Andy Krieger of Capital Holdings.
According to the IMF report, each of these funds has less than Dollars 10bn
under management. But they use their capital to indulge in highly leveraged
positions - or margin trading - giving them formidable power in the market.
The essence of margin trading is that a fund provides a certain sum in
collateral to a commercial bank, which then allows the fund to take
positions in the market which could be up to 10 times greater than the
amount deposited.
If profits are made, the bank passes them on to the fund's account. If the
fund starts to lose, however, the bank will 'close out' its position and
annex the deposit when it equals the net losses.
The power of leverage is consolidated by the fact that the hedge funds take
positions which are very short-term, highly aggressive and often directed at
smaller markets where intense buying and selling can affect exchange rates.
'Their basic principle is that a million lemmings can't be wrong,' said one
investment banker. 'If the peseta is moving downwards, then a hedge fund can
push its entire fund out of the peseta in one go. By being conspicuous and
powerful, they can move the market in a desired direction.'
In the recent currency crisis, the activity of the hedge funds, which have
excellent track records, encouraged other market participants to operate in
a similar way.
As the IMF report puts it: 'While the hedge funds acted as market leaders,
the real financial muscle was provided by institutional investors (mutual
funds, pension funds, insurance companies) and by non-financial
corporations.
The sheer size of these funds provides much of their power. While a bank
might take positions in hundreds of millions of dollars, it would not be
unusual for a pension fund manager to move billions of dollars in one go.
But here again, it is not just the huge sums that the pensions funds have,
but their new methods that explain their new power.
Until recently, the rapid expansion of international fund management had
not, of itself, had much impact on exchange rates. Much of the international
portfolio diversification has been into long-term regional funds which do
not take active currency decisions.
However, improved liquidity and trading technology is now allowing investors
to move quickly into and out of domestic and international investment
positions.
According to the IMF: 'Advances in the technology of financial transactions
 -ranging from back-office clearance and settlement to trading and
information systems to settlements of payments - have reduced transaction
costs to the point where they less and less serve as an impediment to
rearranging portfolios when expectations change.'
Moreover, specialist managers are now managing currency as a separate asset
class in itself or managing the currency exposure of funds as a separate
decision.
This latter method of control, called currency overlay, makes it easier to
separate currency management from that of the underlying assets.
Mr Dirk Morris, of JP Morgan Investments, in London, says: 'The currency
overlay business has grown from nothing four years ago to the management of
somewhere between Dollars 15bn and Dollars 25bn today. And our own business
has grown by 30 per cent over the past year.'
Is all this a cause for concern to central banks? There is little doubt that
these flows can now overwhelm governments.
As the IMF puts it: 'When private markets, led by the increasing financial
muscle of institutional investors, reach the concerted view that the
risk/return outlook for a particular currency has deteriorated
significantly, the defending central bank can be faced with a run that could
easily amount to say Dollars 100-200bn a week.'
Admittedly, turnover in other markets is still far greater. The entire
volume of marketable debt in US government securities turns over, on
average, once every eight days, a far greater figure than would be the case
for foreign exchange.
But the market practitioners are convinced that the role of the big funds in
currency markets is set to increase in the coming years. Governments need to
decide whether there is anything they can do to manage these flows, or
whether the game is already up.
*International Capital Markets, Part 1. Exchange Rate Management and
International Capital Flows

The Financial Times


London Page II

930526

