FT933-10191

FT  05 AUG 93 / Agency to help speed up roadbuilding


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


MR JOHN MacGregor, the transport secretary, will this morning announce the
creation of a special government agency to build and maintain Britain's
trunk road and motorway network.
The transport department expects that 'years' can be slashed off present
completion times, without interfering with people's right to be consulted or
to object.
The agency will be headed by a chief executive reporting to Mr MacGregor.
The transport secretary will decide the overall roads strategy, leaving
day-to-day management to the agency.
The decision, foreshadowed in the transport department's annual report, is
part of a package of six measures to speed up the roadbuilding programme.
The measures will remove the red tape which means that completing a new
trunk road takes, on average, 13 years.
Much of the saving could be achieved by speeding up internal procedures in
the transport department, Mr MacGregor believes. The measures would allow
different parts of the roadbuilding process to proceed in parallel, rather
than consecutively as at present.
Mr Paul Channon, the former transport secretary, set out a 10-year Pounds
20bn programme of roadbuilding in 1989 in a white paper, Roads for
Prosperity. However, the transport department recently admitted it would
take 20 years to complete.
A further use of 'design and build' contracts would speed up roadbuilding,
by allowing a single contractor to bid for both the design and construction
phases.
Lobbyists such as the RAC have been campaigning for reforms to the planning
system, which allows objectors great scope to delay new roads.
'We fully accept there should be a full public inquiry, and
environmentalists should have their say,' said Mr Edmund King, RAC campaign
manager. 'But is it feasible that you have 50 people all putting across the
same thing?' The RAC also believes that residents whose homes stand in the
way of road schemes should be compensated above market prices.
More than 80 executive agencies have now been created in the civil service
to improve the delivery of public services such as the payment of benefits
and vehicle registration.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930805

