FT934-11708

FT  29 OCT 93 / Foreign Exchange: Dollar swings after GDP data


   By PETER JOHN


THE DATA on US economic growth eagerly awaited all week by international
investors caused few surprises. But the dollar subsequently swung sharply
against the D-Mark, reflecting comments from the Bundesbank and the US
Federal Reserve, writes Peter John.
Elsewhere, the French franc weakened, the Portuguese escudo was supported by
intervention and sterling gained ground.
US gross domestic product showed a rise of 2.8 per cent in the third quarter
on an annualised basis. This was slightly higher than the broad consensus
figure of 2.7 per cent, but the range of forecasts was wide and there was
nothing to justify a significant shift in the US currency.
When the statistics were released, however, the dollar jumped a pfennig to
hit a high of DM1.6920. It appeared that some relief over the data was
compounded by a comment from Mr Edgar Meister, a member of the German
Bundesbank council, suggesting that lower German interest rates were still
on the agenda. This defused the impact of comments on Wednesday by Mr Hans
Tietmeyer, the head of the Bundesbank, who said he saw no reason for a
further rate cut for the time being.
Shortly afterwards, a US Federal Reserve official said the growth rate for
GDP in the fourth quarter was likely to be lower than in the third. Many
economists had expected a steady rise and the comments sent the dollar
falling to a DM1.6735 close, down from DM1.6805. It ended New York trading
at DM1.6742.
The German currency was broadly higher in Europe as a result of technical
adjustments and political factors, although it lost some strength after Mr
Meister's comments.
The D-Mark initially rose above FFr3.50. Worries that the Air France strike
would spill over into other areas of the public sector were compounded by
growing doubts over the leadership of Mr Edouard Balladur, the Conservative
prime minister. A French public opinion poll taken before Mr Balladur ceded
to Air France union demands showed that only 46 per cent of those asked
approved of him, against 56 per cent a month earlier.
Also, there are worries over French unemployment figures due tomorrow. The
franc finished at FFr3.4990 to the D-Mark, down from FFr3.4970.
The D-Mark gained against the lira as the Italian government called a
confidence vote on a minimum tax for the self-employed. The lira weakened to
L976.50 per D-Mark before closing at L972.0, down from L971.4. The
Portuguese escudo was also under pressure and the country's central bank was
said to be intervening to support the currency around Es103 to the D-Mark.
Sterling rose but failed to break through DM2.50. There were suggestions
that German bond funds, which have big holdings of UK gilts, might have been
hedging their investments by selling the pound.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

931029

