FT934-10122

FT  06 NOV 93 / Books: Gossip on Dizzy misses the fizz / Assessing a new
biography of Disraeli


   By ROBERT BLAKE


DISRAELI: A BIOGRAPHY by Stanley Weintraub Hamish Hamilton Pounds 25, 717
pages
I WROTE a biography of Disraeli over a quarter of a century ago. So I must
'declare an interest', as they say in Parliament, when reviewing a new one.
There is a great deal of fresh source material since I wrote. Professor
Weintraub has been able to use the Gladstone Diaries, though rather
excessively about Gladstone's 'rescue work'; the papers accumulated by the
Disraeli Project in Kingston Ontario; the Rothschild Papers not available
when I wrote; and many other valuable collections. His research has been
thorough. He writes fluently and his book is easy to read. There is a case
for reconsidering personalities whose lives have been written a generation
ago provided that there is something to reconsider. In Disraeli's case I am
not sure that there is.
His effrontery, recklessness and adventurism - he was in many ways an
English Julien Sorel - have been described in much detail many times.
Professor Weintraub expatiates on these aspects, and he has given us the
fullest account we are ever likely to get about Disraeli's infinitely
complicated and very shady financial dealings. I never fully fathomed these
myself. Perhaps the author has not either, though he has certainly
penetrated deeper than anyone else. But the outlines of Disraeli's
debt-ridden career are well known. Details do not change the general
picture, although the author is right to emphasise a point often forgotten,
that Disraeli's desperate determination to get into Parliament was motivated
not only by hope of fame but by fear of imprisonment for debt, from which
MPs were legally immune. For much of his early life he was teetering on the
brink of ruin.
Disraeli in his youth was involved in numerous sexual as well as financial
imbroglios. Some of these - his affairs with the pushy Clara Bolton, wife of
his fashionable doctor and with Henrietta (Lady) Sykes - are well known;
also his ventures with his debauched Wykehamist friend James Clay in the
bordellos of Constantinople in 1830-31, from which both received unfortunate
maladies. But there is no evidence at all to suggest that, after his
marriage in 1839 to a rich widow 12 years older, he engaged in any
'irregularities'.
The least credible - and creditable - chapter in the book contains the
author's surmise that Disraeli in his early 60s fathered a son by Lady
Dorothy Neville and a daughter by an unknown woman. The daughter said to
look like Disraeli was sent to Australia and claimed a grand and mysterious
parentage. The evidence is slender to the degree of absurdity. A reputable
biographer should never have printed this farrago of guess-work or allowed
its pre-publication hype. The author admitting that his evidence is not
'conclusive' - a masterly under statement - says that the 'jury is still
out'. Only a jury of half-wits would be out for more that a few minutes
before unanimously acquitting the defendant.
This is essentially an anecdotal biography. It reads rather like a gigantic
gossip column - Chips Channon's diaries, or Harold Nicolson's, told in the
third person. There is plenty of 'period' colour, a host of personal
details, descriptions and stories culled from a multitude of sources.
But there are some surprising gaffes. A footnote tells us that a Sovereign
was a gold coin worth 'nearly Pounds 2'. Another explains an ironic letter
comparing Disraeli's salons in Paris in 1843 to 'Law's under the Regent' by
a reference to Henry Lawes, an obscure Cromwellian musician. John Law was of
course the famous Scottish-born speculator and finance minister to the
Regent Orleans in 1720. Again, the Marquess of Hartington, Gladstone's
temporary successor in 1874, did not operate in the House of Lords but from
the House of Commons. The title was a courtesy one. The author wrecks the
famous story of Disraeli saying on being served with champagne after a
series of tepid dishes 'Thank God for something warm at last' by
substituting 'wine' for 'champagne'. Claret is also 'wine'.
Disraeli was a romantic, a cynic, a wit and an orator. Weintraub brings all
this out, but Disraeli was above a ll an important political figure who left
a lasting imprint on the party which he came after so many vicissitudes to
lead. It is not easy to define exactly what his beliefs were or his purpose
was, but his role in politics is what really matters. Weintraub does not add
anything to the history of this, although it is by far the most interesting
aspect of his career. Richard Shannon's The Age of Disraeli (1992) probably
came out too late for Weintraub to take account of it, but in any case the
political side of a man who led the Conservative Party for 13 years and was
Prime Minister for seven does not seem to be his main interest. On one
politically relevant matter he does throw new light. This is the odious
anti-semitism with which Disraeli, despite being a confirmed member of the
Church of England, was continuously assailed right to the end. I believe now
that I under-estimated this in my own book.
There is an enjoyable parallel in modern times to events at the end of
Disraeli's career, though Weintraub could not have known it when he wrote.
Margaret Thatcher is not exactly a Disraeli-like figure, and Disraeli never
wrote his memoirs. But he did publish, shortly after he had been ousted in
1880, a semi-autobiographical novel, Endymion, for which he received a
Pounds 10,000 advance, enormous by the standards of the day and larger than
any known before.
Despite elaborate security a copy was leaked, and to the fury of all
concerned the Standard to a 'scoop' by printing in a pre-publication review
the juicier extracts. 'Plus ca change . . .' one might say.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

931106

