FT932-290

FT  29 JUN 93 / Survey of Computer Networking (10): A long wait for
'vaporware' - The prospects for the main operating systems strategies


   By PHIL MANCHESTER


WINDOWS NT 'represents nothing less than a fundamental change in the way all
companies can address their computing requirements,' Mr Bill Gates, head of
Microsoft, proclaimed at the end of May.
Modesty may be inap- propriate at the official launch of a company's
flagship soft- ware product, but it is fair to accuse Mr Gates of premature
optimism. Development of Windows NT, an operating system for a wide range of
computers, is well-advanced. But it will be at least two months before the
basic software is generally available and it will be even longer before
other important components are released.
It is, of course, a common ploy to announce products before they are ready.
It is the classic way to protect an installed base. Microsoft, like its
rivals, has used the ploy before - with the original Windows software, for
example - and will doubtless use it again.
Mr Stuart Allsop, a US newsletter publisher, coined the term 'vaporware' to
describe the practice. He regularly publishes a Top Ten chart of the
products which have been 'in vapor' the longest.
Windows NT has been on the list since the start of the year, after Microsoft
failed to meet its scheduled delivery date in December 1992. Windows NT was
first announced in April 1991 - putting it 'in vapor' for over two years.
Although NT officially stands for New Technology, it suggests other
interpretations - Not Today, Not Tomorrow, etc.
But it would be wrong to single out Microsoft for castigation. Novell, its
fiercest critic and closest rival in the operating systems market, had
similar delivery problems with the latest version of its NetWare networking
software. NetWare 4.0 was 'in vapor' for 13 months before being finally
released in March this year.
All is fair in the current 'soft wars' and premature announcements are low
down the list of marketing weapons currently being deployed by all the
participants.
In March, for example, a group of Microsoft's main rivals banded together to
announce a possible, final solution to the problem of the many different
versions of Unix in anticipation of the final arrival of Windows NT. IBM,
Hewlett-Packard, Sun, Unix Systems Laboratories and Santa Cruz Operation -
all formerly in different factions of the Unix camp - said that they would
conform to a Common Open Software Environment specification.
Microsoft was conspicuously absent from the party - a factor which leaves
Cose lacking in credibility. Microsoft is, after all, the world's biggest
supplier of open software environments.
Although Mr Gates may have overstated its significance, Windows NT will
certainly mean change for the biggest single constituency in the computer
industry: tens of millions of users of MS/DOS-based personal computers.
It is more than a replacement for MS/DOS and Windows 3.1. Windows NT gives
Microsoft a product specifically to compete in the mid-range and enterprise
systems market against Unix and IBM's OS/2. It is designed to use the
so-called client-server architecture, a technique for distributing functions
across a network of many different computers.
Microsoft aims to extend the client-server principle from the most humble
desktop 'client' computer up to the new high-performance reduced instruction
set computers (Risc). It is working with Digital Equipment to build systems
based on DEC's Alpha Risc, for example.
The combination of Alpha's advanced architecture and Windows NT could
challenge even the largest mainframe systems on both performance and
function. If Windows NT succeeds, Microsoft may come to dominate the entire
software market.
But the question remains whether Microsoft can convince the market that it
has got certain important components in the NT 'family' right. The
networking component, in particular, will come under close scrutiny.
Microsoft has made several attempts to break into the market for PC
networking software, but to no avail.
While it seems unlikely that Microsoft will lose its grip on desktop
computers, it faces a real challenge in the networking market from Novell -
which currently dominates with NetWare.
But Novell, too, has had its failures. Its attempts to break into the
desktop operating system market - by taking over Microsoft's former rival
Digital Research - have had little impact.
The most likely resolution to the conflict is that the two companies will
continue to dominate their respective markets and be forced to combine their
efforts.
Mr Dan Kikinis, president of California-based Oakleigh Systems and the
designer of Elonex's range of PCs, says: 'Microsoft has not been very
successful in the Lan market and Novell is not really successful in the
operating systems market. The two will have to work together whether they
like it or not.
'Windows NT needs another year before it will make any real impact. It will
be difficult for Microsoft to get users to change how they work - and Novell
is still well ahead in networks,' he adds.
So it will be some time before the jury of the marketplace reaches its
verdict on Mr Gates's latest brainchild.

The Financial Times


London Page V

930629

