FT931-3952

FT  12 MAR 93 / EC laws 'will not delay tendering': Minister seeks to
clarify rules on workers' rights


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


EUROPEAN COMMUNITY legislation protecting the rights of employees in mergers
will not delay the government's market-testing programme to put almost
Pounds 1.5bn of Civil Service work out to tender, Mr William Waldegrave,
public service minister, said yesterday.
He was responding to confusion over whether work contracted out to the
private sector is covered by the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of
Employment) regulations 1981, which implement the EC legislation in UK law.
If the rules apply, a successful bidder must take over staff on their
existing terms and conditions, which removes the scope for savings through
lower pay or cutting staff.
Uncertainty over Tupe regulations has affected market-testing in several
government departments including the Home Office and the Crown Prosecution
Service. Contractors have also warned that confusion over the regulations
could wreck the Conservatives' plans to increase contracting-out of public
services.
Mr Waldegrave said, however, that the question of whether the regulations
apply had to be decided on the facts of each case. Even when Tupe rules
applied, he expected bidders to be able to make 'genuinely innovative
proposals' that would offer good value for money. Mr Waldegrave's statement
in reply to a parliamentary question coincided with the publication of
Cabinet Office guidelines on the scope of the regulations.
These list instances in which the Tupe regulations are likely to apply to a
particular contract, such as where the contractor employs 'substantially the
same staff to do the same work as before, using the same premises and the
same equipment'.
The regulations are also likely to apply if the contractor has to take over
a group of key employees to continue the work. They will probably also apply
if the employer takes over the management or control of assets used by the
previous employer that are 'significant in relation to that activity'.
The regulations are unlikely to apply, the guidelines say, where the
contractor 'conducts the operation substantially differently without making
significant use of previous staff, key employees, premises or equipment'.
They are also unlikely to apply if 'the identity of the previous undertaking
is substantially changed' and new staff are employed in 'a different
organisational structure'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930312

