FT934-8811

FT  13 NOV 93 / Team spirit hit for six: Japanese loyalties are breaking
down as 'free agents' are on the rise


   By ROBERT THOMSON


Mr Hiromi Makihara is typical of the old-style baseball heroes fondly
portrayed in the Japanese versions of British boys' own adventure tales.
A pitcher (bowler) for the Yomiuri Giants, the country's most popular team,
Mr Makihara is determinedly stoical on the playing field and, in moments of
great tension or supreme elation, betrays no more than a raised eyebrow or a
curling lip that could be the beginning of a smile.
Twelve years on the team and apparently a Giant for life, Mr Makihara threw
his best curve ball this week, tempting baseball and social commentators to
take a big swing at an explanation.
He has become a 'free agent', and wants to join another team where he will
be properly appreciated. In other words, he is prepared to trade in his
black Giants' cap for more money. His new salary is undecided but is
expected to be more than Y100m (Pounds 635,000).
While Japanese boys are regaled by traditional tales of sci-fi fantasy and
adventure, the stories are really more about loyalty, and are a form of
preparation for the corporate loyalty of adult life.
In his own way, Mr Makihara was wearing the blue suit of a salaryman on that
pitcher's mound, and his unshake-able loyalty was that of the middle-manager
from Mitsubishi or the bulldozer salesman from Komatsu. The defection of Mr
Makihara and a few other baseball stars through the newly introduced free
agent system has prompted the general conclusion in the media that Japan is
becoming a 'free agent' society.
Politicians have been leaving the Liberal Democratic party, the
parliamentary version of the Giants, to create new parties, while workers
are said to be job swapping, and shoppers forsaking their brand loyalty.
These sudden changes of uniform have left the Japanese doubting the
durability of loyalty at a time when leading companies are calculating
whether they can afford to make a lifetime commitment to their workers.
Nippon Steel, which sets industry trends, is planning to halve its graduate
intake and maintain a smaller core of lifetime employees, hiring and firing
the remainder when necessary.
Workers are interested in job flexibility, but the economic downturn has
made them wary of a flexibility that may mean unemployment. The Shukan
Gendai, a magazine popular among commuters, has a cover story this week
describing 'The salaryman's great depression', and promising to provide
answers on 'all those issues which cause unease', including life after
sacking and borrowing money to supplement shrinking bonus payments.
A senior executive at a Japanese bank explained that his institution had
lost employees to high-paying foreign banks in Tokyo, but 'the scalping
problem is not so serious now', as staff want the security of lifetime
employment which non-Japanese institutions do not offer. Salaried workers,
surveyed by Meiji Mutual Life Insurance last month, are putting less
emphasis on pay and more on the quality of working life. Only 17.1 per cent
sought more money, while 44.5 per cent wanted stimulating work.
This comes at a time when Japanese consumers have become more discerning
about price, and want better value for money, regardless of old loyalties to
prestige brands.
In Tokyo, a government-backed 'individuals' import centre', which was opened
in 1987, enables consumers to flick through some 1,500 catalogues and order
German ski wax or buy Japanese-made industrial equipment from a US company,
cutting out a few layers of middle-men.
'Last October, we had about 50 people a day, but now we are getting 200 or
300 people,' says Mr Tadamichi Shiramatsu, a manager. 'In the past, people
were interested in importing luxury goods. They don't care so much about
brands now, and are looking for something different for their home. Japanese
are relatively rich, but they want to spend money wisely.'
However, sales figures suggest prestige brands still have weight, as long as
they come with quality, and a person's self-perceived place in a group is
still central to Japanese identity, whether the group be a university
old-boy network or the supporters' club of the Yomiuri Giants. But Mr
Hiroshi Minami, director of the Japan Psychology Centre, suggests that the
governing creed in Japan is gradually shifting from the collective to the
self-centred.
'At the root of this shift is technical skill. If people have confidence in
their skills, they can move to wherever the skill is appreciated,' Mr Minami
said, though he cautions that this applies to elites such as the
entertainments industry, and not yet to the factory floor.
'This phenomenon is spreading among the people in society who are regarded
as talented. But if you look at the supporters, you still find that there is
strong sense of the collective.'
Now free agents have an important new role model: Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the
prime minister, formerly an outfielder for the LDP, who leads the Japan New
party.
He is strong on technical skill and, at last count, had a 70 per cent
approval rating, higher than any other administration since 1946.
When Mr Hosokawa's patchwork coalition inevitably falls apart under the
weight of its differing views, ranging from the religious right to the
socialist left, he will have a chance to test the market for political free
agents.
Given his good record as prime minister, he could cobble together another
multi-coloured coalition, knowing that if Makihara can leave the Giants,
voters might find it acceptable for Hosokawa to play wherever he likes in
politics.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931113

