FT932-6709

FT  27 MAY 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): A universal message
 -Pan-European ads are increasingly common


   By GARY MEAD


In a dismal period for worldwide advertising generally, pan-European
campaigns for branded products represented a significant bright spot last
year.
According to Euromarketing, Advertising Age's London-based weekly
newsletter, the top 100 pan-European brands in the main EC markets in 1992
increased their TV advertising spending by 28 per cent. The Dollars 5.3bn
(Pounds 3.5bn) paid out by the big spenders amounted to 42 per cent of all
TV advertising in Britain, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and
Spain, compared with a 38 per cent share the year before.
Such figures confirm the tendency for many multinational advertisers -
attracted by cost savings and the convergence of consumer taste - to treat
Europe as a single market. But it would be unwise to get carried away.
Pan-European advertising remains largely a television phenomenon; US
companies predominate (11 of the top 50 are American, including Kellogg's at
number one); and uncertainty and ambivalence remain, even among the
supposedly committed. A fifth of the biggest spending brands in 1991 in the
Euromarketing survey failed to make the top 100 a year later.
Of the factors driving companies towards greater use of Euro-brand
advertising, an important one is cost. Bill Britt, Euromarketing's editor,
says the recent rapid growth of pan-European marketing is partly inspired by
the financial savings.
'It's much cheaper to shoot just one commercial and then use it across
Europe. It's also cheaper for a company to assign one Euro-marketing manager
and to have more junior product managers, rather than full marketing
managers, at country levels.'
John Hegarty, creative director of the London-based independent advertising
agency BBH, which makes pan-European advertising for Levi Jeans, agrees. A
one minute television commercial costs about Pounds 300,000. By shooting a
single TV ad to span six European markets, Levi Jeans saved itself about
Pounds 1.5m.
Hewlett-Packard, the computer company, also cites cost efficiencies as one
benefit of its pan-European approach. Says Roger Wilson, its director of
communications and public affairs: 'We don't have advertising executives
across Europe any more'.
He adds: 'In our business, information technology, where products sometimes
have only six-month life cycles, we are absolutely convinced that marketing
and advertising could not be done any other way.
'The development cycle of the product is now so short you can only afford to
launch it once. The whole marketing process, including the advertising, is
now pan-European'.
Cars claimed the biggest share of pan-European advertising with 24 per cent
of the total of the top 100 brands. Renault, Fiat, Peugeot-Talbot and Ford
were all in the top 10.
Toiletries and cosmetics came next, with 14 per cent, food in third place
with 12 per cent and confectionery and laundry products both taking 10 per
cent.
David Newkirk, vice-president of management consultants Booz Allen &
Hamilton, believes other, more fundamental factors are responsible besides
cost cutting. 'The young and the rich have very similar tastes the world
over, and that's what's driving the convergences in advertising and media',
he says.
Before he joined Booz Allen & Hamilton in 1991, Newkirk was with American
Express, where he promoted its gold card services worldwide. 'Gold card
means prestige everywhere. But the way you signal prestige varies with
culture. The US gold card advertising was all about achievement and it was,
frankly, tacky in Europe. We had to change it. But the basic propositions
involved in products - be it freshness in soap powder, or odour-free in
toiletries, or young and trendy in soft drinks, or prestige in financial
services - those underlying needs are very similar wherever you go.'
Differentiation at local level is nevertheless important even for companies
with aspirations to be noticed internationally, Newkirk explains.
'McDonalds, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, run global campaigns but they still execute
them locally. Take Coca-Cola's new campaign featuring its return to an old
bottle shape. In the UK, that campaign is running heavily on posters in
bus-shelters, a medium that doesn't exist in the US. It's different again in
France because poster sizes are different there. Such differences in media
necessitate that a global advertising message is executed very differently
in different countries.
'It's going to be a long time before the media and the way people use media
converge, even if the products, the positionings, and the copy strategy all
converge,' he adds.
John Hegarty argues that pan-European advertising can work at a deep
cultural level, 'if you focus on the similarities rather than the
differences between people'.
'With Levis, people across Europe have a certain view of 'Americaness', and
the advertising can tap into that commonly held view. Cars are the same; our
experience of the car has developed in cohesion, transcending national
borders. But the Italian experience of olive oil is very different to the
British and it's harder - though not impossible - to do pan-European
advertising for products which have very different national associations.'
Miles Colebrook, president and chief executive officer of JWT Europe,
supports the idea that the most successful pan-European campaigns are those
which have got their central proposition clearly defined. How that is
interpreted locally is of less importance.
'Nestle Rowntree's chocolate bar Kit Kat is now sold throughout Europe with
the same slogan ('Have a break, Have a Kit Kat') but whereas in Britain the
TV ad features a children's puppet show, in Holland the voice-over is done
by a Dutch humorist. Neither would work at all in the other country.'
The further away from a TV screen, however, the more difficult many experts
say it becomes to create and to deliver a pan-European message.
Promotion and purchase practices, product sampling, dealing with the trade
and pricing are all local issues and are likely to remain so.
 ------------------------------------------------------------
        BIGGEST ADVERTISING GROUPS IN TOP 100 IN 1992
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Category                       No. brands       Dollars m
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Cars                               16               1,295
Toiletries/cosmetics               16                 720
Food                                9                 630
Confectionery                      11                 558
Laundry products                    7                 533
Toys                                6                 204
Household cleaners                  6                 180
Petfood                             3                 146
Soft drinks                         3                 131
Video games                         2                 124
Electronics                         2                 109
Coffee/tea                          2                 104
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Euromarketing
 ------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930527

