FT932-13499

FT  23 APR 93 / Russian Referendum: Vast logistical effort across 9 time
zones


   By JOHN LLOYD and GILLIAN TETT


THE Russian referendum on Sunday is a vast logistical exercise. Across nine
time zones of a huge land mass, electoral commissions are preparing ballot
papers and electoral lists to allow Russia's estimated 107m voters to give a
'da' or a 'nyet' to four questions:
Do you trust the president?
Do you approve of his social and economic programme?
Do you want an early election of the president?
Do you want early elections of the people's deputies?
Each one must be answered separately.
Evidence is mixed but signs are most people will have the facilities to vote
despite threats by some republics and regions to boycott the poll.
An example of how the referendum will be organised can be seen at the voting
station in the Lenin Rayon district of Saransk, in the autonomous republic
of Mordovia.
The Saransk electoral commission was first alerted in January, but
preparations were put on hold during two months of infighting between
parliament and Mr Yeltsin.
Once the form of the referendum was decided early this month, work was begun
in Lenin Rayon, much of it by student nurses. Like most places in Russia
they have no computers and everything is being done by hand or on battered
old typewriters.
'We have to do a lot of work in a very little time,' says Mrs Yelina
Lyudmiliavna, chairwoman of the 14-strong electoral committee for Lenin
Rayon.
The young nurses must first verify the district's 2,000 voters, then write
out invitations, vote and address 2,000 envelopes and dispatch them by hand.
When they come to the polling station the voters will exchange their slips
for a ballot paper, go to curtained booths, and make their choice.
'We have a lot of experience from the Soviet time,' says Ms Larissa
Vitalievna 'We had a debate about whether it would be appropriate to use red
banners (from the communist period) and decided no. But it's a pity we won't
be able to put on a show as beautiful as we did then.'
The votes will take some days to count, especially from remote rural
stations, with official results unavailable until the middle of next week.
First results from the cities should be known late on Sunday night or early
Monday morning. Western-style exit polls are not expected to be used.
The president's men are worried by the possibility of a low turnout, and by
the refusal of some regions or republics to provide polling stations. Mr
Sergei Filatov, chief of staff to Mr Yeltsin, said on Tuesday that their
polling showed a possible turnout as low as 53 per cent.
He said that, according to their information, only 73 per cent of the voting
districts were 'technically ready' to conduct the referendum.
Mr Yeltsin felt it necessary to issue an order this week which specifies
that the militia must turn out in force to ensure order during polling.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930423

