FT933-10135

FT  05 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee futures rise as frost is
forecast in Brazil


   By ALISON MAITLAND


THE LONDON coffee futures market reached higher climbs yesterday, driven by
reports of a cold front heading towards southern crop-growing areas of
Brazil, the world's largest producer.
Prices for robusta coffee futures, which had hit 2 1/2 -year highs on
Monday, moved quickly into still higher ground. The November contract peaked
at Dollars 1,138 a tonne in the morning, the highest level since trading in
the dollar contract began in March 1991.
'It shows you what a real frost scare can do,' said one analyst. 'This is
the biggest one we've seen in the past three to four years.'
London initially followed an overnight rise in arabica futures in New York
but eased back to close at Dollars 1,125 a tonne, up Dollars 38. New York's
December arabica contract reached 82.70 cents a lb yesterday before dropping
to 80.70 cents, down 1.00 in late trading.
Traders focused on a report from the National Meteorological Institute in
Brasilia that frost was expected to affect Parana and Sao Paolo states early
next week.
Parana accounts for under 10 per cent of the country's coffee and Sao Paolo
some 15 per cent. The meteorologists told Reuters news agency it was
doubtful the cold would spread to the main coffee-growing areas of Minas
Gerais state, which, according to researchers at London broker ED & F. Man,
is expected to produce 10.5m of Brazil's forecast 23m bags this year.
A slight frost hit parts of Parana last weekend, but damage to coffee trees
appeared to have been limited although the market is still awaiting details.
Buying interest from roasters was reported, as the coffee trade took
increasingly seriously the possibility that supplies will be restricted from
October 1, when Latin American producers are due to start retaining as much
as 20 per cent of their exports.
Price rises were partly self-fuelling, as market-makers covered positions as
the August 17 expiry of September call (buying) options approached.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930805

