FT934-10149

FT  06 NOV 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Survivor of the squalls - Coat
maker who learnt to cut his cloth carefully


   By SUZANNE ASKHAM


WHEN William Macdonald started his own coat-making business in 1985, he was
in the worst possible position. His old family company, making sheepskin
coats, had spectacularly failed (from a UK turnover of Pounds 35m). For four
years William had been running it under receivership for the Royal Bank of
Scotland.
'It was soul-destroying,' he says. 'But I knew that I still wanted to run my
own small business. I would never be happy working for anyone else.'
So William and his wife Malla founded Cocoon. The plan was to take the best
from the old company's philosophy and interweave it with modern market
requirements. The formula has worked. Today, the company makes lightweight
raincoats from their home base in Dumbartonshire, and sells them by mail
order and through their two shops in Edinburgh and London.
From the start, the Macdonalds devised some distinctive selling points.
'Every coat is effectively made to order. Customers specify arm and back
length, and colour,' explains William. 'We will also do repairs.'
Prices are calculated by adding the cost of raw materials and overheads,
then multiplying by a factor of three. The finished coats retail at an
average of Pounds 3,200.
The Macdonalds began with a seed capital of Pounds 310,000, derived from
savings, plus Pounds 37,000 in government grants.
To cover potential cashflow problems, William also negotiated a Pounds
310,000 overdraft facility with his local bank - this was possible because
the manager, who knew him, was confident he would succeed.
'Ironically, my biggest problem at the outset was my own lack of
confidence,' says William. 'Seeing a family business go under makes you
doubt your judgment and abilities.'
William designed a small range of garments, while he and Malla cut them out
and constructed them on the dining room table. They sold by mail order and
advertised in broadsheets and country magazines. In the first year their
turnover was an acceptable Pounds 340,000.
It went on to grow by 30 per cent every year. By 1987, the Macdonalds were
employing four assistants. To expand further, they needed commercial
premises. First, William successfully arranged for the overdraft facility to
be increased to Pounds 320,000.
Then they found suitable workshop space. 'We bought a 20-year lease for
which we pay Pounds 35,000 per annum. For that, we get 2,400 square feet.'
William took on a more active selling role - 'selling comes before
everything else' - while Malla supervised the workshops. One of their most
profitable showcases has turned out to be the country shows, particularly
the big ones: The Royal Show at Stoneleigh, the Badminton and Burley Horse
Trials.
'We spend Pounds 320,000 a year on stand fees, but it's worth it, as it
generates sales of 10 times that amount.' Initially, the Macdonalds found it
hard to get space in the most prestigious shows, but solved that problem by
going through the Rural Crafts Association in Godalming.
Another headache was solved in the past year. 'It's always been difficult to
find good suppliers who will extend credit and dye fabrics in small enough
quantities, ' says William, who has been forced to go abroad for most of his
raw materials. But Cocoon's ongoing growth has recently made suppliers more
inclined to take it seriously.
In 1989, the Macdonalds experienced their biggest disaster. 'We had hired an
agent in New York, who was handling almost half our turnover at the peak,'
explains William. 'Unfortunately, the pound rose, our profits were wiped out
and we could get no new orders.'
Remembering a hard lesson learnt with the previous family firm, William
immediately cut his losses. Cocoon's turnover that year stood still, at
Pounds 3150,000.
Since then the company has concentrated almost entirely on the UK market. He
opened a shop in Edinburgh at the end of 1989 (funded by getting his
overdraft raised to Pounds 330,000) and a shop in London soon after. Both
were paying for themselves within six months.
Today, the Macdonalds employ 12 staff, and turnover has reached Pounds
450,000, up from Pounds 370,000 in 1992. William is pleased at the figure,
although he feels his biggest mistake has been in acting too cautiously
throughout, curbing expansion.
'It's a legacy of the past,' he says. 'With Cocoon I have not taken risks,
have not expanded as much as I ought. Although our profit margin is supposed
to be 10 per cent, it always seems to be less.'
This year's catalogue features the Macdonald's daughter Anna on its cover -
indicating that a new family company has established itself in the ashes of
the old. Cocoon is leaner and less ambitious than its predecessor, and it
probably has more staying power.
William's immediate goal is to keep increasing UK sales; he aims to open
more shops. 'There is still a large untapped market here,' he says. 'I'll
leave the rest of the world for others.'
Cocoon, Macdonalds Originals, Lomond Industrial Estate, Alexandria,
Dumbartonshire G83 0TL. Tel: 0389-55511.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

931106

