FT934-8900

FT  12 NOV 93 / Kohl rebukes CSU ally over Europe


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl yesterday restated his passionate commitment to the
goal of European union, and rejected any revival of nationalism in Germany.
His speech to the German parliament was an unequivocal rebuke to Mr Edmund
Stoiber, the Bavarian prime minister and his political ally.
In an effort to stem popular scepticism about European integration, he said:
'For Germany, there is no alternative to European unity. Securing and
continuing the task of European unification concerns the very fate of this
continent, but above all of our country.'
He warned that if the European Union became no more than a 'glorified free
trade zone' as Lady Thatcher, the former British prime minister, wanted it
to be, 'it will not last long into the next century.' It was essential to
complete the political underpinning of the union, if the 'evil spirits of
the past' were to be kept under control.
His words won support from a great majority of the Bundestag, in a
hastily-arranged debate on the future of Europe and the outcome of the last
European summit.
Yet Mr Stoiber, the political strongman of the conservative, Bavaria-based
Christian Social Union (CSU), the sister party of Mr Kohl's Christian
Democratic Union (CDU) in the ruling coalition, sat unrepentant.
After speaker after speaker from the government benches, and from the
opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD), denounced his views, he said: 'I
stand before you condemned of high treason.'
Accusing his fellow politicians of suffering too long from guilt over their
national identity, he declared: 'We do not want a European nation in the
place of nation states.'
Even before yesterday's debate took place, Mr Rudolf Scharping, the leader
of the SPD, had pledged his support for Mr Kohl's European commitment, in a
remarkable demonstration of cross-party solidarity over the issue.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, the foreign minister and leader of the Free Democratic
Party (FDP), had warned that all his fellow ministers in the European Union
were shaken and dismayed by Mr Stoiber's views.
European union did not mean that Bavarians would lose their identity, he
said.
Yet it was left to Mr Kohl to make the resounding restatement of Germany's
European commitment, and seek to head off international fears of a growing
nationalist sentiment in the country.
'How political union will develop in all its details we still cannot say
today,' he said. 'Nobody wants a European mono-state. But I also hope that
nobody wants to go back to the nation-state thinking of the 19th century:
the rivalries of power politics of earlier times must be banished to the
past.
'Germany is and will remain our Fatherland. But a united Europe is our
common future.'
Mr Stoiber denied that he was anti-European. He believed in a European
union; he believed in a single market; but he rejected a European federal
state.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931112

