FT934-8533

FT  15 NOV 93 / Ferranti investors told to accept GEC bid


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


RECEIVERSHIP is the only alternative to GEC's bid of 1p per ordinary share
in Ferranti International, shareholders have been told in the offer document
released yesterday.
The bid continues to meet strong opposition from some shareholders. Mr John
Katz, chairman and one of the founders of the shareholders' association,
described the offer document as tantamount to mugging the shareholders.
GEC is offering about Pounds 10.1m for the ordinary shares and Pounds 1.29m
for the preference shares. It will also be required to assume Ferranti's
bank debts of around Pounds 110m and further debts of Pounds 30m. The bid
will proceed only if GEC can win acceptance from 90 per cent of the
shareholders.
Mr Eugene Anderson, Ferranti chairman, said at the weekend that it was vital
for shareholders to accept 'because we believe that it is unlikely that they
would receive any return in receivership and that suppliers, customers,
creditors and employees would also suffer'.
Ferranti's 10 largest shareholders own 38 per cent of the equity and the top
100 own 59 per cent. But in order to clear the 90 per cent hurdle, virtually
all its 8,000 largest shareholders will have to accept the deal.
The final 10 per cent of the stock is in the hands of 40,000 individual
shareholders. More than 500 shareholders claiming to represent about 25m
shares have contacted Mr Katz, who is leading the shareholder revolt.
Yesterday he said that if Ferranti did go to the wall and jobs were lost 'it
will be noted that it was not the shareholders who pulled the plug on the
company, but the banks, who are the most massive beneficiaries of the
proposed restructuring'.
Mr Anderson's letter in the offer document paints a bleak picture of the
defence electronics group's financial weakness and the effect on its ability
to do business.
He warns that the position is continuing to deteriorate. The interim pre-tax
loss, to be announced on Thursday, 'is estimated to be in excess of the
Pounds 10.9m loss' for the half year ending September 30 last year.
GEC's offer is also conditional on the conversion of the group's preference
shares to ordinary shares. This requires a 75 per cent vote in favour at the
extraordinary general meeting on December 8.
Mr Anderson conceded in the document that 'shareholders will not be happy
about the value ascribed to their shares'. But in order to continue trading,
Ferranti would need to use working capital facilities which depend on the
offers being made, and would become repayable if the offers lapsed.
'Your board believes that the only alternative to the offers would be to
invite the appointment of receivers. Receivership is unlikely to return any
value to any class of shareholder in Ferranti.'
It rules out the possibility of further disposals, a rights issue, or
finding a strategic partner.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

931115

