FT934-8756

FT  13 NOV 93 / UK probes failure of companies to win EU contracts


   By DAVID DODWELL, World Trade Editor


THE UK government has launched an investigation into problems UK companies
face in winning a bigger share of the Pounds 500bn-worth of public
procurement contracts awarded every year across the European single market.
It fears the failure of British companies to increase their share of
contracts in the European Union may be due to legal loopholes blocking free
trade or to unfair practices.
There is concern that complaints about discrimination are dealt with too
slowly by both the European Commission and member states, and that
procedures fail to prevent abuse.
The first stage of the investigation, which is expected to take four months,
will focus on collecting evidence, mainly through a joint survey by the
Department of Trade and Industry and the Confederation of British Industry
of 5,000 UK suppliers to EU procurement agencies.
Stage two will involve detailed examination of the problems identified. The
DTI will recruit on secondment a private sector expert in EU contracting to
provide the lead, and prepare a report for ministers. The resulting action
plan could call for changes both in Whitehall and in Brussels.
Since January 1 1993, all public works contracts worth more than Ecu5m
(Pounds 3.8m), and all supplies contracts worth Ecu750,000 or more, must be
open to competition, and must be notified in the Official Journal, a
comprehensive daily list of invitations to tender for EU procurement
contracts and of successful bidders.
In practice, the number of contracts awarded across borders has stuck at
less than 4 per cent of all contracts. Exporters complain that contracts are
not being properly advertised; that late arrival of tender forms makes it
difficult to get on bidding lists; and that after failing to win a contract
they are unable to discover the terms on which a contract has been awarded.
'There is a strong suspicion that contracts are being split up to fall
beneath the reporting threshold,' an official said.
'If advertised contracts are to be believed, no public authority on the
continent has bought furniture, bought carpets, or done any substantial
printing,' another official commented following a study of contracts
notified this year.
Mr John Chudleigh, head of Euro-bid Watch, a private consultancy, noted that
Spain had reported the outcome of just 16 of the 1,300 tenders invited so
far this year - compared with the UK, France and Germany which listed more
than 3,000 contract awards apiece.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931113

