FT932-13476

FT  23 APR 93 / World Trade News: The big guns head off a trade war


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


THERE was relief mixed with enthusiasm in Brussels yesterday as officials
digested the last-minute compromise in the EC-US dispute over public
purchasing rules.
The partial deal struck between Sir Leon Brittan, EC trade commissioner, and
Mr Mickey Kantor, US trade representative, avoids a nasty spat. As late as
Tuesday evening, the dispute risked escalating into a tit-for-tat trade war,
wrecking hopes of progress in the Gatt Uruguay Round.
More positively, the compromise establishes a key principle: the
progressive, reciprocal opening of markets in the government procurement
market. The US still intends to proceed with sanctions because the deal does
not cover telecommunications, but these will be token only.
Like Mr Kantor, Sir Leon is a lawyer. In effect he agreed this week to a
plea-bargain. In return for a light sentence, he has acknowledged that 'Buy
European' legislation unfairly closes the EC procurement market; but he has
persuaded the US gradually to start dropping 'Buy American' legislation at
federal and state level.
Right up until the final transatlantic telephone call on Wednesday evening
it was unclear whether the two men could find enough common ground to avoid
a trade war.
Sir Leon, perhaps the staunchest free trader inside the 17-strong European
Commission, was desperate to prevent the procurement dispute spilling over
into the Gatt trade talks. His fear was that the Clinton administration's
aggressive trade stance could provoke an anti-American backlash in Europe.
Yet Sir Leon also recognised that Mr Kantor needed to show the US Congress
and US companies that tough tactics had produced some tangible successes.
The hope is that both men have found a deal which will play to their
respective domestic constituencies, though one EC official said yesterday
there might not be enough blood to assuage EC trade hardliners.
The heart of the dispute lies with Article 29 of the EC utilities directive
which entered into force on January 1 1993. The law gives a 3 per cent price
preference to EC bidders for any government contract and allows an EC bidder
to ignore an offer if the bidder has a European content of less than 50 per
cent.
The US can now point to the EC's agreement to waive Article 29 covering
heavy electrical equipment such as steam turbines - a market valued at
Dollars 1bn a year. In return, the EC can point to the removal of all
restrictions against EC bids from the five publicly-owned federal electrical
utilities, plus the Tennessee Valley Authority - a market which is valued
potentially at Dollars 5bn-Dollars 10bn.
EC officials said yesterday these concessions should lead to the eventual
elimination of 'Buy American' clauses at 'sub-federal' or state level - the
lucrative market for building bridges, airports, rapid transit, or buying
school buses. These are currently effectively closed to EC companies.
According to the deal, the administration will approach the governors of all
50 states about the withdrawal of this legislation. Some 33 states have
expressed general willingness to consider dropping the clauses.
Separately, both sides have agreed to remove all restrictions on each
other's companies bidding for contracts to supply goods and services to
central governments. This is a potentially huge prize, allowing EC and US
companies to bid for services ranging from software to supplies to the US
Army Corps of Engineers.
The final twist in the deal is a joint study to identify market barriers in
government procurement rules and to ensure each side plays by comparable
rules. The study could last a year, but the result would be a yardstick for
negotiations on the thornier subject of telecommunications.
Sir Leon's broader aim appears to be to include telecommunications in a
future multilateral deal, as part of a Gatt agreement on market access. For
a comprehensive deal on the Uruguay Round is the prize he wants most.
The signs are that he is building a relationship with Mr Kantor; but aides
say he has still to master the latter's baseball jokes. With the season just
started in the US, Sir Leon has at least shown he can play in the major
leagues.
Editorial comment, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930423

