FT933-10145

FT  05 AUG 93 / International Company News: Bronfmans to cede control of
Trizec in debt restructuring


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


TORONTO'S Bronfman family will relinquish control of Trizec, North America's
biggest publicly-traded real estate developer, under a debt-restructuring
plan unveiled by the Calgary-based company.
The proposals, covering CDollars 1.9bn of Trizec's CDollars 5.3bn (USDollars
4.14bn) debt, involve the conversion of at least half the parent company's
senior debentures, as well as junior debt and preferred shares, into common
equity.
The recapitalisation plan would reduce debt by CDollars 859m and cut
debt-servicing costs by CDollars 130m a year.
The number of common shares outstanding would more than quadruple to 930m
shares, leaving existing shareholders with a stake of only 23 per cent.
Carena Developments, the Bronfman holding company which owns 53 per cent of
Trizec, would end up with about 12 per cent.
Senior debenture holders would own 49 per cent of the shares, while 16 per
cent would be in the hands of junior debt holders.
Holders of senior debentures, over half of which are held in Europe, would
convert part of their holdings into a new 10-year security with an 8 per
cent interest rate.
Trizec could later convert the new debentures into common shares as well if
the North American real estate market deteriorates further. But Mr Kevin
Benson, chairman, said yesterday that 'we really want to repay that
debenture to preserve equity for the common shareholder'.
The company plans to list its shares on the New York Stock Exchange once the
restructuring is complete. The existing two classes of common shares would
be combined into one.
Mr Benson said he hoped to reach agreements with the senior and junior debt
holders within the next six weeks. Trizec is seeking the concessions because
of its expected inability to meet CDollars 980m in debt repayments which
fall due over the next three years. With real estate financing in the
doldrums, the prospects are slim for raising new equity or refinancing
existing debt. The attractions of selling assets have also diminished.
Trizec's class B shares tumbled by 51 cents in Toronto yesterday to close at
CDollars 1.05, against a 1990 peak of CDollars 30.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930805

