FT933-12652

FT  23 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: Technical document raises ire and
passion - A look at what the social chapter would actually mean for this
country


   By DAVID GOODHART


FOR SOMETHING capable of arousing such passion the social chapter of the
Maastricht treaty is disappointingly short and technical.
The chapter reduces the scope of national veto in the field of employment
regulation, where the UK stands somewhat apart from the rest of the European
Community. It extends qualified majority voting - currently only applicable
to health and safety matters - to areas such as working conditions, the
information and consultation of workers, and gender equality at work.
Without the opt-out the government negotiated, it could have been forced to
accept directives on issues such as the introduction of works councils.
The introduction of works councils, likely to be the first issue agreed by
the 11 social chapter countries, illustrates how trivial the effects of some
such directives can be. The councils will meet no more than twice a year, to
be informed of company plans.
The case may also illustrate the limits to the opt-out. Not only will the UK
still be subject to existing EC employment legislation, but even those
directives agreed by the 11 will affect many large UK companies. At least
100 UK multinationals will be affected by the works-council directive
through their continental operations.
British unions are certain to exert pressure to ensure that they are not
excluded from any rights European workers are granted through the chapter.
The chapter includes another list of areas - such as social security,
protection of workers when dismissed, and employment conditions of workers
from outside the EC - which will continue to be subject to unanimous voting,
thus causing the UK little difficulty.
The government's biggest objection is to Article 118a of the treaty - part
of the chapter - which for the first time in any international treaty
strongly endorses collective bargaining. It insists not only that unions and
employers are consulted on the content of EC directives, but that in some
circumstances they could draw up and implement directives through
legally-backed collective bargaining.
This would probably have no direct effect on the UK, which does not have the
appropriate bargaining institutions. But it shows why a government which,
alone in the EC, strongly backs labour market deregulation and has severe
doubts about collective bargaining, finds the social chapter difficult to
stomach.
This is partly a symbolic debate. The minimum standard employment directives
affect labour markets only very slightly and do not directly affect
pay-setting or rights of association. Also, with continental unemployment
rising Brussels has become more reserved about loading new costs on
employers.
But partly because of the UK's lightly regulated labour market, directives
such as that agreed on working time will have a substantial impact on some
employers, for example by introducing statutory paid holidays for the first
time.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

930723

