FT932-13521

FT  23 APR 93 / Attali bows to criticism over spending: EBRD president to
split responsibility for budgetary control


   By ROBERT PESTON, Banking Editor


MR JACQUES ATTALI, president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, said yesterday that he had 'much to learn' from criticisms that
controls of expenditure at the bank had not been tight enough.
However, he added: 'I am not planning to resign.' Mr Attali said that 'more
than two or three' of the bank's governors, who are finance ministers or top
officials from the 56 countries and agencies which own the bank, had
telephoned him to offer support, following criticisms of his stewardship of
the bank.
He said that the 'most important question which needs to be answered is
whether this bank needs to exist or not'. The importance of the bank, which
provides loans and investments to encourage the growth of market economies
in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, is that 'it is part of the
international response to the urgent need of central and eastern Europe'.
Mr Attali was speaking as the bank published its annual report for 1992. The
report says that the board approved 54 investment projects in the year with
a total EBRD contribution of Ecu1.2bn (Pounds 940m). However, just Ecu126m,
was disbursed, consisting of Ecu75.8m of loans and Ecu50m of equity
injections.
He said it was 'entirely legitimate for the press to raise questions about
the way in which we conduct our affairs'. He justified the lavish
furnishings of the bank's new headquarters, in London's Broadgate complex,
by saying that work on fitting out the building was proceeding 'within the
approved budget'.
He added: 'With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that we should have
done certain things differently.' The replacement of the building's existing
marble with new marble, at a cost of at least Pounds 750,000, fell 'into
this category'.
In order to tighten control over spending, Mr Attali said he was dividing
the responsibilities currently held by Mr Pissaloux, who is both director of
Mr Attali's cabinet and director of the budget.
He said there would now be 'a full time director' with budgetary
responsibilities and a separate cabinet director. He refused to say who
would occupy these posts. Mr Pissaloux would not comment on whether he would
hold one or other of these posts.
Mr Attali also said there would be a 'further deepening and strengthening of
the board committees on budgetary matters, both in preparing and monitoring
the budget' and 'further improvements will be made in the information
supplied to the board about the budget'.
He also confirmed that the board's audit committee was undertaking a review
of the 'costs incurred and the specific procedures followed in the fitting
out of the bank's headquarters'. External assistance, from auditors or cost
consultants, would be given if necessary.
Many of the EBRD's board of 23 directors, who are public officials appointed
to represent the bank's shareholders, have complained that Mr Attali only
agreed to this review and the improvements in the process of monitoring the
budget after they put intense pressure on him.
The EBRD's report also disclosed that two of the projects it has backed had
run into difficulties and it has had to make specific provisions of Ecu2.6m
to cover possible losses.
The EBRD made a loss for the year of Ecu6m, which is a far better
performance than it had been expecting for this stage in its development.
However, the accounts disclose that it overspent by Ecu1m on its budget for
administrative expenses, which had been set at Ecu95m, though the bank said
the overspending was due to currency fluctuations.
Annual report details, Page 3
Observer, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930423

