FT933-5146

FT  04 SEP 93 / Travel: Romantic inspiration in Somerset - Christian Tyler
heads west and discovers what influenced Wordsworth and Coleridge


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


TRY, YOU tireless travellers, to define what is meant by 'a sense of place.'
Is it a view, a sound, a smell, a state of mind? Poets describe it,
musicians too - and, of course, painters who work out of doors.
In a walled garden in the west of England, with a wooded slope of the
Quantock hills behind him and the Bristol Channel invisible below, the
painter David Imms is as attached to bits of the English terrain as any
Aborigine to his song-line.
He was born in the near north and lives in the east Midlands. But it is to
the south-west that he goes to paint: bodies in the landscape, bodies as
part of the landscape, bodies fertilising the earth. After a week on the
millstone grit of Yorkshire he is grinding his teeth. 'I think I am happier
on chalk soil', he said in the matter-of-fact way of one stating a
preference for, say, Bournemouth over Bridlington.
And he is right about travelling west. There is some primitive urge which is
satisfied by following the path of the sun. As you race down the motorway
the grease and smoke of London are sloughed off, the sky expands, the light
and the air turn softer, the colours richer. The sea is perceptible long
before it becomes visible, and at sunset the clouds pile dramatically above
it to compose the mythical land across the water: Tir-na-Og.
In this walled garden in the west, part of the Alfoxton Park estate at
Holford in north Somerset, the sense of place is overpowering. It is a warm
enclosure of reddish earth and brick, quartered by box hedges and planted to
bursting with vegetables, flowers and fruit. It is alive with flying and
crawling creatures not seen since the pre-chemical age. 'Organic' is the
word they use, but the word is too sterile.
The Mad Hatter of Alice in Wonderland protested that to see what you eat is
not to eat what you see. In this instance the Hatter's logic is faulty: you
may see (or paint) your cabbage in the morning and eat it that night. Around
the garden live other attendants of the dinner table: the Large Black pigs
(Pavarotti and Domingo) behind the barn, chickens in the run, goats beside
the driveway and sheep grazing among the deer in the bracken above.
The landscape of Alfoxton Park inspired the early Romantic poets. Wordsworth
lived there in 1797-1798 with his sister Dorothy. At the same time Coleridge
occupied a cottage in Nether Stowey, three miles away, with his wife and
children. Their ghosts have in turn become imprinted on the place.
According to Dorothy, it was on one of their night walks that the Rime of
the Ancient Mariner was conceived and it was in one of the panelled rooms at
Alfoxton that Coleridge five months later recited the finished work to his
friends. Here, too, the poets collaborated to produce Lyrical Ballads.
Dorothy was an indefatigable diarist of Nature's effects in this corner of
England. Her words, as well as suggesting images to the two poets, convey
their own innocently uncontrived sense of place:
'April 2: A very high wind', she wrote. 'Coleridge came to avoid the smoke
(she means, presumably, of poor Sara's cramped kitchen); stayed all night.
We walked in the wood, and sat under the trees. The half of the wood
perfectly still while the wind was making a loud noise behind us. The still
trees only gently bowed their heads, as if listening to the wind. The
hollies in the thick wood unshaken by the blast; only, when it came with a
greater force, shaken by the rain drops falling from the bare oaks above.'
Rebuilt in 1710 on much older foundations, the house is now a hotel of
creaking floorboards, modest comfort and somewhat shambly decor; but it is
privately run, has an unfussily family feel to it - and wonderful English
cooking.
A sense of place can be learned by walking. But, as Dorothy says, it has
also to be learned by sitting and looking. This seaward slope of the
Quantocks handsomely repays a week-end's reflection.
Alfoxton Park Hotel, Holford, Bridgwater, Somerset, TA5 1SG. Tel:
0278-741211. Dinner, bed and breakfast: Pounds 48 per person (b & b only
Pounds 38; two-day breaks Pounds 43 per day). Painting weekends (check
availability): Pounds 150 pp. Literary weekends: Pounds 120 pp. Closed
December to March.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

930904

