FT934-10170

FT  06 NOV 93 / Markets: Price-cutting may prove catching - Serious Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


SAINSBURY was not the only company to be cutting prices this week. Murray
Johnstone has already blazed a trail in the unit trust industry by slashing
the initial charge on its unit trusts to 1 per cent. This week, it went a
step further - by offering units with no initial charge at all.
The deal has a touch of the stock clearance sale about it. Murray
International, one of the investment trusts run by the group, is selling a
holding of Pounds 5m in the Murray Equity Income unit trust. Rather than
redeem the units (and reduce the size of the trust), Murray Johnstone
decided to offer the units elsewhere.
Not only is there no initial charge for those investing in the Murray Equity
Income unit trust between now and November 30, but Personal Equity Plan
investments into the trust are also free.
Furthermore, for the first Pounds 4.8m of investments, there is an
additional 0.5 per cent saving (effectively a reduction in the bid-offer
spread). It adds up to a total Pounds 330 saving on a full Pounds 6,000 Pep.
Investment performance is, of course, more important than charges in the
long run. The trouble is that future investment performance inevitably
cannot be known, whereas charges are set out in black and white.
If two fund managers are equally good, the one who runs the fund with the
lower charges will provide a better return to the investor. So by buying
into a low-charging fund, the investor is tilting the odds in his direction.
The record of Murray Equity Income is reasonable. It is ranked 39th out of
94 funds over the five years to November 1, according to Micropal, with
growth of 62.9 per cent (offer-to-bid with income reinvested). However, its
performance is below average for the sector over one and three years. The
gross yield on the fund is 5 per cent and the minimum investment Pounds 500.
It is also worth noting that Murray's annual charge is 1.5 per cent. There
are other funds with just a 1 per cent annual charge, and a low annual
charge may well work out to be far more important than the size of the
initial charge over the long run.
On the other hand, there are many trusts with a 5-6 per cent initial charge
and a 1.5 per cent annual charge, so Murray's initiative has to be welcome
news for the investor.
                          *       *       *
Save & Prosper, undaunted by the recent adverse comment over high income
products, has launched another stock market-linked income bond. This one
will pay 9 per cent income per year for five years, but investors will only
receive back all their capital if the FT-SE 100 Index rises by 40 per cent
over a five and a quarter year period.
If the FT-SE falls, or fails to grow, over the period, investors will get
back 55 per cent of their original capital. This, together with the five 9
per cent payments, means that in total they will get back what they
invested. However, as one reader pointed out, this guarantee could also be
achieved by leaving your money under the mattress for five years; it takes
no account of inflation or the interest forgone.
Those who buy the bond are gambling future capital to get current income.
There is nothing necessarily wrong with that, provided investors know what
they are doing; S & P claims that surveys show that 97 per cent of those who
bought the first tranche understood the product.
How likely is the gamble to work? A 40 per cent rise in the FT-SE over five
years represents annual growth of 6.6 per cent. But this ignores the
dividend yield, which means that the total return needed from equities is
over 10 per cent per annum. BZW figures show that equities have tended to
offer a real return of 7 per cent per annum, so the S & P return is
compatible with an inflation rate of 3 per cent. That seems quite possible.
If the FT-SE 100 rises by 60 per cent over five years, investors will get an
extra 9 per cent bonus.
Income is payable quarterly or annually, and is free of basic rate tax;
higher rate taxpayers will face an additional charge. Minimum investment is
Pounds 5,000.
                          *       *       *
There was good news for the self-employed yesterday when the Court of Appeal
ruled against the Inland Revenue and in favour of Ian Lorimer, a vision
mixer. The revenue had ruled that although Lorimer did more than 200 jobs
for 30 different production companies in a year, he was not self-employed.
Accordingly he should be taxed under Schedule E, rather than the more
favourable Schedule D, which applies to freelance workers.
According to Jeff Gitter, media and entertainment partner of accountants
Lubbock Fine, the decision dates back to an Inland Revenue review of the
film and TV industry back in 1983, which produced a list of those jobs which
could count as freelance. Vision mixers were not on the list. The Inland
Revenue also claimed that Lorimer was not self-employed because he was not
providing equipment, simply his skill and labour.
The Court of Appeal has said it is clear that Lorimer was in business on his
own account. Gitter says the decision will have application to a number of
professions, such as actors, musicians and even management consultants. The
Revenue was refused leave to appeal to the House of Lords; it may still try
to do so.

The Financial Times


London Page II

931106

