FT932-13381

FT  23 APR 93 / Major links recovery with EC: PM hails beginning of upturn
and dismisses fears of Euro-sceptics


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR sought to draw a line last night under the Conservative civil
war over the Maastricht treaty as he seized on the latest batch of economic
indicators as clear evidence that economic recovery was now under way.
The conclusion at Westminster of the Maastricht bill's tortuous committee
stage was followed by an upbeat speech by the prime minister underlining his
determination to keep Britain 'at the heart of Europe'.
Dismissing the 'nameless' fears of Tory Euro-sceptics, he linked directly
the prospects of sustaining the recovery with maintaining Britain's
influence in the European Community. He told a Conservative party din-ner:
'Outside Europe Britain can survive; inside we will thrive.'
Buoyed by the favourable economic news and the growing conviction at
Westminster that ratification of Maastricht is within his grasp, Mr Major
launched a public relations blitz to underline the wider message that his
government has put behind it the crises of the past year.
While other ministers were cautious in announcing formally the end of the
recession, Mr Major used a series of television interviews to declare that:
'We are beginning now to see the recovery. I think that it is self-evident
from what businesses themselves are saying.'
The interviews will be followed by a speech to businessmen in Manchester
this evening in which the prime minister will emphasise the government's
determination to help extend the economy's manufacturing and technological
base.
His theme in last night's speech was that the government had an agenda which
would give Britain a pivotal role in shaping the future of Europe.
Operating at the centre, the government could press its case for a wider,
free-trade, liberal community that would in turn render irrelevant the idea
of a centralised European superstate. He said: 'The idea of a centralised
Europe had resonance in a Community of six. But for 12, soon 16, and
eventually 20 plus nations, it is a grandiose doodle.' The government's
long-term aim was 'the whole continent of Europe with free democra-cies and
without trade barriers'.
After several months on the defensive Mr Major felt confident enough to
dismiss as 'nonsense' claims from Tory Euro-sceptics that enthusiasm for
Europe meant putting Britain second. He told the dinner: 'It is precisely
because we put Britain's interests first that we need to be in there,
shaping the new Europe.'
Developing the argument, Mr Major said that Britain had to take its
'rightful place' in the world: 'Though no longer a global power, we still
have global interests. We need to defend them with determination but also
with subtlety. We cannot afford to subject ourselves to the despotism of
nostalgia.'
In a subtle sideswipe against Baroness Thatcher - once dubbed 'the Iron
Lady' - the prime minister accused opponents of full participation in the EC
as practising 'a sort of phantom grandeur, a clanking of unusable suits of
armour'.
Tricky time still faces the treaty, Page 11
Editorial Comment, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930423

