FT932-64

FT  30 JUN 93 / International Company News: Saffa plans new legal action
against KIO


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


SAFFA, the Italian packaging and boxboard group which is locked in
litigation with the Kuwait Investment Office over alleged irregularities in
Spain, is poised to open a second front with a new legal action in London.
Mr Carlo Bonomi, Saffa's controlling shareholder, said that it planned to
claim in the UK courts that the KIO had supplied 'misleading' information
about the condition of some of its Spanish activities in which Saffa had
invested.
Earlier this year, Saffa persuaded courts in Geneva and Zurich to freeze
more than L500bn (Dollars 323m) of KIO assets in Switzerland pending the
resolution of a separate, but linked, claim.
The two actions stem from the L420bn deal in 1991 between Saffa and the KIO.
Saffa sold part of its Spanish Sarrio subsidiary to the Kuwaitis in return
for cash, stakes in Prima Immobiliaria and Ebro, two KIO-controlled
companies, and some industrial activities.
Since then, the crisis in the KIO's Spanish operations has resulted in the
deal turning sour.
Saffa has received about L120bn in cash and shares worth L200bn, but claims
that it is still owed about L110bn in cash - the reason for its Swiss court
action.
The new legal initiative is over a separate claim that the KIO misled Saffa
about the financial position of Prinma Immobiliaria, the Spanish property
group in which Saffa has a 6 per cent stake.
Prima shares have fallen steeply as a result of difficulties within the
KIO's Spanish operations and the downturn in the local property market.
Saffa claims that the price at which the shares were bought did not reflect
the true value of Prima's property holdings.
Although the sale contract was signed in Spain, Mr Bonomi claims that UK law
allows the case to be brought in London, as the information provided by the
KIO was conveyed verbally there.
Problems in Spain accounted for a significant portion of Saffa's 1992 group
losses of L34.6bn.
The company set aside L59.1bn in write-downs on its investments.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

930630

