FT933-12577

FT  23 JUL 93 / Survey of European Building and Construction (7): Scars that
may take long to heal - The Nordic countries: The outlook after the
recession ends


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


FOR THE Nordic region's beleaguered construction groups, the market collapse
of the past few years must at times have felt much more severe than a normal
cyclical downturn.
The crash in Finland and Sweden, in particular, has been harder than
anything they have experienced in the past 50 years, although economic
recession and high interest rates have also taken a severe toll on building
activity in both Norway and Denmark. Heavy job losses and bankruptcies have
been common to construction companies in all four countries, while the
related collapse in real estate values has done more than anything to create
the region's wider financial sector crisis.
The immediate outlook is not much brighter. Norway can point to some
encouraging signs - office vacancy rates have started falling, for example -
and at least its government can finance big infrastructure investments
without putting too much stress on its budget. That is not the case in
Finland or Sweden where building activity looks set to slump further both
this year and next. Danish builders, meanwhile, may see an upturn in the
domestic market next year, but they are likely to find the going harder in
eastern Germany where contracts over the last two years have done so much to
cushion them from the impact of domestic recession.
Part of the reason that Sweden and Finland seem to be in a deeper mess is
that the downturn reached them later in the cycle and factors other than
severe economic recession have added to their difficulties. The decline in
Sweden has been accentuated by the removal of many of the government
subsidies which fuelled the building boom of the late 1980s.
Construction volume has fallen by around 50 per cent in the past three years
and investment is down from SKr237.5bn in 1990 to an estimated SKr195.8bn in
1993. One in four building workers has lost his job since 1991; employees in
the sector have fallen from 320,000 to 235,000, amid some estimates that the
figure could drop below 200,000 by the middle of next year.
One of the worst affected sectors has been housing. Investment in new
housing has halved since 1990 to an estimated SKr32.9bn this year, with the
Swedish Construction Federation predicting a further halving next year to
just SKr16.4bn. Office building has also fallen off sharply after the
over-development of the 1980s.
But some areas have held up much better, including road construction,
rebuilding and maintenance work. These sectors are also expected to be
growth areas in the short term, although not to the extent that they offset
the decline in housebuilding and office construction.
The best piece of news the Swedish construction industry has received
recently came in March when the government announced plans to spend SKr98bn
on new road and rail networks over 10 years. A total of SKr36bn has been
earmarked for the 1993-94 to 1995-96 period.
Critics allege, however, that the timing and scale of the investments are
too uncertain to give the market a feeling of optimism, and that in any case
infrastructure investments of SKr10bn a year are not enough to offset the
industry gloom.
Several big projects are being lined up, including the construction of a
railway from Stockholm to Arlanda (where Stockholm's airport, 40km to the
north of the city, is located) and ring-roads round Stockholm, Gothenburg
and Malmo.
However, no infrastructure development is bigger than the proposed
bridge/tunnel over the Oresund strait between Sweden and Denmark. This
project, on which construction was originally supposed to begin this year,
has been delayed by environmental and political wrangles and the firm
go-ahead has still not come from either Denmark or Sweden. Few expect
construction work to begin before next year.
For many of Sweden's smaller and medium-sized construction groups, the
market downturn has already resulted in bankruptcy. For the bigger
companies, it has meant heavy losses and weakened balance sheets but major
rationalisation and re-orientation have so far ensured survival.
Scandinavia's largest construction group, Skanska, made a SKr3.14bn net loss
last year, largely because of property write-downs and losses on financial
operations. The downturn in the Swedish construction activity had a clear
impact on its performance, with revenues from this sector falling 11 per
cent to SKr17.45bn from SKr19.6bn. Overall revenues fell to SKr31.9bn from
SKr34.7bn.
One of the ways in which the group has responded to the crisis is by seeking
to boost its overseas operations, though that has not proved easy as many
other western markets are also in recession. Recent efforts have focused on
the east European markets, where construction demand is likely to grow in
the years ahead. The group has opened offices in Berlin, St Petersburg and
Tallinn in the past year.
Skanska says the outlook for the Swedish construction market remains
depressed, although the market 'will probably reach the bottom next year,'
according to Mr Lennart Hallberg, a senior vice-president. Even when the
recovery does get under way it will be weak, says Mr Hallberg, and the boom
construction years of 1989 and 1990 will never return.
NCC, another big Swedish construction group, suffered a SKr1.2bn loss after
financial items last year, with large property write-downs again largely to
blame. But it has also pursued a vigorous rationalisation programme and
repositioned its activities to survive the downturn.
'Although we expect the construction market to continue to shrink, NCC's
product mix, with a high proportion of roadwork and civil engineering
products, corresponds favourably with the anticipated areas of market
growth,' says Mr Torsten Eriksson, the group's president.
Nevertheless, there is a real worry that if the downturn continues for much
longer, the construction industry will not be able to respond effectively
when the economy recovers its balance. The Swedish Construction Federation
has already warned that if the government does not take more active measures
to encourage building activity now, the result in the second half of the
1990s could be capacity shortages, overheating and inflation.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930723

