FT934-10316

FT  05 NOV 93 / London Stock Exchange: Waters upset by Ofwat


   By CHRISTOPHER PRICE and CHRISTINE BUCKLEY


WATER shares moved erratically after the much-vaunted report from Ofwat, the
regulatory body, over the industry's future pricing policies. Although the
rate of return that will be allowed after 1995 was considered disappointing
by some water specialists, there were other elements of the report which
were thought to be more positive.
The fact that there is to be no clawback of previous revenues, as had been
feared by some, gave the shares an initial spurt as the Ofwat announcement
was made to the market. Analysts also garnered some satisfaction over the
length of time allowed for in converging the companies and Ofwat target rate
of returns.
However, the shares began slipping back as analysts studied the detail of
the report. There was also a rumour - not helped by the fact that brokers
received the couriered report at different times - that Ofwat was planning
to control the rate of dividend increase. This was not the case, but the
weight of the report did reinforce the conclusion for some analysts that the
water companies faced a new and tougher environment.
Recommending an 'underweight' investment position, Ms Angela Whelan at BZW
said: 'The glory days for the water stocks are over. Their attractions are
diminishing and the pace of dividend growth in the rest of the market is
fast catching up.'
Meanwhile, SG Warburg took a more positive view, reinforcing its stance with
the issue of a warrant - a tradeable derivative giving investors the option
to buy shares in the future - on selected water stocks. The broker, assuming
some weakness in the sector following the issuing of the Ofwat report,
issued the warrant in the afternoon session. Thames (6 shares), Severn Trent
(6 shares), Southern (3 shares) and Yorkshire (3 shares) are the basket
stocks chosen, with a strike price of 98p for an underlying price of Pounds
99.81. Yesterday, the warrant price had slipped to 97.5p, although the
underlying shares stayed around the same price.
Severn Trent shares closed 10 down at 548p, as did Thames, at 540p, with
Yorkshire off 11 at 552p and Southern the same amount at 571p. The Recs were
also weak on concern that Offer, the electricity industry body, could adopt
a tougher regulatory regime.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

931105

