FT934-8854

FT  13 NOV 93 / Coalition pressures LDP over reforms


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S ruling coalition yesterday stepped up pressure on the opposition
Liberal Democratic Party to compromise by next week on plans to reform the
scandal-ridden political system.
The government will close committee negotiations with the LDP on Monday and
commence a wrap-up debate in parliament. This is the constitutional prelude
to voting on proposals for the biggest political change since the second
world war, or reaching a firm accord to revise them.
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the prime minister, has proposed a meeting this
weekend with Mr Yohei Kono, the LDP's president, to seek an agreement. By
last night the LDP had not agreed a time for the meeting.
The wrap-up debate, condemned by the LDP as an attempt to steamroller
negotiations, is no surprise, since it is the natural next step from public
hearings on the reform plans, which ended on Thursday. However, it shows
that the government wants to re-establish control over the schedule, delayed
by the LDP, said political analysts.
Mr Hosokawa is eager to make progress on reform by the time he meets US
President Bill Clinton at the Asian Pacific Economic Co-operation summit in
Seattle at the end of next week.
The Japanese leader has indicated he will resign if the plans do not pass
parliament by the end of the year. However, forced votes are rare in the
Japanese parliament, which traditionally makes outline agreements on
legislation at the committee stage.
The government's four political reform bills propose a switch from the
present system of multi-seat constituencies for the lower house, to a
mixture of single seat constituencies and proportional representation.
Company donations to individual politicians would be banned, to be replaced
by a state subsidy for political parties.
The differences between the coalition and the LDP are over the numerical
split between seats chosen by constituency and proportional representation
vote. Each side prefers the split most likely to benefit it in an election.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931113

