FT934-11309

FT  02 NOV 93 / Europe's big day a small affair


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


YESTERDAY was a strange birthday for what may be the most discussed, least
read piece of paper in history.
The Maastricht treaty finally came into force on a day when the Catholic
half of the revitalised European Community was having a day off.
No champagne, no fireworks. Most citizens of the 'new European Union' as
they are described were oblivious to the fact that overnight their
solidarity had been 'deepened', the democratic and efficient functioning of
their institutions 'enhanced', and their economic and social progress
'promoted'.
In Brussels, those same institutions were barely functioning. The European
Commission and Council were enjoying the All Saints Day holiday. The treaty
itself also appeared to be on holiday.
The Gower Street branch of Dillons the UK booksellers had no copies, 'and we
haven't had them for some time'.
There was some confusion over copies at HMSO Books, source for UK government
publications - 'there's one done by the EC, which would be for Europe and
Britain generally, and the government itself has done one that relates to
Britain' - before the Commission's version was tracked down.
As for the specific rights of the EU citizen, some may find them rather
disappointing.
Expatriate EU citizens get the privilege of being able to vote in or stand
for elections to their local municipalities or the European parliament in
the place where they live, but as there are only 5m expatriates in the whole
Union that may not amount to much of a democratic breakthrough.
Mr Len Lewis, electoral services manager at Lambeth Borough Council, was
certainly not expecting a flood of requests from disenfranchised Portuguese
wishing to represent south London at Strasbourg. 'You're the first to call
about it,' he said yesterday.
Not satisfied? The Maastricht treaty tells you how you can complain about
this new-fangled Community and its institutions. You can petition the
European parliament directly or - in particularly bad cases - complain to an
ombudsman, appointed by the parliament.
Alas, the ombudsman could not be contacted yesterday. He, or she, has not
yet been appointed.
As for the town of Maastricht itself, it was possibly the only place to
allow itself a modest celebration. Now that it is no longer synonymous with
particularly nasty disputes between Euro-enthusiasts and Euro-sceptics it is
thinking of subtitling itself 'treaty town'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

931102

