FT932-7167

FT  25 MAY 93 / International Company News: Weak domestic demand hits Suzuki
 -Japanese Corporate News and Results Round-up


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


SUZUKI Motor, Japan's largest minicar producer and the world's third-largest
motorcycle manufacturer, yesterday blamed a 3 per cent fall in pre-tax
profits to Y20.5bn (Dollars 186m) for the year to March on a combination of
weak domestic demand, higher non-operating costs and a plunge in financial
income due to lower interest rates.
Suzuki, however, reported a 34 per cent rise in operating profits to
Y22.9bn, helped by higher sales and a rise in productivity.
The results highlight the contrasting economic climates of developing
countries, where the company's products have been in strong demand, and
Japan, where demand for both motorcycles and cars has been weak.
Strong demand for motorcycles in south-east Asia, China and Latin America
offset otherwise difficult trading conditions for Suzuki, taking sales
marginally higher to Y1,053bn from Y1,047bn previously.
Outside Japan, particularly in developing countries where Suzuki has been
focusing its efforts, the company benefited from rising demand for its
knock-down price compact cars and for its motorcycles in south-east Asia and
South America.
Exports of motorcycles rose 38 per cent in unit terms, helping sales of
motorcycles overall to increase by 18 per cent.
In the domestic market, Suzuki - which is 3.4 per cent owned by General
Motors of the US - suffered from sagging demand for both minicars and
motorcycles, with sales dropping by 21 per cent and 9 per cent respectively
in unit terms.
The strength of the yen was a depressing factor, with exchange rate losses
accounting for Y3.7bn. The company expects the high yen and persistent
economic weakness at home to continue to cloud its prospects in the current
year.
Suzuki is forecasting a moderate improvement in sales to Y1,055bn but a fall
in pre-tax profits to Y20bn for the year to March 1994.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

930525

