FT932-3425

FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (11): New age dawns in old town - A fresh
generation is coming of age in Bizerta


   By FRANCIS GHILES


FIVE years after Tunisia gained independence from France, in 1956, the town
of Bizerta was the scene of a bloody battle which pitted General de Gaulle
against President Habib Bourguiba. Mr Bourguiba was keen to regain control
of the important naval base France had built after it occupied the country
in 1881, and which it was unwilling to hand back.
For 75 years, this former privateering port ranked, along with Mers El Kebir
in western Algeria and Toulon, as one of France's key naval bases. The town
retains most of its colonial architecture, a port dominated by old
fortifications, and its old 'medina' (Arab quarter). Only four hotels have
been built on the nearby corniche - tourism has not ruined the town.
Bizerta was cosmopolitan thanks to the mix of tens of thousands of French
army and navy men and officers, Sicilian fishermen, Maltese handymen, a
smattering of Greeks and White Russian exiles fleeing the 1917 revolution.
Unlike Tunisians elsewhere, the people of Bizerta did not have to fight to
make a living. Few of them became doctors or lawyers. They did not much care
for Mr Bourguiba who did not bother to hide his contempt.
Times are changing and no man could symbolise the new mood better than Mr
Mohamed Ben Rejjeb, who was appointed governor two years ago. Mr Ben Rejjeb
is a hands-on governor, a tireless fighter who seems to be present on every
front coaxing people, pushing others, getting Bizerta's needs noticed in the
capital which, psychologically, still feels more distant than the 60
kilometres separating the towns.
Three factors explain this awakening of Bizerta and its rich farming
hinterland. First, a new generation of 'Bizertins' is coming of age,
well-educated people who want to invest in industry and farming. They have
no nostalgia for an age they never knew. They know that the port and other
industrial facilities, many still unused, which dot the town and the shores
of the large inland lake behind Bizerta - connected to the sea by a wide
canal - offer prime industry sites. A free trade zone, an idea which appears
to make sense, both because Bizerta is strategically placed between the
eastern and western Mediterranean and because Tunisia is liberalising its
economy and actively promoting foreign investment, is expected shortly. This
zone will be managed by a private joint venture associating Tunisian and
foreign capital. A second trade zone is being set up in the southern port of
Zarzis, close to the Libyan frontier.
The industrial sector is strong and varied. There is the country's primary
oil refinery, steelworks at nearby El Fouled, a string of textile factories
 -many started in the mid-1970s by German and French companies which import
the fabric that is then re-exported as jeans, shirts and hosiery. Expensive
'Van Lack' German shirts are made here.
Bizertex manager, Mr Ferinand Terburg, who has lived in Bizerta for 15
years, is looking forward to the company soon opening its third factory in
the town. He praises his workforce's standard of education and professional
skill, saying that 18 per cent of the 500 women working in the factory are
involved in quality checking. He feels the political stability Tunisia
enjoys, the three-year agreements negotiated between the trade unions and
employers' federation, provide a steady environment where he can work. He
adds that government officials are more willing to consider changes to
existing rules and regulations than they were a decade ago.
More ambitious plans are afoot in the farming town of Mateur, just inland
from Bizerta, where Tunisia's leading producer of electrical cables, the
Chakira Group, has started production of electrical harnesses for cars in a
plant where, until 1986 when it went bankrupt, Renault cars were assembled.
The Chakira group already produces harnesses in another factory in Tunisia,
part of a joint venture with General Motors.
Other companies in the group are involved in manufacturing printed circuits
and high-voltage, medium-voltage and low-voltage power cables. Other
activities include manufacturing kitchen equipment such as high-pressure
cookers and 'Tefal' saucepans. Such a company may be small by international
standards but it is symbolic of the internationalisation of the economy.
Indeed, it is investing abroad and will this summer start producing
electrical harnesses in Portugal and in Egypt.
The region of Bizerta is also attracting investment in farming. Natural
advantages include more regular rainfall than elsewhere in the country and
good land. Ninety per cent of all arable land in the region is in the hands
of private farmers, which means the mismanagement of the vast public domains
created in the 1970s out of land expropriated from former French colons has
been avoided. What state land there is is being conceded on long leases to
private companies.
Typical of new farming businesses is the joint venture established by a
Tunisian company with one of Italy's largest plant and flower companies,
Resteya Italia, whose home base is Treviso, north of Venice. Geranium mother
plants are imported to Bizerta in the autumn and cuttings are taken a few
months later and rebedded. When they have grown roots, they are flown to
Treviso. Similar attempts are being made with artichoke plants which, if
successful, could prove lucrative. Such ventures can make use of the
region's temperate winter climate and cheaper labour costs than in Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

930614

