FT932-6992

FT  26 MAY 93 / One firm hand on the tiller: F W de Klerk outlines his
objectives in South Africa's negotiations for a new constitution


   By ANDREW GOWERS, MICHAEL HOLMAN and PATTI WALDMEIR


Mr F W de Klerk, the South African president, is not about to hand over
power to a majority-rule, winner-take-all black government - not now, not
ever.
As the country's constitutional negotiators rush headlong to announce a date
for the first multiracial elections, they would do well to remember Mr de
Klerk's bottom line, made clear again yesterday in an interview with the
Financial Times. He will only share power, not abandon it altogether; and
the National party (which is now open to all, though it remains
white-dominated) must be given what amounts to a veto on significant
decisions within a coalition cabinet based on power-sharing.
Mr de Klerk refuses to use the word 'veto', rightly concerned that his
opposite number, Mr Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress, could
never accept an overt white veto over the decisions of a black-dominated
cabinet.
But since the day in 1990 when Mr de Klerk announced he would end exclusive
white rule, he has never abandoned his guiding principle - that minority
parties must be guaranteed a large measure of power in the new South Africa,
meaning in practice that the National party must be promised a share of
power, or there will be no deal. His oft-repeated vision of a happy
multiracial future for South Africa is based firmly on the reality that
whites - through the National party - retain a share of power for the
foreseeable future (providing they have a minimum level of electoral
support).
This fact does much to deflate the optimism generated over the past few
weeks by the 26 parties negotiating South Africa's new constitution. They
have promised an outline constitutional deal by next week - in time to meet
their self-imposed deadline of June 3 to set a date for multiracial
elections. But they have yet to resolve the most fundamental constitutional
issue of all: where will the real power lie in the new South Africa?
True, much progress has been made on this issue over the past year, as the
gap has narrowed between the ANC's demand for majority rule and the National
party's offer of power-sharing. The ANC has agreed to a coalition cabinet,
based on electoral support, to rule for five years after the first elections
(due to take place next year); and it has conceded that some decisions
should be taken by consensus.
But ANC officials have so far offered to seek National party agreement only
on the most important issues, such as the decision to declare war or a state
of emergency, while Mr de Klerk insists on consensus on a broader range of
issues. And, crucially, the ANC insists that power-sharing must be
voluntary, not entrenched in the constitution. The National party is
concerned that that ANC would not honour a voluntary agreement, once it had
finally tasted power (especially if it wins a large majority of the national
vote).
In yesterday's interview, Mr de Klerk made his demands clear: 'We are
talking about the need in a government of national unity - with regard to
fundamental issues - for the country to be governed on the basis of
consensus between the main role players.
'With regard to matters of average importance, one can always have an
agreement as to how differences between them can be settled. But with regard
to the fundamentals, there needs to be consensus.'
Mr de Klerk protests that the concept of consensus - which he defines as a
'meeting of the minds' through negotiation - is 'psychologically and
philosophically different' from a veto. But consensus can only be declared
where no leading party dissents; and Mr de Klerk's opponents find it
difficult to distinguish between enforced consensus and veto.
What will concern them even more is Mr de Klerk's insistence that
multiracial power-sharing must be a permanent principle of government in
South Africa - despite the fact that three-quarters of the population is
black, and that black leaders are prepared to countenance only a limited
period of power-sharing.
'We definitely believe that in a final constitution . . . the principle of
power-sharing must be part of it,' says Mr de Klerk. He concedes that
power-sharing need not be achieved 'in exactly the same way that it is
achieved in a government of national unity'. But the sharing of power
inherent in an electoral system based on proportional representation and on
maximum devolution of power to regional governments would be insufficient.
'There must be, to our minds, the limitation of power of any government also
when it comes to the executive, not to such an extent that it must be a lame
duck government, but to ensure, as the founders of the American constitution
(did), that there won't be misuse of power.'
It requires a leap of faith to believe that the ANC will accept such limits
to majority rule - that it will sign away its right ever to rule South
Africa on its own. ANC officials categorically reject permanently entrenched
power-sharing, and insist that even within the first multi-party cabinet,
consultation with other leaders must be voluntary.
They may eventually accept Mr de Klerk's proposal for an inner cabinet,
formed by leaders of parties with large electoral support (the ANC, NP,
Inkatha Freedom party, and possibly others); but it is hard to see the ANC
agreeing to entrench this in a constitution.
It is especially difficult to see how big issues such as power-sharing -
along with devolution of power to regions, and the mechanism for writing a
new constitution - can be resolved in the eight days left before next week's
deadline in the constitutional talks.
But Mr de Klerk remains optimistic: 'The negotiation is progressing well in
this regard (power-sharing),' he said, adding 'I believe that a settlement
and an agreement on how you structure a government of national unity will be
achieved.'
On the issue of devolution of power to regions, of crucial importance to
parties such as the Inkatha Freedom party, the president seemed confident of
early resolution: 'I think common sense is prevailing. I've never worried
about the possibility that on this issue we won't make progress,' he said,
noting that Inkatha is 'well on board' the constitutional talks at the
moment.
Mr de Klerk expressed little concern over other potential threats to the
progress of negotiations, whether from the right-wing Conservative party or
a potential alliance between the Conservatives and the Inkatha Freedom
party. The CP had split, he said, and its moderate offshoot, the Afrikaner
Volksunie, would continue to grow at the Conservatives' cost. He discounted
fears of an alliance between the IFP and the Conservative party, because of
the CP's demand for a racist white state, a demand opposed by Inkatha.
Similarly, the threat of the 'lunatic fringe' of radical black and white
supremacists was overestimated. They were receiving 'too much attention', he
said, adding that 'the overwhelming majority of all South Africans are . . .
reaching out towards an agreement that can bring stability and hope . . . an
agreement which builds a bridge between, on the one hand, the need for
security among those who have much to lose and the need for opportunity for
those who have backlogs to catch up with.'
Only time will tell whether Mr de Klerk's optimism is justified, though he
may be more worried than he lets on. But his determination to fight his
corner in the constitutional battle - to fight simultaneously for the
moderate South Africans he hopes to represent in the next election, and for
the Afrikaners he represents by birth - cannot be doubted.
'I'm committed to ensuring that the only workable alternative will be in
place. We cannot afford to experiment with anything else,' he insists. 'I do
not intend to sign a bad agreement'. And if the ANC, or any of the other 24
negotiating parties, believes he will, they had better think again.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930526

