FT934-8299

FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Hollinger drops to CDollars 6.8m
in third term


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


HOLLINGER, the inter-national newspaper group controlled by Mr Conrad Black,
blamed a drop in nine-month earnings on the decline in the pound sterling
and weak advertising in its Canadian publications.
Third-quarter earnings dropped to CDollars 6.8m (USDollars 5.2m), or nine
cents a share, down from CDollars 9.1m, or 13 cents, a year earlier.
Revenues dipped to CDollars 213.6m from CDollars 218m.
Nine-month earnings, excluding unusual items, edged down to CDollars 33.8m
from CDollars 34.5m.
The company said operating results showed an 'encouraging improvement' in
its non-Canadian businesses, which included a 68 per cent stake in the UK
Daily Telegraph, the Jerusalem Post and a chain of small US newspapers. The
Telegraph owns a minority interest in John Fairfax Holdings of Australia.
However, the Telegraph's net contribution to Hollinger's earnings has
increased only slightly so far this year, after taking into account the
decline in the sterling exchange rate to an average of CDollars 1.93 per
pound from CDollars 2.17 in 1992.
Hollinger raised its exposure to the Canadian newspaper market last year by
acquiring a 19 per cent stake in Southam, the country's biggest daily
newspaper publisher. Hollinger does not equity-account its interest in
Southam, which suffered a third-quarter loss of CDollars 3.7m, but reported
progress in reducing labour and other costs.
Hollinger demonstrated its confidence in Southam's future this month by
announcing the sale of CDollars 100m of debentures with a redemption value
pegged to the performance of Southam's share price. The debentures are due
to be priced shortly. Hollinger said the amount of the issue might be
slightly raised.
Mr Black said Hollinger was investigating acquisitions in the US. It made an
abortive attempt last year to buy the floundering New York Daily News.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

931116

