FT933-10207

FT  05 AUG 93 / Long slog to a smooth landing: China's economic tsar is
trying to impose a tough stabilisation programme to prevent overheating


   By TONY WALKER


The stakes could scarcely be higher: for Mr Zhu Rongji, who was entrusted
last month with wide-ranging powers to restrain China's runaway economy; for
foreign investors who have poured billions of dollars into China in the past
decade; and for the country itself.
Failure by the reformist Mr Zhu, China's senior vice-premier in charge of
the economy, to regain control, and more importantly to curb inflation,
would almost certainly invite pressures from Communist party conservatives
for more decisive action, thus risking a return to the boom-and-bust cycle
of the 1980s.
Mr Zhu, known colloquially as China's economic tsar, has wasted little time
in seeking to impose a tough stabilisation programme since panicky
colleagues handed him unprecedented powers over the economy. His initial
efforts to restrain inflation, restore order to China's chaotic public
finances, and to curb rampant speculation in land and other commodities
appear to be making an impact; but he must be well aware that it will be
months before he can claim a semblance of victory, and perhaps at least a
year before it is possible to judge whether his medicine is working.
In the meantime, for foreign investors no less than for Chinese enterprises
and provincial governments, the paramount question is whether China is able
to avoid the 'hard landing' that afflicted its economy in 1988-89 during a
previous period of severe retrenchment.
Western officials and Chinese economists believe that the stabilisation
plan, with its credit curbs and much-needed measures to impose financial
discipline, stands a reasonable chance of success, but they also predict a
'bumpy' road ahead.
While Chinese officials continue to talk of 'macro-economic controls' to
slow growth, which reached an annual real rate of 13.9 per cent in the first
six months of this year, they have been obliged to resort to cruder methods
to achieve their ends. These have included a series of administrative
measures, such as demands that banks and financial intermediaries call in
loans for speculative real estate projects, and a mandatory requirement that
both public and private-sector employees purchase unsold government bonds to
help fund the budget deficit of more than 80bn yuan (Dollars 14bn).
The central authorities have also fallen back on a practice often employed
in the past when they felt their will was being ignored: 'investigation
teams' have been dispatched to the provinces, ostensibly to report on local
developments, but in reality to enforce directives. Mr Zhu's appointment as
governor of the People's Bank of China, the central bank, along with his
other responsibilities as senior vice-premier in charge of the economy, was
designed to send a powerful signal to provincial officials and
representatives of financial institutions that they ignore central
government edicts at their peril.
The appointment of someone of Mr Zhu's seniority to head the central bank is
a sign not only of the depths of the leadership's panic about an economy
spiralling out of control; it also reflects deepening worries about an
erosion of party control over the provinces. Economic liberalisation and
devolution of power had come to be seen not as the promise of a glorious new
dawn, but as a monster threatening to devour its master.
It is perhaps a tribute to Mr Zhu's force of personality that he appears,
for the moment, to have imposed a new sense of sobriety on hyperactive
provincial chiefs who had sought to outbid each other in a scramble for
investment funds. The Chinese press is crowded with the statements of local
officials admitting their overzealousness, and committing themselves to the
stabilisation programme.
But this bout of self-criticism probably derives as much from an age-old
tendency of Chinese officials to set their sails to the prevailing wind,
while biding their time for the next wind-shift, as it does from genuine
remorse. Mr Zhu, who will accumulate enemies during this retrenchment phase,
must know that he can hardly afford to falter.
While his confirmation as the supreme figure in charge of China's economy
provides considerable opportunities for his advancement, it also makes him
especially vulnerable should things go awry, at a time when the leadership
itself is unstable as manoeuvring intensifies in preparation for the
post-Deng Xiaoping era. Mr Zhu also suffers from the lack of an independent
power base: as a former Shanghai mayor he is a relative newcomer to
Beijing's higher echelons.
China has been in transition from one generation of leaders to the next for
the past couple of years, but the worst of the factional conflict can be
contained as long as Mr Deng, or those speaking for him, remains a force
behind the scenes. Chinese officials have discounted the recent spate of
rumours about Deng's deteriorating health, but there is no doubt that he is
much frailer now than he was a year ago.
But Deng's recent reference to problems with China's peasants, suggesting
that their 'burden has already surpassed the limits of their endurance'
certainly helped to focus attention on one of the most critical problems
facing the government. Unrest in the countryside is being fuelled by growing
resentment over disparities in wealth between urban and rural areas. Average
rural per capita net income is about Yn770 annually, less than half that of
urban dwellers.
Peasant unhappiness over the income gap, and crippling taxes and levies,
spilled over into dozens of incidents in the past year across the country,
including the storming in June of government offices in a county
headquarters near Sichuan's capital, Chengdu, where angry farmers held local
officials captive to protest against the levying of a road-building fee.
Increasing restiveness among China's 900m rural dwellers has preoccupied the
leadership for months, and was certainly a catalyst for the stabilisation
programme, one aim of which is the redirection of investment to agriculture,
which had been starved of funds as 'hot money' poured into industrial
development zones and real estate projects in coastal regions.
Significantly, the authorities have suspended all price reforms for the rest
of this year. A principal cause of farmers' unhappiness has been the sharp
rise in the costs of agricultural inputs, such as fertilisers and
pesticides, along with the difficulties they have faced in redeeming IOUs,
in effect promissory notes, for grain acquired compulsorily by the state.
Farmers have been promised that the backlog of billions of yuan in IOUs will
be honoured, but with the authorities seeking to restrain rapid money supply
growth, the promised pay-out will squeeze funds available elsewhere in the
economy. Chinese participants in prospective joint ventures have, for
months, been putting pressure on their foreign partners to secure additional
investment funds abroad as sources of domestic funding dried up. Foreign
investors can expect more of this in the coming period as the government
enforces its credit curbs.
Not least of the challenges facing Mr Zhu is a pervasive corruption that
reaches high into the Communist party itself. With China's laws still
evolving, and with the system having entered a murky transitional phase
between a centrally planned and a market economy, opportunities for corrupt
officials to profit have become almost boundless, especially in the area of
land allocation for real estate. The embryonic privatisation process is also
proving fertile ground for officials seeking to feather their own nests in
an opaque system where back-door deals tend to be the rule rather than the
exception.
Mr Zhu and his supporters appear to have acted with restraint so far in
dealing with officials in the financial sector who have engaged in a welter
of unauthorised lending, either through banks or, more commonly, through
affiliated financial intermediaries such as 'trust and investment' companies
(similar to venture capital groups) that have mushroomed across the country.
Mr Zhu is thought to want to avoid giving the impression at this stage that
he is about to launch a vendetta for sins committed during a previous period
of lax central bank control. He knows that he cannot purge the system
without risking further chaos at this delicate stage.
The main task facing the authorities is to ease pressures on prices.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the cocktail of credit restrictions and two
increases in interest rates since May may be having an effect. Prices for
building materials such as steel and cement have dropped by about 15 per
cent in the past two months, and a property boom in coastal regions is
flagging.
But consumer prices are likely to prove more resistant to measures adopted
thus far, especially in view of the fact that in May and June urban
inflation exceeded 20 per cent on an annualised basis, according to a
western economist in Beijing, who noted that the authorities had been coy
about producing specific details for these months. The cost of living in
urban areas for the first six months of the year was 17 per cent higher than
for the same period of last year.
Officials are concerned that inflation and inflationary expectations have
become so embedded that interrupting the spiral will prove difficult without
resort to harsher administrative measures that would fly in the face of the
market reforms to which China's leaders claim they are committed. But,
judging by recent official statements, the temptation to intervene more
severely by strengthening the price control regime for some essential
commodities may prove irresistible if measures adopted thus far fail to
check the price spiral. On the macro level, further increases in interest
rates would seem to be unavoidable.
Other priorities include strengthening the Chinese yuan, which depreciated
in the past year by more than 50 per cent against the dollar on the
officially sanctioned currency swap markets where the bulk of foreign
exchange transactions are conducted. It has recovered some ground against
the dollar since Mr Zhu took command, and this is being hailed as an early
success. However, the central bank has been obliged on several occasions to
intervene to support the yuan at around nine to the dollar. The official
exchange rate remains at Yn5.7 to the dollar.
If all the above challenges are not more than enough for one man, China's
economic tsar is also being obliged to respond to pressures to reverse the
country's deteriorating balance of trade, which recorded a deficit of
Dollars 3.54bn in the first six months of the year compared with a healthy
surplus last year. Chinese officials have pledged to bring about an
improvement in China's terms of trade without resort to administrative
measures such as import curbs.
If the trade gap continues to widen, Beijing's central planners might find
it difficult to resist intervening, although western officials point out
that such a move would undermine China's case for membership of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Western officials also believe that China,
with adequate foreign exchange reserves of about Dollars 20bn, would be
mistaken if it became too preoccupied with reducing a 'manageable' deficit
on its trade account at a time when its 'modernising' economy is continuing
to grow at an anticipated rate this year of about 11 per cent, and at
forecast rates of 8-9 per cent for the rest of this decade.
Burdened though he is by the challenges involved in stabilising China's
economy, Mr Zhu also insists that he is committed to pressing ahead with
reforms so as not to lose the momentum generated over the past few years.
Among his most urgent targets are a further rationalisation of state
industries such as iron and steel, which accumulated losses last year in the
order of Dollars 76bn, and a drastic overhaul of an archaic banking sector.
The banks have largely been left alone, but reform is long overdue if China
is to move further down the road towards a market economy. China's banks
operate like cashiers, rather than agents of economic activity.
Few would envy Mr Zhu his task. But a hopeful sign for foreign investors and
for the Chinese is that, on this occasion - unlike 1988-89 when the economy
was brought to a virtual standstill by a series of tough administrative
measures - it is the reformists and not party conservatives who have seized
the initiative. The question is whether a lighter hand will achieve results
quickly enough to enable the reformists to claim an early victory. The signs
are that Mr Zhu and his supporters are in for a long, hard slog. Success is
far from assured.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

930805

