FT931-4179

FT  12 MAR 93 / UK presses Israel over Palestinian deportees


   By ROGER MATTHEWS, Middle East Editor


INTERNATIONAL efforts to find a formula which would allow a full resumption
of Middle East peace negotiations intensified yesterday ahead of Monday's
meeting in Washington between President Bill Clinton and Mr Yitzhak Rabin,
Israel's prime minister.
Britain again pressed Israel to find a solution to the issue of Palestinian
deportations which is the main obstacle to the four Arab delegations
accepting the American invitation to resume negotiations on April 20.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, told Mr Yossi Beilin,
Israel's deputy foreign minister, that progress had to be made on bringing
home the nearly 400 Palestinians deported in December to southern Lebanon.
Britain also supports the minimum Palestinian demand that Israel should
commit itself not to engage in future mass deportations.
Mr Beilin said before meeting Mr Hurd that he did not consider this to be a
'serious or tangible demand, and therefore I do not think that we need to
answer it'.
He added that it was neither feasible, nor realistic, for Israel to vow that
it would never resort to deportations again.
The present Labour government had raised the flag of territorial compromise,
said Mr Beilin, unlike the previous Likud administration which had only
wanted to annex the occupied territories.
The Palestinians should recognise this and understand that there was no
other option for them but to return to the negotiating table.
Whether Israel is willing to provide some assurance on the deportation issue
may become clearer after Mr Rabin's meeting with Mr Clinton next week.
The US supported UN Security Council Resolution 799 demanding the return of
the deported Palestinians and subsequently pressured Israel into agreeing to
take back 100 of the men immediately.
If Mr Rabin is to soften his stance further it would most likely be
presented in the form of a goodwill gesture to the new US administration.
Syria, which has stressed its desire to get back to the negotiating table,
worked on new ideas with Egypt yesterday for ending the impasse.
Mr Farouk al-Shara held talks with President Hosni Mubarak in Cairo and said
afterwards that they had specific proposals for the return of the deportees
and for preventing similar action in future.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930312

