FT934-8732

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (3): In
search of the best resort


   By ANDREW ANDERSON


AS WELL as skiing likes and dislikes, FT readers also had strong opinions
about which resorts they most favoured.
Peter Lambert, of Gosport, Hampshire, managed to combine a love of French
resorts with fine wining and dining: 'We almost always ski in France, always
driving there by car, which relieves the memory of travelling by air to
Geneva on a plane that always left two hours late, and the subsequent wait
at the airport for the coach to take us to our resort.
'Driving back requires a rest stop for a good dinner near Beaune; we favour
Meursault or Auxey-Duresses, since they offer a chance to visit one of the
negociants. Whoever wins the toss to taste the wines can enjoy the rest of
the journey in a blissful haze while the other drives to the coast.'
Another foodie, Petteri Kostermaa, of Helsinki, Finland, plumped for
Switzerland: 'The best skiing I had was in Verbier - it's made for serious
skiers but also has some great dining places. What depresses me about skiing
are those skiers who over-estimate their abilities, and also people who
waste chair or gondola space on lifts by not teaming up with other people.'
Andy Marks, of North Hill, London, favoured Italy, but began with a point
that applies to almost any resort: 'Great skiing holidays don't need 600km
of slopes, but adequate snow, with variety, and off-piste for those that
seek it. This usually means higher resorts.
'For ambience, Italy seems to offer the best balance between snow, sun, fun
and festivity. The most memorable meal I had was lunch on the last day of
our trip to Courmayeur: chateaubriand for two sitting outside in the sun on
the slopes, the white-hatted chef bringing it out on a silver platter. Good
wine helped this simple fare.'
Neil Carter, of Cullompton, Devon, spoke for many when expressing his
preference for 'ski-in, ski-out resorts with minimal transport problems.
Breckenridge is a big plus for this, and Arc 1800 is also good.'
Simon Clucas, of Southgate, London, also nominates Italy, namely Cervinia
and Livigno, as good value for money, and further singles out Courchevel,
Crans Montana, Zermatt ('my favourite') and Aviemore in Scotland for special
praise. However, he takes we ski writers to task: 'Many skiing articles
either cater for the knock-kneed beginner - 'it'll be a lark, honest' - or
for the affluent expert hooked on helicopters, five-star hotels and black
runs.' Point taken: mid-range resorts can combine the best of both worlds.
American resorts came in for high praise from many Pink Snow respondents.
James Walters, of Paget, Bermuda, writes: 'To ski America's premier resorts
is like treating yourself to a once-in-a-lifetime meal. One warning: go
there once and you'll want to go again and again.'
Janet Thomas, of Orpington, Kent, broadly agrees: 'Some years ago we went to
Colorado, as a catered chalet there was hardly more expensive than a top
European resort. We had a wonderful time, and without hesitation, we would
go back. The pistes are very different, but I do miss certain aspects of
skiing in Europe - there are no typical Austrian mountain restaurants and
apres ski is virtually non-existent. Having skied in the US for the past
four years, I do sometimes miss that 'let's ski to another village for lunch
and have a gluhwein on the way' approach.'
Anthony Leech, of South Norwood, London, was another fan of the US, in spite
of his chilly experience. 'A warning for those travelling to Vermont: wrap
up warm] Temperatures can fall below -30`C, with wind chill taking it down
to -50`C. The only real cure I have found is a quickly consumed,
steaming-hot alcoholic cocktail. This cure often needs administering more
than twice a day, to the detriment of the perfect parallel]'
However, the boot was on the other foot for American skier Erik Luchs, of
Newport Beach, California: 'We skied Europe for the first time in 1988 and
had the best holiday ever. We find that US resorts get wonderful snow and
the latest chair-lifts, but we found Switzerland and Austria to have all
that and, in addition, the quaint ambience only Europe can give.'
Finally, for those Britons who despair of delayed charter flights and
expensive European resorts, Roger Bade, of Morden, Surrey, actually managed
to find some decent skiing in England. 'In common with most sporting
activities in England, the main determinant is the weather. Allenheads, the
highest village in Northumberland, is probably the best ski centre in
England, close to the British & Scandanavian Ski Club tow. Apres ski in the
Allenheads Inn is superb]
'There are disadvantages: it does snow before the ski tow is set up in
November; it can be difficult to start the tractor that operates the ski
tow; and the vertical drop is only 500ft. Other skiing centres in the North
Pennines include Weardale and Stanhope Ski Club, the Carlisle Ski Club, and
the Teesdale Ski Club, where on the Hartside slalom run, the ski lodge
masquerades as the Hartside Cafe during the summer]'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

931113

