FT933-9979

FT  06 AUG 93 / Leading Article: US steel initiative


NEWS THAT A LARGE chunk of the US steel industry is about to embark on a
radical experiment in collaborative worker-management relationships will
surprise those who remember the violent confrontations that have peppered
its history. But the big steel companies and the United Steelworkers of
America are now both fighting for their lives. They have little to lose, and
potentially something to gain, from the proposed deals.
Details of what has been agreed at Bethlehem Steel, the country's second
biggest producer, and National Steel, the fourth largest company, will
remain sketchy until the terms are ratified over the next few weeks. For
example, it is not clear whether workers are being offered guaranteed
employment, or to what extent they are being required to contribute to cost
savings on health insurance.
But it is evident that under the deals, which are to last for six years, a
two-year pay freeze and greater work flexibility will be exchanged for
improved pensions and, most dramatically, for participation in company
decision-making from the boardroom to the shop-floor.
This is not full-scale co-determination, German-style. No employee at any
level in the company will have a formal veto over management decisions. But
by linking workers' pay to profit performance and giving employees more
influence in company forums, both sides hope to create mutually reinforcing
benefits.
This is not an overnight conversion to collaboration. Ever since the bitter
1986 dispute at USX, the US's biggest producer, there have been several
small-scale experiments in new forms of pay and participation, including
most recently two deals at Inland Steel and LTV. The old line steel
companies have also looked enviously at the productivity levels achieved in
the green-field site mini-mills, and their more harmonious working methods.
As Mr Lynn Williams, the steel union president, is fond of pointing out,
nobody suffers more than the workers when a plant closes. A steel closure
often has a dramatic effect on a town, leaving poor employment prospects and
falling property values. Senior managers are usually more mobile and
employable. So the union, like some of its counterparts in the airline
industry, is ready to trade short-term gains on pay for a more productive
and secure future.
It is not yet clear that the deals will provide such a future, and USX may
be wise to hold back from following its competitors into signing up until
more is known about how they will work out in practice. Even if they do,
they may not be a model for other sectors of US manufacturing, which have
very different industrial relations histories and current prospects. But the
Clinton-appointed Dunlop Commission, which is currently reviewing the
structure of US labour law, will have some useful case studies to examine
before coming up with its report next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

930806

