FT933-9942

FT  06 AUG 93 / UK Company News: French closure costs leave TDG 80% lower at
Pounds 3.5m


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


TRANSPORT Development Group, Britain's second largest haulier, yesterday
revealed an 80 per cent drop in interim pre-tax profits to Pounds 3.5m,
fuelled by the Pounds 12.4m cost of closing a lossmaking business in France.
The decline came as TDG warned of an increasingly gloomy outlook for the
continental European economy in spite of recent ERM turbulence.
Mr Martin Llowarch, chairman, said it was 'a gut feeling that things have
not yet stabilised there . . . We believe matters may well get worse before
they get better.' TDG derives a third of its turnover from continental
Europe.
Mr Llowarch was optimistic, nevertheless, saying the pre-tax figures masked
a solid performance at the operating level, where profits from continuing
operations fell by just Pounds 600,000 to Pounds 15.9m.
Sales for the six months to June 30 were 3 per cent lower at Pounds 276.6m.
'We have taken a one-off hit to deal with a particular situation,' he said,
referring to the costs of winding up Translittoral, the long-distance
haulier.
'The results are quite encouraging against the lack of any economic
recovery.' He did not expect any further significant provisions.
It was on this basis that the group had decided to dip into reserves to
maintain its dividend at 3p.
Losses per share were 1.66p against earnings of 7.51p last time.
TDG had suffered most in continental Europe, where it is heavily exposed in
France, Germany and the Netherlands. Operating profits there had tumbled
from Pounds 4.26m to Pounds 2.89m, while margins had dropped by about a
third.
The UK returned a 9 per cent improvement in operating profits to Pounds
15.1m, largely due to two years of restructuring.
Mr Llowarch stressed that in spite of the improved performance, the group
had 'not noticed any significant change in economic activity'.
He said that the sale of Willig Freight in the US, due for completion in
March, had been difficult to finalise. Some Dollars 16m (Pounds 10.7m) was
still outstanding.
However, he remained confident that the new payment programme would be met
by the US purchaser.
COMMENT
Take a look at some of TDG's peers, such as NFC, and investors might have
some idea of just how the company will look in three to four years' time.
This is a company that seems to be paying the price of starting to cope with
recession just that little bit too late. Nevertheless, the work is under
way, and the balance sheet is strong with gearing of 17 per cent. There is
also the Dollars 16m yet to come from Willig. Forecasts are for Pounds 35m
this year, leaving the shares looking somewhat overvalued on a multiple of
18. It would appear that the market has been somewhat over-enthusiastic
following ERM turmoil. Any real effects of European recovery are expected to
be as much as 18 months away.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930806

