FT932-7103

FT  25 MAY 93 / International Company News: CEA Industrie profits decline
26%


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


CEA Industrie, the French atomic energy commission, yesterday announced a 26
per cent fall in net profits to FFr960m (Dollars 175.34m) for last year,
from FFr1.3bn in 1991, due to the impact of adverse exchange rates and
sluggish demand in some markets.
Meanwhile, France's new conservative government appeared to soften its line
on the future of CEA's involvement with SGS-Thomson, the Franco-Italian
microchip manufacturer. The industry ministry squashed speculation that CEA
would reduce its involvement with SGS-Thomson, in which it is one of the
main French shareholders, by saying it would retain its existing stake.
However, the ministry, which has already made clear it planned to adopt a
far tougher approach in its relations with state-controlled companies such
as CEA and SGS-Thomson, said long-term links between the two companies would
be reviewed.
The new government has also stressed it would be much more rigorous in its
provision of financial support to public sector concerns, although the
industry ministry said CEA would continue to participate in the
recapitalisation of SGS-Thomson.
CEA saw turnover rise from FFr38.9bn to FFr39.18bn last year, due largely to
an increase in sales outside France. The proportion of sales generated from
other countries rose to 34.3 per cent from 28.2 per cent over the same
period.
The group identified its main problems last year as the difficult condition
of the mining industry and poor demand for capital goods. CEA, like other
French companies, was also affected in the closing months of 1992 by the
strength of the franc following the September currency crisis.
Operating profits rose to FFr3.24bn from FFr1.68bn. But group net profits
were hit by an exceptional deficit of FFr322m against an exceptional credit
of FFr2.25bn in the previous year.
CEA does, however, hope to secure growth this year through the inclusion of
SGS-Thomson's semi-conductor operations, the mines recently acquired from
the Total oil group and the Sopha medical business.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

930525

