FT932-3326

FT  15 JUN 93 / Minister calls for building ventures


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


A LIST of construction projects, which the government would like to see
developed jointly by private and public-sector interests, is expected to be
published today.
Sir George Young, construction minister, is expected to announce the schemes
during a visit to Coventry. He will emphasise the government's commitment to
attracting private investment in infrastructure and services when it is
under intense pressure to reduce public spending.
The latest projects are in addition to 21 developments costing more than
Pounds 1bn which Mr John Redwood, then environment minister, identified as
candidates for joint ventures earlier this year.
Previous schemes included a new airport for Sheffield, a power station for
London's Docklands and a road tunnel under the River Tyne. The government is
thought to be close to announcing that private-sector backers have been
found for several of these.
Most of the schemes identified by the department would involve public
authorities handing over land to private companies which, in return, would
be expected to finance much needed inner-city developments.
The department said private investment might be supplemented either by local
authority capital receipts or from the Pounds 600m-a-year urban development
corporation, urban partnership and City Challenge budgets.
The projects have attracted strong interest from construction companies
which have been starved of public and private-sector work during the
recession.
The environment department schemes are in addition to several large road and
rail schemes which have been identified by the transport department as
candidates for joint ventures.
The government's determination to encourage greater private-sector
investment has prompted it to relax Treasury rules which required that
private schemes could proceed only if they were cheaper than equivalent
public-sector proposals.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930615

