FT932-7068

FT  26 MAY 93 / World Trade News: Sutherland set to be named Gatt
director-general


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


MR Peter Sutherland, former EC competition commissioner and now chairman of
Allied Irish Banks, is expected to be named the next director-general of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade when Gatt members meet in special
session on June 9.
The 47-year-old Irishman will take over from Mr Arthur Dunkel, a Swiss who
has held the post since 1980. Mr Dunkel retires at the end of June.
Mr Sutherland, nominated by the Dublin government with EC support, was the
clear favourite for the job once, after initial hesitation, he allowed his
name to go forward.
Once the US and other European nations made clear their support for Mr
Sutherland, the two Latin American candidates, Mr Julio Lacarte-Muro of
Uruguay and Mr Luis Fernando Jaramillo of Colombia, had no chance of
securing the necessary consensus of Gatt's 111 members.
Mr Balkrishan Zutshi, chairman of Gatt's contracting parties (members),
expects to complete his consultations on Mr Sutherland's appointment,
including terms and conditions, by the end of this month.
Mr Sutherland's most pressing tasks will be to complete the long-delayed
Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation talks by the end of this year, when US
negotiating authority runs out, and to give the world trade body new
dynamism.
The June 9 contracting party session is also expected to decide to create a
third post of deputy director-general, probably with responsibility for
Gatt's economic analysis.
Mr Warren Lavorel, formerly chief US negotiator in the Uruguay Round, is in
the running for one post, traditionally held by an American, which will
become vacant when Mr Charles Carlisle steps down this summer. The second
post has traditionally been held by an Indian and the third may go to a
Latin American.
This 'package' has disappointed Japan with no national of senior rank in
Gatt. Tokyo has been lukewarm on Mr Sutherland's candidacy, though it is not
expected to block a consensus.
Observer, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 5

930526

