FT932-113

FT  30 JUN 93 / China is the key to ambitions


Rupert Murdoch is not a man who often makes mistakes. But the obstacles to
him using Hong Kong as a launching pad for his Asian broadcasting ambitions
were such that initial failure should come as no surprise.
His bid to own 22 per cent of Hong Kong's Television Broadcasts ran counter
to at least three legislative prohibitions. His side deal with TVB's
controlling shareholders, Sir Run Run Shaw and Mr Robert Kuok, to increase
his stake to about 33 per cent compounded the problem.
Hong Kong broadcasting law is written with the presumption that foreign
ownership will be refused. Exemptions are needed for a foreigner to vote
more than 10 per cent of a licensee's stock and for an existing broadcaster
to own more than 15 per cent of a licensee. Mr Murdoch's ownership of Fox
Television of the US puts him at odds with the latter.
To obtain these exemptions, Mr Murdoch would have to produce compelling
evidence of how the public interest would be served.
The logic for Mr Murdoch of the TVB deal can be summed up in one word:
China. It is the emerging television market in north east Asia and TVB alone
has the wherewithal to make commercial Chinese broadcasting work. It is the
dominant terrestrial broadcaster in Hong Kong with a Chinese language
channel that reaches an estimated 16m viewers in neighbouring Guangdong. It
has recently entered satellite broadcasting in Asia.
Mr Murdoch hoped to marry his abilities in managing a satellite broadcaster
with TVB's control of Chinese language programming. It produces 5,000 hours
of Chinese programming annually and has a library of more than 100,000 hours
of material. Indeed, it has been estimated that TVB's library is equivalent
to 60 per cent of Asia's stock of Chinese language material, excluding
communist China.
Mr Murdoch has been assiduous in his cultivation of Chinese leaders. He
first visited China in the early 1980s and earlier this year he spent a week
in Beijing meeting the leadership. His Fox Television distributes movies in
China and houses a Chinese government censor in Hong Kong.
It was, however, becoming increasingly clear that China had reservations
about the proposed deal. Media in China is controlled by the Communist
party, which takes seriously what mainland Chinese view and read.
Late last week, the semi-official China News Agency in Hong Kong reminded
the colonial government that 'deep thought' was required before a decision
was made. The phraseology was low key, but the message was clear: don't do
this.
As one British diplomat observed: 'The Chinese want to have as few
uncontrollable influences on the media as possible after 1997' - the date at
which sovereignty reverts.
Chinese opposition to the deal also appears to be impervious to the
entreaties of Sir Run Run and Mr Kuok, both of whom have longstanding
connections in Beijing. As one TVB executive said last night: 'Connections
are one thing but whether they are useful in this case is another matter.'

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930630

