FT933-12798

FT  22 JUL 93 / The last picture show from Elstree


   By MAGGIE URRY


THE credits are finally rolling at Elstree Studios. No longer will cries of
'darling' and 'luvvie' echo around the sets.
After more than 20 years of changes of ownership and rescues, the British
Hollywood, in the unlikely setting of Borehamwood, Herts, a million miles
from Sunset Boulevard, is to close.
This time even Superman, Indiana Jones and Luke Skywalker, all characters
who have walked the sets, seem unlikely to save the studio where the first
British 'talkie' was made and Laurence Olivier, Ralph Richardson and James
Mason made their screen debuts.
The last important feature film to be made there was, perhaps appropriately,
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, completed in 1989. Since then the
studios have been used for television films and commercials.
Elstree's owner, Brent Walker, the property and leisure group struggling
under Pounds 1.3bn of debts, said yesterday that the facilities had been
'substantially under-utilised'.
Despite 'vigorous efforts' Brent Walker had been unable to find a buyer for
the studios, and could no longer afford to subsidise film production there.
The news brought an outcry from the beleaguered British film industry. Mr
Wilf Stevenson, director of the British Film Institute, said the closure
'will be damaging to the long- term prospects of a UK cinema industry'.
After Brent Walker bought the studios in 1988, for Pounds 32.5m it sold part
of the land for a Tesco superstore.
In 1990 Brent Walker agreed with the local council, Hertsmere, that the site
would be used for film-making for the following 25 years. It could forfeit a
Pounds 10m bond if the property is used for other purposes.
Brent Walker is now applying to the Land Tribunal for an amendment of its
agreement so that it can redevelop the town-centre site.
Brent Walker has promised development will be 'as sympathetic as possible',
although this may be poor recompense for the Borehamwood locals, used to
seeing Harrison Ford and Sean Connery in the newsagents.
Fade . . . and CUT.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

930722

