FT934-8739

FT  13 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: Think second-hand for your policy -
The market in 'used' endownments and where you can get them


   By PHILIP COGGAN


BUYING an investment 'second-hand' implies something vaguely moth-eaten and
sub-standard. But the growing market in second-hand endowment policies
indicates that investors are not put off by the terminology. Most shares are
bought second-hand, after all.
With-profits endowment policies are the investments most often used to back
a mortgage. The fund invests in a mixture of bonds, equities and property
and pays out the investment return in the form of bonuses. These are added
to a guaranteed sum assured, which is the minimum the policy will pay if it
is held until maturity.
Bonuses generally come in two forms: reversionary, which are paid every year
and, once announced, cannot be withdrawn; and terminal, which are paid at
the end of the policy's life.
The idea is for the policy to produce a smoothed return so that the investor
is not threatened by a sudden dip in the stock markets. But this smoothing
effect has other consequences, which has led to much criticism of the
widespread sale of endowments.
The main problem is that investors who cash in policies early often receive
poor returns. On a 25-year policy - the type used most commonly to repay a
mortgage - it can easily take 10 years for the surrender value of the policy
to equal the premiums paid in.
These low surrender values are caused by a variety of factors. One is that
endowment policies give investors some life cover; that represents a cost to
the insurance company.
The company also has other costs to bear, such as the commission paid to the
salesman or adviser which might total several hundreds of pounds.
Another factor is that the bonus system forces companies to be cautious.
Because reversionary bonuses, once paid, cannot be withdrawn, companies
inevitably do not pay out all the investment return in that form. A fair
chunk is left to be paid as the terminal bonus.
The peculiarities of this system create the opportunity for second-hand
investors. Many investors want to surrender their policies early. If they
surrender after only 10 years of 25, they will normally receive far less
than they would have received as the final payout of a 10-year policy.
According to Kleinwort Benson, research shows that such surrenders average
around 72 per cent of the 'asset share' attributable to the policy. So, an
outside investor could buy a policy at, say, 85 per cent of asset share and
everybody would be happy. The policyholder gets a greater amount than he
would have done had he surrendered; the second-hand investor will have
bought assets at a discount.
Obviously, a lot of legal paperwork is needed before an insurance policy can
be transferred (assigned in the jargon) from one person to another. The
Bath-based Policy Plus arranges for an independent solicitor to handle the
transaction and to check, for example, that the policy has not been assigned
to someone else. After a few months, the investor should receive an
acknowledgement from the insurance company that the policy has been
re-assigned.
What happens then? The second-hand buyer must keep up the payments on the
policy until it matures. On maturity, he will get its full value. Providing
it is a qualifying policy (essentially, that it has a term of more than 10
years), the proceeds will be free of income tax but subject to capital gains
tax.
If the investor alters the maturity of the policy, it might become
non-qualifying and there could be a higher-rate income tax charge on the
maturity proceeds.
If the original policyholder dies before the policy matures, then the
second-hand investor will receive either the death benefit or the guaranteed
sum plus accrued bonuses, whichever is the higher. The second-hand investor
does not himself receive any life cover.
Where do you buy a second-hand policy? There are a number of routes. Foster
& Cranfield (071-608 1941) holds a regular auction at which investors can
bid for individual policies. Other companies such as Beale Dobie (0621-851
133), Policy Plus (0225-466 466), Policy Portfolio (081-343 4567) and
Securitised Endowment Contracts (081-207 1666) are market-makers. They act
as middle men between buyers and sellers, making a profit from the spread
between their buying and selling prices.
A different approach is to buy shares in one of the growing number of funds
which invest in second-hand endowment policies. Kleinwort Benson is
launching its second investment trust in the field.
According to Kleinwort's Simon White, buying through a fund means investors
do not have to worry about paying future premiums. They also get the benefit
of a spread of policies managed by investment professionals. 'Few investors
would feel confident enough to know the right price to pay for a policy at
auction,' White adds.
The trust will have a 12.5-year life and, mainly, will buy policies maturing
in 2005-2006. Shares are on offer at 100p, with 50p payable on application
and a further 50p six months later.
Minimum investment is 1,000 shares. The trust will pay no dividends and all
the return will come in the form of capital gain.
Kleinwort estimates that the investor will receive a compound return of 11.5
per cent a year, assuming existing reversionary and terminal bonus rates are
maintained. On more conservative assumptions that bonus rates are paid at
90, or 80, per cent of present levels, the return falls to 10.3 and 9 per
cent respectively. That is still significantly ahead of the returns on offer
from building societies - and, since it comes in the form of capital gain,
it has the chance of being tax-free.
Shares in the first Kleinwort Endowment Policy trust were trading yesterday
at 114.5p, compared with an issue price of 100p.
Another option for investors is BZW's endowment fund, based offshore, which
will distribute its assets over the last five years of its life (from 2001
to 2005) and is designed to help investors with planning for items such as
school fees.
What returns should investors expect from second-hand policies? Over the
past few years, 25-year policies have tended to pay out the equivalent of
11-13 per cent a year over their life. Buying second-hand ought to enhance
those returns. On the other hand, bonuses are on the way down as companies
'smooth out' the effects of 1990 when they set bonuses too high.
While those returns are respectable, a good unit or investment trust ought
to earn more. M&G Recovery, for one, has returned 20.8 per cent a year since
launch in 1969.

The Financial Times


London Page III

931113

