FT934-11177

FT  02 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Tip of Japan's debt iceberg


IT WOULD be churlish not to be generous in praise of the Japanese
authorities' macroeconomic management over the past three years. The Bank of
Japan has succeeded, using both interest rate cuts and arm-twisting, in
maintaining financial order following the 1990 Tokyo stock and property
market collapse. The Ministry of Finance, after some prompting, has used
both administrative measures and three fiscal injections to put a floor
under share prices and prevent a slump. Faced with similar problems, the US,
UK and Scandinavian countries have all suffered recessions. Japan, by
contrast, has just about kept growth alive.
It is against this background that the significance of the bankruptcy of
Muramoto Construction should be judged. The collapse of the Japanese
property contractor, leaving Y590bn in unpaid debts, may be the largest
bankruptcy in Japan since the second world war. What is surprising is that
there have been so few Muramotos, given the scale of Japan's property market
collapse.
Yet Muramoto Construction represents the tip of a large iceberg. Last March,
official Japanese government figures put the total of 'non-performing' loans
at the top 21 city banks at Y12,700bn, a little over 3 per cent of
outstanding loans. But government sources also acknowledge that, when the
debts of non-bank subsidiaries are included, the true figure is at least
three times the official level, raising the ratio of bad debts to loans to
Scandinavian levels. Even the official stock of non-performing loans
represents four times last year's operating profits of the 21 city banks.
Meanwhile, the Co-operative Credit Purchasing Company (CCPC), the agency set
up last year without public money in order to remove non-performing loans
from bank balance sheets, is moving at a slow pace. Between February and the
end of September, it purchased loans with a face value of a mere Y1,050bn.
Of course, as the Bank of Japan points out, the evidence that Japan is
currently facing a credit crunch is far from conclusive. Yes, bank lending
is falling and the broad money supply is barely growing. But, with Japanese
companies themselves restructuring after the over-investment of the late
1980s, the demand for credit is hardly buoyant.
Moreover, the Bank of Japan is probably right to claim, citing the Muramoto
Construction liquidation as an example, that the disposal of these
non-performing loans can occur gradually, in orderly fashion, without a risk
of systemic crisis in Japan's financial markets. And the bank is
understandably worried that a publicly financed bail-out of the banking
industry would generate moral hazard problems, although a few more
resignations by senior bank officials would help.
Yet unless the Bank of Japan provides funds to capitalise the CCPC, it will
take years rather than months for Japan's bad debt iceberg to thaw and melt.
And until the banks are restored to health, the prospects for economic
recovery will remain poor.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

931102

