FT931-4099

FT  12 MAR 93 / Letter: Conservative party not immune to principles of
democracy


   From Mr ERIC CHALKER


Sir, In his letter (March 5) Sir Norman Fowler drew a perfectly correct
distinction between his constitutional position within the Conservative
party and that of the constituency associations. Because that distinction is
rarely pointed out and because the colloquial title 'party chairman' is used
as frequently by Sir Norman as his predecessors, it is hardly surprising
that many think he has a wider authority.
However, while he correctly distances himself from the party's membership in
one paragraph, he purports to speak on their behalf in the next. In praising
Sir Basil Feldman's report dealing with party members' affairs Sir Norman
was misinformed, because this report has never even been discussed by the
party's executive committee, let alone 'passed' as he suggests.
The true view of the membership may be deduced from the fact that key
changes proposed in the Feldman report failed to win the necessary support
at Harrogate on March 5.
The original Financial Times report which provoked Sir Norman's letter
referred to the blocking of a special meeting requisition by 50 constituency
associations co-ordinated by the party reform steering committee. Sir Norman
is quite right to say that we are not opposed to many of the steps he has
taken to reform the management of Central Office, but he sidesteps what is
our concern. Not one single member of the new board of management will be
accountable to the constituency associations.
We believe that a majority of them should be, in order to make the board
itself democratically accountable to the membership. Sir Norman argues
instead for a restricted form of representation that leaves him with total
control and the constituencies with no say.
This lack of democratic accountability is highlighted by Sir Norman's
intention declared at Harrogate but not in his letter - to make the whole
party accountable to his board. This is particularly perverse, of course,
considering the very limited constitutional authority enjoyed by Sir Norman,
as he so clearly described at the start of his letter.
If the Conservative party were a company and this correspondence were to
appear on your City pages, it would hardly seem credible. If the
Conservative party were a trade union, it would long ago have been dragged
before the courts for its abuse of membership rights. The fact that it is
the principal political party of this country should not make it immune to
the principles of good governance and democracy.
Eric Chalker,
secretary,
Party Reform Steering
Committee,
21 Ingleside Close,
Beckenham,
Kent BR3 1QU

The Financial Times


London Page 18

930312

