FT934-8679

FT  13 NOV 93 / Arts: Exposes from the gents - Alastair Macaulay reviews
Lloyd Newson's work on 'cottaging'


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


NEVER before has so much significance been attached to going to the gents
after the performance. DV8's latest work, MSM (which opened at the Royal
Court this week), is about cottaging - ie gay male sex in public lavatories.
As theatre, it is just so-so. As documentary, however, it is interesting.
This is not the first time that cottaging has been brought into the open. It
has been covered on television and there is a famous scene of group
cottaging in Joe Orton's diaries. But a theatre work is a uniquely public
event. You can claim not to have read Orton, or not to have watched certain
programmes; but, if you watch MSM, you do so in a theatre full of other
folk. Hundreds of you together, indeed, are watching a theatre piece about
secretive sex between men who usually never even ask each other's names.
DV8's choreographer-director is Lloyd Newson. His talent has three separate
strands: gay sociology; wit; plaintive expressionism. Compare him with a
famous gay artist like Orton, and he hardly seems an artist at all. Newson
is more like a radical journalist; he means to expose issues.
MSM features spoken passages culled from 50 interviews about cottaging.
These are selected and shaped in a thoroughly Newson style: a mix of expose,
confessional and commentary. I was often astonished by their frankness and
the seriousness of their self-analysis. Newson's wit is evident in the way
he has selected and presented them. He combines this with visual jokes such
as the episode in which five men join, with infinite absorption, in a bout
of pass-the-orange-under-the-chin.
A peculiar feature of Newson's works is that they convey no happy-to-be-out
gay pride. They are about the psychopathology of gayness. His best work,
Dead Dreams of Monochrome Men (1988; televised, 1990), was about a subject
which not many years ago would have been considered far beyond the pale for
a theatre performance: gay necrophylia. Many features of MSM recall it.
MSM's cast of seven, ranging from portly middle-age to pretty-boy
lissomeness, is excellent. Language is explicit; clothes are worn in most
scenes; the most basic acts of cottaging are indicated rather than shown
explicitly.
Like Dead Dreams, MSM is a view of gayness as a prison from which there is
no escape. The hero of Dead Dreams commits foul murders and unnatural acts.
In his home, which becomes a grotesque charnel house, the audience sees the
hell of his own mind. MSM suggests that the basic emotions and attitudes
involved in cottaging are despair, loneliness, and escapism. (Many cottagers
are married and/or bisexual.) 'I have sex with complete strangers,' one man
says, 'because it's a way of numbing my mind.'
The walls, cubicles, doors of gents' lavatories become metaphors. Early on,
while men before a wall start to loiter with intent, parts of naked torsos,
beyond the wall, rise and turn, showing the practice, the steamy fantasy and
in between, a psycholgical barrier; Through a hole in the wall, a naked leg
protrudes. A man caresses it. The nature of cottaging could not be indicated
with more loaded irony.
Newson's 'physical theatre' has become popular in recent years because it is
all about 'the body' - that big buzzword in hip intellectual circles. Not
the transformed body of academically virtuoso dance, but ordinary mortal
flesh. And a disappointment in MSM is that it focusses on 'the body' only
intermittently. MSM is 90 minutes of graphic sociology, and closer to being
a lecture-demonstration than a sustained sequence of theatrical images.
Like David Mamet's Oleanna, MSM is a less-than-great work of theatre that
nonetheless I think is worth going to see. It raises questions about what
causes men to seek homosexual sex in illicit, dangerous, and awkward
circumstances, without providing unambiguous anaswers. But like everything
Newson has made, MSM gives me a headache. Behind his wit, humanity, and
documentary force, one senses a hectoring temperament and a terrible
hysteria. Newson now knows 50 different ways of banging his head against a
wall; but it is the same head. And the same wall.
At the Royal Court, SW1, 071-730-1745/2554, until November 20.
Restricted-view seats only.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

931113

