FT932-7124

FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (5): Fights on many fronts - Big
business families


   By VICTOR MALLET


THE RECENT battle for control of newly privatised Philippine Airlines (PAL)
has served to emphasise an old truism: the Philippine economy is dominated
by a small number of very powerful business families with surnames such as
Cojuangco, Ayala and Soriano.
Such families often trace their strength to the quasi-feudal relationship
between master and peasant which still exists in much of the countryside,
and some of them have increased their influence by cosying up to successive
central governments in Manila and by protecting their industrial enterprises
behind high tariff barriers.
The privatisation of PAL in January 1992 has involved several of the
country's best-known business families in a bruising and complex battle for
control of PR Holdings, which bought 67 per cent of PAL from the state for
Dollars 370m.
Mr Antonio 'Tonyboy' Cojuangco, president of Philippine Long Distance
Telephone (PLDT) and the former PAL chief, lost the first round of the PAL
fight to Mr Lucio Tan, a Chinese-Filipino businessman with tobacco and
banking interests, partly because Mr Cojuangco himself had secretly
approached Mr Tan to help finance the transaction when he was unable to
raise enough cash.
Mr Andres Soriano III, head of the San Miguel beverage and food
conglomerate, regards Mr Tan as a dangerous rival in the brewing industry
(Mr Tan has been marketing a beer called 'Beer' which looks remarkably like
San Miguel's own brand but costs less). Mr Soriano, like the Ayala family,
had been allied to Mr Cojuangco against Mr Tan for the airline deal.
But Mr Soriano, outraged by Mr Cojuangco's scheming, apparently ended up
selling his stake to Mr Tan via International Container Terminal Services,
which wanted a ground handling contract from PAL.
There was a serious side to this unedifying and as yet unfinished saga,
namely a dispute between Mr Tan and Mr Cojuangco over the wisdom of buying
Dollars 1.2bn of new aircraft; Mr Tan wanted more emphasis on regional
rather than long-haul routes. But the squabbling forced the government,
which still holds a stake in the airline, to intervene and impose a
compromise. Both Mr Gabriel Singson, the new PR Holdings chairman, and Mr
Carlos Dominguez, the new PAL chief, are effectively government appointees.
Mr Tan is now reported to be seeking to sell his stake of just over 50 per
cent in PR Holdings, describing his involvement in the airline as 'a big
headache.'
An equally murky war has been waged over the location of the new, unified
Philippine stock exchange (at present there are two exchanges, one in Makati
and one in Manila).
A vote among stockbrokers in March chose Philrealty Holdings' Tektite
Towers, in territory controlled by the Ortigas family, over a site owned by
the Ayala family; but the margin of victory was narrow and the losers are
challenging the result.
Mr Tan is regarded as something of an upstart by the dynasties which can
trace their influence back to the days of Spanish colonialism, but his name,
like theirs, seems to crop up again and again when big deals are being
discussed in the Philippines.
The late Ferdinand Marcos helped to justify his dictatorship with a populist
commitment to reduce the power of wealthy landlords and businessmen, but he
gathered around him a set of equally influential business 'cronies' instead;
when he was overthrown in the uprising which brought Mrs Corazon Aquino to
the presidency in 1986, some of the cronies found themselves in trouble and
Marcos's old enemies emerged once more to flex their financial muscles.
The legacy of these continuing struggles is a corrosive uncertainty in the
world of Philippine big business.
The Soriano family company San Miguel, for example, was brought under the
control of Mr Eduardo Cojuangco (a Marcos associate who is one of Antonio's
cousins) in the time of Marcos. The Aquino administration seized some of the
Cojuangco-controlled shares in the company, saying they were unfairly
obtained, but he is fighting in the courts to retrieve them.
Ownership of part of PLDT is also under a cloud; in March the Presidential
Commission on Good Government declared that the 44 per cent stake in PLDT's
holding company claimed by the Cojuangco family may have in fact been owned
by Marcos and therefore was at risk of seizure by the state.
Like others before him, President Fidel Ramos has vowed since his election
in May last year to liberalise the economy and reduce the power of
inefficient monopolies, although he has moved with deliberate caution to
avoid antagonising the business community; his critics say the government,
by intervening in PLDT, San Miguel and PAL, is taking an unhealthy interest
in running big businesses.
'There is this intention to really overcome or eliminate inefficient
monopolies in our economy,' said Mr Cielito Habito, the Socio-Economic
Planning Secretary in the Ramos administration and head of the National
Economic and Development Authority. 'My impression is that 90 per cent or
more of the population is supportive of this trend.'
But he added: 'We don't want to overdo this. We don't want to do this to the
point of discouraging investment.'
Filipino businessmen, even those with free market tendencies, are concerned
that Congress might pass anti-trust legislation so sweeping that it cripples
big companies and provides further avenues for corruption and litigation in
a country already over-burdened with both.
Although the big families are mostly fighting each other, some of them are
starting to grumble about Mr Ramos's drive to increase competition. Mr Jaime
Zobel de Ayala, head of the Ayala clan, complained in a recent speech that
some officials were starting to regard businesses 'particularly large and
established ones' as detrimental to the national interest.
Seasoned observers of the Philippines believe Mr Ramos is bound to reach
some sort of compromise with the big families he is targeting.
'The intention is sincere as a way of equalising the level of competition in
the marketplace,' says Mr Raffy Manalaysay, senior investment analyst at
Crosby Securities in Hong Kong, 'but whether the implementation is going to
be as steadfast and earnest as he would like people to think - that's
another matter.'
PLDT is likely to be the focus of the government's attention for the time
being. It is widely seen as an inefficient monopoly (there are only two
telephones per 100 people in the Philippines) and improvements would be
welcomed by the people forced to use PLDT's service, including the sort of
protectionist businessmen who might otherwise be expected to oppose
liberalisation; there are, furthermore, plenty of competent international
companies which would be delighted to compete with PLDT for the lucrative
Philippine market.
The ground has been further prepared for the Ramos administration by
accusations of bribery and skulduggery. PLDT has long resisted attempts to
make it connect its network to those of rival organisations such as Eastern
Telecommunications, a Cable & Wireless affiliate, and it won an order from
the Supreme Court to stop Eastern handling international traffic. Now,
however, Eastern has suggested that the judgement read out by a supreme
court justice - who has now resigned - was written by a PLDT lawyer.
Perhaps encouraged by these developments and by the likelihood of public
support, President Ramos has ordered PLDT to allow other companies to
connect with its network. He has also directed the government to exercise
more vigorously its rights as a shareholder in PLDT and the holding company,
replacing the government representatives on both boards.
The result of these moves is that Mr Antonio Cojuangco is starting to back
down. In late March, PLDT announced that it was making connections with a
number of other companies, including Eastern.
Big families still dominate the economy - and local politics - in the
Philippines and they are unlikely to lose control during the Ramos
presidency; but they may - as Mr Ramos seems to be showing with PLDT - be
obliged to loosen their grip slightly if the economy is again to compete
with the rest of south-east Asia.

The Financial Times


London Page II

930525

