FT934-8721

FT  13 NOV 93 / How To Spend It: Shoes, put your best foot forward - Spit
and polish is not enough: stylish footwear never comes cheap


   By JOHN MORGAN


A PLASTIC surgeon once said that the difference between a beautiful woman
and a not-so-beautiful one was millimetres. The same applies to men's shoes.
The perfectly-shaped toe-cap, superbly proportioned detailing and right
height of heel set truly splendid shoes apart from the also-rans.
Bad shoes, on the other hand, always make a poor impression. They can also
be indicative of shortcomings elsewhere in a man. In a survey in W magazine,
in which leading international women were asked what they most hated in a
man's appearance, a large proportion cited badly-chosen, ill-cared-for shoes
as their sartorial bete noir in the opposite sex.
A friend tells of (her) happily accepting a dinner invitation from a
seemingly attractive tennis partner, only to be irredeemably disappointed by
his shoes when they finally met for a date. 'One glance at his Italian
wide-boy shoes and I knew instantly there was no point looking any further,'
she confides.
However, shoes often present problems. Men who normally have no trouble
choosing a good suit, the right shirt and an amusing tie often seem to lose
all discrimination when buying shoes. I often see perfectly attractive
clothes ruined by cheap, ill-fitting and grubby shoes and wish the wearer
would invest more in his footwear and less in his designer outfit.
Britain makes some of the best classic men's footwear in the world - shoes
that illustrate the traditional British idea of combining style and quality
with practicality. The best not only look good but last a very long time if
properly looked after. Although expensive at around Pounds 250, they, more
than many luxury items, offer value for money, because of the large cost of
good materials and the many highly-skilled man-hours used in their
production.
But what are the tell-tale signs of quality? 'The shape of a shoe is the
first consideration,' explains Richard Allen, of Edward Green, a leading
maker of first-class men's shoes. 'When choosing a shoe, its shape,
determined by its last, should be the same as the foot itself - straight on
the inside and curved on the outside. This means that the shoe will actually
fit as well as look attractive.'
His advice is shared by Oliver Sweeney, a fashionable shoe designer who, in
his obsessive quest for the 'aristocratically-slender look' shoe, stresses
the importance of 'the instep pointing towards the big toe and not to the
centreline of the shoe.' A correctly-shaped shoe fits the wearer from the
start and needs none of the ritual 'breaking-in' so mistakenly beloved of
sadistic nannies.
The second consideration is style and cut. As with the last, millimetres
matter. The length of the cap, height of the vamp and patterning must be in
harmony with the shape of the last. Many men make the mistake of choosing
shoes bristling with punching, tassels and nasty bits of metal and forget
that often the simpler styles look the smartest.
The next test is the quality of the 'upper' (top part of the shoe). 'The
best shoes are made from young skins, no more than twelve weeks old: they
have a fine grain and take a high polish,' explains Allen. When buying brown
shoes, he recommends asking for ones made in aniline leather. These,
although needing plenty of polishing, develop a wonderful patina with age.
He and other shoemakers I talked to are scathing about the cheap,
plastic-treated leathers used by lesser manufacturers. Suede should be
proper reversed calf or stag skin, both of which are unlikely to develop
shiny patches. Now check any decoration: punching, perforations and gimping,
if done by hand, will be crisp and even. Then test the toe and heel for
firmess: good shoes have leather stiffeners to keep them in shape.
Lastly look at the shoe's soles. 'The insole,' stresses Sweeney, 'must be
made of leather to absorb sweat, allow the feet to breathe and, most
important, form a perfect reproduction of the underside of the foot, thus
making the shoe supremely comfortable.'
The outer sole, also made of leather, should be 'welted' to the rest of the
shoe. A welt is a strip of leather placed between and sewn on to the edge of
the sole and the turned-in edge of the upper. It produces a comfortable,
elegant shoe that can be repaired repeatedly.
The soles of the best shoes are vegetable-tanned for longevity and coolness.
No stitches should be visible as they are hidden in a specially-cut channel
in the sole. Heels should also be made from layers of leather (man-made
substitutes tend to gape in the rain) and should have brass pins as they
provide the best grip. Rubber tips provide extra protection against
slipping.
The final tip for investing in good shoes is to buy them in the right shop,
one that will cater to your needs and preferences and provide a
comprehensive aftercare service. The type of shoes I have described will, if
properly cared for, last for years. However they need to be kept on trees,
regularly polished and repaired by their makers. Follow this advice and
avoid the false economy of buying shoes that are anything less than the
best.
John Morgan is associate editor of GQ Magazine.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

931113

