FT933-5387

FT  03 SEP 93 / LBC set to lose radio franchises: Commercial services face
biggest shake-up in 20 years since launch


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


THE London Broadcasting Company appeared set last night to lose both its
commercial radio franchises covering the London area.
The disappearance of the two London-wide speech-based services will be the
biggest shake-up of commercial radio since its launch in the UK 20 years
ago.
London News Radio, a consortium put together by merchant bank Guinness
Mahon, was being tipped as the likely winner of LBC's frequencies.
The expected announcement by the Radio Authority at 10am today will come as
a serious blow to LBC's chairman, Dame Shirley Porter, the controversial
former leader of Westminster city council, whose family interests injected
fresh capital into the radio station.
The case for licence renewal of LBC's popular Newstalk and Talkback radio
services may have been damaged by the collapse earlier this year of its
parent, Crown Communications. LBC survived after the cash injection.
The station was also hit by the departure of its general manager, Mr Charlie
Cox, just before its franchise application was submitted earlier in the
summer. About 120 people are employed by LBC at its Hammersmith
head-quarters.
The readvertising of the London licences is part of a two-year programme by
the Radio Authority which began earlier this year. So far no incumbent has
lost.
In addition to London News Radio, LBC also faced a strong rival bid from a
consortium which included Independent Television News and Associated
Newspapers, publishers of the Daily Mail and the London Evening Standard.
Fears of creating a London news monopoly may have counted against this
consortium.
The Radio Authority, chaired by Lord Chalfont, chose eight new radio
licences for London yesterday out of 48 applicants - four FM and four AM.
All the winners will be announced today. Six applicants were re-applying for
their existing franchises.
The apparent LBC loss would suggest that the holders of the other FM
licences, Melody Radio, Jazz FM and Kiss FM, may have retained their
licences.
Hot favourites in the industry last night for the two new AM licences were a
sports station and a country music station as part of the Radio Authority's
policy of extending listener choice in commercial radio.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

930903

