FT933-10174

FT  05 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Haemocell hit by distribution hitch


   By DANIEL GREEN


SHARES IN Haemocell, the medical equipment company, fell 23p to 121p
yesterday after the group dropped the exclusive worldwide distributor for
its only product.
At the same time, the company estimated its loss for the current year to
August 31 would be at about last year's level of Pounds 1.69m and warned
that final severance terms agreed with the distributor, Stryker Corporation
of Chicago, may affect the figures further.
Haemocell's product, a blood cleansing machine called S350, only received
approval from the US Food and Drug Administration in October 1992. This was
followed by a rights issue and a launch on the US market through Stryker.
Mr Trevor Wilson, operations director and 10 per cent shareholder, gave few
details of the reasons for the cancellation of the contract because 'there
is a potential for litigation.' He said that the severance talks with
Stryker were amicable.
He acknowledged, however, that Stryker sales staff had only recently begun
their effort and that targets 'clearly had not been met.'
Haemocell had decided to end the relationship 'to make sure that there were
no adverse comments' about S350. There was a danger 'the product could have
been compromised.'
As a result of last year's cash call, the company has more than Pounds 4.4m
in the bank and Mr Wilson said there was no need to ask for more.
He has already begun the search for new distributors and offers so far
included one from Stryker's European operation. He said that finding a new
distributor for the US, likely to be by far its most important market, would
'take weeks or months'.
The machine purifies blood lost by a patient during an operation so that it
can be reinfused into the body a few minutes later.
The advantage is that the patient receives his or her own blood cutting down
the chance of infection from blood contaminated with, for example, HIV.
Each S350 costs abut Pounds 7,000, but a hospital also needs to buy
replaceable filters that cost about as much as donated blood.
The heavy capital outlay by comparison with conventional blood transfusion
methods has meant that there has been only limited interest from the
National Health Service where capital spending is tightly controlled.
Haemocell came to market at 85p in 1988.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930805

