FT931-3965

FT  12 MAR 93 / Survey of European Property (15): An unpredictable fledgling
 -For a foreign company trying to develop or acquire office space - even in
Moscow - property rights are still uncertain and the red tape is formidable
/ The CIS


   By LEYLA BOULTON


New legislation and new buildings springing up in Moscow underpin the
reappearance of a real estate market in Russia after seven decades of
Communist rule which nationalised state property and stifled private
enterprise.
But the workings of the fledgling market remain arbitrary, unpredictable and
limited to certain parts of the former Soviet Union.
International demand for office space and other real estate remains greater
in Moscow than anywhere else in the 15 newly-independent former Soviet
republics.
Other pockets where real estate is in demand but not necessarily available
include St Petersburg, Russia's second city and traditional 'window on the
west', and Kiev, the capital of Ukraine, the second most populous republic
which started privatisation only this month.
The Baltic republics, among the most open to foreign investment of the
former republics, also offer opportunities. Lithuania allows foreigners
leases of up to 99 years, while the Estonians allow outright foreign
ownership except where otherwise specified.
The TransCaucasian republics remain volatile (including Georgia, a land rich
in tourist potential but which is involved in a civil war), while the
Central Asian republics are remote or slow to open up to foreigners.
In Russia, in theory, everything is allowed except for outright foreign land
ownership: its unrestricted sale and purchase has been blocked so far by the
conservative parliament.
Although this has not yet been put to practice, the only land which
foreigners can own outright is that beneath enterprises bought in the
government's privatisation campaign.
But for a foreign company trying to develop, or acquire, office space even
in Moscow, property rights are still uncertain, the red-tape formidable, and
the need for reliable local advice and partners overwhelming in the absence
of clear-cut rules and business ethics.
'You need 12 to 14 signatures for any project, and the bureaucracy,
regulations and (lack of) ethics make life very difficult,' says Mr Haluk
Gercek of Mosenka, a joint venture between Enka, the Turkish construction
group, and Mosstroi, one of the capital's state-owned construction
authorities.
Having completed 1,200 sq m of office space which is being let out to
foreign companies such as Renault-Volvo, and Allianz, the German insurance
company, Mosenka is now contemplating negotiating the right to the freehold.
Its present lease on a building which it rebuilt with its own funds and bank
loans is for 25 years.
But Mr Alexander Papachristou, attorney with US law firm White and Case in
Moscow, insists that despite the problems Moscow real estate can be a
judicious investment opportunity. He believes that foreign developers and
banks risk being closed out for being too sceptical, for 'not being willing
to consider some risk and explore security opportunities that are within the
law.'
'Six months ago I would have said there were terrible problems with the law.
A lot of people are frustrated. But others are getting things done. A lot is
being done by Russian companies, joint ventures, small western companies,
not large real estate developers. The hotels are not being opened by the big
names.'
While he stresses the need for caution - ensuring for a start that Russian
parties to a deal have clear rights to the properties they are signing over
 -he admits that so far he has not heard of any foreign company buying a
building.
His own firm has a short lease on premises rented from the Central Telegraph
Office - a widespread sort of practice that involves leasing space from
state-owned organisations with lots of space and a need for cash.
Most newly-emerging Russian companies prefer not to spend their money on
expensive offices, not least to avoid attracting attention from the public,
the tax-inspectors and the Mafia. More often than not, they lease space from
state-owned enterprises, schools, or various institutes and public
associations strapped for cash for their upkeep.
There are basically two possibilities. One is acquiring state-owned property
sold by the city authorities - a path little tried since new rules were
imposed stipulating that this can only be done through auction, and not by
special arrangement with the mayor's office. The other - which remains
popular for being simpler even though it does not usually entail ownership -
is jointly developing and leasing from state-owned institutions that already
occupy buildings.
The main customers for offices meeting western standards are foreign
companies and rich Russian banks for whom solid-looking offices are part of
the business of inspiring confidence.
The demand for decent office space and the lack of competition in supplying
it has meant that prices are among the highest in the world, with a square
metre of western-style office space in central Moscow costing an average of
Dollars 700 a year.
'We are trying to keep the prices very high because there is no market here;
there is not much space of this quality,' admits Mr Konstantin Gusikov,
development director of Perestroika, a pioneering US-Soviet joint venture in
real estate which started up in 1988 and has finished several buildings. 'We
are doing western-style real estate and asking for western-style rent.'
One of the recent arrivals on the property development scene is McDonald's,
which is putting up an office building just down the road from the hamburger
restaurant it opened three years ago, gaining both a name and contacts to
help it obtain its prime site from the mayor's office.
While Mosenka says it has opted for a step-by-step approach, Mr Gusikov
complains the only thing Perestroika lacks to press on with an aggressive
building strategy is money.
It is looking for finance of Dollars 100m for each of five new sites in
central Moscow, and promises potential lenders secure title over the
buildings as collateral until debts are paid back.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

930312

