FT932-3318

FT  15 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Tory right dents PM's strategy


   By RALPH ATKINS


THE TORY right wing last night voiced bitter criticism of Sir Norman Fowler,
party chairman, and warned Mr John Major againsttax increases.
A private meeting of the Conservative 92 group heard a series of attacks on
Sir Norman - a close confidant of Mr Major - for his assault last week on Mr
Norman Lamont, the former chancellor.
One senior MP in the group said the party chairman's intervention had caused
'more damage' than Mr Lamont's resignation speech itself. 'There were lots
of nasty words about Sir Norman,' the MP said.
The 92 group's reaction reflects a widespread belief among Tory MPs that Sir
Norman had been instrumental in Mr Lamont's downfall.
Sir George Gardiner, the group's chairman, is expected to seek an early
meeting with the prime minister and is likely to pass on the criticism of
Sir Norman.
The 92 group met as it emerged that Mr Clarke is to launch later this month
a concerted Treasury operation to brief Tory MPs on the state of public
finances and to test views on how the spiralling deficit should be
controlled.
Most of the 92 group MPs spoke out against direct tax increases - although
there was support for sweeping public spending cuts and, possibly, some
increases in indirect taxes to raise revenue.
One 92 group member said the public spending review was 'a litmus test' for
the new chancellor.
Suggestions that Mr Clarke is winning support as a possible future Tory
leader among the right wing were being played down last night. Instead,
senior members of the 92 group reported 'almost unanimous' support for Mr
Major with only one or two MPs, out of almost 60 who attended last night's
meeting, speaking against him.
Many rightwing MPs still regard Mr Major as 'on probation' for a year,
however. 'The government must get it's act together quickly,' said one.
Members of the 92 group complain that in last month's reshuffle Mr Major
'missed an opportunity' to promote rightwingers. One said Mr Major had to
realise rightwingers were his 'natural allies'. Apart from on Maastricht,
most Tory rebels were from the left of the party, he added.
The meeting took place on the eve of a key meeting between the prime
minister, Mr Michael Portillo, treasury chief secretary, and social security
secretary Mr Peter Lilley to consider the extent to which the spending axe
should fall on welfare payments.
Lord Howe, the former chancellor, yesterday suggested that Tory election
pledges could be put aside, perhaps temporarily, and income tax increased in
order to tackle the public sector deficit.
'There is no surer way of destroying the recovery than to run indefinitely
into debt,' he told BBC radio.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

930615

