FT934-8747

FT  13 NOV 93 / Markets: C shares: a simple A to B - Serious Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


THESE ARE heady days for the investment trust sector. Stock markets are
riding high, discounts are narrow, investors are queueing to put more money
into the industry.
Apart from the various new issues (see pages VII and VIII), existing trusts
are taking advantage of the buoyant conditions to raise new funds. Govett
Emerging Markets is looking for Pounds 30m, Foreign & Colonial Smaller
Companies Pounds 40m, Amicable Smaller Enterprises Pounds 30m and Morgan
Grenfell Equity Income Trust Pounds 25m; all in the form of C shares.
The documentation for a C share issue may be complicated but the idea is
clever. When an investment trust raises new money, there will inevitably be
a phase in which the bulk of the new money is in cash. If all the shares
were lumped together in one pool, the effect for existing shareholders is
that their money would cease to be fully invested in equities. Should the
market rise suddenly, their shares would underperform.
Keeping the new money separate, in the form of C shares, avoids this
problem. The C shares are only converted into ordinary shares once the bulk
of the money is invested. As Hamish Buchan, analyst at NatWest Markets,
describes the process: 'It's as if a sister trust were being formed and they
were then merged later on an agreed basis.'
The C share structure also avoids the problem of market risk during the time
the offer is open. Under a conventional rights issue, the rights price is
set at a discount to the share price at the time of the announcement. Should
the stock market fall sufficiently for the shares to drop below the rights
price, no one would want to take up their rights and the issue would fail.
For a C share issue, the trust simply sets the price of the C shares at a
nice round number (often 100p). When the time comes for conversion, the
trust managers simply arrange the switch on an asset basis. If the C shares
have an asset value of 100p, and the ordinary shares have an asset value of
200p, then two C shares will convert into one ordinary share.
Another advantage for existing shareholders is that the C shares bear all
the costs of the issue. 'It's a very clean, neat and fair system,' says
Buchan.
But should existing shareholders take up the C shares they are offered?
There are some attractions. A C share issue usually occurs when the existing
shares are trading at a premium to asset value. (If the existing shares were
trading at a wide discount, there would be no incentive for investors to buy
C shares and thus no chance of a successful issue.)
Since a premium is evidence of demand for shares exceeding supply, the issue
of new shares is a sensible way of soaking up demand. If the premium is wide
enough, the C shares could be more attractive than buying more ordinaries.
Apart from such technical factors, the most important decision to make is:
do you want to commit more money to this investment area? If you already
have 20 per cent of your portfolio in emerging markets, then subscribing to
a C share issue might make you over-committed to a volatile sector.
If you had not even thought about buying more shares in the trust before you
saw details of the C share issue, then perhaps the issue is not for you. You
will be no worse off if you ignore it.
There is a more general point. History has tended to show that the times
when investment trusts enjoy helter-skelter expansion are often the most
dangerous times to buy their shares. The motto is invest in haste, repent at
leisure.
A danger signal can be seen in the price of investment trust warrants, which
have tended to rise sharply in price shortly after issue. Some investors are
apparently stagging such issues; selling the shares in early trading but
hanging on to the warrants.
What can easily happen is that the shares fall to say 95p (compared with an
issue price of 100p) but the warrants (often issued on a one-for-five basis)
shoot to 60p. The investor has effectively made a profit of 7p. 'Value' has
been created, apparently out of nothing.
But such alchemy cannot succeed for ever. A warrant issue is merely a
deferred rights issue, after all. At some point, new shares will be issued
and the existing shareholder's stakes will be diluted.
Warrant prices are a factor of the volatility of the assets within the trust
and the time left for exercise. (The greater the volatility and the longer
the time period, the more chance there is for profitable exercise and the
higher the price investors are prepared to pay.)
But according to Colin McLean of Scottish Value Management, who runs the
Warrants and Value Trust, some of the very long dated warrants seem
currently to be overpriced and his trust is looking for value in the
shorter-dated area.
Investors should remember that warrants are highly-geared and speculative
securities and are likely to be at their most speculative when stock markets
are trading at all-time highs.

The Financial Times


London Page II

931113

