FT933-12807

FT  22 JUL 93 / Easy option or unnecessary risk: A look at the debate
surrounding the explosive growth of new financial instruments


   By RICHARD WATERS


They could be about to bring the world's financial system to its knees, or
they could be among the most beneficial products created by the financial
industry. The trouble is, so few people understand derivatives that the
debate about these new-fangled instruments has hardly got beyond a handful
of bank trading floors.
Derivatives - the term covers futures, options, swaps and a growing array of
more arcane products - are instruments whose value is based on some other
asset, such as a currency, interest rate or share price. An option on a
currency, for example, gives the holder the right to buy the currency at a
predetermined level from the person who sold the option: if the currency
rises on the foreign exchange markets, the value of the option will go up.
Options like these may be used by corporate treasurers and others to hedge
their future currency cashflows - or just to speculate.
To their supporters, such instruments have brought new flexibility to the
management of financial risks for companies, investors, government agencies
and others. To their critics, they have opened a Pandora's box, creating
complex risks that few users and traders of derivatives know how to handle.
The financial industry had its own say yesterday in the shape of a report
from the Group of 30, a Washington-based think-tank. It concludes that
derivatives make a 'favourable and substantial' contribution to economic
activity - though some banks need to think harder about how they manage the
risks attached to derivatives.
Other studies this year have reached a similar conclusion, including one
from the Bank for International Settlements, the Basle-based club of central
bankers. The view that derivatives have been generally beneficial could yet
be challenged, however, as financial regulators, particularly in the US,
continue to scrutinise the subject.
Derivatives have become popular because they make it possible to hedge or
take risks in a way that could not be done before, and because they make
existing hedging and risk-taking cheaper. Also, by using an interest-rate
swap, a company can change the structure of its liabilities, exchanging a
fixed-rate liability for a floating-rate one (the entity on the other side
of the swap - usually a bank - takes the opposite position). Such liability
management is entirely new.
The returns on assets can be shifted around in much the same way: a
shareholder could swap the return on equity for the return on, say, a
commodities index. Derivatives have thus given a whole new meaning to the
way companies, investors and others manage their assets and liabilities.
Derivatives have also brought down borrowing costs for large borrowers by
making it possible for them to take advantage of pricing inefficiencies in
different markets. For tax, regulatory or other reasons, a company may be
able to borrow more cheaply in a currency it does not need than in one it
does.
The World Bank, one of the biggest borrowers internationally, raised Dollars
3.6bn-worth of currencies for which it did not have a use in the 12 months
to the end of June, swapping the money into the dollars, yen and D-Marks
which it lends. This enabled it to reach a wide range of investors around
the world, says Ms Jessica Einhorn, the bank's treasurer: 'It allows us to
use the world's capital markets to diversify our borrowings into a pool of
currencies, and to lock in our borrowing at a lower cost.' The bank reckons
it saved 40 basis points (0.4 percentage point) a year in interest charges
in the past 12 months.
McDonald's, the US-based hamburger chain, uses the swaps market to reduce
the cost of financing new hamburger restaurants abroad. In Denmark last
year, a swap helped save 1.5 percentage points a year on the financing costs
of new restaurants. Mr Carelton Pearl, treasurer, says: 'I'm just trying to
get the lowest-cost hamburgers for our customers.'
Thriving markets have developed in swaps and other new financial products,
in the process creating one of the most profitable activities for the
handful of large banks which dominate the business. In the first half of
this year, trading profits at the biggest US banks climbed sharply, much of
it driven by derivatives.
Sophisticated computer systems and highly qualified staff are needed to
price derivatives correctly and to enable the banks which sell derivatives
to manage their own risks. This has limited the number of institutions able
to trade, and added a premium to their efforts. Companies and investors have
been prepared to pay the banks' big profit margins on such products for the
benefits they convey - a clear case of a technological leap forward that has
benefited those financial institutions which made the investment early
enough.
Derivatives look set to revolutionise the banking industry for other reasons
as well. The business of taking deposits and making loans - the traditional
credit intermediation process of banks - has declined as large companies
have turned to the securities and commercial paper markets to raise money
from investors directly. But by setting themselves up in the derivatives
business, banks have been making themselves useful again to big companies.
While loan growth has stopped or gone into reverse at most big commercial
banks in the US and UK, there has been a steady growth in the credit risks
taken on by banks through their derivatives activities.
The process has been most marked at the US banks JP Morgan and Bankers
Trust, which have moved fastest into the derivatives business. At Bankers
Trust, off-balance sheet credit risks from derivatives now exceed loans
recorded on its balance sheet. Bankers Trust and JP Morgan have become the
most profitable big commercial banks in the US, making a return on equity of
more than 20 per cent each last year. Other big banks struggled to get into
double figures.
It is not difficult to see why regulators have expressed concern at the pace
of growth in derivatives. Mr Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, warned last year: 'High-tech banking and finance
has its place, but it's not all it's cracked up to be . . . The growth and
complexity of off-balance sheet activities and the nature of the credit,
price and settlement risk they entail should give us all pause for concern.'
The banking industry has hardly covered itself with glory in the past
decade, stumbling from the third-world debt crisis at the start of the 1980s
to the popping of the credit-induced bubble in property and other asset
markets at the end of the decade. If bankers are unable to handle credit
risks they have dealt with for generations, can they deal with the new risks
associated with derivatives?
In addition, the stock market crash of 1987 has left a lingering suspicion
of high-tech trading techniques. Computer-driven 'portfolio insurance',
which was meant to limit the risk of loss from a fall in share prices, was
suspected of having hastened the collapse in 1987. To critics, the safety
offered by the sort of hedging techniques used by derivatives traders could
turn out to be just as illusory.
There is some evidence to support this fear. Last September's currency
crisis in the European exchange rate mechanism led some interest rate
derivatives markets to dry up, making it impossible for derivatives traders
to hedge the risks they were running. The financial markets had proved more
volatile and less liquid than derivatives traders had assumed.
Although the prospect that a bank's trading strategy will go wrong prompts
the most frequent expressions of concern, the real danger from derivatives
probably lies elsewhere - in the lack of an adequate infrastructure to
support these fast-growing markets, and a shortage of people, including
senior bank executives, who understand derivatives.
The lack of infrastructure stems from the speed with which the markets have
grown: the legal, accounting and regulatory framework of the financial
markets has failed to keep up. Also, banks have put more effort into their
'front offices' (the traders and supporting computer systems which conduct
the business) than their 'back offices' (the administrative support
functions such as internal valuation and reporting, and settlement).
Without efficient administration, trading activities could founder. As Mr
Bill Rhodes, vice-chairman of Citicorp, says: 'Very often that's the one
thing that's missed. If there's one thing that concerns me, it's that the
back office is set up properly.'

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930722

