FT934-11368

FT  01 NOV 93 / Economics Notebook: Hungary builds capitalism without
capital


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


Surprises have lurked behind every corner of eastern Europe's tortuous
transition from a planned to a market economy - many of them unpleasant.
Often, the first to encounter unexpected difficulties has been Hungary,
which has pioneered reform since the late 1960s. So the recent survey of
Hungary published by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, and especially its focus on the critical role played by credit
markets, contains a broader message for the post-communist states.
The OECD found that Hungary's early, albeit hesitant start, did little to
ease the pain of reform. 'Despite Hungary's status as the most
Western-market oriented of the centrally planned economies, the post-1989
economic transition still came as an abrupt and wrenching shock.'
Hope for recovery has been vested in the privatisation process, but
dismantling the state economy is taking longer than expected. In Hungary's
case the OECD cites estimates that 18 per cent of state enterprise assets
were under private control by the end of 1992, well short of the
government's target of privatising half the state sector by 1994.
Privatisation of state assets is not the whole story. Start-ups and
greenfield investments have boosted the private sector to about 30 per cent
of GDP, but even that has been far from enough to offset the contraction of
state-owned industry and avert recession.
Up to now Hungary has relied the most on foreign investment to flesh out the
private sector, attracting more than Dollars 5.5bn (Pounds 3.64bn) since
1988, over half the total for central and eastern Europe. But foreign
investment alone cannot transform the economy.
Most Hungarian consumer goods companies attractive to multinationals have
been sold and foreign economic penetration has come close to its political
limits. Increasingly foreign investors are looking to Poland which has four
times the population of Hungary or the Czech Republic - and an economy
stimulated by the dynamism of home-grown Polish entrepreneurs.
The growing stress on home-grown capitalism means closer attention must be
paid to solving the dilemma of how to build capitalism without capital.
One recourse is to distribute ownership through voucher schemes like the
Czech Republic or Poland's investment fund -based mass privatisation
programme. Hungary is belatedly implementing a more modest 'small investor
share buying programme'. But its conversion to the virtues of mass
privatisation has been half-hearted. Distribution cannot in itself provide
enterprises with the capital injection most desperately need.
An obvious solution is to mobilise household savings which were negligible
under communism but have since surged. In Hungary the savings ratio rose to
15.8 per cent in 1991, dropping slightly to 13.2 per cent in 1992. But
higher savings alone cannot stimulate investment in the absence of
functioning banks and capital markets.
This was the conclusion of a recent World Bank internal aide-memoire which
stated that Hungary's financial sector was 'unable to finance the transition
to a market economy'. The OECD's survey was more circumspect, but the urgent
need for financial sector reform runs like a thread through the report.
The financial sector effectively means the banks. The OECD, for example,
dismissed the Budapest stock market as of 'minor importance', although this
year's boom in the Polish stock market indicates that equity markets do have
a future.
But the banks risk seizing up. In Hungary real lending rates remained above
10 per cent in 1991 and 1992. Despite growing liquidity, banks curtailed
their lending to the enterprise sector in 1992 while the spread between
their deposit and lending rates rose from about 4 per cent to a gaping 11
per cent.
Behind this phenomenon lies Hungary's status as the first east European
country to implement western-style bankruptcy, accounting and banking acts.
The new laws have forced many Hungarian companies and banks to face their
real, and previously hidden, financial plight. One in six registered
companies, producing about 14 per cent of GDP, have been affected by the
bankruptcy legislation, according to the OECD.
To finance provisions against non-performing loans and rebuild capital,
banks increased spreads. But high lending rates make default more likely as
only the most desperate enterprises apply for loans. This process led to a
'credit crunch' in Hungary last year.
Throughout the region government hunger for higher revenue is compounding
the difficulties of the banking system. Until 1991, taxation of banks' paper
profits was an important source of revenue, equivalent to about 2 per cent
of GDP in Hungary's case. Despite the current plight of financial
institutions, governments continue to drain their liquidity.
Recapitalisation of the banks would reduce spreads and help stimulate
lending to the corporate sector. But here again, the OECD says, budgetary
economy has conflicted with bank consolidation. Hungary's effort last year
to shore up balance sheets was conducted on the cheap.
Budapest, supported by the promise of a World Bank credit of Dollars
200m-Dollars 300m, is now planning another, more comprehensive attempt. But
the government has warned of a rise in the budget deficit to Ft350bn (Pounds
4.41bn)next year, around 9 per cent of GDP. This would exceed targets set by
the International Monetary Fund, so the temptation to cut corners on bank
consolidation remains.
Lest Hungary despair, however the OECD notes: 'The visible size of the
problems does not mean that the difficulties in Hungary are bigger than
elsewhere in central and eastern Europe; rather it may be a sign that things
are coming into the open earlier than elsewhere. This could mean that
solutions are found more quickly, as issues are recognised in public
discussion and measures are being debated and implemented.'
That may console Hungary. It is less heartening for its east European
neighbours.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

931101

