FT932-6989

FT  26 MAY 93 / Big test for Large ambition


THE REPORT on UK financial services regulation published yesterday by Mr
Andrew Large, chairman of the Securities and Investments Board, has as its
subtitle the phrase 'Making the two tier system work.' That may also be its
epitaph. By exploring what it will take to make the current system of
regulation work, Mr Large has cast a vivid light on the difficulty of the
task.
The upper tier to which he refers is the SIB. The second tier is its
alphabet soup of 'practitioner-based' self-regulatory organisations such as
SFA, Lautro, Imro and Fimbra.
Mr Large is open in his criticisms of the way these bodies have worked in
the past. He believes that in the early years, too much attention was
focused on rule-making. The second phase of the SIB's history - a more
relaxed approach to regulation known as the New Settlement - delivered less
than it promised in the way of lightness of touch, while failing to keep the
SROs up to the mark.
The SIB also allowed itself to become a rival to the SROs, by directly
supervising too many financial services businesses which preferred to deal
with it rather than one of the SROs.
Performance standards
'The question is not whether there should be change,' says Mr Large, 'but
what changes should be made.' He therefore proposes to change the SIB's role
to one of setting performance standards for its flock of SROs, and of
watching over them in a 'more exacting' fashion, while withdrawing as much
as possible from the business of direct regulation.
This approach lays bare the tension at the heart of the regulatory system,
between protecting the public interest and leaving the industry free to
grow.
Mr Large is cranking up the tension by stressing the SIB's unalloyed
commitment to its public interest role and by promising to keep the SROs on
a tighter leash. He says the SROs will welcome the clearer standards to
which they will be kept, and will relish the challenge posed by the SIB's
willingness to move into their patches to pick up on any derelictions of
duty.
Maybe. It is just as likely, however, that the process of setting standards
and establishing a new relationship between the SIB and the SROs will usher
in a new period of navel-gazing, negotiation and backbiting inside the
regulatory system. Such a process would divert attention from what Mr Large
rightly stresses as the main priority - the enforcement of the public
interest in investor protection.
Many risks
His answer to this worry is, in essence: trust me. He is aware of the risk,
he says, and will not let it happen. In any case, what is the alternative?
No one wants the upheaval involved in a whole new regulatory system; and the
'single-tier' option (in which the SIB would subsume the SROs) would still
need the sort of relationships now to be developed. If in the end, the
two-tier system fails, then the new single-tier regulator can be based on
the structure and attitudes now being sought.
Given the patent lack of political enthusiasm for new legislation, this may
be a realistic view. It is none the less a disappointing one. A more radical
approach to separating out the regulatory system's four tasks - the
detection of fraud; the protection of consumers against unscrupulous selling
practices; the prudential supervision of financial services business; and
the enforcement of 'fair dealing' in professional markets - would have been
welcome.
In the absence of such an approach, too much of a burden falls on Mr Large's
good intentions. Still, they are not a negligible force. He has already
demonstrated them by telling the proposed new retail SRO, the Personal
Investment Authority, to pull its socks up, and he seems prepared to take a
tougher line with the insurance industry than his predecessors. Also, he has
some challenging ideas: on plea-bargaining, on the need for a 'central
policeman' for the enforcement of securities law and on the impact of
changing market structures.
Mr Large has chosen to stake his success not on his skill in drawing new
structures, but on his ability to deliver within the existing one. The test
lies ahead.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

930526

