FT934-10155

FT  06 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: An easier road to retirement - The
attractions of a scheme free from Revenue restrictions


   By MARILYN MCKEEVER


MANY people may already be aware of the advantages of a funded unapproved
retirement benefits scheme (Furbs). But they may not know that its
attractions can be increased if it is established offshore.
Although a Furbs is called a retirement benefits scheme, it is free from the
restrictions that the Inland Revenue applies to approved pension schemes.
There are no limits on the amount of either contributions or benefits, and
employees can take all their benefits as a tax-free lump sum.
They do not have to wait until they have actually retired to take their
money, either; there is great flexibility over the time when they can
cash-in the scheme and take their tax-free sum. And if employees die before
taking their benefits, the trustees can pay the whole of the fund to their
family free of inheritance tax.
The ban on self-investment that applies to approved schemes does not apply
to a Furbs, so the trustees can invest in shares in the employer company or
loans to it. This can be a useful source of finance if a company is
family-owned and managed.
The employer's payments are tax-deductible and do not attract employer's
National Insurance Contributions. The employee pays tax on the employer's
payments to a Furbs in the same way as on any other bonus. So long as the
employee's total remuneration takes account of this tax liability, it need
not be a drawback to establishing a Furbs.
All these advantages apply to any Furbs, whether set up in the UK or abroad.
The difference lies in the tax treatment.
The rate of income and capital gains tax on investments in a UK Furbs is
limited to the 25 per cent basic rate. This represents an immediate saving
of 15 per cent compared with the tax rate which the employee would pay on
the same investments.
So, a UK Furbs is an attractive investment vehicle in its own right. But the
attractions increase considerably if the employer establishes the scheme
offshore.
Normally, a Furbs would be a trust; thus, it would be 'offshore' if the
trustees were themselves resident outside the UK, perhaps in the Channel
Islands.
The major advantage of an offshore Furbs is that it is completely free of
CGT. This represents a 25 per cent tax advantage over a UK Furbs - a nil
rate of tax compared with the basic rate.
This favourable tax treatment would apply only if the Furbs was part of an
'ordinary commercial arrangement.' Exactly what constitutes such an
arrangement depends, of course, on the facts of the case. But there should
not be a problem where contributions are part of the remuneration package of
a senior employee who is not otherwise connected with the company - as a
major shareholder, for example.
More caution is needed, though, when the employee is also a substantial
shareholder. If payments to the Furbs are excessively generous, the Revenue
might argue that the company's contributions contain an element of 'bounty'
 -ie, that it intends to give the employee a benefit over and above that
which it would give to an unconnected employee as a reward for his services.
Indeed, the Revenue could take this further and say that the company had
acted as the mere puppet of the shareholder/director so that the Furbs trust
was 'really' established indirectly by the director.
If the Revenue succeeded in showing that there was a non-commercial element
of generosity in the arrangements, the employee would pay tax on the capital
gains made by the Furbs trustees when he received payments from the scheme.
While he would at least have deferred the CGT, he would pay tax at between
40 and 64 per cent when he received the money.
If the Revenue took the view that the individual himself had 'really'
established the Furbs, he would face a tax bill when the trustees made
capital gains, as if he had made them himself.
The trustees would normally pay tax on any dividend and other income from
their UK investments. They would not pay out the income to the employee
during the life of the Furbs, but would accumulate it and add it to capital.
When the trustees paid out the fund, the employee would normally be taxed on
the accumulated income as if it were his own.
Trustees should, therefore, adopt an investment policy which maximises
capital gains and minimises income. They should consider such investments as
zero coupon preference shares, capital shares, investment trust warrants,
second-hand qualifying life policies and non-dividend-paying shares in
private companies (typically, the employee's family company) - indeed any
investment that shows mainly capital returns with a low income.
Where the Furbs is a genuinely commercial arrangement and is set up offshore
for a reason other than the avoidance of UK tax (perhaps because the
employee is an international employee who is seconded abroad for long
periods), the tax position is even more favourable. In this case, the
employee would have no liability on the Furbs income, even if he were UK
resident at the time he took his benefits.
A UK Furbs is an attractive investment vehicle, combining flexibility with a
favourable tax regime. An offshore Furbs can provide an even more favourable
CGT environment, but at the price of a possible income tax charge.
Where the employee's circumstances involve an overseas element, this tax
charge may be avoided. Even if this is not the case, the trustees can
contain or eliminate the potential income tax by an appropriate investment
policy, and the high-earning employee might well feel it is a small price to
pay for long term freedom from CGT.
Marilyn McKeever is a solicitor in the private client department of the
London firm of Gouldens.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

931106

