FT934-8470

FT  16 NOV 93 / Move to let schools mortgage buildings for funds


   By JOHN AUTHERS


SECONDARY schools in England and Wales are to be allowed to mortgage their
buildings to raise funds under plans the Department for Education is
preparing.
According to Whitehall officials, Mr John Patten, the education secretary,
and Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, are working on
a plan to allow schools to raise private sector finance for building
projects.
The move is part of the government's 'private finance initiative' aimed at
increasing private investment in the public sector and finding new ways of
cutting the Pounds 50bn public-sector deficit.
Many school buildings are in severe disrepair and private funds are seen as
necessary.
At first, only schools that have opted out of local education authority
control will be able to use the facility. Buildings of maintained schools
are still officially owned by local authorities. More than 1,000 schools
have opted out so far.
However, the government is understood to want eventually to extend the move
to all 4,000 schools in England and Wales, including local authority
maintained schools. It is also considering proposals to remove
grant-maintained schools' funding from the public sector borrowing
requirement.
An announcement is hoped for within weeks. The new loan facilities might be
possible for the next financial year, although 1995-96 is more likely.
Two crucial factors will determine whether the scheme succeeds: the
valuation banks place on school buildings, some of which can by law be used
only for educational purposes, and whether the government will underwrite
the loans.
Banks would worry about repossessing a school that failed to keep up with
its payments, especially if it could not be easily used for another purpose.
Banks reacted cautiously to the prospect last night. Barclays said the bank
already had numerous business customers among grant-maintained schools and
was interested in extending within the sector. It already lends widely to
universities and colleges.
The Department for Education was uncertain whether the Treasury would
underwrite any loans made to schools.
According to Barclays: 'If the government offered guarantees, then that
would make it very attractive.'
Similar measures to relax controls over using publicly funded assets as
securities for loans have already been introduced to aid investment in
universities and other higher education colleges.
They now receive more than Pounds 1bn each year from private sources,
according to Mr Patten.
Radical report, Page 11
Joe Rogaly, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931116

