FT934-11527

FT  30 OCT 93 / The Financial Times Guide To Secondary Education (3):
Charters - first among equals / John Authers visits three very different
schools, each of which excels academically


   By JOHN AUTHERS


KATE MORSE, head girl of Charters School in Sunningdale, Berkshire, wants to
make something quite clear: 'I hope you don't think we're just a nice school
full of nice people and that's why we get good results. This area isn't like
that at all.'
Charters is one of the top schools in the UK, ranking 210th in the FT
survey. But unlike the highest flyers it has achieved this with a fully
comprehensive intake. Nobody in the catchment area can be turned away.
That catchment area is wealthier than the national average, but the towns of
Ascot and Sunningdale are not as affluent as their reputations might
suggest. Besides, its GCSE results - which show 60.5 per cent of Charters
pupils passing at least five grades A to C - put the school far ahead of
other Berkshire schools, where on average only 41.6 per cent of GCSE
candidates did this well. Its A-levels make it the third-ranked mixed
comprehensive to stay under local authority control in the UK.
A closer look shows that the school is far removed from the stereotyped
image of the vast and impersonal comprehensive.
Steve Pratt, head of sixth form, does not regard league tables as a fair way
to assess a school's worth. He believes that the high ranking comes from the
school's policy of using the National Record of Achievement scheme to
monitor pupils regularly.
Each pupil is issued with a folder, in which targets and reports are
accumulated at meetings with tutors throughout the pupil's school career.
This way the children who use the school's large and well-equipped centre
for special educational needs are given the extra care they need.
It also allows the truly talented pupils to be identified and nurtured.
Pratt says with pride that his staff can usually predict the A-level grades
their children will get a year in advance.
Charters encourages pupils to stay on for the sixth form with a wider range
of A-levels than most independent schools can offer. Theatre studies and
physical education were added this year to a list which already included
History of Art, Government & Politics, Greek, Russian, Spanish, and
Sociology. Vocational qualifications are now being added.
The school's version of the prefect system also helps to maintain interest.
Sixth-formers act as liaison officers for tutor groups in lower forms and
sit on the school council, where issues such as recycling waste bins are
discussed with an intensity reminiscent of university junior common rooms.
Even in the sixth form there is no such thing as a free period at Charters,
with time not spent in lessons occupied either by private study, or by a
range of optional extra courses including interviewing skills, games
leadership and business French.
Sixth-formers are also encouraged to spend time helping both children with
learning problems lower in the school and autistics from a neighbouring
specialist unit. Two flourishing Young Enterprise companies are in business.
Do the potential university entrants lose anything by going to school with
their academic inferiors? Barry Mitchell, the headmaster and a veteran of
secondary moderns in greater London, dismisses the idea as ridiculous. 'We
do divide pupils into sets depending on which subject they are studying as
they move through the school. Therefore at appropriate times in their
development pupils are brought together to work with their peers
academically.
'Wherever you look you have got a pleasant atmosphere and a pleasant
approach by the teaching staff. You don't get that by setting in motion
systems which will divide pupils,' says Mitchell.
The school is well-maintained and adequately resourced, although its
facilities do not match the best of the independent sector.
But no sixth-formers believe they have missed out on anything. Parents
considering spending good money to send their children to one of the
Berkshire independent schools which finished below Charters might bear in
mind another candid comment from Kate Morse, when asked if she would have
preferred to attend an independent school: 'I can't see the point. They just
don't have the the taste of real life and the mix and variety in their lives
that we do.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

931030

