FT934-10003

FT  08 NOV 93 / Arts: Imagination and idiosyncrasy in Pittsburgh -
Architecture


   By COLIN AMERY


Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania may well become an important stopping-off place on
the itinerary of the architecturally curious traveller. Last week's opening
of the Heinz Architectural Centre at the Carnegie Museum of Art, made
possible by a gift of Dollars 10m from the Drue Heinz Foundation, revealed
an imaginative and idiosyncratic approach to the exposition of architecture.
Pittsburgh's business giants - Carnegie, Mellon, Frick, Heinz, Westinghouse,
Alcoa - pioneered the mass production of steel, oil, glass and aluminium as
well as astonishingly productive modern methods of food processing. It is
not surprising, then, that the rapid growth of this industrial city resulted
in an environment more renowned for pollution than beauty.
But the other side of this thunder of industrial activity is the continuing
generosity of business benefactors and their family foundations. The
standard was set by Andrew Carnegie, who had a great belief in the value of
universal literacy and education. His Carnegie Institute is a unique
combination of library, art museum, concert hall, and museum of natural
history and science, a living demonstration of his belief that 'it is the
mind that makes the body rich'.
A perambulation through the vast marble hall of the Carnegie reveals both
the overwhelming wealth of Pittsburgh's turn-of-the-century golden age and
the conviction that architecture should be queen of the arts.
The Great Hall of Architecture in Pittsburgh is one of the only three
significant collection of architectural casts left in the world. Carnegie
financed the making of 1,200 of the finest models in architecture and
sculpture, which he exhibited in a great hall based upon the ancient
mausoleum of Halicarnassus. The greatest triumph was the casting of the
whole of the west front of the abbey church of St Gilles-du-Gard in France.
This superb facade was the appropriate backdrop for the opening ceremony of
the Heinz Centre.
In planning for the new centre, curator Christopher Monkhouse and donor Drue
Heinz were right not to attempt to rival the scale of the existing
collections. The mission of the new centre is simple: 'To further the
appreciation and understanding of architecture.' With no specific
territorial or chronological limits, it has begun to collect and interpret
architectural drawings, photographs and models. The only area of particular
concentration is to be the architecture of Pittsburgh itself and Western
Pennsylvania.
In 1991 the New York firm Cicognani Kalla was chosen from a short list of
four architects to design the new centre inside the giant, empty shell of an
enormous old gallery space. The decision to create an intimate series of
small galleries around a high central entrance hall was clearly the right
one. As the visitor leaves the main museum's huge white marble hall of
sculpture, the first impression of the Heinz Centre is a high hall flooded
with golden light. This tall, narrow hall is crossed by bridges and was
designed as a place for the display of three-dimensional architectural
elements. The walls are bright yellow plaster created in the Italian
tradition of 'stucco-lustro', where the pigment is mixed into wet plaster to
create a more intense surface colour. Two green copper dormer windows from
the Carnegie New York mansion have been incorporated into the design, adding
a sense of outdoor architecture to the indoor space.
A domestic scale gives the whole centre an intimacy which is enhanced by the
use of dark wood and strong colours. Inevitably the inspiration of the Sir
John Soane Museum in London is cited by the architects - quite rightly as it
has the same eclectic selection of both objects and spaces.
An important acquisition for the centre has been the room that Frank Lloyd
Wright designed for his own office in San Francisco in 1951. It is a classic
example of Wright's ingenuity, creating three diverse areas within a modest
warehouse space. The office was dismantled in 1988 by Aaron Green, who had
worked with Wright and who personally supervised the recreation of the room
in Pittsburgh. It is at least as interesting a room as the Kauffmann office
on show at the Victoria & Albert Museum, but because it was Wright's own
office it has a more vivid and poignant atmosphere.
On the upper floors of the centre students will enjoy the new library, a
startlingly vivid pink room which will come to life when the fireplace is
installed. Its first major exhibition is called The Shock of the Old, a
display of architectural drawings from Robert Adam to Frank Lloyd Wright
that attempts to demonstrate that innovation in architectural design is
nothing new. The drawings are densely hung in three galleries on a
typological basis. Buildings for transportation include Frank Lloyd Wright's
twin bridge project for Pittsburgh as well as a range of designs for
airports, gas stations and American railways. In the second gallery the
commercial architecture is contrasted with ecclesiastical buildings; while
in the third small room the collection is concentrated upon domestic
architecture, both European and American.
A second, smaller exhibition displays work by Cicognani Kalla, an impressive
summary of the first eight years' work of this young New York practice. Much
of its work is domestic, which has clearly influenced the design of the
Heinz Centre. Visiting it is rather like paying a call on a colourful and
original collector in his own house and, unlike so many new museum
facilities, this one has colour, domestic scale and a strong sense of its
own personality. This is a great achievement in so new a venture; its
founders were carefully guided away from the surgical and anonymous
whiteness of so many new museums. There is an enjoyable and old-fashioned
eclecticism about the new Heinz Centre that will upset purists and delight
the curiousity of the public.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

931108

