FT931-3958

FT  12 MAR 93 / Peace mediators seek help from Milosevic


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER


   PARIS


THE international mediators seeking a peace settlement in Bosnia-Hercegovina
yesterday tried to enlist the help of Serbia's President Slobodan Milosevic
in persuading the Bosnian Serbs to accept their plan for a Bosnian state
divided into 10 semi-autonomous provinces.
But the meeting between Mr Cyrus Vance, Lord Owen and Mr Milosevic, hosted
at the Elysee Palace by President Francois Mitterrand of France, was
undermined even before it started by statements by both the Bosnian Moslems
and Serbs that they were not prepared to endorse the peace plan in its
present form.
Mr Vance and Lord Owen had hoped to isolate Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian
Serb leader. But they were thwarted when President Alija Izetbegovic, the
Moslem Bosnian president, said on Wednesday he would not return to the peace
talks in New York at the end of this week to sign the mediators' map, as he
had previously intimated.
Mr Izetbegovic has delayed his return to New York until the middle of next
week at the earliest, pending further consultations with other members of
the joint Bosnian presidency, several of whom, including Mr Ejup Ganic, the
vice-president, are reported to be strongly opposed to the Vance-Owen plan.
When Mr Izetbegovic finally returns to New York, he is expected to take with
him demands for changes to the map which will almost certainly prove
unacceptable to Mr Karadzic.
In a letter to the British newspaper, the Daily Telegraph, published
yesterday, Mr Karadzic warned the mediators and the international community
against any attempt to isolate or oust him. Stressing that the Vance-Owen
map was acceptable neither to the Serbs nor the Moslems, the Bosnian Serb
leader said: 'We should recognise that fact and not believe that assent can
be imposed.'
Before meeting Mr Milosevic, Mr Vance emphasised that the mediators would
talk 'totally frankly' about the problems facing them.
They were expected to tell him that, if the Bosnian Serbs refused to
subscribe to the peace plan, Serbia would face tougher United Nations
sanctions. These would include total diplomatic isolation and draconian new
measures to stop supplies reaching the country along the Danube.
Lord Owen said the Paris talks offered the Bosnian Serbs an opportunity 'to
move ahead of the game', by which he is understood to mean that, by
accepting the peace plan now, they could isolate the Moslems, instead of the
other way round.
It remains questionable, however, whether President Milosevic would be
prepared to exert great pressure on his close ally Mr Karadzic to accept the
peace plan as long as the Bosnian Moslems remained uncommitted to it.
President Mitterrand, who has always believed the EC should take a leading
role in solving the crisis of the former Yugoslavia, had a long telephone
conversation on Wednesday evening with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany to
discuss the Bosnian situation.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

930312

