FT933-12728

FT  22 JUL 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee growers' retention
scheme gaining in credibility


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


THE LATIN American coffee retention scheme looks increasingly likely to
start as planned at the beginning of October, according to London analysts.
'We have got to give a lot of credibility to the retention scheme,' said Mr
Lawrence Eagles, analyst with GNI, the London futures brokers, yesterday.
'The retention scheme is gaining in credibility,' agreed Mr Peter Kettle, of
ED & F. Man, the London trade house.
The scheme aims to take 20 per cent of participating countries' production
off the world market. Producers want to force prices well above the
historically low levels that they have suffered since the collapse of the
International Coffee Organisation's export quota system in 1989.
Producing countries believe that a cumulative Dollars 10bn has been wiped
off the value of the coffee they have sold over the past four years. Last
March saw the collapse in disarray of the last of a series of meetings at
the International Coffee Organisation aimed at reviving the international
agreement.
Colombia and the Central American producers of top quality arabica coffees
immediately started to explore ways of forcing the market up. The
breakthrough came at the beginning of this month at a meeting in San
Salvador when Brazil, the biggest producer, proposed the retention of 20 per
cent of exports.
When the New York arabica futures traders returned from their Independence
Day holiday, prices rose by more than 5 cents a lb. London's second position
robusta contract touched Dollars 1,000 a tonne.
However, widespread scepticism soon emerged about the ability of the
producers to create viable rules for their retention scheme. That scepticism
appears to be evaporating.
On Tuesday Colombia and Central American producers said after a meeting in
Guatemala City that they had sufficient controls to implement a retention
scheme in October. 'Colombia and Central American countries are ready to put
retention into practice. Each one of the countries has rules to retain
coffee and to control retention efficiently,' they told the Reuter news
agency.
Eight African countries, including the Ivory Coast, Uganda and Kenya, are
thought to be ready to join the scheme, according to a report from
Knight-Ridder. African producers are due to meet on August 16 and 17 in
Kampala.
If those eight countries back the Latin Americans, the proportion of world
coffee production represented by the scheme will rise from just over 50 per
cent to more than 64 per cent.
The Latin American countries meet in Rio de Janeiro on July 29 and 30 to
thrash out the workings of the scheme and officially to inaugurate a new
Association of Coffee Producing Countries.
Last week coffee prices were once again on the upward path over fears of
frost in Brazil. The fears have disappeared, but prices have not retreated
far. Last night the London September price closed at Dollars 997 a tonne -
compared with Dollars 926 just before the San Salvador meeting and Dollars
862 a tonne as the ICO talks collapsed at the end of March. New York's
nearby arabica contract was 72.20 cents a lb in late trading last night,
compared with a low this year of 51.70.
Mr Eagles believes the producers had no option but to try to transfer the
balance of power from consumers to producers once the ICO talks had failed.
'It will be difficult for them to stick together,' he said, but the economic
pain they had suffered might be sufficient if they were not too ambitious.'
Mr Kettle pointed out that after the interminable ICO negotiations, the
markets were now seeing some real action. 'There has been a remarkable
degree of agreement about everything so far,' he added.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

930722

