FT934-8822

FT  13 NOV 93 / Planned A-level grade attacked


   By JOHN AUTHERS


A NEW top grade will be created for the highest achievers in A-level exams
under proposals announced last night by Mr John Patten, the education
secretary.
The move is part of a package of reforms to the exams, which form the basis
of the university admissions procedure.
The changes brought a negative reaction from teachers and from university
admissions tutors.
Mr Patten said the new 'A-starred' grade was needed 'to reward exceptional
ability among the growing number of candidates now obtaining A grades'.
Below the new grade there would still be five grades of pass, ranking from A
to E.
The Committee of Vice- Chancellors and Principals, which represents
universities, said there was no evidence that the new grade would help
admissions tutors, and that the move was 'somewhat depressing because it
provides another way to reject a candidate'.
The universities added: 'What is needed is candidates for university
education with a broad education.'
The National Association of Head Teachers accused Mr Patten of 'tinkering
unhelpfully with a system he appears not to understand'.
The committee welcomed, however, Mr Patten's proposal to ask the Schools
Curriculum and Assessment Authority, the quango that controls exams, to
encourage greater take-up of Advanced Supplementary (or AS) levels.
Each AS-level is intended to be at the same level of difficulty as an
A-level, but requiring only half as much work. The intention is that
candidates specialising heavily in one group of subjects can maintain some
breadth by taking an AS-level in a different subject.
Take-up of AS-levels has been disappointing, mainly because many schools
believe that in most subjects they are too difficult and worth rather more
than half an A-level. Some headmasters complain of timetabling difficulties.
Mr Patten also called for the authority to implement a common code of
practice for A-levels to ensure greater consistency between exam boards  -
particularly in spelling, punctuation and grammar.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

931113

