FT932-6545

FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Russia (9): Banking on the future - Russia has
over 1,600 banks in all shapes and sizes


   By LEYLA BOULTON


RUSSIA'S bankers are at the cutting edge of what is sometimes described as
the country's 'wild capitalism' - the reaping of big profits without
supervision. But for the more serious banks, attempts to 'civilise' the
market are crucial to long-term success.
A study financed by the European Commission found that Russia has too many
institutions calling themselves banks, with as many as 1,325 in the small
category, and 336 medium or large size.
'There exist roughly 80 to 130 commercial banks in Russia likely to comply
with western standards for banking activity,' says the report, adding that
such banks account for least 60 per cent of total capital and assets in the
banking system.
But high inflation and instability mean that even the biggest banks offer
only short-term finance instead of investment credit needed to overhaul the
economy - except when they are acting as transmission belts for cheap
central bank credits to industry and agriculture.
And even if the authorities managed to bring down inflation - exceeding
1,000 per cent a year - commercial lending in Russia would remain
complicated by a low rate of recovery and the absence of tools to assess
credit risk.
'The major problem is finding decent projects and implementing all the
necessary conditions. In Russia, we have a lot of good ideas but not a lot
of specialists,' says Mr Yuri Agapov, chairman of Credo Bank, one of the top
new commercial banks. 'The problem is not only checking commercial banks but
checking projects.'
While the country's distorted price structure and tumbling currency enable
commercial banks to make big profits on foreign exchange and financing raw
materials exports, the health of many banks - in particular those spawned by
former state-owned banks or founded by state-owned enterprises - is tied to
the inefficient enterprises they support.
THE fragility of the banks complicates the government's ambitions of
restructuring enterprises. The central bank itself, traditionally the
Communist state's cash-register, has so far failed to organise either an
efficient payments system or banking supervision. Its problems are
compounded by gaps in banking legislation and a loss of skilled staff to the
private sector. Not only is the central bank payments system known to lose
documents, it is open to fraud and bribery as witnessed by a big swindle of
central bank funds last year through forged transfer documents.
While the state remains paralysed by inefficiency, commercial banks are
increasingly taking matters into their own hands.
In response to the central bank system taking weeks to move money from one
account to another, groups of commercial banks have set up their own
clearing systems. With the help of foreign advisers, including western
central banks, the central bank of Russia is trying to overhaul the national
payments system, while commercial bankers hope their own clearing systems
will somehow spontaneously produce a unified western-style system.
Meanwhile, the banks are pressing ahead with the introduction of
market-style novelties like credit cards. Some are also devoting
considerable resources to computerising their operations and training their
staff abroad.
The activities of Incombank, another leading Russian commercial bank, are
fairly typical of the more serious institutions which are trying, in the
words of one banker, to 'be a bank, not a bag of state money'.
Only two to five per cent of its loans are 'long-term' (which means less
than five years in Russia) and they have typically financed real estate
deals, construction and the purchase of processing equipment for exporters
of Russia's natural wealth. Short-term credit has financed items such as
imports of foreign cars for the nouveaux riches, and exports of raw
materials.
'Nobody can dictate to whom we should give money,' said Mr Alexei Kuznetsov,
the bank's 34-year-old acting chairman (the chairman was in the United
States for training). 'It is not possible to limit us because we doing
everything for ourselves.' He said the bank had not received 'a kopeck' in
central bank funds, the distribution of which is also believed to be
facilitated by personal friendships with older-generation bosses of the
central bank bosses.
Incombank's plans to expand abroad include the possibility of establishing a
branch in Cyprus - to service clients who have set up offshore companies in
order to avoid taxation and arbitrary treatment by government authorities.
While acknowledging that some funds are illegally channelled into offshore
havens, Mr Kuznetsov said the bank's first duty was towards its customers -
'we know that when our clients put money in western trust companies, they
get robbed. When the money is not totally legal, they get miserable interest
rates,' he said. 'You can perfectly understand an enterprise for taking
money out of country. It is worried about the fate of its workers,
technology, instability.'
Although it has been one of the few banks to get its accounts audited by
western auditors, the notes to the accounts confirm the difficulties of
assessing the health of the bank's loan portfolio as borrowers struggle to
adjust to market conditions.
In contrast, Sberbank, the country's nationwide savings bank, has struggled
to break free from the stranglehold of the state, which has controlled it
for seven decades. But with the best will in the world, it remains trapped
by the difficult transition from a state-run economy to a market system, as
witnessed by a public squabble with the central bank over just how much
independence it should enjoy.
Although it has sought to diversify since it was transformed into a joint
stock company with shareholders including the central bank, Sberbank
continues to provide housing and home improvement loans at derisory interest
rates.
It also provides state-subsidised loans for 22 'socially useful' programmes,
like helping victims of the Chernobyl nuclear accident.
Finally, it acts as the state's agent when required, last year using its
unparalleled network to distribute privatisation vouchers to Russia's 148m
inhabitants.
IN January, however, Mr Vicktor Gerashchanko, the central bank chairman,
launched an attempt to take it over, undoing its status as a commercial bank
in order - he wrote in a letter to parliament - to 'protect' depositors from
the possibility of a US-style Savings and Loans crisis: 'Acting in
accordance with market laws and the realities of contemporary life,
(Sberbank) has in fact rejected its previous financial policy, designed to
satisfy the small depositor, and is increasingly looking for super profits.'
This was a striking accusation, given that the Soviet state has for decades,
including under his stewardship as governor of the Soviet central bank,
systematically appropriated the bank's deposits to finance the budget
deficit. Only recently, Mr Boris Fyodorov, the finance minister, managed to
get Sberbank to raise interest rates paid to depositors after the state
repaid money owed to it.
IT is against this chaotic background that the small number of foreign banks
with representative offices in Moscow are cautiously dipping a toe in the
Russian market by setting up branches.
But they remain wary of fresh lending after Vnesheconombank, the Soviet bank
responsible for servicing the former Soviet Union's foreign debt, defaulted
on payments and froze billions of dollars belonging to foreign companies.
Under pressure from the Russian commercial banks, which fear the westerners
simply want to grab their prized hard currency deposits, the central bank
recently produced rules limiting foreign banking activity in Russia.
But the rules are vague - saying that foreign banks will not exceed an as
yet unspecified percentage of total banking activity - that Mr Alexander
Khandruyev, a deputy governor of the central bank, suggests they are
intended as a deliberate fudge to reconcile conflicting interests.
The downside to the Russian banks' tumultuous growth is the central bank's
inability to take on the challenge of supervising them to enhance public
confidence in the sector.
Mr Georgy Matiukhin, the former chairman of the central bank, said in a
recent interview that finding skilled people to do that job had been his
greatest failing - even his supervision chief had left to head a commercial
bank.
The central bank sharply raised minimum capital requirements this year to
try to squeeze out smaller institutions that are not performing banking
functions and in some cases have been set up to abuse central bank funds or
run off with deposits.
The EC report says this would mean that 90 per cent of banking institutions
would have to close down or merge with others, but no restructuring has been
visible so far.
The central bank's ability to enforce its own rules, and fully switch from
the role of state monopoly to market regulator, has yet to be proven.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

930527

