FT934-10231

FT  06 NOV 93 / When the little children suffer: The UK Child Support Agency
has caused a furore


   By JOHN WILLMAN and JAMES BLITZ


Ms Ros Hepplewhite, chief executive of the UK's much criticised Child
Support Agency, always knew that the task of making divorced and separated
parents pay adequate maintenance for their children would cause a storm.
'Making absent parents responsible for supporting their natural children
inevitably means a redistribution of income,' she says. 'Many of those
parents have been living a lifestyle which they can afford only because
their first families are living on social security.
'They are naturally upset that they now have to make choices about what they
can afford to spend. But those choices are of a different order from those
which are made almost daily by lone parents on social security.'
If Ms Hepplewhite anticipated the furore that has erupted over the agency in
the past few weeks, the MPs who legislated it into existence seem to have
had no such prescience. The debates when the Child Support Act passed
through parliament in 1990 barely reflected the concerns now filling MPs'
postbags.
The agency has been accused of wrongly identifying happily married men as
fathers of illegitimate children. Its maintenance awards are said to be too
tough on absent parents. Second families are allegedly suffering hardship
because of the higher maintenance to be paid to children of first marriages.
Ms Jane Kennedy, a Labour MP on the Commons social security committee, which
is looking into the complaints, believes that the row raises important
questions over the agency's powers. She believes those powers are much more
wide ranging than people thought they would be.
'Single-parent families, for example, cannot make any claims for benefits
without involving the agency,' she says. 'That very considerable power needs
to be questioned.'
Despite growing misgivings on both sides of the Commons, social security
ministers are standing firm behind the agency. Making absent parents support
their children has become a moral crusade for a party anxious to establish
itself as pro-family.
Conveniently, it also offers the possibility of knocking as much as Pounds
1bn off the social security budget, which currently picks up most of the
bill for lone-parent families. The only concession the government has made
to the protests has been to set new priorities for the agency, so that it
can pursue the most deserving cases, not just those producing the biggest
savings for the Treasury.
Mr David Willetts, a Conservative member of the social security committee,
supports the agency. He is impressed that it has managed to find 90 per cent
of the absent parents who had 'disappeared' from all records. But the prime
minister appeared to wobble in his support earlier this week, when he
promised that ministers would closely monitor the agency's operations.
The furore is likely to increase. So far, just 36,000 assessments have been
completed out of a workload for the first full year of 1m cases. More than
2m cases will have been settled by the agency within four years - the time
it estimates it will take to review all maintenance agreements and bring
them into the system.
Each case involves three or more people - two parents and at least one
child. The agency will eventually affect the lives of perhaps a sixth of the
population, multiplying the volume of complaints.
Most of those complaints come from the absent parents, 90 per cent of whom
are men. Yet the case for making those absent parents pay up and pay more is
strong. Seventy per cent make no maintenance payments at all to their
children. Of those that do, the amount averages Pounds 25 a week.
This poor record is acknowledged by some of those protesting over the
agency's work. They nonetheless question the fairness of the higher payments
awarded by the agency - averaging about Pounds 50 a week.
The formula used to calculate payments is set out in the Child Support Act
that created the agency. The amount absent parents must pay depends on their
'assessable income' - their net income less housing costs and an allowance
of Pounds 44 for essential personal expenditure. This latter figure is based
on the amount of social security the parent with the child will already be
expected to live off.
The amount of maintenance with the child should be paid depends on the
number and age of the children. A single mother with two children under 11
would be entitled to Pounds 70.55 a week.
However, the absent parent will never have to pay more than half of his
assessable income. So the full Pounds 70.55 a week would only have to be
paid if the absent parent's net income less housing costs came to more than
Pounds 185 a week. For each Pounds 1 below this level, the single mother
would lose 50p of maintenance.
According to the agency, this leaves absent parents with between 70 and 85
per cent of their after-tax income. But many of the parents who have
protested at the formula say this is too inflexible.
Ms Kennedy highlights two features of the formula that need changing:
It ignores the travel costs of absent parents who wish to keep in contact
with their children.
It leaves fathers who have remarried with too little for their second
families.
Ms Sue Slipman, director of the National Council for One-Parent Families,
supports an allowance for travel costs, though not for the expensive treats
that the lone mother often cannot afford. But she is much less sympathetic
to those absent parents who complain that their second families have less to
spend because of the higher maintenance payments.
'The agency is trying to right the amazing injustice of first families who
live in poverty while the second family does not,' she says. 'A transfer of
wealth is inevitable if family break-up becomes endemic in society.'
Ms Slipman sees the need for adjusting the formula in so-called 'clean
break' divorces, where the absent parent has settled property on the mother.
She points out that there is actually no such thing as a clean-break
settlement - the courts were always able to reopen maintenance assessments
if circumstances changed. And many such settlements were designed to
minimise the father's costs: in most cases, social security would pick up
the bill for mortgage payments on a home transferred to a single mother.
But if property settlements are not acknowledged in setting maintenance, Ms
Slipman fears that absent fathers will wish to reclaim their share of their
ex-wives' homes. The consequences could be a rise in homelessness among
single parents as the homes are sold off.
However, supporters of the agency's work are unrepentant at the reopening of
settlements made by the courts. 'The courts often awarded as little as
Pounds 10 a week per child,' says Ms Mary Honeyball of Gingerbread, the
lone-parents' pressure group. 'The agency's awards merely show how low some
court awards were.'
Ms Slipman goes further: 'The agency must be judged not on how much the
absent parents are squealing, but on the amount of money which is
transferred to the parents caring for the children.' Whether MPs will agree
with this stern judgment will be seen when the social security committee
reports on its inquiries into the agency at the end of this month. Until
then, as Mr Donald Dewar, Labour's social security spokesman, puts it: 'This
issue will run and run.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

931106

