FT934-10104

FT  06 NOV 93 / As They Say in Europe: Just another Irish bomb


   By JAMES MORGAN


THE UK chamber of horrors has re-opened an occasional European debate.
Britain's reputation for extreme inequality and social brutalism co-exists
with the continuing, unexpected image of a land of honesty and justice. But
there is no challenger to the reputation of Ulster and Liverpool as western
Europe's worst places. They are why British lectures about the deficiencies
of the social chapter in the Maastricht treaty fall on cynical ears.
The Irish atrocities provoked the greatest concern in most European papers
but the trial of two 11-year-old Liverpool boys, accused at Preston crown
court of murdering a two-year old, aroused greater interest in France. The
contrasting attitudes towards Britain were reflected graphically.
La Depeche du Midi wrote: 'There is, in fact, something radically new in the
crime being judged today in Preston. A threshold has been crossed, a taboo
overturned and an image shattered . . . A rich western society trying in all
circumstances to save its children from violence. Violence strikes in the
third world suburbs of Liverpool and thereby marks, in one bloody symbol,
the end of our cosy blindness.'
At the other end of the country, however, Paris-Normandie wrote that the
British, like others, found it hard to accept that children could be
murderers because 'we wish to believe man has a future and that youth, more
than any other age group, carries the hope of a better world . . . British
justice is confronted with a basic problem. The mere fact that it is dealing
with it arouses and deserves the respect of everyone.'
The Ulster killings made the front pages almost everywhere else (but not
more than the death of the Italian film director, Federico Fellini).
Editorials abounded in Germany, but they were always short.
Only the Mitteldeutsche Zeitung made what one might have thought the obvious
point on November 1: 'The insanity is unbelievable: on the one hand, the EC
in Brussels celebrates the growing unity of Europe; on the other, people are
being killed under the screen of Christianity in one of the countries with
the greatest future in this Europe.' The last phrase might surprise some
readers: the German romantic attachment to those of opposite temperament is
often overlooked.
Only one Bonn paper observed that Ulster's atrocities would not be permitted
to continue if they took place on the British mainland. The Neue Zurcher
Zeitung wrote: 'Northern Ireland society has . . . stepped over an invisible
frontier, but nobody knows what lies on the other side. Either the wilful
and macabre shedding of blood has reached saturation level and will lead to
a readiness to compromise, with both sides giving up their ideals, or
despair will take over.'
The two sides in Northern Ireland are treated like terrible natural
disasters with no great causes at stake. The terms 'Protestant' and
'Catholic' are the norm, alongside ritual denials that the troubles are
based primarily on religion. Since 'Unionist' and 'republican' are not
susceptible to concise translation, the full political dimension is hard for
continental readers to grasp.
In Ireland itself, though, it is different. After the Shankill Road bomb
which killed 10 (Protestant) people, the Limerick Leader wrote a letter to a
nine-year old boy, Darren Baird, who lost his mother, father and sister.
'The culprits claim to represent Irish republicanism  - and, to our shame,
many of us, by our silence, have lent credibility to that falsehood . . .
many of us are so sick at what has happened this past quarter of a century
that we are sorely tempted to reject republicanism, even of the
constitutional kind. Truth to tell, many of us could no longer care less
what colour the flag flying over Belfast is. Thanks to the Provos, the stage
has now been reached where, rather than re-uniting the north, more and more
southerners would gladly cut it adrift.'
It has taken 25 years to reach a conclusion that seems like a cliche
everywhere else. For many commentators, Northern Ireland already is a place
cut adrift. But the human tragedy is not the whole story.
The British government spends twice as much per head in the province as it
does on the mainland. This adds Pounds 3bn to its budget deficit,
supplemented by another Pounds 480m in security costs. And the province,
year after year, eats up four times as much, relatively, in European farm
subsidies as the rest of the country.
On the Continent, there is scarcely any backgrounding or analysis of events
in Northern Ireland, in contrast with the attention devoted to the former
Yugoslavia. Stories are usually dropped - 'It's just another bomb.' The
Irish problem is nearly as complex as Bosnia, but more boring and far more
manageable.
Perhaps in Britain, too, it is understood less well because few think it
worth understanding.
James Morgan is the economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

931106

