FT931-4149

FT  12 MAR 93 / Nuclear fuel may be bought abroad


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


SCOTTISH NUCLEAR, the state-owned power company, has approached foreign
suppliers to try to obtain fuel for its two advanced gas-cooled reactor
stations at a cheaper price than British Nuclear Fuels charges.
'We will buy the fuel in Britain if we can,' said Mr James Hann, chairman of
Scottish Nuclear. 'But if we cannot get it at a reasonable price we will go
overseas.'
Although BNF is the world's only AGR fuel supplier, Scottish Nuclear is
investigating the possibility of financing the creation of AGR fuel
production facilities at the foreign companies. It is understood to have
made informal approaches to companies in the US, Japan and France.
BNF and Scottish Nuclear agreed in principle early last year on fuel
supplies and the reprocessing of spent fuel covering the next 15 years.
In a big departure from established practice in the UK nuclear industry, it
was agreed that Scottish Nuclear could store its spent fuel on its sites in
dry stores instead of sending it for reprocessing to BNF's Pounds 5bn
Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant (Thorp) at Sellafield in Cumbria.
Scottish Nuclear recently gave evidence to a planning inquiry into its
application to build a dry store at Torness, Lothian, and will soon apply to
build one at Hunterston, Ayrshire.
Scottish Nuclear's decision to cut the amount of fuel it sends for
reprocessing was a serious blow to BNF.
Scottish Nuclear is stepping up pressure on BNF as part of a drive to reduce
its Pounds 400m annual operating costs by about a quarter over the next
three years.
Its agreements in principle with BNF, which cover contracts worth about
Pounds 2.7bn, have not been signed.
Scottish Nuclear made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 14m in 1991-92 and expects
to double that in the year to March 31. Although there is no nuclear levy in
Scotland, it sells its power to Scottish Power and Scottish Hydro-Electric
on long-term contracts at above the market price for electricity.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930312

