FT932-3190

FT  15 JUN 93 / Money Markets: Bundesbank ignored


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE BANK of France yest-erday cut both of its most important interest rates
on a day which underlined how European monetary policy is decoupling itself
from the Bundesbank's strategy, writes James Blitz.
The French central bank lowered its intervention rate by 25 basis points to
7.25 per cent, and its 5 to 10-day lending rate by the same amount to 8.25
per cent. The move was France's eighth reduction in interest rates in two
months.
The move was widely anticipated by the market and had virtually no effect on
French cash and futures prices. But the importance of yesterday's move was
that it followed a long period in which the Bundesbank had kept interest
rate policy on hold, amid a weakening of the D-Mark in the European exchange
rate mechanism.
That potential weakness of the D-Mark yesterday encouraged two other central
banks to make important announcements.
The Portuguese authorities cut their mop-up rate by 75 basis points to 11.25
per cent. Mr Erik Hoffmeyer, the Danish central bank chief, was also
reported as saying that he would like to lower his country's interest rates
as soon as possible, and would not necessarily follow the Bundesbank.
French short-term interest rates have been below those in Germany for
several weeks now. The French intervention rate, for example, was some 35
basis points below the German repo rate, while three-month French francs
were yesterday afternoon some 22 basis points beneath three-month D-Marks on
the bid side.
Mr Nicolas Sarkozy, the French budget minister, said there was still room
for a decline in French rates, even if German rates remain on hold. Mr Jean
Michel Charpin, chief economist of BNP in Paris, said there was a chance
that the three-month spreads could widen in the near future. But, further
out, he expected the rates to converge again as the D-Mark and French franc
remained tied to a parity.
Sterling markets were quiet in the run-up to Mr Kenneth Clarke's first
Mansion House Speech today as chancellor. Three-month money eased to 5 7/8
per cent yesterday from Friday's 5 15/16 per cent, following a small Pounds
500m shortage. The September short sterling contract rose 2 basis points to
finish at 94.17.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

930615

