FT934-8738

FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (2):
The uphill struggles of an FT reader - Andrew Anderson analyses the Pink
Snow letters for tales of triumph and tribulation


   By ANDREW ANDERSON


   YOU SEEK it here, you seek it there, you seek it almost everywhere


when it comes to skiing, FT readers are nothing if not adventurous.
A total of 55 readers responded to Pink Snow's request in early October for
'300 words on what I most like or dislike about skiing'.
Nearly 20,000 words arrived by post, fax and hand delivery, bringing tales
of sunny days on perfect pistes; frozen marathons in total white-outs;
dreamboat ski instructors; chalet girls apparently trained to cook by
medieval court poisoners; grim struggles with snowplough turns on the wrong
side of 40; broken dreams and (a few) smashed bones; near-unprintable tales
of apres ski shenanigans; and above all a sense of indomitable spirit in the
face of adversity.
Lack of space precludes anything more than the edited highlights, but here,
in FT readers' own words, is the very essence of what makes otherwise
apparently sane people strap two planks to their feet and hurtle down a
hillside in the pursuit of . . . le ski]
J Allwright, of Nottingham spoke for us all when he simply listed among his
likes and dislikes: 'Skiing well' and 'Skiing badly,' respectively. Pfyffer
Hughes, of Upminster, Essex, also put it simply: '10 reasons I like skiing:
mountains; snow; altitude; feeling of freedom; beauty; clean air; fondues;
chalets; sliding and (rather more puzzlingly) acrobatics.'
D Bennett, of Wick, Bristol, spoke for many when he wrote: 'Skiing is an
escape from cities, pollution and noise into the thrill of champagne air and
the challenge of downhill runs.' Roger Cohen, of Barnes, London, agreed, and
added a financially-aware rider: 'I enjoy the sense of exclusiveness at
prices that don't exclude me]' Gay Dowson, of Exmouth, Devon, was adamant
that he loves skiing, but again spoke for many when pointing out her biggest
dislike: 'That moment of panic when one looks down the almost sheer drop
that is the only way out. Why was I fool enough to think I could do it one
wonders? Courage, mon brave] Forget the knees of jelly and think of
England]'
That struck a chord with Alan Horgan, of Bishopthorpe, York: ''What am I
doing here?' are the most memorable words I have used while skiing. The
excitement, fear and feeling on top of the world were all present when I
first stood on top of a blue run. But that was why I was there: for the
sense of exhilaration and freedom.'
Susan Paddington, of Blackheath, London, was one of several who pointed out
that: 'The best skiing holidays have been the sunniest. Nothing is worse
than being frozen to death in a blizzard, no matter how good the skiing.'
She also had some good advice on lift queues, which proved a bugbear for
many: 'Don't let it ruin your holiday. Be like the Euros - take an evening
class in French, German or Italian, plenty of fake tan, sunglasses and PUSH
to the front] It's a state of mind - if you keep fault-finding and
criticising the resort you won't enjoy it. You can't change it - and
remember, the UK has few decent mountains to offer.
Anke Hackethal, of Bochum, Germany, loves 'the experience of speed, of the
way the piste consistency constantly changes, of the sound of skis in the
snow.' But she adds a topical environmental warning: 'I cannot ignore the
ecological consequences of mass tourism in Alpine regions. And I am angered
by the people who think that drinking large quantities of alcohol early in
the day is a necessary part of a holiday.'
Michael Grimwood, of Crawley, Sussex, found solace in big groups: 'There are
few holidays that mean, in a short time that you find yourself making
friends who like doing what you do: skiing. This especially applies if you
join a good ski school, such as the ones in Austria.'
Michael Godfrey-Isaacs, of Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, even seemed to
enjoy falling down: 'The best thing is to ski down a steep slope on real
spring snow. If you have climbed to the top on skins then the descent is
doubly satisfying. I had one memorable descent headfirst and halfway down I
felt I was still accelerating. When I stood up my Thermos flask was still
coming down behind me.
'However, my most memorable skiing moment was effecting the mountain rescue
of a young lady who, as she was only wearing slippers, could not climb back
up the slope to her mountain restaurant after visiting the outside toilet.'
Keith Moss, of Mill Hill Village, London, likes, among other things:
'Releasing my feet from my boots at the end of the day and relaxing with a
whisky in the bath.' His dislike - 'lunatic speeding skiers who cut me up
with total disregard for my safety and their own' - was a recurring theme
with many contributors.
Many of you complained about poor flight arrangements and long resort
transfers. John Auld, of Brookthorpe, Gloucester, spoke from the heart:
'There's nothing like the start of a skiing holiday. Where in the brochure
did it say you had to get up at some ungodly hour in order to arrive at the
airport two hours before take-off? Who worries about early morning flights?
Certainly not the ski companies. Using their 'wealth of experience gleaned
from years in the business' the process of getting there has been carefully
developed to inflict the maximum amount of inconvenience, discomfort and
exhaustion. By the time you get there, after an unremarkable in-flight meal,
a Swiss airport and a tedious coach journey, you really need a holiday.'
Stephen Brookson, of Thames Ditton, Surrey, agreed. While he likes
'thinking, planning, doing and remembering skiing,' and also looks forward
to - a possible tip, here? - 'the next impending French franc devaluation,'
he dislikes, among other things: 'Never learning that the early morning
flight is a waste of time as you wait interminably at Geneva 'for the
Manchester flight'. One other bugbear: 'Silver Ski's brochure with about 40
wrong uses of it's - as in 'it is' - when they really mean 'its'.'
Michael Wilkin, of Henfield, Sussex, whose returned questionnaire was rather
sweetly decorated with doodles of ski helicopters and champagne glasses, was
nothing if not forthright in his dislikes. In his letter - headlined: To
Hell With Snowboarders] - he writes:
'The day of departure: flight delayed one hour, turns out to be two. Actual
flight perfect, but then chaos at Geneva airport. One bus is missing;
another only goes half-way there, then a forced change. Finally, out on the
pistes. Perfect] If Heaven is how you want it to be, it will be like this.
But here comes a snowboarder] Too late] My wife is sent spinning by a
snow-boarder who doesn't stop; luckily she is OK. We both agree that the
first Alpine resort to go snow-board free will be booked solid before the
season opens.'
Frances Clark, of Catford, London, rightly took her fellow skiers to task
about an issue we are all guilty of: 'Why is it that all Good Skiers forget
how difficult skiing can be? Good Skiers develop selective memories - they
cannot allow themselves to acknowledge that a difficult run is exactly that
 -difficult] So come on Good Skiers; when we beginners ask your advice, we
will respect your honesty more than your bravado.'
Andrew Baker, of Hatton, Warwick, touched on another common theme among the
dislikes: 'My worst dislike is falling off a drag lift - or so my wife tells
me; it has of course never happened to me - in the middle of a long run,
having to scramble out of the way of the very big German who flicks
cigarette ash on you as he passes, and then finding that the only way down
the ravine on either side of you is to slide down on your posterior, to the
amusement of all around.'
Patricia Clark, of Newport Pagnell, Bucks, agreed: 'What do I most dislike
about skiing? Easy - drag lifts] And T-bars are the worst of all.'
Things did get better once she finally got to the top: 'What do I like? the
fact that I, an ageing, overweight, life-long intermediate, can still enjoy
finding my way down a (fairly) steep mogul field. We've already booked for
Tignes and Lech this year - and remember that ski passes are cheaper when
you are over 60]'
Kay Beer, of Billingshurst, West Sussex, also found age and physical
attributes no barrier to enjoyment: 'I most like the knowledge that this
overweight frame with no sense of co-ordination can actually ski. When I
started, most of the time I just entertained my group with cries of
'Bugger]' as the required exercise went hopelessly wrong. But after five
days I actually entered and completed the slalom course. It was, and it
still remains, my most unexpected achievement.'
For some, however, the experience was all just too much. Nicholas Coates, of
Wargash, Hampshire, wrote in evident despair: 'I went on a skiing holiday on
the wrong side of 40 and wish I hadn't. It was an expensive and painful
experience, and even when I could ski enough, the few seconds of pleasure I
got did not justify the queueing at lifts, the discomfort of sweaty clothes,
and the noisy, ill-behaved youngsters. I have better things to do and to
spend my money on in what holiday time I have.'
Courage, Mr Coates] If at first you do not succeed, heed the words of Mrs
Pauline Eaton, of West Horsley, Surrey: 'The worst thing about skiing is
that I did not start earlier. Beginning at 40, with no sporting interest, it
took time to master the basics. Now I'm trapped in the intermediate stage -
I will never ski parallel on red runs, or ski couloirs, or jump off cliffs.
But the best thing is that I do it at all] It lets you be a child again - I
enjoy it totally because it is totally absorbing.'
Robert Cherry, of Carnforth, Lancashire, upped the age stakes considerably,
pointing out that his group, aged from middle 40s to 71, skis regularly on
the Continent and in Scotland, and 'skiing is the only exercise we take,
apart from two of us doing a little scrambling in the Lake District.'
David Stuart, of Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, actually enjoyed being an Oldie:
'What I most like about skiing is getting old] At last I am free from the
tyranny of trying to be a good skier - they have taught me three different
ways of swinging my hips since 1956 without managing to make my feet go the
same way. Now I only go on the runs I think I am going to enjoy. If a
white-out appears, into the mountain huts we go. Grow old along with me -
the best skiing is yet to be]'
Meanwhile, Clive Cartlidge, of Endon, Stoke-on-Trent, supplied a
heart-warming tale: 'I am 57, the youngest in our group - my brother-in-law
is 65. When we ski together, my role is to act as eyes for him as he is
completely blind in one eye and only partially sighted in the other. I ski
in pole position, shouting instructions as to when to turn, stop etc. Only
one accident so far - my wife cracked her shoulder blade, but still kept on
skiing.'
Tales of injury were mercifully few, but Daphne Scott-Harden, of Richmond,
Yorkshire, had her fair share of drama: 'I started skiing in 1956 in
Switzerland, where I was at school. We had huge wooden skis, lace-up boots
and no bindings. I was a slow starter] Two years later I went to Austria by
mini-bus: it took over 30 hours but the cost for 16 days was Pounds 36] On
the first day I rushed out, fell over and broke my ankle. A doctor lent me a
ski-bob, and I spent the rest of the holiday on that.
'Next year I skied in Scotland. I had bought new skis and on the last run
one ski came off, the other held and I was left screaming with my foot
facing the opposite way to my leg. Luckily another doctor was skiing right
behind and jammed me full of morphine. I spent two weeks in hospital and six
months on crutches, and did not ski for seven years.
'Meanwhile I married and had a family, and for the past three years have
spent Christmas in the Alps. My husband hates Christmas and prefers just to
ski. He even hates Christmas wrapping paper - so he was mortified to find
his ski-boots full of presents on Christmas Day]'
Guy Timewell, of Uffington, Lancashire, thought that the best bit of skiing
is the, er . . . social aspect: 'Skiing is actually better than sex,' he
proclaimed. 'In fact, most times you go skiing you end up having sex.
Conversely, I am unhappy to admit that every time you have sex, skiing does
not necessarily follow.'
Quite so, but Mr Timewell also found time for more cerebral matters:
'Standing at the top of a mountain, confronted by miles of beautiful steep
piste, is a feeling that is almost incomparable. I say almost, because one
would be silly to dismiss the experience of David Platt's 11th-hour goal for
England against Belgium, and the euphoria associated with Linford Christie's
100 metre gold medal.' Thank you, Mr Timewell.
Philip Smith, of Sandy, Bedfordshire, was also a sociable soul who found
true love on the slopes: 'I love chalet parties] For me it's the best way to
ski - you meet people to ski with, people of different standards so you
don't have to ski together all the time.
'I'll admit to being prejudiced as I met my partner on a chalet holiday in
the Dolomites seven years ago. On our next trip we were invited to join a
group filling a chalet, and now we ski regularly with our new-found friends.
One of our best holidays was with the operator who declared that 'Hooray
Henries and Sloanes are recommended to book with another company, where
their unusual sense of humour will be better appreciated.''
Chalet parties and family groups, however, did not find favour with
everyone. Roger Kirk-Bell, of Cuckfield, Sussex, thundered: 'What do I not
like about skiing? The 17-year-old 'gourmet' chalet chef whose entire
experience is six weeks at Eastbourne technical college. The slovenly style
of dress at dinner that is considered acceptable in chalets - for casual,
insert the word 'unsmart'. Parents who take offspring when the 'little
darlings' just cry and moan. Why can't these 'little darlings' start skiing
on their own initiative? And I hate the French architecture that destroys
mountains and puts supermarkets on the slopes. Thanks for letting me get
this off my chest]'
Richard Pollen, of Chiddingfold, Surrey, knows more than most about 'little
darlings' on the slopes: 'As a child I did not ski until I was a young man
working in London. Now, as parents of SEVEN, we ski en famille, and return
to work mentally refreshed and physically exhausted.'
He also made an interesting point: 'I believe that skiing offers more
advantages than most sports in terms of challenge and social behaviour.
However, the decreasing cost of packaged skiing holidays has made skiing
accessible to a much wider cross section of society which, in turn, has led
to problems caused by overcrowding and lack of proper tuition. I wonder if
the 1993/94 season may see a downturn in the trend.'
Another interesting questionnaire - it was entirely devoid of information
about favourite resorts, operators and indeed skiing in general - came from
Sylvia Hays, of Oxford. Her accompanying letter made matters more clear:
'I tried to go skiing once, in New England at Christmas in 1975. But the ski
rental stores were empty and nearly all the stores were closed.' Nothing
daunted, she rented snow shoes, trudged about for a while, and then 'bought
two frozen Christmas dinners from a 24-hour corner shop: turkey, stuffing,
mashed potato, peas and cranberry sauce. Back home, we were hungry tired -
and happy. But I would still like to try skiing sometime . . . '
Lorraine Preston, of Woking, Surrey, went for the slow burn approach: 'What
do I like about skiing? The smell of the new tube of sun oil on Christmas
morning; the first television episode of Ski Sunday; hauling the skis out of
the outhouse; putting one's boots on for the first time; the first run; the
first gluhwein; the second gluhwein . . ]'
Nigel Musson, of Alderley Edge, Cheshire, was the first of many to wax
lyrical about the sport: 'The gondola groans and rumbles into the bright
morning sunlight. The vibration disturbs the fresh snow on the pylons and
the air becomes filled with millions of gleaming diamonds as the sun's rays
pierce them . . . the doors open, a quick rush, a last-minute adjustment to
bindings, and off into the wide, blue, shining day to mile after mile of
glorious piste. Isn't this what life is all about?'
It certainly is, agreed Ricardo Nunes, of Portalegre, Portugal: 'Skiing in
the main is like climbing up and down the walls of a shining, silent
cathedral effortlessly pulled by gravity. Besides, one may also indulge in
the bravado of a fast charge down the slopes, the euphoria of jumping in the
air or the childish joy of tumbling in the fluffy snow.'
None, however, waxed as lyrical as Jonathan King, of BP-Exploration,
Indonesia, who was inspired to leap into poetry:
'A few hundred words can barely suffice
to explain the allure of snow and ice
but if for example you
consider Zermatt
absolutely the best place to look at . . .
He went on in similar vein for quite some time and concluded:
But the glory from which you cannot be torn
is to gaze on the Matterhorn day, night and morn
a staggering peak which dominates the scene
magnificent and moody, stormy, serene.'
It was left to Mark Green, of Wymond Street, London, to have the final,
brief word that best sums it up: 'Will we be back next weekend? Of course]
We're mad] We're skiers]]'
Sincere thanks to all FT readers who took the time to write to Pink Snow.
Other edited excerpts from submitted letters are used elsewhere in this
supplement.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

931113

