FT933-12536

FT  23 JUL 93 / Life insurance agents to reveal commissions: Treasury orders
change in rules of disclosure


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


LIFE INSURANCE sales agents will have to give customers more information
about policies, including how much cash commission they receive on each one.
The Treasury yesterday ordered securities regulators to draft rules
requiring agents to disclose more about their products.
The life insurance industry has fiercely resisted disclosure of commissions.
The Office of Fair Trading first urged full disclosure in 1987 when it
ordered the abandonment of an industry agreement setting a limit on
commissions paid to agents.
The Treasury's pronouncement followed its review of an OFT report which
concluded that proposals on disclosure from the Securities and Investments
Board, supported by the life insurance industry, gave consumers too little
information to choose products wisely. The Treasury yesterday gave the SIB
until the end of the year to rewrite its rules to conform to the OFT report.
In addition to disclosing commissions, companies will have to tell
prospective customers by how much their charges are likely to reduce
investment returns, how early surrender would affect the value of a policy
and allow low-cost sales outlets to charge less for the same product than
high-cost outlets.
The Treasury went beyond the recommendations of the OFT in the area of
commission disclosure and ordered the SIB to propose ways in which all sales
agents, including those based at banks and building societies, could
accurately portray to prospective customers their commission on each sale.
The OFT had urged that only independent financial advisers, who sell the
products of many companies, should disclose commission.
Mr Anthony Nelson, economics secretary to the Treasury, said the government
was concerned by the high lapsing rate of life insurance and pensions
policies, causing serious losses for investors.
He said an estimated Pounds 250m in premiums was lost each year on charges
incurred on lapsed policies and that a third of all policies lapsed in the
first two years when the investor was unlikely to receive any significant
refund of premiums paid.
Also, data submitted to the Treasury showed that as few as one-eighth of all
policies were held until maturity. 'I am very concerned about the
obligations and liabilities that people are getting themselves into,' Mr
Nelson said.
The ruling was welcomed by the Consumers' Association, which has campaigned
for greater transparency in the sale of life insurance and pension products.
Dispute laid to rest by Treasury, Page 9
Editorial Comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930723

