FT934-11536

FT  30 OCT 93 / Travel: Loved the Galapagos, loathed the red tape - Richard
Mooney visits the Ecuadorian islands made famous by Darwin but discovers
that a mouth-watering itinerary can prove deceptive


   By RICHARD MOONEY


IT SEEMED too good to be true. 'Cruise the Galapagos Islands with Gerald
Durrell,' the advertisement said.
To visit the Galapagos archipelago, cradle of Darwinian evolutionary theory
and home to many unique species, was a long-cherished dream; and to meet
Durrell, naturalist, author and founder of the Jersey Wildlife Preservation
Trust, had for 30 years been among my wife's fondest ambitions.
A call to Superlative Travel, the London agent, brought a mouth-watering
itinerary by return post: three days at leisure in Quito (capital of
Ecuador, of which the Galapagos Islands are a province); a flight to the
islands to join the cruise ship, followed by five days hopping between no
fewer than seven of them; and return to Quito for Andean tours on the final
day. So we booked. The cost was Pounds 4,998 for two.
The first change of itinerary came a few weeks later. We were told that
over-booked flights from Quito meant we had to join the ship at the main
port of Guayaquil, an hour's flight from the capital; sail the 600 miles to
the Galapagos; and, on completion of the island-hopping, sail north to Costa
Rica before heading homewards. That resulted in a two-day extension to the
13-day holiday - an inconvenience, but hardly a disaster.
The writing, however, was on the wall.
Ten days later we arrived in Quito and, having made contact at the airport
with one other UK adventurer, were transported to the Grand Hotel Colon. We
became uneasy at the continued absence of a detailed itinerary.
A telephone call to the office of Metropolitan Touring, which was handling
the mainland phase of the holiday, and a request to speak to Paddy Romirez,
named as local contact in our pre-departure information sheet, produced only
consternation. An English speaker was found and the request repeated. Deeper
consternation.
Eventually, someone was found who had heard of Romirez (apparently, he
worked for another company altogether and was based in Dallas, Texas). More
helpfully, someone else in the office knew the arrangements for that
evening.
Contact having been established, the Andean tours (brought forward in the
changed itinerary) passed off enjoyably and reasonably smoothly. Then came
the time for transfer to Guayaquil and the high seas, or so we thought.
The air transfer was all right but the high seas had to wait. The ship had
been unable to dock at the port and was sailing direct to the islands, to
which we were to fly next day.
The morning saw the party, which had grown to five while in Quito, augmented
further by two American passengers who were rejoining the ship after a spell
of back-packing in Peru; and a Newfoundlander, Kevin, who was taking over as
ship's chef. The three-hour flight seemed longer in the cramped light
aircraft that had been chartered specially, and it was with some relief that
we landed on the island of San Cristobal.
The ship had not yet arrived so we were put up overnight in a small hotel
where Ernesto, a naturalist-guide, gave us an introductory lecture in the
evening, laying particular stress on the restrictions under which visitors
were placed.
Wildlife reserve areas could be visited only in the company of a licensed
guide and visitors had to keep to the designated trails; no food was to be
taken ashore; smoking was banned, as was flash photography; touching the
animals was forbidden; and footwear was to be washed on departure from each
island as a precaution against plant seeds being transferred and upsetting
the fragile balance of their unique eco-systems.
Next morning, the odyssey was resumed with a five-hour trip in a small, slow
and incommodious boat to the island of Espanola. Earth has plenty of things
to show more fair than this featureless platform of volcanic rock, but dull
would be the person unmoved by its inhabitants' extraordinarily relaxed
attitude to humankind. And so accessible is its profuse wildlife that more
species can be seen in an hour on Espanola than in a week almost anywhere
else.
As soon as we dropped anchor, our dinghy was appropriated as a perch by two
brown pelicans. And as this vessel ferried us ashore past marine iguanas,
both swimming and sunning themselves sinisterly on the rocks, we were joined
by a young sea lion showing ill-concealed delight at our arrival. This usher
conducted us eagerly on to the beach, where lay a score of older members of
his extended family.
It seemed that most of the neighbourhood had turned out to receive us.
Frigate birds wheeled overhead; mocking birds hopped around us; Galapagos
doves made more sedate inspections. Little lava lizards scuttled to and fro,
going over, rather than round, lounging iguanas. A few yards away, a
Galapagos hawk was casting a beady eye over the new arrivals.
Arriving back on San Cristobal after another tedious five hours at sea, we
found the ship in the harbour and Patrick Shaw, the tour host, at the hotel.
Within 20 minutes, we and our luggage were on board. The information sheet
had said that the Northern Ranger was 'comfortable but not luxurious,' which
turned out to be a fair description. Its appointments were what might have
been expected of a craft designed to ferry fisherfolk and supplies up and
down the Labrador coast during the northern summer. Accommodation was in
cabins rather than suites, furnished with bunks rather than beds, and
'facilities' rather than bathrooms. But it did have air-conditioning.
At that evening's briefing, the hand-to-mouth nature of the voyage's
organisation began to become apparent. Shaw revealed that it had proved
impossible to get permission for the Northern Ranger to move to any other
anchorage during its stay in the archipelago. Thus, our trips over the next
four days would, like our visit to Espanola, have to be conducted as return
journeys on small Ecuadorian craft, restricting severely the scope of our
expeditions.
Conversations with our shipmates, mostly elderly Americans and Canadians who
had boarded three weeks earlier in Argentina, confirmed that confidence in
the organisational skills of Blyth and Co., the Toronto-based cruise
operator, had expired soon after the Northern Ranger rounded the southern
tip of the continent. And a lengthening list of cancelled excursions and
aborted landfalls had done nothing to revive it.
Somewhat daunted, my wife and I retired to the promenade deck. There, in the
sultry darkness, the islands' enchantment began to work on us once more. As
we watched sea lions hunting flying fish attracted by the ship's lights, our
spirits rose. We were in the Galapagos; Gerald Durrell was on board (we had
met his wife, Lee, but not yet the man himself); and, if not exactly
cruising, at least we were afloat.
The next two days were spent very enjoyably - except for the sweltering,
interminable boat rides - on visits to sites on San Cristobal (red-footed
boobies, marine iguanas, more sea lions), followed by a crossing to Santa Fe
island (land iguanas, more finches, still more sea lions) and on to Santa
Cruz, where we were rejoined by the Northern Ranger before leaving Galapagos
waters the next day.
What lay ahead was the two-day journey north to Puntarenas in Costa Rica,
during which long turtle- and dolphin-spotting vigils would be interspersed
with lectures and slide shows presented by Gerald and Lee Durrell (herself a
noted naturalist).
The hurried manner of our departure from Santa Cruz (the captain had been
given a deadline to depart, under naval escort if necessary, whether or not
all his passengers and crew were back on board) underlined the basic problem
that resulted in the uncomfortably ad hoc arrangements of our stay in the
islands. We were not welcome. This is not to say there was any
unpleasantness towards the visitors from individual Galapagans; anything
but. It was between the organisers and the local authorities that the
tension existed - and one had to admit the authorities had a point.
As the jewel in the crown of Ecuadorian tourism the Galapagos group is,
understandably, guarded jealously. If this third world country is to
maximise its revenues from the limited number of visitors the islands can
sustain without irreparable harm to their ecologies, those revenues must be
earned chiefly at sea. So, cruising the islands in foreign vessels is,
effectively, banned.
On our return, I checked with a London-based firm, Twickers World, which has
been taking tourists to the Galapagos Islands for more than 20 years. It
confirmed that the only way to cruise the islands is to transfer on arrival
to a licensed Ecuadorian vessel. So now we know. Next time we will make sure
our trip is organised according to Ecuadorian rules.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

931030

