FT933-12761

FT  22 JUL 93 / International Company News: The challenge bestowed by excess
 -A look at Karl Otto Pohl's role at Sal Oppenheim


   By DAVID WALLER


A former central banker in his early sixties recently landed what may count
as the perfect job: part-time chief executive of an ancient, aristocratic
bank which has so much money it does not know quite what to do with it.
The man is Mr Karl Otto Pohl, president of the Bundesbank for 12 years until
July 1991, and the bank is Sal Oppenheim, the largest and one of the oldest
of Germany's select breed of private banks.
'I am no big private banker,' confides Mr Pohl. 'I am something of an
outsider.'
Outsider though he may claim to be, he looks thoroughly at home in the
private banking world.
Anointed in May this year as 'speaker' of the bank's elite board of
personally liable managing directors, Mr Pohl spends just over half his time
on the affairs of the bank, which was founded in the year of the French
revolution.
'I see myself not as chief executive of the bank but as chairman,' he
explains. 'I chair the board meeting. I represent the bank in the outside
world.
'I bring this heterogeneous troupe together,' he continues, alluding to his
fellow partners and to the 50 members of the Oppenheim and related families
who own the bank in its entirety.
'Together with Alfie (Baron Alfred von Oppenheim, chairman of the bank's
supervisory board), I develop a strategy for the bank,' he says.
The strategic problem is easy to identify: what to do with the Cologne-based
bank's vast capital resources. With more than DM1bn (Dollars 500m) in 'core'
equity capital, Sal Oppenheim dwarfs fellow German private banks such as B.
Metzler or Trinkaus & Burckhardt. Its balance sheet is as big as that of
leading UK merchant banks such as Schroders or Kleinwort Benson, and more
than twice as big as Rothschild's. But with around 700 employees, it has
only a fraction of the staff of many less well-capitalised institutions.
While other German banks are struggling to comply with capital adequacy
rules requiring a minimum of 4 per cent core capital, Sal Oppenheim has 12
to 13 per cent. This is down from a peak of 18 per cent after some recent
acquisitions, 'but it is still too high,' Mr Pohl concedes. Core capital of
'DM300m-DM400m would be enough for a bank of this size,' he says.
Although the Oppenheims have always been prosperous, this superfluity of
capital dates back only a few years, to 1989. In the bank's 200th
anniversary year, it decided to sell its majority stake in the Colonia
insurance company.
The proceeds of the sale to the French Victoire group have never been
disclosed, but the figure is authoritatively rumoured to be in excess of
DM4bn. Of this, a quarter went to the tax authorities. A further DM1bn-plus
went directly to Oppenheim's 50 shareholders. The balance went to the bank
and core capital jumped overnight from DM180m to more than DM1bn.
For Sal Oppenheim, the sale of the holding has ensured the bank will be able
to remain independent for generations to come. Although there are formally
dozens of institutions in Germany classified as private banks, most are now
majority owned by larger institutions - for example, Trinkaus & Burckhardt
is controlled by the Midland Bank and Schroder Munchmeyer Hengst by Lloyds
Bank.
Oppenheim, owned by sixth- and seventh-generation family members, is one of
the few that are totally independent: another, much smaller example is the
Frankfurt-based Metzler bank, owned and managed by 11th-generation family
members. But, thanks to the disposal of the Colonia stake, Oppenheim is in a
class of its own.
This is underscored by the five-fold increase in the bank's core capital.
This is the main measure of a bank's balance sheet power, providing the
resources for future growth via new lending business. However as Mr Pohl
explains, 'of course our lending business did not quintuple as well'.
Despite the bank's ancient business links to 90 per cent of Germany's
largest companies, there was not enough good quality credit business around.
'Our future is not in classical commercial banking,' Pohl reflects, 'the
margins are too small. We will carry on in this area but it simply isn't the
business of the future.'
The search was on for a new strategy. With the help of the McKinsey
consulting firm, Mr Pohl and Baron Alfred set in motion a process of
restructuring which has divided the bank's business into four main areas.
The first is straightforward commercial lending; the second, financial
markets activities - including trading in currencies, equities and futures
and options; the third is private client services; and the fourth is asset
management for institutional investors (with more than DM20bn under
management).
If this gives the bank a more rigorous structure - each of the four
divisions has been made a separate profit centre for the first time in the
bank's history - it does not solve the problem of how to deploy the bank's
capital profitably.
Acquisitions may provide the answer: in the past two years Sal Oppenheim has
bought a Zurich-based fund management company and has spent DM200m buying
the Hypobank Rheinboden, a mortgage bank. But these alone do not give a new
dimension to the bank's business.
One area of potential expansion is Anglo-American-style merchant banking
business. 'Astonishingly, in view of our corporate connections,' says Mr
Pohl, 'we play only a very small role in merchant banking. We want to build
this one up.' This may mean - although Mr Pohl is not prepared to comment on
this - buying a London-based merchant bank.
The problems of the bank which has too much money are far from pressing, and
for Mr Pohl, the search for a new direction for Sal Oppenheim is less than a
full-time occupation. The former central banker spends nearly half his time
outside the bank, busying himself with 12 other boardroom posts and a host
of honorary positions.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

930722

