FT934-10226

FT  06 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Greycoat's moves to survive - Financial
restructuring recommended to fend off receivership


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


GREYCOAT, the property company struggling to fend off receivership,
yesterday recommended a financial restructuring that includes an injection
of Pounds 86m by investors led by the UK Active Value Fund.
If accepted by ordinary and preference shareholders and bond holders in
early December, the package will secure the survival of one of the UK's most
original 1980s property companies, whose buildings were as adventurous as
its methods of raising finance.
The rescue improved the terms for preference shareholders who last month
voted down a similar restructuring proposed by Postel, the UK's largest
pension fund.
Mr Brian Myerson and Mr Julian Treger, advisers to the UK Active Fund which
orchestrated the rescue, said they were confident the new package addressed
the concerns of the various investor groups and would be approved.
Ordinary shareholders are being asked to subscribe to a five for one rights
issue at 12.5p, worse terms than the four for one rights proposed by Postel
at the same price. The rights issue, which will raise Pounds 73.6m, is
underwritten by Samuel Montagu.
Investors led by the UKAV fund will subscribe to a placing of 30m shares at
20p, raising Pounds 6m, whereas Postel was proposing a placing at 15p. UKAV
will end up with 22 per cent of the ordinary shares.
The underwriters, who include Postel, have effectively agreed to take
warrants in lieu of underwriting fees.
Preference shareholders are being asked to subscribe to a rights issue of
one ordinary share for every preference share at 12.5p which would raise
Pounds 6.25m.
They are also being asked to approve a reduction in the nominal value of
their shares from 100p to 60p, where Postel had asked them to reduce the
value to 40p.
The shares will carry a lower 7 per cent coupon on the higher nominal value.
Postel proposed a 9 per cent coupon.
This scheme allows a hike in income, over Postel's deal, combined with a
lower capital write-down and an option to convert into ordinary shares until
the year 2013.
Preference shareholders can also elect to convert each of their shares to
3.75 new ordinary shares within 21 days after the financial restructuring
becomes effective.
Mr Treger says that any preference shareholders who fully convert will
retrieve par of 100p if the ordinary shares were to rise to 24p.
The deal for Britannic bond holders, who are secured on one of Greycoat's
assets, is barely changed.
Approval fromthe zero coupon bondholders, who voted against the Postel deal,
will no longer be needed. The restructuring, if approved by other bond and
shareholders will cure the current breach of gearing covenants on the bonds.
'Ordinary shareholders are paying the price of keeping the preference
shareholders happy and the extra cost of the zeros,' said Mr Myerson.
Mr Myerson said there was no current intention to change the executive
management team. The UKAV was a long term investor and interested in the
development skills within Greycoat. 'We see ourselves as bringers in of
equity' in the future, Mr Myerson said.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

931106

