FT933-12562

FT  23 JUL 93 / Arts: Cartoons from a new master - Art


   By LYNN MACRITCHIE


In an innovative series, the British Museum in London is hosting five
exhibitions of work by contemporary Japanese artists. Having missed the
first of these, I have vowed to miss no more.
'Takeda Hideo and the Japanese Cartoon Tradition', the second show, is a
revelation, a living history lesson and an opportunity to admire the work of
a controversial modern artist whose screen prints, based on traditional
subjects, seem to my eye at least the equal of the works of those revered
masters whose images he has reinterpreted with astonishing power and skill.
Takeda, born in Osaka in 1948 and originally trained as a sculptor, rose to
fame as the cartoonist for 'Asahi Journal.' His work was influenced by
western artists, most significantly Tomi Ungerer and Gerald Scarfe. He
visited New York several times and seems to have absorbed the deadpan style
of 'New Yorker' cartoons. All these influences can be seen in his earlier
work, which has very few obvious Japanese characteristics apart, perhaps,
from the thoroughness with which graphic styles from another culture have
been appropriated and reused.
His first published collection, 'Mme Chang's Chinese Restaurant' (1973), a
series of black and white cartoons presented as his dissertation in graduate
school, is already astonishing in its graphic fluency and enjoyment of
slightly surreal and sexual images. Two other collections, 'Yogi', 1974, and
'Opera Glasses,' 1977, are also in this style.
The Japanese have a long tradition of enjoying books of drawings and prints
which continues vigorously today, its most well known manifestation the
popular 'Mangas' or comic books devoured with relish by a considerable part
of the population.
Takeda's 'Altamira' series of 1979 is in the more sober tradition of picture
books on educational or scientific subjects. It is a series of black ink
studies of animal skeletons, meticulously observed and accurate, but each
with a touch of fantasy - a bony horse borne upwards on the wings of a bird
trapped in its rib cage, for example.
The series 'One Hundred Occupations' reworks a favourite genre which dates
back to the late 16th century. A delightful 1855 example by Hiroshige is on
display, showing dockers, actors, river porters and others at work, observed
with a humorous eye. Takeda's 'Occupations' is quite different. He uses the
ancient form to satirise his subjects mercilessly, in a cold, western manner
which brings a shiver to the spine rather than a smile to the lips.
The original 'manga' was a book by Hokusai, a collection of drawings from
life published between 1814 and 1849, of which several volumes are on view.
Each page is filled with incidents - drunken men singing while the geisha
who is 'entertaining' them falls asleep, ladies washing in all sorts of
positions, men practising with spears.
Some of the drawings have more 'fantastic' subjects, such as a man sawing
through his arm, or two men strolling unaware of the close scrutiny of what
appears to be an octopus. Takeda himself has never worked for mangas, but
his style, combining precise observation with fantasy, is very close both to
the ancient examples and their modern counterparts.
Best of all, however, are his two series of screen prints, 'The Wars of the
Minamoto and Taira,' the first produced in 1985, the second this year.
Displayed along with them are volumes by Kuniyoshi, the 19th century master
of the subject.
While Takeda borrows much from Kuniyoshi, his images are absolutely modern,
their stylistic innovations strictly 20th century. Unlike the old master,
who sets his incidents against a natural if stylised background, Takeda sets
his figures against plain backgrounds, concentrating on the swirling
patterns of bodies entwined in fierce fighting.
His warriors are naked, another break with tradition, but their bodies are
decorated from head to foot with complicated tattoos. Tattoos, a traditional
Japanese decorative art now most widely associated with the gangster culture
of the Yakuza, were the subject of his first set of screen prints, 'Mon
mon', produced in 1976.
Most controversial is his use of sexual imagery to contextualise the
warriors' deeds. In 'Mark of a Fan', an image directly based on Kuniyoshi,
women's legs represent the waves through which the hero rides. The birds
which cause the Taira to flee in 'The Battle of Fujigawa' emerge from
between a woman's thighs, their white curves forming the background to the
densely patterned mass of soldiers. The final images of the second series
show the defeat of the Taira in terms of the subjugation of their women,
literally ridden off by their conquerors.
While these images are horrifying, they are also entirely convincing, both
in relation to their ancient models and their modern counterparts, the
graphic novels and science fiction comics whose shifting viewpoints, bold
close ups and sexual brutality Takeda manipulates with genius. Whether the
unseen works by this self-proclaimed 'sadist' that have been judged too
shocking to be displayed transgressed this dangerous boundary it is
unfortunately impossible to tell.
Takeda Hideo and the Japanese Cartoon Tradition July 14 - August 15. British
Museum, Great Russell Street, London WC1B 3DG. Tel: 071-636 1555.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

930723

