FT933-5154

FT  04 SEP 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Just forget the llamas . . . -
The image of Bolivian sweaters has been turned upside down by a venture
employing all the latest techniques


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


   LA PAZ


THINK OF Bolivian sweaters and you probably picture scratchy,
oatmeal-coloured creations with little brown llamas jumping across - the
kind of street market garment favoured by students and hippies in the belief
they are helping to keep Andean peasants off the breadline. But an American
couple has found that combining soft alpaca wool, ethnic designs and
techniques with modern colour dyes, styles and general know-how can result
in highly individual products sold profitably in boutiques and leading
stores world-wide.
Laurie Adelson, a specialist in Tibetan weaving, and Arthur Tracht, a Latin
American historian, met in Bolivia while researching weaving techniques of
the Aymara Indians - one of the few pre-Columbian native art forms to have
survived almost intact the 16th century Spanish invasion and which, to this
day, can be seen on the streets of La Paz. After writing a book for the
Smithsonian Institute, they decided to do something 'contemporary and
productive' with their amassed knowledge.
The result was Millma, an up-market alpaca knitwear company specialising in
ethnic design with not a llama or snowflake in sight. In 1983, they joined
with two friends - neither of whom had any business experience - to buy a
shop in a La Paz hotel for Dollars 24,000. They then began contracting out
work to local knitters and weavers. Ten years on, annual sales surpass
Dollars 1.3m.
It has not been easy doing business in South America's poorest country,
though. In their second year, inflation hit 24,000 per cent - which meant
money to pay bills and salaries had to be carried in suitcases or
wheelbarrows - and frequent transport strikes held up deliveries. Moreover,
order dates have little meaning in this part of the world. 'If something is
ordered for June 5 and it arrives in July, that's considered good service,'
says Adelson, ruefully.
Although labour costs were low, so was quality. After a year of getting
sweaters with one arm longer than the other or one shoulder higher, they
decided the only answer was to keep a constant eye on the work force. Tracht
and Adelson bought out their partners and rented space in an old colonial
house where they installed three hand looms and three manual knitting
machines, sharing a desk because there was no more money.
For the first year, they contracted a specialist in knitwear construction to
show them how to make sweaters. Then, they hired a New York designer to
translate their ideas into knitwear. Tracht explains: 'There were a lot of
sweaters in the market and we couldn't compete on price. We had to offer
something different in terms of design and quality and, for that, we needed
professional help.'
Initially, they dyed their wool using plant, insect and mineral dyes such as
cochineal and indigo. But, as sales began to take off, they were unable to
get sufficient supplies, while customers were not willing to pay the extra
cost. So, they turned to chemical dyes, which offer a far wider range for
their bold, geometric designs.
From the start, there was a lot of interest in Millma sweaters, but
expansion was hindered by the need to train staff and the difficulties of
raising finance in Bolivia. Tracht says: 'We had no contacts and had to beg
banks to get a one-year loan at 30 per cent interest with 90 days to pay, so
we decided to be self-financing and grow at a natural rate.'
They have now acquired a factory - formerly a plant for making light bulbs -
which illustrates the combination of first and third world which
characterises Millma. Adelson and Tracht work upstairs from offices of
stripped pine and comfortable white sofas with a large window overlooking
the shop floor.
Down below, row upon row of women - in traditional dress of multi-layered
skirts, brightly embroidered shawls and bowler hats - beaver over knitting
machines, stopping every few rows to manipulate the shape, colours or
pattern.
Each sweater consist of many pieces which are ironed, measured and then sewn
together, stitch by stitch, so there are no unsightly lumps or seams. The
remaining jumble of loose threads is then sewn in.
Millma's work force is almost entirely female, even the security guard. This
is unusual in Bolivia, where labour laws require that women work fewer hours
per week than men for the same wage. But Adelson says: 'We find they are
better workers and they really need the work.' The company now has 170 women
and 15 men on site and another 150 working from home.
The production process is complicated; each sweater takes up to 24
man-hours. And, at more than Dollars 100 a time, the retail price is not
cheap. But output has risen from 500 in the initial years to 18,000.
Around 90 per cent of production is exported - about half to Europe, where
the sweaters sell in the French Facconable chain and the German Pro-idee
catalogue, and half to the US, where a major client is the Nordstrom
department store group. They are also starting to break into Canada and
Japan.
Tracht believes the key to their success is the hands-on nature of the
business and the focus on design. 'We are constantly evolving and
incorporating new ideas from paintings, wallpapers and Bauhaus textiles, and
we don't look at the bottom line too much.'
While Millma's production is small compared with better known knitwear
companies, returns are good and sales are expected to top Dollars 1.5m this
year. 'We've found our niche,' says Adelson, adding: 'We never envisaged
anything like this. We just wanted to communicate our love of textiles.'

The Financial Times


London Page VII

930904

