FT934-8313

FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Italy kicks off state sales with
67% of banking group


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


ITALY'S first attempt at a big privatisation aimed at retail investors will
start on December 6 with the sale of the IRI state holding company's 67 per
cent stake in Credito Italiano, the country's sixth largest bank.
The deal, forecast to raise about L2,000bn (Dollars 1.2bn), marks the
beginning of an ambitious and much delayed privatisation drive which should
see the disposal of two further government-controlled banks by next March.
The forthcoming privatisations include Istituto Mobiliare Italiano, the
Rome-based financial services group, due for sale in February, and Banca
Commerciale Italiana, one of Italy's best-known financial institutions,
scheduled for March.
The sales will loosen the state's stranglehold on the financial services
sector. They could herald a reorganisation of domestic banking, which has
failed to match the pace of change in other big European countries because
of geographical limits on growth and political barriers to bank mergers.
Both have now been removed.
The terms of the Credito Italiano flotation, being co-ordinated by the bank
and Goldman Sachs, will be revealed on December 4.
IRI will sell between 336m ordinary shares, representing 25.6 per cent of
the total, and 840m. It will dispose of its remaining 17.4 per cent of the
bank's non-voting preference stock.
Credito Italiano's reputation is founded on corporate lending, notably to
northern Italy's leading industrial groups, and securities trading. Since
the liberalisation of branch expansion rules in 1990, it has sought to
develop its retail banking coverage by opening new branches. Net profits
amounted to L133bn in the first half of this year.
The bank has tended to be in the shadow of BCI, its slightly bigger
neighbour. That image was partly confirmed yesterday by Mr Romano Prodi,
IRI's chairman, who said BCI would have been privatised first had it not
been for the fact that the Credito Italiano deal had been announced.
Credito Italiano and its advisers have embarked on an unprecedented press
and publicity campaign to facilitate the sale. The bank's two managing
directors appeared on Italian breakfast television yesterday and branches
opened early to allow staff members to watch the broadcast.
A roadshow will kick off in Milan on Friday, when further details of the
sale plans and trading prospects are likely to be revealed.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 28

931116

