FT934-10037

FT  08 NOV 93 / Japan chief enters Thorp fray


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


SURPLUS plutonium extracted from Japanese nuclear waste by Britain's new
Thorp plant will have to be stored at Thorp 'for some time' until it is
needed, according to Japanese electric power utilities.
In a letter in today's Financial Times Mr K. Kaneko, general manager of the
nuclear power department of the Federation of Electric Power Companies of
Japan, concedes that there will be differences in timing between plutonium
recovery and its use. 'But this does not mean that such stored plutonium
would be kept in store as surplus plutonium for ever,' he says.
Mr Kaneko is responding to a recent open letter from nine Japanese MPs from
the ruling coalition parties appealing to British MPs to support a
renegotiation of contracts to reprocess Japanese nuclear waste at Thorp.
They said Japan had no foreseeable use for the plutonium that would be
recovered.
Mr Kaneko says electricity utilities still support an early start-up of
Thorp. 'It should be noted that some Japanese parliament members' views are
only their personal views, not representing the whole Japanese public
opinion, and that the early commencement of Thorp operation is supported not
only by the Japanese utilities but also by the Japanese government,' he
adds.
Under the terms of the contract with Thorp's owner, British Nuclear Fuels,
Japan is obliged to take back all radioactive substances extracted from the
waste, although it can ask for it to be stored at Thorp until it is needed.
Mr Kaneko says: 'All plutonium recovered at the Thorp reprocessing facility
will be utilised for research and development activities including the fast
breeder reactor and in our own light water reactors as mixed oxide fuels.'
Any stored plutonium would be strictly controlled by the British government,
Euratom and the International Atomic Energy Agency, Mr Kaneko says.
He also stresses that Japanese law stipulates that nuclear power should only
be put to peaceful uses, and that controls will ensure that plutonium is not
proliferated.
The UK government is conducting a review to decide whether to permit the
start-up of Thorp, which cost Pounds 2.8bn to build but is now surrounded by
controversy.
Environmentalists say it is dangerous and some members of the nuclear
industry believe it is unnecessary because alternatives exist to waste
reprocessing, such as dry storage.
Japan is the largest foreign customer of Thorp, which will also reprocess
fuel from the UK, Germany and several other countries.
Letters, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 11

931108

