FT934-11512

FT  30 OCT 93 / Books: Massacres of the innocents


   By NIGEL SPIVEY


INSIDE HITLER'S GREECE
by Mark Mazower
Yale, Pounds 19.95, 464 pages
IN OCTOBER 1944, the streets approaching Athens were strewn with palms and
carpets: to salute jeeps charged with British troops. By December 1944,
those same troops were fighting in the streets against the Greeks they had
supposedly 'liberated'. This is ostensibly one of the most perplexing events
of the last war, and objectively-sketched explanations of it are not easy to
cite. Here, at last, is one such.
Mark Mazower's account of the Italo-German seizure of Greece is often
elliptical and specialised, but it should make sense to anyone with a feel
for truthful documentation, and sympathy for modern Greek political history.
The reason why British Tommies found themselves sniping from the Acropolis
in late 1944 is basically that Churchill misread the extent of Greek support
for the exiled Greek monarchy.
Churchill also underestimated the part played against the Axis invasion by
the mountain-based guerrillas who did all they could to stop the occupying
forces from treating this posting as a holiday. Churchill thought them
reckless bandits, judging them more from external appearance than their
internal organisation, which had a primarily Communist political tincture.
To describe the situation as an 'entanglement', in Churchill's phrase, is to
understate the complex of local impulses right and left. Even British
officers working with the guerrillas were sometimes mystified. What
compounded these tensions were the intolerable economic circumstances
created by the invaders, and the Wehrmacht's policy of local reprisals for
gun attacks. As Mazower points out, the German forces had no experience of
fighting an invisible enemy: frustration, as much as anything else, led them
into a massacres of the innocents.
Sometimes this succeeded in raising local indignation against the
guerrillas; more often, however, it merely intensified partisan support.
There are some poignant photographs here of one such slaughter of villagers
at Kondomari, on Crete; and a telling shift of focus to German headquarters,
where a young officer called Kurt Waldheim translated barbarities into the
language of bureaucratic acceptability.
Substantial differences are drawn between the joint forces of occupation,
reinforcing general stereotypes (to German irritation, the Italians were
considerably gentler in their areas of control, and also refused to
co-operate in the extirpation of Greece's ancient Jewish community). But
what is perhaps most extraordinary about the Teutonic military presence was
its overt philhellenism.
Troops and officers eagerly studied classical remains. When Himmler went to
Athens, it was not so much on SS business as to visit the Parthenon. True,
there were appalling cases of double standards. Some Germans may have been
sensitive to it: their escape route was the ethnic casuistry of bracketing
modern Greeks as 'Balkan', and therefore sub-human.
As I say, this is an objective study. Not all Greeks or British are heroes,
and not every Nazi acts dishonourably. But German behaviour in Greece 50
years ago has living witnesses. You might expect their accounts to be
exaggerated. The documentation assembled in this book, however, suggests
that they are right. It was a genuinely atrocious occupation.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

931030

