FT932-3328

FT  15 JUN 93 / Abolish county of Avon, commission says


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM, Wales and West Correspondent


THE COUNTY of Avon should be abolished and Bristol, Gloucestershire and
Somerset restored to their historic boundaries, the Local Government
Commission for England recommended yesterday.
The commission proposes that the two-tier structure of three county and 17
district councils be replaced by eight unitary authorities. It estimates
that annual savings would be about Pounds 19m, mostly in administrative
costs, and that the transitional costs could be paid for within two years.
Under the proposals Bristol would regain the status it lost in 1974 when
Avon was created and took over responsibility for such matters as education
and social services.
But the commission does not support the case argued by Bristol City Council
and some businesses for its boundaries to be widened to include the
travel-to-work area. The commission says there are strong arguments of
community identity against such a move.
Under the commission's proposals Somerset and Gloucestershire would return
for non-administrative purposes to their boundaries of pre-1974, when they
lost territory to Avon. The commission said people identified strongly with
Somerset, and it proposed a single authority called South and West Somerset
to cover almost all the existing county. The southern part of Avon would
return to Somerset and would be covered by two unitary councils, one
including Bath.
The commission recommends that Gloucestershire County Council be replaced by
four unitary authorities, one covering the northern part of Avon and the
others covering Gloucester and Stroud, Cheltenham and Tewkesbury, and the
Forest of Dean.
Sir John Banham, chairman of the commission, stressed that the proposals
were a 'preferred solution' and that there would be consultation until
September. 'This is an unprecedented effort to tailor the structure of local
government to the expressed views of local people,' he said.
The commission, which was contacted by more than 6,000 local people and
organisations, said the abolition of Avon was seen as inevitable. It was the
structure of local government rather than Avon council's performance that
seemed to provoke the antipathy, it said.
Almost 1m people live in Avon but, as an 'artificial' county, it has never
been popular and the council, which employs 17,000, has appeared resigned to
its probable abolition. A Mori poll for the commission found that only 5 per
cent of people in Avon identified strongly with the county.
The Association of County Councils said the proposals for Avon and
Gloucestershire would harm services and lead to higher costs. But it
welcomed the recommendation that most of Somerset should be a unitary
authority.
Mr John Savage, chief executive of the Bristol Chamber of Commerce and
Initiative, which supports the case for a greater Bristol council, attacked
the commission's proposals as a 'disaster for local government funding'.
Bristol and its problems would be isolated from the people who lived outside
the city but looked to it for their work and leisure, he said.
The commission has already published proposals for the Isle of Wight,
Cleveland and County Durham and Derbyshire. A review of Leicestershire is
under way and one of Nottinghamshire is due to start on June 21.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

930615

