FT933-10071

FT  06 AUG 93 / World Trade News: Menem finds that free trade is something
of a mixed blessing - Second thoughts in Argentina


   By JOHN BARHAM


A STEADILY deteriorating trade balance and approaching elections are forcing
Argentina to backtrack gradually on its free trade policies. In recent weeks
it has resorted to a battery of protectionist measures aimed mainly at
Brazil, its principal trading partner with which it is trying to consolidate
Mercosur, a four-nation regional common market with Uruguay and Paraguay.
Claiming that recession-bound Brazilian companies have captured excessive
shares of the paper market, Argentina last month imposed quotas for some
paper products. Then, it announced an 18-month halt to preferential tariffs
on Brazilian refrigeration equipment. Now, it has placed extra duties on
textiles and is considering further protection for the petrochemicals
industry.
All this is welcomed by hard-pressed industrialists who had accused
President Carlos Menem's government of being 'anti-industry', pursuing
policies that have led to unrestrained import competition, rising costs, an
overvalued currency and excessive taxation.
Mr Jorge Blanco Villegas, president of the Argentine Industrial Union which
represents manufacturers, complained that 'in a world of recession and
change, no serious country cheerfully gives away its (domestic) markets'.
Textile imports had risen 89 per cent in the first half of this year, and
paper imports had captured a third of the market.
This is not the first time Argentina has retaliated against Brazil. Last
October, Mr Domingo Cavallo, economy minister, trebled to 10 per cent a tax
on imports, aimed specifically at Brazilian goods.
Officials blamed Brazil's severe recession, covert subsidies and an
aggressive exchange rate for unleashing a torrent of exports to Argentina.
Half the 1992 trade deficit of Dollars 2.62bn - Argentina's first since 1981
 -was with Brazil. However, despite last year's tax increase, this year's
first quarter Dollars 511m deficit was up by 57 per cent.
The friction comes against a background of steadily increasing trade between
South America's largest economies. Reductions in tariffs called for by
Mercosur helped to boost bilateral trade by two-thirds last year to Dollars
4.93bn and Brazil is now Argentina's biggest export market as well as its
biggest supplier.
Brazil has reduced its surplus with Argentina by more than half in the first
quarter of 1993, by importing more Argentine flour and crude oil. But
Argentines complain that trade is one sided: Argentina is becoming an
exporter of raw materials to Brazil and an importer of Brazilian
manufactures.
Mr Carlos Magarinos, trade undersecretary, says the more aggressive trade
policies are part of a wider change in industrial policy. Most of
Argentina's companies are small, incorporate little technology and produce a
wide range of products inefficiently. The government wants them to gain
economies of scale by narrowing product ranges and investing more in
technology. Companies which can show they have made efforts to change but
remain exposed to predatory exporters can expect a sympathetic hearing from
the government.
Argentina's trade deficit has also become a political problem, with the
opposition railing against government 'insensitivity' to industry's
problems. They accuse Mr Menem of repeating an earlier experiment with free
trade that ended disastrously in 1981 with mounting bankruptcies, current
account deficits and devaluation.
With important congressional elections due in October, Mr Magarinos says 'we
must take care of the (trade liberalisation) process to avoid criticisms. It
must continue and be done reasonably.' Otherwise, he fears, people 'would
say 'we cannot trust (the government) with our future' and vote against us,
and they would be right. And then (other parties) would come and close the
economy again.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930806

