FT934-11658

FT  30 OCT 93 / EC Summit: United stand in fight against crime


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


EC LEADERS yesterday threw their weight behind common efforts to fight
organised crime, drug trafficking and terrorism.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and President Francois Mitterrand of
France both stressed the importance of a co-ordinated effort, taking
advantage of the new framework provided by the Maastricht treaty, which
comes into force on Monday.
The other leaders agreed with their view that the new European Union should
aim to reinforce its co-operation in justice, immigration and police
matters.
In a final communique, they said member states should reassure European
citizens that the removal of border posts and controls would not weaken
security. Not only that, 'the creation of a barrier-free space should
guarantee even better security in the future, thanks to systematic and
organised co-operation between member states'.
In his opening comments to his summit colleagues, Mr Kohl placed particular
emphasis on the fight against organised international crime.
Until the entry into force of the Maastricht treaty, such matters have been
dealt with by loose co-operation between governments. But the treaty will
set up an institutional framework for closer co-ordination of policies.
The treaty should also give new impulse to Europol - a central agency
overseeing the pan-European fight against drug trafficking and terrorism.
The EC leaders agreed that Europol would be based in The Hague and that the
drugs unit of the agency should be operational by October 1994.
The Hague was selected in spite of vocal objections from the French Interior
Ministry, which claimed the comparatively relaxed Dutch attitude towards
soft drugs would make it an inappropriate site.
Justice and home affairs ministers will present proposals to the December
summit of EC leaders in Brussels for the rapid establishment of Europol;
effective measures against drugs and against money laundering; common action
on asylum, including a list of third countries whose nationals have to carry
visas in the Community; and reinforcement of judicial co-operation,
particularly on extradition.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

931030

