FT934-8346

FT  16 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Yasuda to invest in Lloyd's - Japanese
group plans capital injection into insurance market


   By RICHARD LAPPER


PLANS TO introduce corporate capital to Lloyd's of London received a further
boost yesterday when Yasuda Fire and Marine Insurance, Japan's second
largest insurance group, announced it was intending to invest money in the
insurance market.
The news came amid further indications that the limit of UK institutional
and retail investment interest in Lloyd's plans has been reached, when two
investment trusts - New London Capital and CLM Insurance Fund - announced
they had raised less capital then expected.
Yasuda will invest Pounds 1.5m (the minimum possible under Lloyd's rules) in
its own corporate fund, committing Pounds 3m to eight Lloyd's syndicates
managed by the Wellington, Murray Lawrence and Kiln managing agencies. Kiln
Cotesworth Members Agency will advise the Japanese on syndicate selection.
It is understood that the syndicates will tend to be those which already
have Japanese business links.
'Yasuda has been trading with Lloyd's for many years and considers that the
introduction of corporate capital provides an excellent opportunity to
reconfirm our support and long-term commitment to this important market,'
said Yasuda.
'Although modest in size the investment has immense importance in strategic
terms,' said Mr Andrew Fleming-Williams of RJ Kiln. Kiln Cotesworth is also
working with Cazenove and Baring Brothers on a Pounds 10m investment trust.
New London Capital, the investment trust sponsored by SG Warburg, published
its listing particulars but announced that only Pounds 60m had been placed
with institutions, compared with an original target of between Pounds 100m
and Pounds 150m.
Mr Bruce Schnitzer, chairman, conceded that the company was 'smaller than we
would have ideally liked.'
New London, which is advised by Chartwell Advisers, a subsidiary of
Chartwell Re Corporation, will raise Pounds 60m before expenses by issuing
60m shares at a price of 100p. Minimum subscription is for 20,000 shares.
The trust will provide up to Pounds 105m of underwriting capacity to
approximately 20 syndicates.
Separately, CLM Insurance Fund, the investment trust sponsored by Barclays
de Zoete Wedd, announced that only 6.2m of the 30m shares available under
its offer for subscription had been sold, raising more than Pounds 6m. CLM
had earlier reduced the size of its placement with institutions, raising
Pounds 80m, compared to an earlier target of Pounds 200m.
BZW took a 15.01 per cent stake in the fund, subscribing for 12.94m shares.
Mr Jeremy Mead, a director of BZW, conceded that 'we would have hoped for a
little more, but there has been a lot of competition for public funds.'

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931116

