FT933-5201

FT  04 SEP 93 / International Company News: Attitude the key to colony's
destiny - How Hong Kong's taipans are preparing for 1997


   By SIMON DAVIES


IT IS still four years to go before Hong Kong leaves the British Empire, but
the colony's influential British-style trading companies - or 'hongs' - have
already carved out their destiny under the future sovereign, China.
Of the four major hongs - Hutchison Whampoa, Jardine Matheson, Swire Pacific
and Wharf/Wheelock Marden - only the Princely house of Jardine has failed to
draw up favourable alliances with the future sovereign power.
For the hongs, which thrive on government land grants and infra-structural
franchises, politics is of key importance and the potential implications of
the China relationships can be seen already.
Wharf's Cable Television franchise gained rapid Chinese approval, while
opposition continues against a new Container Terminal 'franchise", to be
part owned by Jardine - the Hong Kong government had awarded the contract,
claiming that no approval was needed.
The British corporate grip on Hong Kong has been declining for some time.
The so-called 'colonial amateurs', who ran many of the old hongs, could not
survive the more competitive and volatile atmosphere of the 1970s and 1980s;
their businesses were bought up by the newly-rich Chinese property and
shipping magnates.
Mr Li Ka-shing purchased the restructured Hutchison Group in 1979, the year
in which the late Sir YK Pao bought into the Wharf group, which he later
expanded through the acquisition of Wheelock Marden, in 1985.
The changes have accelerated since Deng Xiaoping visited southern China in
1991, sparking off a surge in investment across the border.
This partly reflected the economic domination of the colony by China, and
the need to expand beyond the limited confines of Hong Kong. But it also
reveals an attitude that to continue to play a significant role in Hong
Kong, companies must show commitment to China. The expatriate is at a
definite disadvantage in developing either political or business links.
Last Tuesday, Mr Simon Murray, one of the last of Hong Kong's taipans - the
traditional British managing directors of the trading companies - was
replaced by a Hong Kong Chinese co-director, Canning Fok, symbolising the
end of expatriate influence for another of the colony's major conglomerates.
Mr Murray, was instrumental in Hutchison's expansion outside Asia, but he
admitted he would have had a lesser role to play in the group's investment
push into China.
Hutchison has already started to develop container terminals, power
stations, property projects and a retail network; and it has been the
chairman Li Ka-shing who is at the forefront of negotiations.
Wharf's chairman Peter Woo, has also made great strides in building on the
Beijing contacts of his influential late father-in-law Sir YK Pao. He signed
up agreements for Wharf to transform the city of Wuhan, into a major
containerisation centre for central China, with infra-structural links to
Hong Kong's container port.
In recognition of their efforts, Peter Woo was appointed an adviser on Hong
Kong affairs to China, while Mr Li is a member of the Preliminary Working
Committee, China's new body on Hong Kong affairs.
If anything, this has increased their influence in Hong Kong, where Mr Woo
and the eldest son of Mr Li are also on the 18-member business panel
selected by Governor Christopher Patten.
For the British-owned houses, with their cultural and linguistic
differences, the barriers are great; but they have tackled the potential
problem in a totally different manner.
Sir Adrian Swire - whose family controls 27 per cent of Hong Kong-based
Swire Pacific - has for years been a regular visitor to Beijing, and the
company is regarded in China as being a committed long-term investor in Hong
Kong.
In 1987, it cemented this relationship by selling a 12.5 per cent stake in
its airline Cathay Pacific to the mainland-controlled Citic group.
Subsequently, China Travel Service and China National Aviation Corporation
have both been brought in as 5 per cent shareholders, leaving the airline
with three extremely influential backers.
The symbolic removal of the Union Jack from the tailplane of Cathay's fleet
has already begun, and the China links were further cemented last year, when
Swire jointly purchased a HKDollars 2.85bn (USDollars 36.8m) property site
with Citic Pacific.
The extent of the contrast with the experience of Jardine, controlled by the
Keswick family, was shown last year, when a Chinese official launched a
tirade against its opium trading past. Jardine's difficulties stem from
China's sensitivity to the concepts of sincerity and trust.
During the 1980s, Jardine shared widespread concerns over the possibility of
post-1997 political change in Hong Kong. But it was alone in stridently
voicing those concerns through its move of domicile to Bermuda and its push
for a primary listing in London. In international terms, this could be
deemed prudent; but in China, it could prove unforgivable.
Jardine director Sir Charles Powell has been on diplomatic missions to
Beijing to improve relationships, but as a former political adviser to Mrs
Margaret Thatcher, this has done little to erase the view that Jardine is a
British, rather than Hong Kong, company.
However, Hong Kong has always had a preponderence of cozy business cartels,
which contrast starkly with its laissez-faire reputation; and it appears the
primary requirement for membership of any post-1997 'club' will be Chinese
attitude, if not Chinese race. The realignment of the hongs suggests that
membership will definitely have its privileges.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

930904

