FT932-6976

FT  26 MAY 93 / Lloyd's urges Names to settle grievances through
negotiation: Insurance market chief hopes investors will 'give peace a
chance'


   By RICHARD LAPPER


ANGRY Lloyd's Names were yesterday urged to 'give peace a chance' and
participate in new negotiations to achieve an out-of-court settlement to the
legal actions dogging the insurance market.
The call was made by Mr Peter Middleton, chief executive, who was presenting
Lloyd's new business plan to an audience of some 2,800 Names  - the
individuals whose assets provide Lloyd's capital - at the Royal Albert Hall
in London.
Emphasising that it was impossible 'not to be moved' by the fate of many
ruined Names, Mr Middleton said: 'We are not made of stone but we are not
made of money either.' The atmosphere at the meeting, however, provided
indications that a deal might be hard to achieve. Platform speakers were
heckled and the audience demanded a minute's silence for those Names driven
to suicide by their losses.
Mr Middleton said Sir Michael Kerr, a privy councillor and former High Court
judge, had agreed to chair a panel to assess the relative strength of Names'
claims.
Sir Jeremy Morse, former chairman of Lloyds Bank, will chair a second panel
to investigate the financial contributions that might be available for a
settlement. 'Sir Jeremy will have absolute access to the financial knowledge
of the society,' Mr David Rowland, Lloyd's chairman, said. Lloyd's will hope
to persuade errors-and-omissions insurers - which cover Lloyd's agents
against legal awards - to contribute to a deal, while further cash might
come from Lloyd's central fund.
That meets insurance claims when Names cannot fulfil obligations. A
settlement is seen as vital to Lloyd's business plan, published last month.
The plan aims to cut costs, restore profitability and attract new capital.
Lloyd's hopes to make an offer by the end of September to many Names taking
legal action. However, both Mr Middleton and Mr Rowland emphasised that only
limited funds could be made available and that the effort would concentrate
on claims on E&O policies that affect the 1989, 1990 and 1991 years. Lloyd's
also had to take into account the interest of Names who are members of
syndicates underwriting E&O policies, Mr Middleton said.
A market committee reported last month that E&O funds of Pounds 690m to
Pounds 940m might be available for syndicates which participated in the
so-called 'spiral' - the business of reinsuring catastrophe losses of other
syndicates and companies. This compares with Names' losses of more than
Pounds 1.8bn.
Mr Michael Deeny, chairman of the Gooda Walker Action group, which
represents the biggest group of loss-making Lloyd's Names, said his group
would press on with litigation.
Odd socks and loose suits, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 20

930526

