FT932-318

FT  29 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Monopoly fears dog German coal
strategy - The difficult privatisation of the east's vast lignite fields


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


LAUSITZER Braunkohle, or Laubag, is eastern Germany's biggest open-cast
lignite mine. These vast brown coal fields straddle the states of
Brandenburg and Saxony-Anhalt. And like almost every other industry in
eastern Germany, Laubag is to be privatised.
The former state-run mines are currently under the Treuhand, the agency
charged with restructuring and privatising eastern German industry. But of
all the sales undertaken by the Treuhand, the privatisation of Laubag is
proving one of the most difficult.
A consortium, led by Rheinbraun, the brown coal subsidiary of RWE Energie,
western Germany's utility company, is negotiating to buy Laubag from the
Treuhand. The consortium includes RWE Energie, PreussenElektra, and
Bayernwerk, Germany's three biggest utility companies.
The big three, as they are known, already have interests in eastern Germany.
Each holds a 25 per cent stake in Vereinigte Energiewerke AG, or Veag,
eastern Germany's big utility company, which operates the region's high
voltage transmission grid and depends on brown coal for power generation.
Under the terms of the stromvertrag, or electricity contract of August 1990,
eastern Germany's regional utilities must buy 70 per cent of their energy
from Veag in order to underwrite the massive investments it is undertaking.
These include the modernisation, or construction, of brown coal-fired power
stations. In practise, however, the stromvertrag has severely restricted
competition in eastern Germany's electricity sector.
Although Veag is monopolised by the big three, it is legally owned by the
Treuhand, which intends to privatise it by the end of the year. But the
agency is insisting that the privatisation of Veag should be coupled with
the privatisation of the Laubag lignite fields.
'It makes sense,' a Treuhand official said. 'The sale of electricity and
coal must be linked. Both companies need each other. Veag needs Laubag's
coal for electricity generation and Laubag needs coal contracts with Veag
for its economic survival.'
It now appears, however, that Rheinbraun is slowing down the Treuhand's
attempts at selling Laubag partly to de-couple this complex privatisation
process. If Rheinbraun succeeded, Veag, once privatised, could be in a much
stronger position to negotiate coal contracts suited to its own interests.
Such a development would mean that the existing electricity monopoly in
eastern Germany would be extended to the brown coal sector - and dominated
by the same west German utility companies. The Treuhand is aware of this.
But as it has no choice, for the moment, but to negotiate only with the
Rheinbraun-led consortium for the sale of Laubag, the least the agency wants
is a competitive price structure introduced for eastern German lignite.
To make Laubag economically viable, the Treuhand reckons it requires annual
delivery contracts of about 57m tonnes to Veag's power generation blocks in
eastern Germany. But Rheinbraun is arguing that it is not certain it can
sell that amount to Veag because consumption of brown coal in eastern
Germany will not be high enough to absorb this amount.
Before unification annual lignite supply of 87.7m tonnes accounted for more
than 68 per cent of eastern Germany's primary energy consumption (compared
with 8.5 per cent in western Germany). In 1990, that figure fell by 12 per
cent, and a further 26 per cent in 1991 following the virtual collapse and
closure of eastern Germany's uncompetitive industry.
In a recent study, Goldman Sachs, the investment banker, suggests that
electricity demand in eastern Germany has bottomed out.
'The problem remains. It is difficult to give any precise forecasts for
future energy consumption of brown coal,' said Mr Gunther Kramer, one of the
board members of Laubag, and formerly employed by Rheinbraun.
'We are arguing with the Treuhand and Veag about the size of the coal
contracts, in particular about the price per tonne of coal,' a senior
Rheinbraun official said. 'We would prefer open coal contracts for Laubag,
rather than one which locks us into permanent contract deliveries, because
we are not sure about future consumption of brown coal,' he added.
Rheinbraun's reluctance to agree on coal delivery contracts for Laubag
coincides with a suggestion by Veag that it may delay part of its own
building programme, most notably, the construction of a second new 800 MW
power generation block at Boxberg, to which Laubag would deliver coal.
Mr Martin Martiny, a member of Veag's board, said recently that the building
timetable for Boxberg might be put back because 'it is difficult to know how
much brown coal eastern German industry will in future need, and therefore
how much Veag will require for power generation'.
Treuhand officials argue that if Veag does not adhere to its original
building programme, it will have the effect of delaying the privatisation of
Laubag.
'We cannot sell Laubag without an agreement with Veag over coal contract
deliveries,' a senior Treuhand official said. 'This is important for setting
the selling price, establishing the economic viability of Laubag,
guaranteeing jobs for the thousands who are employed at the mines and
financing environmental clean-up.'
But it is not primarily the uncertainty about eastern Germany's future
energy consumption of brown coal that is undermining the Treuhand's attempts
at putting coal contracts in place so as to speed up the privatisation of
Laubag, but rather the network of mutual west German interests attempting to
monopolise energy pricing in eastern Germany.
For instance, Veag is monopolised by the big three, which, through
Rheinbraun, is negotiating to buy Laubag. In theory, a comfortable
'in-house' private deal could be forged between Veag and Laubag on the size,
price and delivery timetable for coal contracts, once the Treuhand
privatises Veag. That is precisely what the Treuhand wants to avoid.
'You can see the challenge facing the Treuhand,' said an investment banker
who has advised the agency on other privatisation contracts. 'The Treuhand's
role is to privatise Laubag and Veag at the best possible price. Yet it
knows it has to deal with one big family which dominates Veag. That family
does not want to go against its own interests as it attempts to acquire
Laubag.'
Another investment banker agreed. 'Rheinbraun believes the Big Three in Veag
will drag its feet over setting the price and size of coal contracts for
Laubag because Veag believes electricity is more profitable than coal,' he
said. 'It thinks it can wear down the Treuhand in the hope that the agency
will de-couple Veag from the sale of Laubag, then the brown coal can be sold
at a much cheaper price to the big three consortium headed by Rheinbraun.'
The Treuhand appears determined to stick to its original plan. 'We are not
going to de-couple the privatisation of Veag and Laubag. There's little
enough competition in eastern Germany without extending a monopoly over coal
prices as well. The stromvertrag (electricity contract) has already limited
competition for electricity prices. We are not going to be pushed around,
and see the creation of another monopoly,' the senior Treuhand official
declared.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

930629

