FT934-8728

FT  13 NOV 93 / As They Say in Europe: If only Maastricht weren't Dutch


   By JAMES MORGAN


JUST AS the European Union comes into being, everyone is having another look
at it. There is the kind of reassessment that follows a night on the town,
the town in this case being Maastricht.
The mood, in spite of official denials, is 'forget it and do what we can.'
But, in Britain, the press sustains an obbligato on the iniquitous ambitions
of Brussels and its bureaucrats. The Sunday Telegraph is the most gifted
specialist in this area: each week, columns of well-researched exposes
nestle by others of polished sneers.
Suddenly, though, the shaky foundations of this erudite structure are
revealed. A writer last week made much of the discovery of a geological age
known as 'maastrichtian.' This intelligence was pressed into service as a
lumbering recruit in the struggle that continues forever.
Then came a reference to the 'infamous Belgian town.' So, one is reminded
that the corpus of British Euro-scepticism is founded on a knowledge of
Maastricht the treaty but not of Maastricht the city; it knows so much of
'Europe' and nothing of Europe.
The point of the treaty is that it could not have been written anywhere
other than in Holland, and at no time other than when the EC laboured under
the dual monarchy of Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission,
and the Dutch - the rule of grand design and impenetrable pedantry.
In the Maastricht treaty, the hand of Holland's Prime Minister, Ruud
Lubbers, works its magic in every arcane compromise, in each dreary
derogation, and in the full stop turned into masterly semi-colon.
Many in Britain will wonder if the confusion matters: Belgium, Holland -
what's the difference? All the difference in the world. Holland owes its
existence to the enterprise and vigour of the natives, Belgium to the
enterprise and vigour of others, notably the British.
In Holland, the inhabitants sleep well and eat badly; in Belgium, it is the
other way round. Belgium consists of two warring factions held together
shakily by a bankrupt government, a state permanently about to disintegrate.
Holland unites behind defiant dams and dykes. But try to build, or change,
anything else and you will be in trouble.
Belgium is visited by everyone and known by none, Everybody knows Holland,
but who goes there? Brussels has more foreign correspondents per square
metre than any other Community capital, but Belgium remains the
least-reported nation. It is also the country to which all good Dutchmen
retire to dispose of their businesses. Today, the Dutch financial press
caters to a narrow band of subscribers who live just inside Belgium.
The standard joke the country suffers is the demand to find six famous
Belgians, a list which apparently begins and ends with the singer Jacques
Brel. But, in fact, half the masters of the Dutch renaissance would have
been Belgians had Belgium existed.
And Belgium has given us Tintin, the most popular boy in the world. His
exploits are translated into all major languages but Tintin is Belgium
itself, the figure one would never notice, anonymous and unconscious of his
central role.
His universe changes shape depending on the location of the reader:
Professor Calculus is known to every English-speaking child but he is
Professor 'Sunflower', Zonnebloem or Tournesol, to Dutch and French infants.
Thompson and Thomson are English and French but, when German, become Schultz
and Schultze, while the British dog Snowy is Milou or Strupi elsewhere.
Thus, in Belgium, if you land in Zeebrugge and make for Liege, you will
never find it. You have to look for a sign to Luik; if it says Liege, you
are there. Arrive from the east and only Luttich will guide you. Belgium is
what others make it, the product of everybody else's vision, a solipsistic
dream.
To find the truth about a country, I read its papers; but these are no help
in Belgium. In Wallonia, the nation is one thing; in Flanders, another. But,
this week for once, Le Soir and the Gazet van Antwerpen were united by what
always brings the country together - strikes. In Le Soir, one reads about
France; in the Gazet, the news is from nowhere.
If only Maastricht had been a Belgian town. It would have had three names
and 15 different meanings. Each of us could have settled on the one we found
most pleasing and the treaty would be all things to all men, a rich tapestry
of clear compromises, unconcealed by academic obfuscation.
Subsidiarity would be made flesh over plates of mussels and frites, washed
down with endless bottles of Trappist ale. Breughel and Tintin would have
given us a self-indulgent Europe, one that would work (but only just), and a
happy ending. But, unfortunately for us and the treaty, Maastricht is Dutch.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

931113

