FT934-8752

FT  13 NOV 93 / Why the BBC should be privatised: Ian Hargreaves argues that
the corporation needs radical change to prepare for the harsher environment
it will face in the next millennium


   By IAN HARGREAVES


'Broadcasting was one of a number of areas in which special pleading by
powerful interest groups was disguised as high-minded commitment to some
greater good. So, anyone who queried, as I did, whether a licence fee was
the best way to pay for the BBC, was likely to be pilloried as at best
philistine and at worse undermining its 'constitutional independence'.'
 -Former prime minister Margaret Thatcher in her recently published memoirs,
explaining how she failed to persuade Whitehall and fellow ministers of the
case for radical change at the BBC.
'Much of what passes for quality on British television really is no more
than a reflection of the values of the narrow elite which controls it and
which has always thought that its tastes are synonymous with quality . . .
My own view is that anybody who, within the law of the land, provides a
service which the public wants at a price it can afford is providing a
public service.'
 -Media tycoon Rupert Murdoch at the Edinburgh television festival in 1989.
AS THE government puts the finishing touches to a white paper on the BBC, as
good as certain to propose an unchanged funding regime for the corporation,
it is striking to recall the ferocity of the attack on public service
broadcasting which was sustained throughout the 1980s by the combined
engines of Thatcherism and Murdoch.
Two questions are prompted: just why has controversy given way to consensus?
And, is it a good thing that it has? Is it possible that Thatcher, in her
instinctive, unstrategic way, perceived a truth about British broadcasting
that her opponents are foolish to ignore?
The re-making of consensus about the BBC plainly has its roots in the
replacement of Thatcher by a more conservative successor and in the fact
that the BBC has, in response to the pressures of the Thatcher years, made
sweeping changes, designed to make itself both more efficient and more
acceptable to a Conservative government.
There is, however, a third, less obvious cause of the new consensus, namely
a shift in the politics of the broadcasting industry itself. This has had
the effect of uniting the satellite broadcasters and their terrestrial
brethren in ITV behind the BBC status quo. It is the most interesting aspect
of the consensus, because it points to the flaw which runs through the heart
of UK broadcasting policy.
With hindsight, it can be seen that Murdoch's Edinburgh lecture was the
high-water mark of the new broadcasters' attacks on the BBC. A year later,
financial pressures forced Murdoch's Sky to merge with British Satellite
Broadcasting to form BSkyB, and led him into a search for the sort of
business alliances which would help him sell satellite dishes and
subscriptions for the re-launched Sky TV.
Prime among these was a joint deal between Sky and the BBC to televise
league soccer, something which would, at that stage, have been impossible
for Sky to achieve unaided. In other words, as Murdoch became a broadcasting
industry insider, he stopped rocking the BBC's boat. No wonder the Murdoch
press duly turned friendly. Last November's green paper would, said The
Times, secure the future of 'the best all-round broadcasting organisation in
the world.'
It is less surprising that the terrestrial broadcasters should have also
swung behind the BBC - after all, the traditional ITV position is that its
own advertising monopoly is a quid pro quo for the BBC's monopoly on public
funding. But ITV is also painfully aware that the BBC is making common cause
with commercial rivals outside the ITV system, including not only BSkyB, but
also the disenfranchised Thames Television (in UK Gold, a repeats channel
broadcast on Sky); and, through BBC World Service Television, with Reuters
and Star Television of Hong Kong, which since July has also been controlled
by Murdoch.
As part of its own response to the BBC green paper, ITV commissioned a
report from consultant Booz Allen & Hamilton; this set out for its client a
blood-chilling - and by no means implausible - scenario for the 1990s in
which BSkyB's revenues surpass those of the 14 ITV companies combined. If
this were to happen, by the year 2000 Britain would have three broadcasting
segments of roughly equal size: the BBC, BSkyB and ITV.
The larger, more ambitious ITV companies are thus starting to see themselves
as minnows in an ocean of killer sharks, confined by the comforts of their
regional advertising monopolies. This explains the urgency of their pleas to
government to be allowed to merge with each other.
The ITV companies, however, also believe that their own prosperity requires
a quiescent BBC, one confined safely to making high quality domestic
programmes; competing as little as possible for bought-in American material;
restricted from forming new commercial alliances; and, above all, excluded
from the market for sponsorship, advertising or pay-television. Viewed from
this angle, the new consensus on the BBC rests not upon high principle, but
on the short-term commercial convenience of rival broadcasters, buttressed
by the inability of a weak government to take a longer view.
All this is happening at a time when technology is turning the international
broadcasting industry inside out. Digital broadcast signals, along with the
spread of both satellite and cable, is dissolving technological entry
barriers to broadcasting and powering a fusion of the broadcasting,
telecommunications, entertainment and information industries. This
multi-media revolution lies behind the remarkable wave of takeover struggles
on Wall Street in recent weeks involving companies like Bell Atlantic
(telecommunications), TCI (cable), QVC (television shopping), Viacom (its
interests include the MTV global rock music channel) and Paramount, the
Hollywood studio. It also explains Murdoch's strategy to establish global
satellite distribution for his own and other companies' news and
entertainment services.
It is, perhaps, not surprising that UK broadcasting policy has simply failed
to keep up, marked as it was with the self-contradictions of the Thatcher
era: her desire to de-regulate on the one hand, but her taste for an ever
sterner moral and political oversight on the other. The result was muddle
and U-turn.
In satellite television, the government at first favoured a BBC role, then a
private sector monopoly, then did not resist Sky's entry, then sanctioned
the BSB-Sky merger without so much as a reference to the broadcasting
regulator.
In terrestrial television, policy in practice was directed mainly at
squeezing more Treasury revenue out of the ITV monopolies while requiring
the duopolists of BBC and ITV to take a quota of programmes from a highly
fragmented independent production sector.
In cable, there was a fitful policy of encouraging capital to enter the
sector while excluding British Telecom from transmitting entertainment
services on the grounds that it would be able to squash new competitors in
cable telephony.
The regulatory regime which sits atop this dizzying structure has only added
to the confusion. In essence, the BBC is regulated heavily, the ITV
companies moderately and the satellite broadcasters not at all. Ownership
rules are even more bizarre. It is possible for Murdoch to own half of
BSkyB, along with 35 per cent of Britain's national press, but impossible
for any national newspaper owner to possess more than a 20 per cent stake in
an ITV company.
The result is that, in terms of its international competiveness, the UK
faces the multi-media revolution in a parlous state. It has an inefficient,
monopolistic but fragmented terrestrial broadcasting system, and a satellite
and cable sector dominated by non-UK interests. Of only two potential world
class UK organisations on the scene, one, British Telecom, is excluded for
regulatory reasons and the other, the BBC, is stuck in the public sector
where it is condemned to behave like a public sector utility.
Does a Conservative government really think that Britain's charge in the
global electronic media battle can be led by a nationalised company? Small
wonder that Michael Heseltine, the Trade Secretary, has started recently to
harumph from his department about broadcasting matters. He will have noted
the Booz Allen study for ITV, which forecast that Britain's broadcasting
trade account will move from a surplus of Pounds 24m in 1985 and a deficit
of Pounds 100m in 1991 to a Pounds 600m deficit in 2000.
From a traditional BBC perspective, this is a more or less ideal background
for a licence fee review; the government is muddled, the competition on
side; indeed, only last week, the government conceded an index-linked fee
for the 1994-96 period.
As John Birt, the corporation's director-general, puts it in the latest
annual report: 'The case is a simple one. In the face of increasing
competition from commercial broadcasters, the BBC should use its public
funding to provide programmes that would be at risk in a purely commercial
market: authoritative news and information; ambitious and original
entertainment; and programmes to meet the complex learning needs of a modern
society.' The price demanded is, in effect, indefinite indexation of the
licence fee.
What has confused most people is that almost all public debate about the BBC
in recent months has painted Birt as a dangerous radical, bent upon
threatening all that is best in its traditions. Playwright Dennis Potter
called him a 'croak-voiced Dalek,' Michael Grade, the boss of Channel 4, a
'pseudo-Leninist.'
Such comments, along with many more ferocious, have obscured the reality.
Birt has changed the BBC's managerial style and its internal structures, but
the ethos is unchanged: to defend the existing, publicly-funded broadcasting
base and extend it judiciously when opportunity arises - for example, in the
proposed Radio 5 news and sports channel, World Service Television and UK
Gold. John Reith's body lies a'mouldering in the grave but his soul goes
marching on. Reith, remember, opposed the creation of commercial television.
In terms of the present rules of the game, Birt's strategy cannot be
faulted. But it fails to address a number of long-standing problems, from
the BBC's excessive reliance upon the goodwill of the government of the day
to the enormously difficult problems which arise in running a nationalised
company of 20,000 people which requires, for creative reasons, a honeycomb
structure but, for reasons of financial and political accountability, strong
lines of central control.
The biggest blind spot in the Birt plan, however, is that it proposes a
renewed royal charter (to run from 1996 until at least 2006) during a time
when the broadcasting landscape will be subject to further dramatic change.
The BBC is certain to see its market share plunge - its own forecasts
predict that its share of the television audience will drop from just under
half to 30 per cent inside a decade.
Although, at Pounds 83 a year, the licence fee does not look expensive
today, it will come to seem so when up-rated steadily in line with
inflation. Thus, it is likely the fee will in practice be eroded further in
real terms, forcing the corporation to seek a new deal on funding - in, say,
2004 - in a much weakened state. Therein lies the case for requiring the BBC
to kick the licence fee habit now, while it remains strong, so freeing it to
compete and to punch its weight in the international marketplace.
The key is not to imagine that an instant transition can be made from public
funding to another single source of revenue; rather, it is to devise a mixed
funding base which can be shaped during the next decade as conditions
change. That could mean some advertising (perhaps on BBC1, Radio 1 and Radio
2); planning a move to subscription (perhaps for BBC2) as satellite and
cable extend the pay-television infrastructure; and some continued public
funding, both to support wholly non-commercial activities and to ease a
smooth transition towards commercial revenues.
Arrangements of this kind would give the BBC a new freedom of action because
it would make possible a change in ownership, bringing two desirable
results. One would be to distance it from governmental influence and the
second to place it within the scope of a single broadcasting regulator, an
Office of Broadcasting, which would, in turn, work closely with the
telecommunications regulator, Oftel.
Here at last would be a framework for a UK broadcasting industry able to
take part in the multi-media revolution; it would create conditions in which
the BBC and the ITV companies could compete, develop and expand.
Privatising the BBC could be achieved in much the same way as British
Telecom, British Gas or British Airways: through a stock market flotation, a
process which would bring proven advantages in terms of access to capital,
freedom to manage, efficiency and innovation; compare BA today with Air
France. With the BBC, though, there should be something more imaginative.
This could involve devising a form of ownership which would not pass the
corporation into the hands of institutional shareholders but would place
significant ownership stakes in the hands of viewers and listeners,
employees and the BBC's broadcasting industry partners. Government could
also retain a stake, or a golden share, if that were judged desirable.
At present, the BBC is funded by the public but, in practice, expression of
the public will is channelled exclusively through government ministers, who
make all key decisions about the corporation's future. Privatised as a
stakeholder partnership - relevant UK models include the John Lewis
Partnership and NFC, the road haulage company, although there are many more
examples in the US - the public's sense of owning the BBC would be enhanced,
not diminished.
It is true that to liberate the BBC - and, indeed, ITV - from a monopolistic
pasture would be risky. By exposing the BBC directly to competition for
audiences and funds, it might lose out; it might be shown not to be good
enough. But there is no reason to believe this would happen, since the BBC
is rich in talent and enterprise.
The more likely outcome is that the new BBC would succeed. It would develop
new services on satellite and cable - perhaps an arts channel, a children's
channel, a news channel or a music channel. It could run an events channel,
offering full coverage of major national occasions such as the Wimbledon
tennis, cricket Test matches and the Proms. As television goes inter-active,
the BBC would be an appropriate vehicle for government to fund new
developments, such as an electronic jobs market.
With a structure, constitution and funding base appropriate for the
hurly-burly of the new broadcasting age, this new BBC would have a real
chance of moving into the next century as a growing, dynamic organisation.
The alternative is bleak: for the BBC, a long, morale-sapping march on an
indefinitely descending path; for the broadcasting industry, yet another
missed opportunity.
This is an edited extract from Sharper Vision: the BBC and the
communications revolution. From Demos, 9 Bridewell Place, London EC4V 6AP;
tel 071-353-4479. Price Pounds 5.95. The author is deputy editor of the FT
and a former director of news and current affairs at the BBC.

The Financial Times


London Page I

931113

