FT934-8754

FT  13 NOV 93 / Italian police hunt for heads of drug groups: Arrest
warrants issued as corruption scandal spreads


   By HAIG SIMONIAN and PAUL ABRAHAMS


   MILAN, LONDON


ITALIAN police have stepped up their search for a number of top
pharmaceuticals executives who have been implicated in the country's
spiralling political corruption scandal.
The list of those being sought includes Mr Flavio Maffeis, the suspended
chairman and managing director of Glaxo Holdings' Italian subsidiary. Some
have already been held, such as Mr Ambrogio Secondi, the chairman of
SmithKline Beecham's operations in Italy, who is under house arrest.
The new warrants, issued by Naples magistrates investigating alleged
kickbacks paid by top pharmaceuticals groups to health ministry officials,
follow renewed questioning of Mr Duilio Poggiolini, an eminent academic and
a civil servant in the ministry, who was arrested in September.
Subsequent inquiries disclosed a trove of hidden bank accounts in Italy and
Switzerland held by Mr Poggiolini and his wife. A police search of the
family's property uncovered gold coins, jewels and gold bars in a hidden
safe. Investigators confiscated modern art worth billions of lire this week.
Leading businessmen in the subsidiaries of a number of German groups are
also implicated in the scandal. Arrest warrants have been issued for Mr
Bernardino Sala, managing director of Farmadis, Schering's fully owned
subsidiary; Mr Massimiliano Pancera of Boehringer Mannheim; and Mr Enrico De
Angelis of Errekappa Euroterapeutici, a subsidiary of BASF. Mr Livio Cesare
Camozzi of Bioresearch, another BASF subsidiary, has been arrested.
The latest wave of arrest warrants also takes in some of Italy's best known
domestic pharmaceuticals entrepreneurs. They in-clude Mr Arrigo Recordati
and Mr Giovanni Recordati, the fath-er-and-son team heading the stock
market-listed Recordati group, Italy's eighth-largest pharmaceuticals
company.
Pharmaceutical Business News, the industry newsletter, reported that Mr
Marino Golinelli of the Italian concern Alfa Wassermann was in Germany but
would be returning to Italy to meet magistrates.
Glaxo, the UK's largest drugs group, said Mr Maffeis had temporarily been
released from his duties at Glaxo Italia, the company's third most important
subsidiary with sales last year of Pounds 331m. He was made chairman of the
business this year.
Mr Franz Humer, a main board director and group chief operating officer, has
been appointed Glaxo Italia's chairman. Mr Pietro Leone, finance director of
the Italian business, has been made acting managing director.
Italy is the world's fifth-largest medicines market, worth Dollars 11bn
(Pounds 7.2bn) last year, but sales have collapsed after healthcare reforms
introduced in April.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

931113

