FT932-7039

FT  26 MAY 93 / Names, odd socks and loose suits . . .


   By RICHARD LAPPER


'MAXWELL bust, BCCI bust, Lloyd's bust; policyholders won't be paid' read a
makeshift banner outside London's Royal Albert Hall, held aloft by a number
of bedraggled protesters wearing scruffy T-shirts, shorts and, in one case,
odd socks.
'We are friends of a Lloyd's Name,' said one protester. 'We can't disclose
who we are. But Lloyd's has been sneaking around and the Names are bust.'
Inside the hall, where Mr Peter Middleton, the chief executive, and Mr David
Rowland, the chairman, addressed a three-and-a-half-hour meeting on the
future of the insurance market, many Names - the individuals whose assets
support Lloyd's - seemed to share the sentiments and were more forthcoming.
'I feel like a creditor at a liquidation meeting. This is a spiv
liquidation,' said one gloomy Name. 'It's a long time since I bought a new
suit. This one no longer fits. I've lost so much weight through worry. I
stand before you as a victim and a loser. There can be no plan for the
future unless an equitable plan is made for the present.'
Mr Richard Micklethwaite, another loss-making Name, described the Lloyd's
business plan, published last month, as 'a plan to deceive all the Names all
the time.'
He added: 'We have no reason to trust Lloyd's any more, but, my God, how
much pain it's taken to understand that.'
Speakers criticising Lloyd's were warmly applauded, especially those
targeting the market's cost base and the high salaries paid to underwriters.
'Lloyd's is in cloud cuckoo land. They have no idea at all about the big
wide world outside,' said one Name, who introduced himself simply as Mr
Lloyd. 'The real problem is one of cost. There is a certain arrogance among
working people at Lloyd's. At the moment all I see is 'eat, drink and be
merry before we go broke and the Names can pay for it'. I don't see the
entrepreneurial flair.'
Mr Roger Bradley, a Name and retired underwriter at Lloyd's, criticised the
sharp rise in costs at the end of the 1980s and attacked the amount of money
called by syndicates to build up reserves.
Mr Rowland himself was urged to 'do something' about the problems of the
loss-making Names by sacrificing part of his salary of more than Pounds
400,000 a year. 'You've got half a million, chuck it in,' said one angry
Name.
Waiting in the lobby before the meeting, Mr Tony Ravenscroft, a Name since
1979 and a member of the disastrous Pulbrook syndicate, admitted that he
regretted having joined Lloyd's. The business plan represented a 'brave and
serious effort to stem the tide', he added, and he said that he would
continue as a Name.
'If I don't, the whole thing will have been a waste of time and money.'
A former expatriate who lived and worked in Kenya, Mr Ravenscroft said that
he was recruited at a riverside picnic in Africa.
'It was full of crocodiles,' he said. 'But they were not half as dangerous
as the sharks at Lime Street.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930526

