FT932-7211

FT  25 MAY 93 / Buildings take on new air of respectability


   By VANESSA HOULDER


COMMERCIAL property, the pariah of the investment markets for the past three
years, is edging back into favour, writes Vanessa Houlder.
A Gallup survey for Smith New Court reported last week that a balance of 12
per cent of fund managers want to increase their property holdings in May;
two months earlier, the same survey found that a majority of funds wanted to
disinvest.
Increased institutional interest in property has also been detected by
agents. 'There are definite signs of a sea change in investment activity,'
says Mr Greg Nicholson of Hillier Parker, chartered surveyors. 'The
institutions have moved back into the market.'
Increased demand has already pushed down investment yields in small pockets
of the market, notably retail warehouses and high yielding office buildings
in central London.
In part, the increased demand from institutions stems from the need to
rebuild the balance of property in their portfolios, after the drastic
underperformance of property in the past three years.
At the same time, a growing number of investors believes the property market
is near the bottom of its cycle and will begin to recover within the next 18
months. The industry's prospects have improved significantly since
sterling's withdrawal from the exchange rate mechanism, which paved the way
for lower interest rates, economic recovery and potentially a revival in
inflation, which enhances the investment appeal of assets like property.
The appeal of property can also be ascribed to its high investment yields,
compared with those offered by equity and gilts. 'It is a rational response
to the economic circumstances we are facing,' says Mr Peter Lyon, strategist
at Smith New Court Securities.
But the enthusiasm for property is tempered by a number of caveats. On a
practical level, the funds' investment criteria are so demanding that they
have difficulty in finding property they are prepared to invest in. On a
strategic level, many funds doubt whether property still has a valuable role
to play in diversifying risk. The renewed enthusiasm for property is
demonstrated by a relatively small number of funds.
In a market glutted with unwanted property, the difficulty in obtaining
suitable buildings is a surprisingly serious obstacle. Finding stock is a
'fundamental problem' says Mr Andrew Strang of Allied Dunbar, which invested
about Pounds 100m over the last year.
Being risk-averse, most institutions want to buy properties with highly
secure income streams. They have virtually no interest in the huge number of
second-rate properties which overhang the market.
But the number of properties with long leases let to financially secure
tenants is limited to as little as a fifth of the market; moreover, many are
in the hands of long-term investors which are reluctant to sell.
As the economy recovers, concern about tenants' ability to pay the rent will
ease. But even then, it is unclear whether institutions will be willing to
invest in a wider range of properties. Changes to the UK commercial lease
have reduced the security of income associated with property. Unless
institutions adopt a less demanding stance on the security of property
income, there could be a depleting stock of desirable acquisitions, forcing
up prices of a limited number of properties still further.
This trend will only continue until an improvement in prices persuades
existing investors to put more property on the market. This could happen
sooner than most pundits think. A recent survey of investors' intentions by
Gallup suggested that the institutions polled planned to sell nearly as much
property as they intended to buy. The 37 institutions questioned said that,
in aggregate, they would spend Pounds 770m and raise Pounds 750m from sales
over the next year.
It is scarcely surprising that institutions' attitudes to property differ:
the arguments for and against buying property are finely balanced. Although
property yields have moved substantially above gilt yields for the first
time in many fund managers' memories, that does not necessarily mean that
property is cheap. Investors have to weigh up a property's generous yield
against its limited prospects of rental growth, the risk of tenant default
and costs arising from the building's physical deterioration.
Furthermore, attitudes to property differ according to the type of fund. The
insurance companies have tended to be steadier and more enthusiastic buyers
than the pension funds, many of which view property as too illiquid an
investment medium.
Size has an important bearing on funds' appetite for property. The number of
funds that are active in the property market has shrunk from 150 funds five
years ago to a couple of dozen, according to the Investment Property
Databank, a research group.
'Small funds are put off by the way that the market has become terribly
complicated,' says Mr Rupert Nabarro, a director of IPD. The property market
is not homogeneous: it is split into many tiers depending on sector, region,
tenant and type of lease.
Investors are also nervous about the erosion of tenants' responsibility to
pay rent for the full duration of a 25-year lease, which stems from the
improved bargaining position of tenants in an oversupplied market and from
proposed changes to the law.
Many funds feel that property no longer has a role to play in their
portfolios. In the 1970s, it was seen as a good way of hedging against
inflation while reducing the risk and volatility of a portfolio. By 1981,
property accounted for 24 per cent of life assurance companies' portfolios
and 15 per cent of pension funds.
But property went out of fashion with the institutions in the 1980s. In real
terms, the net investment in property by institutions between 1983 and 1992
was just over half the total for the previous decade.
This largely resulted from the removal of exchange controls that allowed
funds to invest in overseas equities, which were often seen as a better way
to diversify risk than property. In the five years to end-1992, institutions
invested Pounds 33.2bn in overseas equities, compared with Pounds 6.5bn in
UK property.
Some analysts, such as UBS, reckon that the balance between overseas
equities and property may soon reach equilibrium, as they now represent
about 18 per cent and 8 per cent of institutional funds, respectively.
But that does not necessarily mean that a larger proportion of new funds
would be channelled into property. 'The events of the past four or five
years have damaged property's record of low volatility in returns,
heightening investors' perception of the risk in property investment,' says
Mr John Atkins of UBS.
For all these reasons, the institutions are unlikely to play a large part in
pulling the market out of its slump, as they did in the wake of the crash of
1974-75.
But those funds that do take the plunge have a strong case for believing
that they are investing near the bottom of the property cycle. Although
property has a slim chance of becoming fashionable, it may at least become
respectable.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

930525

