FT934-8644

FT  15 NOV 93 / UK to reduce Trident deterrent: Rifkind set to announce
significant change to country's nuclear stance


   By DAVID WHITE, Defence Correspondent


BRITAIN is set to announce plans to restrict the size of its Trident nuclear
deterrent in the most significant change to the country's UK's strategic
nuclear stance since the end of the cold war.
Under the new policy the UK will commit itself to deploying a force with a
total explosive power no greater than that of the current generation of
Polaris ballistic missile submarines.
The shift means it will need far fewer Trident missiles than first planned,
saving possibly hundreds of millions of pounds from the defence budget.
Experts say the 44 missiles already purchased would easily fulfil the new
requirement, although the navy may seek some extra missiles to keep in
reserve.
Trident submarines, due to come into service in about a year, are capable of
much larger firepower than Polaris, as well as greater range and accuracy.
Each Trident missile carries up to eight warheads, each capable of being
directed at a different target, while Polaris missiles carry two or three.
The decision to limit the Trident system's total explosive power, in terms
of tons of TNT, to that of the Polaris fleet is due to be announced tomorrow
by Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, at the Centre for Defence Studies
in London.
The move is in part designed to pre-empt criticism that the UK is re-arming
while the US and Russia are engaged in drastic reductions in their nuclear
arsenals.
In line with US policy, Britain has already withdrawn tactical nuclear
weapons from navy surface ships and has roughly halved its stockpile of
nuclear aircraft bombs. Last month it abandoned plans to replace its
aircraft bombs with a new air-launched nuclear missile which would have cost
up to Pounds 3bn.
US short-range nuclear weapons deployed with British troops in Germany have
also been sent back to the US for destruction under Nato arms cuts agreed in
1991.
Mr Rifkind's announcement will be the first confirmation of the UK's
intention to deploy a reduced Trident arsenal, although the government has
hinted in the past that it would not seek the full complement of 512
warheads for the Trident fleet.
The Ministry of Defence does not plan to declare the total number of
warheads in the fleet, a figure it has always kept secret. Explosive yields
are also classified.
Mr Daniel Plesch, director of the British American Security Information
Council, an independent research group which lobbies against nuclear
weapons, said it was unclear what figure the ministry would use as the
'baseline' for Polaris firepower which would then be used as a yardstick for
Trident. He described the expected announcement as 'a very positive move'.
The decision means that the UK will cut short deliveries of Trident missiles
from the US, which supplies them to Britain and undertakes to take them back
and replace them when they need servicing. The Trident D5 missiles are made
by Lockheed of the US, while the warheads are manufactured by Britain's
Atomic Weapons Establishment.
Reductions in the US Trident programme have threatened to increase
significantly the price the UK pays for its missiles.
Under the new policy, Britain's Trident submarines would have some of their
missile-tubes filled with ballast. Some Trident missiles are expected to be
fitted with single warheads to fulfil a 'sub-strategic' nuclear role, or
even with non-nuclear warheads.
Another possibility is that the submarines could be adapted to carry cruise
missiles as well. Further savings will be sought by relaxing the schedule of
patrols. Although one submarine will always be on patrol, there will be
fewer times when two or more are at sea. This will enable the navy to make
do with fewer than the six crews currently attached to the Polaris fleet.
The UK's first Trident submarine, the Pounds 650m HMS Vanguard, was formally
accepted by the navy in September. The second is due for sea trials next
year. Two more are under construction.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

931115

