FT933-12614

FT  23 JUL 93 / Shipyard workers win redundancy tax battle


   By DIANE SUMMERS, Labour Staff


THE LAW LORDS yesterday ruled that enhanced redundancy payments under Pounds
30,000 cannot be taxed, ending a four-year dispute between the Inland
Revenue and more than 2,000 employees of Harland and Wolff, the Belfast
shipyard.
Lawyers for the company said the Revenue would now have to return Pounds
1.8m to the employees and the company. The Revenue was also ordered to pay
costs.
The case clarifies the position on redundancy payments and has implications
for other sums received by employees as part of their contracts of
employment, said Evershed Wells and Hind, the law firm representing the
Harland and Wolff workers.
Harland and Wolff went into private ownership in 1989 as the result of a
management and employee buy-out. Workers who stayed with the new company
were given a total of Pounds 5.5m by what was then the Department of
Economic Development in return for giving up their entitlement to redundancy
payments above the legal minimum. The money was equivalent to 30 per cent of
the sum the employees would have received under their contracts.
The Revenue argued that while enhanced redundancy payments were taxable in
law, in practice payments under Pounds 30,000 were not taxed. But it refused
to extend this to payments made for giving up enhanced redundancy rights.
The five Law Lords rejected an appeal by the Revenue against an earlier
decision made by the Court of Appeal. The Law Lords found that the payments
were genuinely enhanced redundancy payments and not inducements to join or
stay with the company.
As a result of the ruling, Evershed Wells and Hind said Pounds 1.3m in tax
and national insurance would have to be returned to the shipyard workers and
Pounds 500,000 in employer's national insurance contributions to Harland and
Wolff.
Mr Philip Harrison, an Evershed partner, said the case was an important
legal decision 'which means that redundancy payments under Pounds 30,000
cannot be taxed. It also protects those workers with enhanced redundancy
rights from being taxed should they choose to give up those rights'.
The Revenue said last night that its solicitors would consider the
implications of the judgment.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

930723

