FT933-12665

FT  23 JUL 93 / Kanemaru pleads not guilty


   By ROBERT THOMSON


PUSHED into the courtroom in a wheelchair, Mr Shin Kanemaru, the once
all-powerful godfather of the ruling Liberal Democratic party, yesterday sat
calmly through the first day of what is seen as the trial of the traditional
Japanese way of politics.
Mr Kanemaru, 78, pleaded not guilty to evading Y1.037bn (Pounds 6.3m) in
taxes due on funds raised from the construction and other sympathetic
industries that prosecutors say were for personal use. However, Mr Kanemaru
claims that the money was needed to realise his 'cherished dream of
political reform.'
Raids on Mr Kanemaru's home and office uncovered a remarkable Y5bn haul of
gold bars, bank debentures and cash, part of the assets used to maintain his
position as the LDP's pre-eminent power broker, fixing political disputes
and backing loyal MPs. He suggested the funds were 'tokens of gratitude'
from enthusiastic supporters.
Prosecutors intend the case to be a warning to other politicians and their
corporate donors. Related investigations have already led to the resignation
of a provincial mayor and the arrest of executives at four leading
construction companies for alleged bribery.
Mr Kanemaru is alleged to have accumulated Y1.842bn of taxable funds from
1987 and to have concealed the money through the purchase of
difficult-to-trace bank debentures.
The trial of Mr Kanemaru and his former secretary, Mr Masahisa Haibara, 49,
alleged to have evaded Y307m in taxes, comes in the middle of a debate on
reform of a political system prone to scandal.
An unusual confession last year from Mr Kanemaru that he had received Y500m
in illicit funds from a trucking company, Sagawa Kyubin, set the case in
motion after public anger that prosecutors then showed unusual tolerance in
allowing him to draft a statement from his home.
Sensing their reputation had been tarnished, the prosecutors began a tougher
investigation into his finances and into his well-known links with the
construction industry, an important source of LDP funds.
The prosecutors' opening statements yesterday did not implicate other
leading politicians, but it is expected that the case will prove extremely
embarrassing for politicians close to Mr Kanemaru.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

930723

