FT932-6671

FT  27 MAY 93 / Economic Viewpoint: What the Budget could look like


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


Michael Portillo's celebrated scrutiny of UK public spending is not strictly
what the Americans would call a zero-based review. In other words, it does
not ask if there would be a National Health Service or state education if we
were starting in a new country with a clean sheet. But within roughly the
framework of existing institutions, it is meant to ask fairly fundamental
questions about coverage, methods and means of payment.
Less clear is the period of time meant to be covered. The main impact of any
radical decisions would be felt after 1995-96, the period covered by present
medium-term plans. As for the coming two financial years themselves, the
official attitude seems to be that any savings would be welcome, but no one
is counting on too much. In fact some unpopular moves may be required to
enable the government to stay within the ceilings for the present three-year
period which have supposedly been agreed by the cabinet.
Meanwhile a lot of work is being done on how best to measure the
government's deficit. One of the stock subjects of business indignation
relates to the absence of a proper public sector capital account. The famous
Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR) resembles a confusingly combined
profit and loss and capital account. This seems to many trained in the
private sector a recipe for confusion.
The chancellor in fact promised in his Mansion House speech last October
that the first unified Budget to be presented towards the end of this year
'will be drawn up in a way that makes a proper distinction between current
and capital transactions'. He added that this would underpin 'the
government's commitment to infrastructure investment in the longer run'. It
will also make the Budget deficit look smaller.
There are undoubted benefits in presenting the public sector accounts in as
similar a way to private sector ones as possible and also in having the same
kinds of accounts for different parts of public sector. Very often however
this reform is put forward as a panacea by people who do not understand the
fundamental differences between government and business. Sometimes the
motive seems to be to find a way of reconciling calls for economies in
government spending in general with more spending in areas in which the
critic happens to be interested.
The best way to see both the value and the limitations of a separate public
sector capital account is to try to do so oneself on the back of an
envelope. Such an effort can never hope to anticipate exactly the
distinctions that Treasury officials will come up with next November, when
moreover fresh estimates of revenue and expenditure will be available But it
should reveal the main contours.
The tables in this article are a simple rearrangement of the last table
(7.9) in the Red Book accompanying the 1993 Budget. In the Red Book itself
the items are just classified as receipts or expenditure. Here the spending
items normally regarded as capital by national income statisticians have
been segregated from the others. (The expenditure 'reserve' has also been
divided between capital and current.) There is, however, a reluctance in the
Treasury to apply the same treatment to Pounds 7bn of so-called capital
receipts. This is a category covering items such as capital gains tax which
is indexed and is not really levied on capital.
If we apply the suggested procedures to the estimates already given at the
time of the March Budget, the result is to divide up the envisaged Pounds
50bn PBSR into a current deficit of about Pounds 30bn, a capital spending
total of nearly Pounds 25bn and an offsetting inflow on financial
transactions of some Pounds 5bn. (The latter are mainly privatisation
receipts.)
The Treasury has in some recent publications shown a higher figure - of
about Pounds 30bn - for public sector asset creation. This has been reached
not only by ignoring the revenue side, but also by adding in investment by
the nationalised industries and other public corporations. This is cheating.
For, in a reform introduced by a Labour government in the 1970s,
nationalised industry was excluded from the public spending total, so long
as it was self-financed and not a charge on the Treasury.
At between 5 1/2 and 6 per cent of GDP, the UK public sector current deficit
shown in the table would be substantially lower than the 8 cent of GDP
represented by the PSBR; and it is more plausible to believe that most of
the lower figure is due to recession.
The instinct of the traditional Treasury official is to say that the whole
PSBR has to be financed irrespective of how one chooses to divide it up.
Indeed the chancellor next November may well try to have it both ways - to
emphasise the lower current deficit to the financial markets while telling
spending departments that the whole PSBR has still to be financed.
Indeed there are ways in which official estimates of public capital
expenditure over-estimate the amount of spending for longer-term productive
purposes. How many of those who clamour for more capital and less current
spending realise that nearly Pounds 6bn of military spending counts as
capital? On the other hand the payment of salaries to science teachers
counts as current expenditure.
The current-capital distinction is not nearly as illuminating here as it is
in the private sector. The basic point is that government lacks the simple
business test of intended future cash return to decide what really is its
capital spending. So the division between current and capital is much more a
conventional demarcation between payments for resources which are used up in
a single year and those which leave buildings, machines or stocks of
equipment behind.
There is indeed an almost unlimited number of respectable ways of defining
the Budget deficit. But to pursue them all is not consistent with continued
sanity. Here, however, are a few hints.
You can reduce the deficit further by asking for it to be estimated on an
inflation-adjusted basis. Even at current relatively low rates of inflation,
a large proportion of government interest payments can be regarded as
compensation to debt-holders for the falling value of money. Moreover, the
government has never seen fit to publish a cyclically adjusted deficit which
would eliminate that part which is just the reflection of recession.
If, on the other hand, you think the tentative separation of capital from
current spending in the tables lets the government off the hook too lightly,
try insisting on measuring capital spending net of depreciation. If you do
that, you will be back not far from the original PSBR figure. If you want to
make deficits look larger still, add on something for the unfunded social
security liabilities in the next century as the population ages.
In the most highbrow circles of all the key concept is the primary deficit
before debt servicing. The point is that a sufficient primary surplus is a
pre-condition for reducing the level of national debt or its ratio to GDP.
The primary balance was indeed mentioned by Mr Portillo last week - the
first time by a British Treasury minister.
Its application produces bewildering results. The UK has the highest primary
deficit among the industrial countries. On the other hand, Greece, Italy and
Belgium - normally regarded as fiscal basket cases - emerge with quite large
primary surpluses.
What this means is not that the UK is worse off but that countries such as
Italy are in a fiscally bad way and gradually getting better, while the UK
starts off from a pretty sound budgetary position but is gradually getting
worse. Hence the flap.
In the end experience shows how large a deficit a government can afford and
if that is too large no amount of playing with definitions can help.
 --------------------------------------------------
PUBLIC SECTOR BALANCE: TOWARDS A NEW PRESENTATION
 --------------------------------------------------
1993-94 estimates (pounds bn)
 --------------------------------------------------
Current expenditure                     262.4
Current receipts                        232.0
Current deficit                          30.4
Capital spending                         24.8
Financial deficit                        55.2
Surplus on financial transaction *        5.1
Public sector borrowing requirment       50.1
 --------------------------------------------------
* Mainly privatisation proceeds
 --------------------------------------------------
DRAFT PUBLIC SECTOR CAPITAL BUDGET
 --------------------------------------------------
1993-94 estimates (pounds bn)
 --------------------------------------------------
Gross domestic fixed capital formation** 18.3
Increase in stocks                        0.2
Capital grants to private sector          5.3
Share of expenditure reserve              1.0
 --------------------------------------------------
Total capital spending                   24.8
 --------------------------------------------------
** Net of Pounds 0.2 bn of capital transfer
 --------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 22

930527

