FT933-5155

FT  04 SEP 93 / Briefcase Special: Why dividends may prove taxing - A more
complex system of taxing dividends is explained by Maurice Parry-Wingfield


   By MAURICE PARRY-WINGFIELD


THE TAXATION of dividends was radically altered by Norman Lamont, the former
chancellor, in his last Budget. For private investors in particular, the new
system is much more difficult to understand than the one it replaced.
Unsurprisingly, the Weekend FT's Q & A Briefcase section has received a lot
of questions on this topic in the last few months, including the rather
strange interaction of income and capital gains tax. In this article, I try
to explain the new provisions in basic terms so that readers will be able to
work out their own situation from the principles involved.
Let us start by reminding ourselves of the basic tax rules. The first slice
of income is covered by personal allowances (eg a single person's allowance
of Pounds 3,445) and reliefs (eg for BES investment); the first taxable
slice of Pounds 2,500 is taxed at the lower rate of 20 per cent; the next
slice between Pounds 2,501 and Pounds 23,700 is taxed at the basic rate of
25 per cent; and anything over this is taxed at the higher rate of 40 per
cent.
Capital gains add a certain amount of complication. In principle, however,
once the gains of the year, net of losses, exceed the annual exemption of
Pounds 5,800, they are taxed as though they were a top slice of income.
Consequently, if your net gains, after deducting your annual exemption, come
to Pounds 5,000 and your income, after deducting personal allowances and
reliefs, comes to Pounds 20,000, then the first Pounds 3,700 of your gains
are taxed at 25 per cent and the remaining Pounds 1,300 at 40 per cent.
After the Budget, however, the position is considerably more complicated. I
will start with those of you who - perhaps as a spouse of a breadwinner - do
not pay any tax or whose marginal tax rate is at the lower rate, and then
move on to those who are basic rate and higher rate taxpayers. I will
concentrate mainly on UK dividends as part of income.
I will also deal with the effect of realising capital gains (meaning, for
simplicity, gains arrived at after deducting the annual exemption). It will
be seen that the treatment of UK company dividends, together with the
treatment of capital gains where there is insufficient non-dividend income
to absorb the lower rate band, produces quirks.
The basic point is that a dividend from a UK company now carries a tax
credit of 20/80. This means that a dividend of Pounds 80 from a UK company
is grossed up to Pounds 100 and a credit of Pounds 20 is available for
offset against the tax liability or, where appropriate, to be repaid.
(Previously the rate of tax credit was 25/75 so that a dividend of Pounds 80
would be grossed up to about Pounds 107 and carry a tax credit of Pounds
27).
Non-taxpayers
If your income is fully covered by allowances and reliefs, an additional
dividend of Pounds 80 will use up a further Pounds 100 of those allowances
and reliefs and entitle you to a tax repayment of Pounds 20. Capital gains
(ie, as mentioned, gains in excess of the annual exemption) will be taxed at
20 per cent, 25 per cent and 40 per cent, depending upon the amount.
Lower rate taxpayers
If you fall within this category, an additional dividend of Pounds 80,
grossed up to Pounds 100, will be taxable at 20 per cent but fully covered
by the tax credit of Pounds 20, so there will be no tax payable or
repayable. Capital gains will be taxed at 20 per cent, and then at 25 per
cent and 40 per cent if they are high enough.
Basic and higher rate taxpayers
The fun starts where dividends, when added to other income, fall within the
basic rate band. Here you might think that a dividend of Pounds 80,
producing gross income of Pounds 100, would give you a net tax liability of
Pounds 5 - ie tax at 25 per cent less a credit at 20 per cent. In fact you
will have no liability because the legislation provides that, within the
basic rate band, the rate of tax applying to dividends is only 20 per cent,
not 25 per cent.
No doubt it was felt that the policy of reducing Revenue manpower would not
be helped by making inspectors collect trivial liabilities on dividends.
This treatment, once understood, is not particularly difficult to apply in
calculating your income tax liability. The real problem comes when capital
gains are taken into account. The draftsman of the new tax rules had to
decide at what rate to tax gains where dividends are taxed at the new
'dividend rate' of 20 per cent. His solution is best explained by looking at
the following four examples.
These show that dividends are taxed after other income, but where that other
income falls short of the Pounds 2,500 lower rate limit, gains take up the
remainder of the lower rate band so far as possible. This is a departure
from the principle that gains are always taxed as though they are a top
slice of income.
Example 1
You have enough income other than from dividends to absorb your lower rate
band of Pounds 2,500. Here your dividends are taxed as the next slice, at
the 20 per cent 'dividend rate' or at 40 per cent as appropriate; and your
gains are then taxed as the top slice, at the basic rate of 25 per cent or
at 40 per cent as appropriate.
Example 2
Your income consists entirely of dividends. Here your income and gains are
taxed in the sequence shown in the table.
This is illustrated in columns 1 and 2 of diagram A, which shows how your
income and gains are apportioned between the three rate bands in two
situations. (In this and all other examples, it is assumed that you already
have sufficient other income to absorb your personal allowances and
reliefs).
Example 3
You have non-dividend income but it falls short of the lower rate limit.
Here the position is the same as in example 2, except that the non-dividend
income uses up the bottom slice of the lower rate band, so that more of your
dividends and gains will be pushed into the other rate bands. This is
illustrated in columns 1 and 2 of diagram B, which are identical to those of
diagram A except that interest of Pounds 1,500 has been added.
Example 4
Your non-dividend income exceeds the lower rate limit. Here a different
approach is taken. Your income and gains take you through the rate bands in
the following sequence: non-dividend income, then dividend income, then
gains. This is shown in columns 1 and 2 of diagram C.
For the technically minded, I should mention that the legislation which
allocates income and gains to the rate bands provides that, for income tax
purposes, the basic rate limit is reduced from Pounds 23,700 to the extent
that capital gains use up any part of the lower rate bands. Since this does
no more than ensure that gains taxed at the lower rate are included within
the full basic rate limit, I have ignored it to be able to explain the new
system clearly. Foreign dividends
Finally, we have to consider the impact of foreign dividends. These are
treated in much the same way as UK dividends - including the 20 per cent
dividend rate where they fall within the basic rate band - subject to two
exceptions.
The first is that there will normally be overseas withholding tax to credit
against your UK tax, resulting in a reduction or even elimination of your UK
liability. The second relates to those of you who are not domiciled in the
UK. Your foreign dividends are taxed in the UK on the 'remittance' basis,
and accordingly the 20 per cent dividend rate does not apply - though it
does, surprisingly, for Irish dividends.
Conclusions
These issues are important, for two reasons in particular. First, the tax
treatment of dividends and gains is yet another example of the regrettable
trend away from the Lawsonian simplification of the tax system of the late
1980s.
Anything which makes it more difficult for you to work out your own tax
liability is retrograde. It causes unnecessary time and cost for you, your
advisers and the Revenue.
Equally important, if you do not know your marginal rate of tax, you are not
in a position to make informed investment decisions. Either you will make
the wrong decisions, or you will play safe and put your funds into a bank or
building society account.
Maurice Parry-Wingfield is a tax partner with Touche Ross & Co
 ----------------------------------------------
THE TAX TRIANGLE
 ----------------------------------------------
Source          Cumulative total       Rate
                                    (Per cent)
 ----------------------------------------------
Gains         Up to Pounds 2,500         20
Dividends     Up to Pounds 2,500         20
Dividends    Up to Pounds 23,700         20
Gains        Up to Pounds 23,700         25
Dividends     Over Pounds 23,700         40
Gains         Over Pounds 23,700         40
 ----------------------------------------------
Source: Touche Ross
 ----------------------------------------------
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All enquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

930904

