FT933-10095

FT  06 AUG 93 / Clinton budget bill approved by House


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's compromise budget bill cleared the first of its two
congressional hurdles early today when it was narrowly approved by the US
House of Representatives.
The battle now moves later today to the Senate, where the outcome is even
more finely balanced.
The House vote came after intense lobbying by Mr Clinton and a flood of
phone calls by voters trying to sway their congressmen on the controversial
bill.
Mr Clinton lobbied ceaselessly throughout yesterday to persuade congressmen
and senators from his own Democratic party to support the legislation, which
is seen as vital to the authority of his presidency.
He argued that the bill was critical for the health of the economy and to
show that president and Congress could work together.
Under the proposed legislation, the federal budget deficit will be reduced
by Dollars 496bn (Pounds 332.8bn) over the next five years, raising Dollars
241bn in new revenue and cutting spending by Dollars 255bn.
Mr Clinton said that he had been spelling out what would happen in the
months ahead, assuming the bill was passed. 'This is the beginning, not the
end, of responsible budgeting,' he said. 'No one I have spoken to believes
seriously that a better result will occur if the bill does not pass.'
In one of the more emotional speeches yesterday, Congressman John Lewis from
Georgia urged his fellow Democrats to demonstrate 'courage, nothing but raw
courage'.
Republican members of both houses oppose the legislation and have
concentrated their attacks on the planned increases in income tax for the
highest-paid Americans and on the 4.3 cents a gallon increase in the federal
tax on petrol and diesel fuel.
Mr Bob Dole, Senate Republican leader, has described the tax increases as
the biggest in the history of the US.
But while attention centred on the House of Representatives' debate, there
was no let-up among Democrat leaders to secure at least one more vote in the
Senate. When the original bill came before the Senate in June it was tied at
49-49 and was only passed on the casting vote of vice-president Al Gore.
Because the House and Senate passed different versions of the measure, the
compromise bill was then worked out by Democratic leaders for this week's
crucial votes.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

930806

