FT934-8302

FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Reichmanns take a gamble on
Mexico - Deals planned by the Canadian brothers and George Soros


   By DAMIAN FRASER


THE Reichmann brothers, the Canadian property developers who last week
announced three big real estate investments in Mexico City, are convinced
that Mexico is heading for an Asian-style economic boom.
But some rival developers are already saying they have arrived too late and
the decision to invest in projects worth more than Dollars 1bn, with US
financier George Soros, resembles their ill-fated investment in London's
Canary Wharf.
The Canadian developers have been warmly welcomed by the Mexican government,
which is anxious to turn the decaying capital city into a centre of
services, with world-class office space, hotels, and shopping malls.
The Reichmanns are attracted by a market that until recently has had few top
quality buildings, and where developers obtain annual returns on their
capital of around 30 - 40 per cent.
Like other developers, they expect Mexico's integration with the US (helped
but not dependent upon the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement) and
rapid economic growth to fuel demand for top class office space.
'The demand for more space and demand for international level of quality
will grow rapidly,' says Paul Soskolne, head of development for Reichmann
International. 'Top level quality does not exist in any building in Mexico.
We can bring expertise to the market.'
However, some developers warn that the Reichmanns may have arrived too late
for spectacular returns, and may be too optimistic about Mexico's economic
prospects. They suggest that one of their projects bears a striking
resemblance to Canary Wharf, the development in London's docklands that
brought Olympia & York to bankruptcy.
In anticipation of an economic upturn that has yet to materialise, Mexico
has seen a construction boom for the past couple of years.
Softec, a leading property consultancy in Mexico City, calculates that the
supply of top quality triple-A office space will more than double from
5.158m sq ft in 1993 to 11.545m by 1995. Vacancy rates have already
increased from about 1 per cent in 1990 to 13 per cent now, and rents have
started to fall.
'There is a huge over-supply of office space that will take a long time to
absorb,' says Mr Gene Towle, the head of Softec. 'There are a lot of
projects that will find themselves without tenants.' Part of the problem has
been low growth: Mexico's economy is set to grow by only 2 per cent this
year, much less than originally forecast.
The Reichmanns will build a shopping, residential and office centre in an
old part of town devastated by the 1985 earthquake known as Alameda; a
42-storey office tower in Mexico City's principal financial district, on
Avenue Reforma; and a 20 acre commercial, office and residential village in
Santa Fe, on the western outskirts of the city.
Both the Alameda and Santa Fe projects are considered by many developers to
be risky. Previous plans to develop Alameda have fallen foul of local
residents' complaints. Mexico is changing government next year, and without
strong backing from the new Mayor of the city, the project could fail to
obtain the necessary momentum.
Santa Fe - a brand new 1,600 acre commercial, office and residential zone of
which the first part is already open - is about eight miles from the
financial centre of the city.
As yet there are no reliable transport links connecting it to the city, and
few restaurants or other secondary services have been set up.
Some developers say the project, like Canary Wharf, is too big and too far
away from the centre to attract necessary demand.
Mr Juan Enriquez Cabot, the city official in charge of Santa Fe, says
infrastructure will come when the development reaches a critical mass.
Unlike Canary Wharf, Santa Fe is just 10 minutes drive from the most
affluent residential zone of the City, making the site convenient for
executives.
Mr Reichmann said in a news conference in Mexico City that he will pre-sell
offices and sites before starting construction, thus reducing the risk of
being landed with unlet buildings.
The Reichmanns are looking for local partners to share the investment. Some
capital may be raised by a new Reichmann/Soros property fund.
The crucial and uncertain factor is demand for top quality space in the
future.
If Mexico's economy fails to boom, then even the most optimistic developers
admit the chances of all new buildings finding tenants is slight. The
country's property sector would then resemble more the sluggish markets in
the US and UK, and less the fast-growing high margin one the Reichmanns take
Mexico to be.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

931116

