FT931-4114

FT  12 MAR 93 / The Property Market: Out of town but much in mind - Approval
of a new shopping centre for Manchester has refueled an old debate


   By VANESSA HOULDER


One of the fiercest planning debates of the past decade was rekindled last
week when the government gave the go-ahead for Manchester's Trafford Centre,
one of the largest out-of-town shopping centres in the UK.
Its supporters, in one corner, were the developers who claimed the Pounds
200m scheme would bolster Manchester's regeneration and its attempt to
attract the Olympic games, the retailers who argued it would be a magnet for
shoppers throughout the north-west and the politicians who believed it would
generate 3,000 construction jobs and 6,000 permanent jobs thereafter.
In the other corner were its critics: the property owners, retailers and
local councillors who claimed that 1m sq ft of new shops on the outskirts of
Manchester would further damage business in the city. 'Our fear is that a
development of this size will have a profound effect on the town centre,'
said Mr John Ellison, a director of MEPC, the UK's second largest property
company.
Mr David Kaiserman, senior assistant city planning officer for Manchester
City Council, said: 'We see development of this type making it even more
difficult to achieve regeneration in the inner parts of the city.' Mr
Kaiserman is spokesman for a consortium of local authorities and property
developers that opposed the secretary of state's decision last week and are
considering whether to mount a High Court challenge.
Even the developers, the Manchester Ship Canal Company, accepted that the
arguments, which have raged for seven years, were not cut-and-dried.
'It was a knife-edge decision between planning considerations and economic
benefits,' said Mr Robert Hough, the company's chairman. 'Perversely, the
economic position may have helped; the government may have seen it as
creating 6,000 jobs at no public cost,' he added.
The schemes' critics accuse the government of changing its stance on
out-of-town retailing. 'We are surprised because the government's stated
policy is to protect existing shopping centres,' says Mr Ellison. This
belief stems chiefly from draft planning guidelines issued last October,
which appeared to emphasise the need to revitalise town centres, rather than
promote large out-of-town stores.
The guidelines talked about promoting the vitality and viability of town
centres and stressed the virtue of town centres in keeping private car use
to a minimum, reducing emissions of carbon dioxide.
They said that regional out-of-town shopping centres 'would not normally be
appropriate' if they would seriously jeopardise investment in nearby town
centres or unless there was likely to be a significant growth in population
or retail spending.
In the event, the government's decision on the Trafford Centre did little
more than mention these draft guidelines. 'While accepting that policy
guidance relating to town centres and retail development is still evolving,
the secretary of state does not consider that this means the proposals
before him should be refused planning permission on grounds of prematurity,'
said the DoE's letter explaining the decision.
In any case, the question of whether the Trafford Centre is likely to
jeopardise investment in town centres is hotly contested. An inquiry into
the Trafford Centre in 1988 found that it would not cause 'unacceptable harm
to the regeneration of the conurbation or to the vitality and viability of
any existing town centre'. But some retailers in the town centre have never
accepted this, believing that the more affluent shoppers will desert central
Manchester and its satellite towns.
Previous studies have focused on the 'Big Four' shopping centres -
Tyneside's MetroCentre, the UK's first out-of-town shopping centre, opened
in 1986, Meadowhall near Sheffield, Merry Hill in the West Midlands and
Lakeside in Essex.
Research published a year ago by the Oxford Institute of Retail Management,
commissioned by the Department of the Environment, found out-of-town sites
were adding to the plight of many town centres. But the general growth in
retail sales in the late 1980s softened the impact. The harsher economic
climate, and the gradual expiry of leases in town centres may further
encourage the retailers' desertion of the high street.
The Trafford Centre may turn out to be the last regional shopping centre to
be granted planning consent. With the exception of the south-west of
England, most of the country is now within reach of a regional centre. But
the arguments about the regional centres also apply to other types of
out-of-town stores, particularly supermarkets.
There is a fear that the growth of out-of-town food stores is hastening the
demise of local shops. The number of grocery shops has fallen in the last
three decades from more than 100,000 to 40,000, and the recession has
continued to throw up casualties.
This pressure is mounting, as the large supermarket groups target smaller
towns. Chesterton, the surveying firm, recently reported that the proportion
of large new food stores located in small towns has increased from less than
10 per cent in 1990 to about 25 per cent today.
At the same time, supermarket groups have been fiercely attacked for
building on greenfield sites and recreational land. This issue came to a
head last year, when protestors fought the development by Tesco of a
superstore on a former school playing field at Golden Hill in north-west
Bristol. The protest attracted extensive publicity as residents staged
vigils in trees to try to stop them being cut down.
One result was the formation of a pressure group, the National Sensitive
Sites Alliance, to fight supermarket developments on greenfield sites.
Earlier this year, a group of MPs tabled a motion calling for a moratorium
on such greenfield developments.
The supermarkets say that only a handful of their developments are on
greenfield sites, and that, recently, several chains have opened new high
street stores.
For all that, the attitude of retailers, consumers and investors suggests
that the increasing emphasis on out-of-town stores will not be relinquished
lightly.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

930312

