FT934-8895

FT  12 NOV 93 / Pohl breaks silence about Maastricht


   By DAVID MARSH, European Editor


MR Karl Otto Pohl, who resigned after 11 years as president of the German
Bundesbank two years ago, has broken his silence and has spoken out about
'defects' in the Maastricht treaty on European union.
In two lectures this week at the London School of Economics, the man who was
once Europe's best known central banker and is now part-time chairman of the
well capitalised Cologne-based Sal Oppenheim private bank,
left a 500-strong audience in no doubt of his scepticism about the likely
impact of the European Monetary Institute. The EMI is being set up in
Frankfurt next year to supervise the next stage of the planned move to
European economic and monetary union (Emu).
He risked inflaming old wounds with Chancellor Helmut Kohl, with whom
relations have soured because of Mr Pohl's criticism in 1990-91 of the
financing of German reunification.
Mr Pohl said mistakes over introducing the D-Mark into eastern Germany were
partly to blame for German budgetary imbalances which have caused the
Bundesbank to maintain tight money. This had worsened the European
recession, and made Emu prospects 'much less favourable'.
Mr Pohl referred defiantly to his celebrated remarks in March 1991 that the
aftermath of German monetary union had been 'a disaster'. The controversy
stirred by these comments helped lead to his resignation, and rankles still
with Mr Kohl. 'The Chancellor did not like the remark. But it was not
wrong,' Mr Pohl said.
Although he took care not to criticise directly Mr Kohl or the present
Bundesbank leadership, Mr Pohl took issue with the central bank's reliance
on monetary targets to guide interest rate policy. 'Money supply figures
should be used with caution,' he said.
On the next stage of Emu, Mr Pohl damped some European politicians' hopes
that the EMI would have a role in monetary decision-making. 'You must always
be aware that the EMI will have no decision-making powers. This is something
the Bundesbank will always insist on. The Bundesbank is not ready to share
responsibility with this new institution.' Trying to sound diplomatic, he
added: 'The creation of the EMI in Frankfurt might appear a rather academic
event without much practical relevance. I wouldn't say that. It could be
useful in some respects to continue the work of the European committee of
central bank governors to develop tools for a common monetary policy. But
this could also be carried out by the governors' committee.'
Mr Pohl said the main issue facing Europe was combating unemployment and
opening the west to the former eastern bloc. 'We can't solve these problems
by establishing a monetary institution in Frankfurt.'
Because of 'hidden unemployment', he said the true figure for unemployment
in Germany was between 5m and 6m compared with the official total of 3.5m.
'It's the same problem in Spain or France.'
Mr Pohl said the Maastricht treaty dealt more with the past than the future.
'I'm not sure whether a treaty which seeks to establish monetary and
political union in the west is the right answer to those countries (in
central and eastern Europe) who say they are also part of the European
community and European culture.'

The Financial Times


International Page 2

931112

