FT941-16925

FT  07 JAN 94 / Ladbroke and MAI to launch joint lottery bid


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Ladbroke, the leisure and hotel group, is joining forces with Lord Hollick's
MAI, the television and financial services company, to bid for the National
Lottery licence. An announcement is expected next week.
The new 50-50 consortium, which will be independent of both parent
companies, joins a growing list of significant groups vying to run the
lottery that within a few years could grow to a turnover of between Pounds
3bn and Pounds 4bn.
The declared bidders include Camelot, a consortium backed by Cadbury
Schweppes; The Great British Lottery Company, whose shareholders include
Granada, Carlton and Associated Newspapers; and Mr Richard Branson's UK
Lottery Foundation, which plans to hand over all its profits to a charitable
foundation.
Neither Ladbroke nor MAI would comment last night.
Ladbroke's interests include Vernons football pools and a chain of betting
offices. Apart from financial services and market research, MAI is the
controlling shareholder in Meridian Broadcasting, the ITV company for the
south of England.
It is believed the two companies intend to buy-in the specialist services
they need.
Mr Peter Davis, director-general of the National Lottery, has called for
expressions of interest in applying for the lottery licence by January 14,
with the applications deadline set for February 14.
The National Lottery could be launched late this year although early next
year now seems more likely.
IMS, the interactive telephone company, yesterday appealed for telephone
selling of lottery tickets and promoting of lottery games played by
telephone to be part of the lottery from the outset.
IMS estimates telephone transactions could account for 5 per cent of lottery
turnover.
Customs and Excise yesterday rejected a proposal from the UK Lottery
Foundation that the National Lottery should be zero-rated for value added
tax.
Stable hand, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940107

