FT943-1023

FT  27 SEP 94 / Belarus looks for a way ahead


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


   MINSK


Mr Alexander Lukashenko, elected president of Belarus two months ago, has
been furiously rethinking the country's future direction since President
Boris Yeltsin refused to burden Russia with the costs of a new economic and
currency union with the former Soviet republic.
Election promises, including a pledge of full employment and the wholesale
sacking of 'corrupt' officials have been thrown out the window following the
collapse of the main plank in Mr Lukashenko's election campaign, a close
Russian connection. Instead, he has imposed steep rises in the price of
bread, milk and vodka to cut the burden of subsidies and block the
haemorrhage of artificially cheap foodstuffs to Poland and Russia.
This month he announced that the Belarus rouble, called the Zaitsev (hare)
and nicknamed the 'Belarus bunny', would be the sole legal tender,
reinforcing the position of Mr Stanislav Bogdankevich, the pro-reform
president of the Belarus central bank who was one of the officials
threatened with dismissal in Mr Lukashenko's election campaign.
Instead of the promised bail-out from Moscow the 'programme of economic
priorities' outlined by the president two weeks ago emphasises self-help and
painful macro-economic stabilisation. The main aim is to reduce monthly
inflation from around 30-40 per cent to 10-11 per cent by the end of the
year and 7 per cent a year later.
Many details still have to be fleshed out in a programme which was put
together mainly by Soviet-era bureaucrats. Mr Vladimir Karyagin, president
of the Belarus Union of Entrepreneurs, complains: 'The programme has no
strategic view with far too much emphasis on controls and not enough on
incentives.'
Mr Karyagin says resolving the country's economic problems requires
encouragement for a private sector which hardly existed four years ago and
remains small.
The advocates of more private enterprise believe they have three cards up
their sleeve. The first is Mr Lukashenko's desperate need to succeed. The
40-year-old former army political commissar and collective farm manager
waged an unashamedly populist election campaign which swept away Mr
Vyacheslav Kebich, an old-style communist apparatchik. But now he has to
deliver higher living standards without the hoped-for Russian economic
assistance.
The second is the presence in Minsk of representatives from the
international financial institutions whose much needed financial assistance
and technical advice is conditional on the government keeping to policy
targets yet to be agreed.
In many ways the most convincing card is the example of its next-door
neighbour - Poland. But Mr Karyagin says: 'We can't just copy the
Balcerowicz plan (the shock therapy stabilisation programme named after the
former Polish finance minister). Poland always had private agriculture and a
large and influential diaspora and Poles always had a few dollars in their
pockets. They also received large-scale western financial aid. But the fact
that the Poles took certain policy decisions and received the results that
we can see helps us enormously in arguing with our bureaucrats.'
Many Belarussians still find it hard to imagine an independent existence for
this flat land of 10m people with no naturally defined borders, which was
totally integrated into the Soviet economy. Most of the big military plants
which produced over 70 per cent of industrial output are now idle, while the
country remains dependent on Russian oil and gas, apart from minimal local
oil production of around 2m tons annually.
In an interview inside the Stalin-era government offices, still graced
outside by an enormous jet-black sculpture of Lenin, Mr Lukashenko put the
emphasise on self-help but also appealed for more foreign investment. He has
chosen Mr Vladimir Sopronov, a young parliamentary deputy, as the head of
foreign economic policy co-ordination, and promised to take personal charge
of land sales to foreign investors 'to protect their interests and make sure
they don't have to pay bribes to corrupt officials'.
The aim now is to profit from the country's skill base and excellent
transport infrastructure by pursuing macro-economic stabilisation policies
which have laid the basis for economic prosperity and national sovereignty
not only in neighbouring Poland but also in Hungary and the Czech Republic.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940927

