FT943-13204

FT  21 JUL 94 / Directors may be liable to fines by new watchdog: Financial
services sector faces stronger penalties


   By ALISON SMITH


Individual board members of financial services companies - including
non-executive directors - could be penalised for the regulatory failures of
the organisations they run under proposals being considered by the Personal
Investment Authority, the new financial watchdog.
The move would be possible if - as expected - the new regulator to protect
the private investor introduces a system of registering individuals as well
as companies in the retail financial services sector.
The PIA, which began operations this week, is hoping to launch a public
debate about the arrangements for disciplining the organisations it
regulates, probably later this year. This proposal is likely to be included
in the consultation exercise.
At first, individual registration was seen as enabling the regulator to
impose fines specifically on 'rogue' sales agents. But after an initial
discussion, the PIA board has commissioned further work from its staff on
how this system could be used to make individual directors more responsible.
This might mean, for example, that a finance director who failed to ensure
that enough resources were put into training or compliance could be fined by
the PIA.
While it is less likely that non-executives would receive individual
penalties, if there were cases where they had brushed aside concerns that
had been put to them, they too could fall foul of the watchdog.
The current arrangements for disciplining companies have concerned City
regulators, who believe that they mean fines imposed for serious rule
breaches have to keep rising in order to attract publicity, which acts as
the most significant deterrent.
The record penalty imposed by Lautro, the existing regulator for the life
insurance industry, has risen from Pounds 180,000 imposed on Legal & General
in February to Pounds 300,000 imposed on Premium Life and Norwich Union in
April. So far this year, Lautro has fined 10 organisations a total of Pounds
1.77m.
If the rising trend continues, some regulators can foresee a point at which
ever-increasing penalties could reduce the returns available to investors.
They believe that penalising individual board members would end 'fine
inflation' while intensifying the deterrent effect.
Supporters of the idea accept it would put a greater burden of
responsibility on the PIA, since it would have a more direct impact on
individuals' careers.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940721

