FT944-14488

FT  22 OCT 94 / London Stock Exchange: Dollar weakness takes toll of blue
chip stocks - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


Concern over the US dollar dominated the London stock market yesterday, as
City analysts began to count the cost to profits of British companies of the
latest slide in the US currency. Developments closer to home, including the
latest UK gross domestic product numbers and growth numbers for the increase
in M3 money supply figures for Germany, while not helpful, were pushed to
one side.
A further setback was suffered when US bond yield moved above 8 per cent in
early trading yesterday. However, trading volume was not heavy and the
shares rallied quickly in London when Federal bonds steadied late in the UK
trading session.
The worst of the day saw the FT-SE 100 Share Index fall 46.8 to within 17
points of 3,000. The rally towards the close took the FT-SE 100 Index to
3,032.8 for a net loss on the session of 30.4.
Marketmakers were quicker yesterday to mark down share prices across the
full range of the market. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which had performed
better than the FT-SE 100 Index earlier in the week, dropped by 22.5 points
to 3,502.4. Business in non-Footsie stocks increased to make up around 62
per cent of the day's total. Private investors, who favour Mid 250 stocks,
have backed away from buying in London this week but appeared to turn
sellers yesterday.
The UK stock market has fallen by around 2.4 per cent this week, largely in
response to the dollar's setback. City analysts calculate that around one
fifth of aggregate profits of the FT-SE 100 listed companies are in dollar
form, and would be hit merely by translation into sterling.
In addition, some analysts stress the danger that the US Federal Reserve may
be forced to protect the dollar by raising key interest rates. The sharp
jump in its business index disclosed on Thursday by the Federal Bank of
Philadelphia appeared to signal serious inflationary pressures and has
focused attention on the statistics on third quarter US GDP due next Friday.
Any rise in rates in the US would increase pressure for similar moves in
Europe.
The fall overnight in both the US currency and bond prices hit British
government bonds at the opening. Gilts eased afresh when a gain of 7.7 per
cent in German M3 money supply for the September quarter was announced, and
brought further weakness in German bonds. The 0.7 per cent rise in UK GDP
was not far from forecasts but tended to confirm views that recovery in the
domestic economy might be softening.
Long-dated UK government bonds extended early losses to show falls ranging
to around  5/8 , with the shorts also easier. By the close of trading when
London was responding to a rally in US markets, losses in UK long gilts had
been trimmed to  9/32 , with the shorts  1/8 off.
Equity business was slow to develop yesterday morning, and the opening fall
of nearly 14 points on the Footsie reflected marking down operations rather
than selling pressure. Further falls in the Index were invariably prompted
by sudden plunges in the stock index futures. This in turn prompted deals in
the underlying equities and Seaq volume increased to show a final total for
the day of 516.2m shares, some 9 per cent up on the previous session.
The London market was subdued at the close when dealers admitted that the
near-term outlook for UK equities now depends on the dollar. Suggestions
that the Federal Reserve might have intervened to help the US currency
yesterday afternoon were left unconfirmed in UK stock market hours. City
analysts have begun to identify London stocks where profits are thought to
be vulnerable to further weakness in the dollar. There have also been signs
that investors are moving towards domestically-orientated stocks, with the
UK banking sector attracting buyers.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

941022

