FT944-2879

FT  15 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Harvest disappointment causes
havoc in Indian market


   By KUNAL BOSE


   CALCUTTA


The absence of a scientific crop forecasting agency has once again caused
havoc in Indian textile mills. As earlier forecasts of a bumper cotton crop
of 13.8m to 14m bales (170kg each) have proved excessive there has been
runaway inflation in local cotton prices.
Not only have cotton prices risen by 60 to 90 per cent over the levels
ruling a year ago, say Industry officials, but farmers and ginners are
holding on to their stocks in anticipation of still higher prices.
The spot price of Punjab J-34 grade is over Rs1,900 a maund (82lb), compared
with Rs1,010 a year ago. Concerned about the suspected large-scale cornering
of the harvest from the 1994-95 season (September to August), the Indian
Cotton Mills Federation has urged the government to impose restrictions on
ginners' and traders' stocks. Such restrictions are already enforced on
textile mills.
'The market had seen so many distortions in the current season that all
transactions in cotton were suspended in Punjab, a big trading centre, for a
week,' an industry official said.
Most analysts have now lowered this season's estimate to about 13.1m bales.
Some believe, however, that it will not be much more than last year's 12.1m.
Industry officials say slow arrivals of new season supplies make it
difficult to make a confident prediction. 'Only in the new year will we get
a fair idea of the Indian cotton crop,' said one.
What is known, however, is that crops in the three northern states of
Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan have suffered a setback because of the second
severe boll worm attack in two years. And growers are worried that boll
worms and other pests have become immune to pesticide. The combined crop in
the three states may be only 3.8m bales, down from the original estimate of
4.4m.
Elsewhere, cyclonic storms have hit crops in the southern states of Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka and late rains cut output in Maharashtra
and Gujarat.
'Because of the high prices of the commodity last year, the farmers have
raised the land under cotton by nearly 9 per cent to 7.92m hectares,' said
an industry official. 'The crop will once again be small, but the unusually
high prices will sustain the growers' interest.'
The Eastern India Textile Mills Association has pointed out that many of its
members are 'holding cotton stocks of less than a week'. In these
circumstances the mills, as last year, will be importing cotton. During
1993-94, they imported around 300,000 bales duty free.
Even though the crop is going to be small, the government, in conformity
with the long-term export policy, has been considering allowing the export
of 500,000 bales. So far, however, export quotas have been granted for only
100,000 bales of the Bengal Deshi variety and 30,000 bales of soft cotton
waste. The government may go slow on exports if prices remain at the present
level.
'The issue is not only to satisfy the domestic requirement of nearly 13m
bales of cotton but also to have enough carry forward stocks for the next
season,' said an EITMA official. 'The Indian cotton season officially begins
in September. But the new crop starts coming into the market only in
November. Ideally, we should have an end-season surplus of 3m bales.'

The Financial Times


London Page 40

941215

