FT942-16134

FT  12 APR 94 / Observer: A rose by any other name


Who would be a bank supervisor? Success is untrumpeted and the best
reputations usually end up tarnished. Yet Rosalind Gilmore, 57, chairman of
the Building Societies Commission, is in danger of leaving her job smelling
of roses.
She intends to retire at the end of this year, having steered the building
society movement safely through its worst upheaval in living memory.
Financial deregulation, a consequent hair-raising increase in the level of
mortgage debt, the first collapse in nominal house prices since the second
world war, unprecedented arrears and repossessions - all came at a time when
the building societies' capital base was uncomfortably slender.
The worst she can be accused of is nannying her charges. A robust approach
to supervision was anyway part of the key to Gilmore's success. Serious
nannying was required to ensure that troubled societies were taken over by
larger and sounder institutions before cross-infection caused further
turmoil in the sector. The successful absorption of Town & Country by the
Woolwich Building Society in November 1991 marked the high tide - in the
public eye, at least - of Gilmore's regulatory activism.
True, her success owed something to the charity of others, notably the
insurance companies that chose to underwrite a growing share of the risk in
mortgage lending at the most inauspicious moment.
Taxpayers and legislators have also done their bit, since income support for
distressed borrowers is now paid direct to mortgage lenders. And Gilmore
didn't have to cope with a US-style deposit insurance scheme which gave
managers of troubled savings and loans carte blanche to run amok.
Yet the record speaks for itself: depositors have emerged with their savings
intact. If only she had been in charge of regulating the life assurance and
pensions industry. Were it not for her age, she would have made a natural
replacement for the Bank of England's Brian Quinn when he gives up
regulating.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940412

