FT942-14381

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (3): Office in the sky spreads its wings
 -Paul Taylor discusses the widening use of passengers' air-ground telephone
links


   By PAUL TAYLOR


The sight of an business traveller using the latest in slimline colour
notebook computers no longer attracts much attention from airline cabin crew
or fellow passengers.
Some of them will probably also be carrying a shoulder bag or briefcase
containing a portable computer, fax-modem, cellular telephone and the
associated paraphernalia that makes up the 'mobile office'.
Advances in technology over the past decade have removed most of the
restrictions imposed in the past by heavy hardware and fixed communications
links. Today it is possible to make a voice telephone call, send a facsimile
message or exchange computer data with the office local area network from
virtually anywhere in the world by using cellular radio or satellite
telecommunications services.
Soon a second generation of pocket-sized personal digital assistants (PDAs)
will be available, adding another dimension to the concept of the mobile
office by combining the functions of a pen-based computer and a hand-held
telecommunications device.
Meanwhile, the data and voice telecommunications services available to the
globe-trotting business traveller are also expanding rapidly and becoming
more international. For example, the introduction of digital cellular
telephone services across Europe based on the pan-European GSM standard
means that travellers will soon be able to use their mobile phone or even
more conveniently, their GSM smart card, anywhere in Europe.
Similarly, on both sides of the Atlantic a new breed of dedicated mobile
digital packet-switched data networks is springing up to provide portable
computer users with high speed, high quality wireless data links.
These terrestrial telecommunications developments are being mirrored in the
sky with the introduction of new digital aeronautical telecommunications
services in the US and now in Europe and elsewhere.
For the first time they are providing airline passengers with a wide range
of high-quality telecommunications and other services such as in-seat
shopping, forward bookings, flight information and business news. Credit
cards are used to pay for all the services.
The original air-to-ground public telephone services - dubbed 'pay phones in
the sky' - were introduced by US carriers on their domestic flights in the
mid-1980s and were based on analogue VHF radio links. Although call quality
often left much to be desired, their growth was nevertheless impressive.
For example, more than 41m calls, including 10.5m in 1993 alone, have been
made using GTE's original Airfone system, which was introduced in late 1984,
and its more recent digital successor, GTE GenStar. GTE currently has air
telephones installed in 2,049 US jets.
The new GenStar system is built around 109 terrestrial base stations which
provide a telephone service over the US at Dollars 2 a minute.
In addition to enabling passengers to connect their portable computers to
send facsimile messages or data, GenStar - which is already in operation in
34 shuttle aircraft - will eventually also provide access to multi-language
video, video games, entertainment channels and flight information delivered
via seat-back screens or liquid crystal displays.
GenStar's customers include the USAir and Delta shuttles, United Airlines,
TWA and Air Canada. GTE plans to have the new service installed on more than
1,400 aircraft by the end of this year.
However, GTE faces fierce competition in the US and elsewhere from Claircom
Communications, a joint venture between McCaw Cellular Communications and
General Motor's Hughes Network Systems, which holds a 19 per cent stake.
Claircom's AirOne system, launched in 1992 with orders from Alaska,
Southwest and Northwest, has also won contracts from American Airlines and
from Air France which plans to install the system in up to 80
transcontinental jets. Altogether, Claircom claims that more than 1,500
aircraft are due to be fitted with its AirOne system.
The third competitor in the US digital air telecommunications market is
In-Flight Phone, a privately-controlled Illinois-based company. Its
FlightLink system has won orders from USAir, America West and Carnival
Airlines in the US and with Kuwait and Saudi Arabian Airlines in the Middle
East.
Some industry estimates suggest that revenues from digital US terrestrial
flight telephone system (TFTS) networks and services will be running at
Dollars 450m a year by the end of 1995.
All three US digital network operators are linking up their systems with
emerging satellite-based telecommunications systems to provide worldwide
access.
Satellite-based telephone services have been available on many private jets
and on a limited number of long-haul flights for a number of years. However,
outside North America public access aircraft telecommunications services
have been much slower to develop.
The development of a European terrestrial flight telephone system capable of
supporting low cost, high quality telecommunications services in the skies
above the region has been delayed by years of debate and wrangling between
rival national telephone organisations.
Unlike the competing US systems which all use proprietary technology, the
West European TFTS is being built by individual telecommunications
organisations but will be based on a common standard.
The telecommunications organisations in the UK and France have already
completed their segments of the TFTS network infrastructure and the first
ground stations in Sweden and Italy are also operational. The remainder of
Europe, including Scandinavia and Germany, will go live by the end of this
year.
Two TFTS service providers, Jetphone, a Pounds 10m BT-France Telecom joint
venture, and Mercury FlightLink, a subsidiary of Mercury Communications set
up in partnership with In-Flight Phone of the US, have already been
established to resell services on the trans-European network and provide the
aircraft equipment.
Like their transatlantic counterparts, both European service providers also
plan eventually to offer their customers a wide range of services in
addition to basic voice telecommunications.
Jetphone marked its official launch in January by announcing an agreement
with Air France to equip the French national carrier's entire short and
medium-haul fleet of 110 aircraft. British Airways is also installing
Jetphone equipment on 11 Super Shuttle airliners.
Jetphone has set a price of Ecu4.20 (Dollars 5.80) a minute for all calls
regardless of time of day or destination. Airlines will set prices in their
own currencies. Air France has tentatively set its price at FFr30 a minute
while British Airways will charge Pounds 3.30 a minute.
Meanwhile, Mercury FlightLink, which plans a two-tier call tariff structure
 -Pounds 2 for calls within Europe and Pounds 4 for calls to destinations
outside the region - is understood to have already signed two service
contracts which will be announced shortly and to be negotiating a third.
Although the company is likely to concentrate on being a TFTS service
provider, it is also considering building and operating its own network
segments in the UK and other countries where competition is being
encouraged. Mercury is also bidding for the German TFTS contract.
Mr David Stone, managing director of Jetphone, is predicting that the first
commercial calls will be made over the European TFTS 'in the next couple of
months'. Over the next five years he believes 1,000 aircraft in Europe will
be fitted with equipment for TFTS services, and that these aircraft will be
generating call revenues of Pounds 80m a year.
Mr Stone does not expect the TFTS services to compete directly with
expensive satellite-based airborne communications services.
For example, calls on Skyphone, the satellite system in which BT is also a
shareholder along with Singapore Telecom and Norwegian Telecom, are charged
at Dollars 9.95 a minute. Instead, he suggests that TFTS-based systems will
primarily serve local and regional markets while satellite-based systems
will service long-haul flights.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940420

