FT944-10972

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (7): Choppy
conditions likely to continue - Bonds / Conner Middelmann discusses the
effects of the bear market


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


The year 1994 will not be easily forgotten by fixed-income fund managers.
It started out promisingly enough, at the height of a global bond rally
which had driven yields close to their historical lows. Expecting
bond-positive fundamentals to continue into 1994, the majority of fund
managers went into the new year holding long positions in most markets - an
error many spent the rest of the year scrambling to rectify.
'We haven't come out of this year in flying colours as an industry,' says
Peter Flynn, a director of the fixed income group at Fleming Investment
Management. 'Many fund managers were like rabbits caught in the headlights,'
he says. he added: 'The majority got it plain wrong: many thought Europe
would decouple from the US market and continue to outperform, but that
didn't happen.'
After the spectacular bull run in 1993, the market's fortunes turned
abruptly in early February when the US Federal Reserve raised interest rates
for the first time in the current cycle, raising fears of inflation fuelled
by economic growth. Further pressure came from the failure of US-Japanese
trade talks, which undermined the dollar - contrary to widespread
expectations for a strengthening US currency. Both of these factors
triggered heavy selling by highly leveraged bond market operators, causing
prices to spiral lower.
'The mother of all bond rallies turned into the mother of all bear markets,'
sighs one portfolio manager.
In this environment, many investors fled to the sidelines, reducing their
exposure to a minimum. But while investor demand for bonds was shrinking,
supply was swelling through heavy debt issuance by governments around the
world. Moreover, huge amounts of supply which had been issued in 1993 and
placed in loose hands flooded back to haunt the market.
All this pushed bond yields - nominal and real - to dizzy heights, where, it
was hoped, they would eventually lure investors back into the market.
Although this appears to have begun in recent weeks, many investors remain
reluctant to launch a bold comeback. Indeed, many fund managers got their
fingers so badly burnt that they are likely to keep a very low profile
between now and the end of the year.
'As we get closer to year-end a lot of investors will just sit on their
hands,' says Paul Campayne, bond strategist at Paribas Capital Markets.
'It's been a bad year for investors, and I think a lot of them will prefer
to stay out than take any more bets.'
JP Morgan's Global Government Bond Index, which many fund managers track as
their performance benchmark, has shed 4.1 per cent in the year to
mid-October, after rising by 14.5 per cent in 1993. The European index has
been even more volatile, dropping by 5 per cent so far this year after
gaining 20.6 per cent last year.
However, many fund managers appear even to have underperformed their
benchmarks: according to data compiled by Micropal, an independent data
provider, investors who put their money in UK unit trusts investing in gilts
and international bonds have lost an average 10.77 per cent (including
charges) in the year to October 17.
While there have been few success stories, there has been successful damage
control, especially by the lucky few who reduced their bond market exposure
early on.
'We felt everything had got hugely carried away last year and were very
nervous for a large part of 1993, so we scaled back our exposure during the
year - if anything, we came out too early,' says Gerard Wherity, director of
fixed interest at Abbey Life.
This year, Mr Wherity says he concentrated on core markets in Europe, US
Treasuries and Japan and avoided some of the more peripheral markets.
The higher-yielding peripheral markets, including Scandinavia and southern
Europe, were particularly badly hit during the sell-off. During the 1993
rally, they were boosted by yield-hungry investors seeking yield pick-ups
over the core markets which had already become very expensive. But after
sentiment turned they got hammered as investors refocused on these
countries' fiscal and political concerns.
Cash also proved a safe haven during the worst of the sell-off, says Mr
Wherity. 'At some points in the first half of the year we had more than 50
per cent in cash.' He says he started running down cash positions from
mid-year, bringing cash holdings down to around 14 per cent in mid-October -
the lowest it's been all year.
However, although he feels there is scope for a sizeable bounce, he says it
is hard to predict where the markets will go next. 'I have no faith in all
the economic arguments for a bond rally - that's all crystal ball-gazing. We
will simply wait and see how things develop and take it from there.'
In the next 18 months, as Europe's economies continue to grow, fears of
inflationary pressures will remain on the boil and interest rates are
expected to rise across Europe. This is likely to spell continued choppy
conditions for the bond markets, although some expect volatility to ease.
'This year saw the transition from falling to rising interest rates, and the
market was split among those who expected rates to ease further and those
expecting them to rise,' says Ian Donald, a fund manager at Lazard
Investors. 'Next year will see a much clearer trend as far as interest rate
expectations go - the question now is not whether rates will rise, but only
by how much,' he says, adding that he expects markets to be less volatile as
a result.
But how can bond fund managers, who are essentially bull-market
professionals, prosper in an environment where interest rates are rising?
Basically, they will have to refine the way they take bets on interest
rates. 'Once you see you're in a bear market, you have to get more creative
and sophisticated,' says Fleming's Mr Flynn.
This means that, rather than looking for markets where rates are falling
(which causes bond yields to fall and prices to rise), fund managers need to
identify markets where interest rates are changing. With the help of
sophisticated investment tools and strategies, they can take advantage of
these changes, no matter the direction in which rates are going. This may
include structured products, for instance bonds with embedded options,
sophisticated derivatives strategies, and active yield curve management -
both on spreads between different countries' yield curves and along one
particular curve.
Some of these strategies can be quite conservative, but while they may limit
the portfolio's upside, they certainly protect its downside - which will
endear fund managers to their clients at times when the going gets tough.
'If you get it right, it won't knock the lights out of your portfolio, but
will allow you to outperform incrementally,' says Mr Flynn.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

941108

