FT943-13085

FT  21 JUL 94 / World Trade News: The joint way to break steel bars - A look
at Japanese-American partnerships that beat the import barriers


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


Nippon Steel, the world's largest steelmaker, last week agreed to take a 10
per cent equity stake in New CF&I of the US, a subsidiary of Oregon Steel,
and provide its subsidiary, CF&I, with the technology and facilities to
manufacture head-hardened rail.
The arrangement will enable Nippon Steel to overcome the impact of the yen's
sharp rise against the dollar and to deflect US anti-dumping charges, while
CF&I will benefit by being able to supply the railway industry with a
leading product.
The venture comes two years after CF&I joined Bethlehem Steel in bringing
charges against Japanese steelmakers of dumping rail in the US, and is one
of six ventures by Japanese steelmakers in the US.
Through partnerships with US steel companies, Japanese producers have been
enjoying thriving business in the US while the domestic market has been in
the doldrums.
The US recovery and the longer term need to invest in infrastructure are
expected to support continuing demand for steel products, which Japanese
producers will be able to supply through their US operations without the
worry of anti-dumping duties.
An example of a successful move of this type is Kobe Steel's two joint
ventures in the US with USS, the largest US steelmaker.
Mr Ryuji Higashi, director of Kobe's steel sales group, expresses regret
over the persistent trade friction between the US and Japan - which he
blames in part on the politicians and bureaucrats - but says that between
businesses on both sides, and particularly between Kobe and USX, 'things are
going very well'.
USS/Kobe Steel is an equal partnership joint venture with USX, the parent
company of USS, which produces steel bars and pipes for the automotive,
petrochemical and aerospace industries.
The company has been profitable in each of its five years in operation, with
profits of Y190bn (Pounds 1.2bn) in the fiscal year to end-March. Its
success has enabled it to finance substantial capital investments.
Pro-Tec, the second joint venture between Kobe and USX, which makes coated
steel sheet for the car, electronics and construction industries, did not
make a profit in its first year of operation.
But Kobe is pleased that the company, which began operations in January last
year, is already running at 70 per cent capacity and turned profitable in
the fourth quarter of its first year.
'Whether a joint venture succeeds depends on whether the partners can trust
each other and in that sense, Kobe and USX have been a great success,' says
Mr Higashi.
From the start, the partnership seemed like a perfect match. At the time,
USX's Lorain Works in Ohio needed equipment and technology if it was to
remain competitive.
Kobe Steel needed a facility in the US and an experienced workforce to help
it supply that market, including the growing number of Japanese 'transplant'
motor vehicle manufacturers, free from the risk of anti-dumping charges.
There are obvious differences in management style. 'The culture is
different, the history is different, the language is different,' Mr Higashi
says.
However, the two sides have been careful to respect each other's strengths
and capitalise on them. On technology, for example, the US company generally
heeds the advice of its Japanese partner whose technological expertise
helped transform Lorain into a world class facility. Kobe leaves production
matters largely to the Americans.
The partnership has also been able to take advantage of the US company's
marketing skills and of Kobe's connections with Japanese companies which
have set up manufacturing operations in the US.
Kobe is also pleased that it is able to avoid the worst impact of the yen's
recent rise against the dollar. If the company had still been exporting
coated steel sheet to the US, for example, the yen's rise would have meant
loss of the business, Mr Higashi says.
Kobe's US experience will provide useful lessons as the company faces
pressure to look outside Japan for future growth.
Given the long history and pride of the European steel industry, Europe is
unlikely to provide opportunities for similar ventures. But Mr Higashi
believes that eventually the company will have to consider manufacturing
elsewhere in Asia to supply the growing south-east Asian and Chinese
markets.
'One day we will no longer be able to export to these regions,' Mr Higashi
says.
Although setting up manufacturing facilities overseas is a risky move for
capital intensive steel companies, and there are no large steel companies
such as USX in the region to smooth the process, Kobe's happy experience
with its American partner bodes well for such ventures in Asia.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940721

