FT941-13130

FT  27 JAN 94 / Palumbo raps 'irresponsible neglect' of arts


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Lord Palumbo, outgoing chairman of the Arts Council, yesterday delivered a
stinging attack on the government's 'irresponsible neglect' of the arts.
He told the Lords that cuts in the next three years would reduce funds for
artists by 12 per cent, virtually reversing a 15 per cent increase since
1989. He said: 'This amounts to irresponsible neglect of a precious national
resource which generates a threefold return for every pound of taxpayers
money invested in it.
'The government's timing is impeccable, coinciding with a contemporary
decline in available funds for the arts from its mainstays of local
authorities, box office, sponsorship and charitable foundations.
'I am well aware of the vital necessity to constrain public expenditure, but
success feeds upon itself and it should be encouraged and built upon, not
penalised.'
Lord Palumbo's outspoken criticism of the government reflects anger in the
arts establishment about a Pounds 3.2m cut in the Arts Council budget,
announced in November.
In what amounted to a comprehensive indictment of the government's arts
policy, he accused ministers of wasting Pounds 6m since 1989 in a failed
attempt to achieve value for money.
He said: 'There has never been a moment in those five years when we have not
been reviewed, counter-reviewed, surveyed, appraised (and) tested against
market forces. That has cost a great deal in time and effort, and although
the calculation is imprecise, it has probably cost the taxpayer something in
the order of Pounds 6m in an attempt to establish value for money, and I
doubt very much that we have been able to do it.
'Of course mistakes are sometimes made, and when they are we regret them.
Equally on some occasions the blame we receive is unjust.'
Lord Palumbo said the decision to divert funds from the performing arts to
the refurbishment of London's Albert Memorial rather than use national
lottery profits was 'an act of the purest folly.'
Lord Palumbo will be replaced as Art Council chairman in March by Lord
Gowrie, a former Conservative arts minister.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940127

