FT941-12826

FT  28 JAN 94 / Agency aids jobless graduates


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


When Mandy Glucksman graduated from Liverpool John Moores University in June
1992 with an upper second in business studies, she expected to step straight
into a career.
Instead she encountered the dole, four low-level temporary clerical jobs,
and a series of rejections at final interviews for work that matched her
qualifications.
Ms Glucksman then heard through friends about Prospectus, an experimental
centre for unemployed graduates being set up in her native Manchester. She
became one of its first clients last October.
Six weeks later - after assessment, tests and training - she was taken on by
JD Williams, a Manchester-based catalogue and mail order company in the N.
Brown Group. She is now in charge of a team of 15 telephone salespeople.
Prospectus, which says it is the first agency of its kind in Britain, was
formally opened yesterday. It already has about 200 unemployed graduate
clients and another 450 have made inquiries.
Its Pounds 75,000 annual budget is being met jointly by Manchester Training
and Enterprise Council and the European Social Fund.
Greater Manchester was chosen for the experiment because with four
universities, two graduate schools and an array of colleges of higher or
further education, it houses one of the largest concentrations of full-time
students in Europe - more than 55,000 of them. However, jobless graduates
have been turning up from as far afield as Devon.
Mr Martin McNally, the manager of Prospectus, estimates graduate
unemployment at between 12 per cent and 15 per cent, with many of those in
employment doing jobs well below their qualifications, some of them menial.
The centre offers free counselling, psychological profiling, and
psychometric testing, as well as coaching through videos to help graduates
perform better at inter-views.
The idea is to define their skills and aptitudes so they can target jobs
where they will have the best chance and then sell themselves to the
employers more effectively.
Clients have been equally split between the sexes, while 43 per cent have
been graduates in the sciences, 33 per cent in the arts and 24 per cent in
business studies.
Ms Glucksman's problem was not being memorable enough at interviews. 'I was
shown how to rewrite my curriculum vitae to highlight points that would
attract questions. I then prepared answers to those questions which would
help make me stand out in the interviewer's mind.'
A project on job satisfaction in a regional health authority, which she had
done as part of her degree, thus enabled her say something unusual about
herself at interviews.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940128

