FT941-13027

FT  27 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Rover sales above break-even - Honda said
to be in talks with BAe about raising 20% holding


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


New vehicle sales by Rover Group, the British Aerospace subsidiary, rose by
5 per cent to 442,745 last year - well above break-even level.
The increase, disclosed yesterday, underpinned the forecast made in
September by Mr George Simpson, the outgoing chairman, that Rover would
return to profit in 1993 after two consecutive years of losses.
However, Rover denied reports that it had already confirmed it would be
disclosing a profit, before interest and tax, as part of BAe's results
announcement on February 23.
Disclosure of the improved performance came as insiders close to both Rover
in London and Honda in Tokyo indicated that the two companies were
discussing the possible raising by Honda of its 20 per cent equity stake in
Rover.
This, also, has been formally dismissed as speculation by both sides.
However, it is understood that discussions have been going on for some time
although they are weeks, and possibly months, away from a conclusion.
'There are obvious benefits to such an arrangement', one insider commented
in London last night. 'It would free up capital for BAe and in the case of
BAe floating off Rover a bigger Honda stake would help keep away predators.'
In Tokyo a Honda executive said: 'There are no details we can talk about yet
. . . but the issue of our stake in Rover is something we are talking about
with BAe.'
While total sales to dealers were up 5 per cent at 442,000 units, retail
sales by dealers rose 9 per cent to 448,000 cars.
'This performance has been achieved despite extremely difficult trading
conditions throughout the world,' said Mr John Towers, Rover's group
managing director.
Rover's last profit of Pounds 65m before tax and interest was in 1990.
Within the sales total, the contribution of the Land Rover four-wheel-drive
subsidiary leapt by 30 per cent to a record 73,527.
Total export sales rose 17 per cent to 180,256 vehicles. Sales in
continental Europe rose by 8 per cent, despite the new car market as a whole
falling by 15 per cent, making Rover the only sizeable manufacturer to
increase sales on the Continent last year. Its sales in France, Spain and
Portugal also reached record levels.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940127

