FT942-12829

FT  28 APR 94 / Watchdog warns DTI on gas document


   By ROLAND RUDD and DAVID LASCELLES


The regulator of the gas industry yesterday warned the Department of Trade
and Industry that she was ready to publish an important consultation
document on the future of the UK gas market if the government continued to
hold it up unnecessarily.
Ms Clare Spottiswoode, Ofgas director general, said she would rather rewrite
the document than see the delay continue beyond the local elections on May
5.
The document will lay out the structure of the liberalised gas market in the
wake of last year's monopoly inquiry into British Gas, and pave the way for
a new bill regulating the industry. Ofgas has already sent the DTI detailed
proposals on which the document will be based.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, originally promised
publication early this year, but it has been delayed for several months for
reasons which have not been disclosed.
One theory is that the document is so sensitive politically the government
wants to postpone it until after the May 5 poll.
The gas industry says the delay is jeopardising investment plans. One of the
gas industry's main concerns is that lengthy delay could throw into question
the entire gas industry reform because it would prevent the new bill being
passed before the next general election.
At a conference yesterday on the future of the gas industry at the Institute
of Economic Affairs, Ms Spottiswoode said: 'If the gas consultation document
is delayed beyond that time (of the local elections) then I would prefer to
rewrite it myself and send it out as an Ofgas document.'
Ms Spottiswoode stressed there was no dispute with the DTI.
Ofgas believes it could rewrite and publish the document 'within days'. The
text would have to be redrafted because the document is Crown copyright.
Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, said yesterday he hoped the document would be
published 'soon'. He told the same conference: 'It has taken us some time,
but I make no apology for this. The issues are complex. We want to find the
best way forward. This is not to say that we are going to have solved every
problem and found all the right answers when we issue the document. If we
thought that, we would not need to consult at all. But we do want to get as
close as we can.'
Among the issues in the document are whether prices will rise in a
liberalised market, and how the poor and elderly will be assured continuing
gas supplies.
Energy row intensifies, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940428

