FT942-16278

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (13): Agreements may hinder
growth - A look at trade accords


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


Those arguing that Latin America is set for substantial growth into the 21st
century often cite the rapid move of the region towards free trade in
support of their case.
There is little doubt that trade within the western hemisphere is growing
rapidly, if from a low base that has characterised the region's trade
relations in the past. The proportion of the region's exports accounted for
by other Latin American countries jumped to 16.7 per cent in 1992, up from
10.8 per cent in 1990. US exports to Latin America have doubled in seven
years, rising to more than Dollars 80bn in 1993.
Yet this growth stems largely from the unilateral reduction of trade
barriers in nearly every Latin country rather than the complicated patchwork
of trade agreements which has grown up in the region in recent years.
Furthermore, some proponents of free trade are beginning to worry that this
proliferation of agreements may hinder further trade growth and provide
obstacles to the development of a free trade zone in the whole western
hemisphere.
Far from being the building blocks of hemispheric economic integration,
sub-regional free trade agreements 'are more likely to be stumbling blocks,'
argues Mr Moises Nam, senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment in
Washington and a former Venezuelan minister.
One concern is that so many of these agreements lack common external
tariffs, requiring in their place complicated agreements on rules of origin.
The aim of rules of origin is to prevent the country with the lowest tariff
acting as the conduit for all exports from outside the free trade area.
They have a potential, however, for developing into a bureaucratic nightmare
and being used as a proxy for protectionism. In this way, these agreements
could water down the benefits of generalised lower tariffs, and herald a
return to the inefficient and usually corrupt customs operations from which
the region moved in the late 1980s.
Where trade agreements do carry provisions for common external tariffs,
there have usually been difficulties. Mercosur, which brings together
Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay, was forced to agree a list of
important exceptions to the common tariff. The Andean group of Venezuela,
Colombia, Ecuador, Bolivia and Peru, meanwhile, has to cope with the
supposedly temporary withdrawal of Peru, lower tariffs negotiated for
Bolivia and the new Venezuelan government's suspicion of neighbouring
Colombia and its general distrust of free trade.
The Caribbean Community's attempts to lower its common external tariff have
been beset by compliance problems, while the common external tariff proposed
in 1997 for the Central American Common Market is likely to be selective.
But these are not the only concerns. A proliferation of trade accords could
marginalise some states by encouraging investment to concentrate on a few
'hub' countries and by developing trade links between the most dynamic
economies, leaving others by the wayside.
Even the prospect of free trade with the US does not necessarily offer the
benefits to Latin American economies that are commonly supposed.
A 1992 analysis by two World Bank economists, Refik Erzan and Alexander
Yeats, argued that the trade benefits for most Latin counties - apart from
Brazil and Mexico - of free trade with the US will anyway be small. This is
because most Latin American products - predominantly raw materials - enter
the US with low tariffs already.
The analysis ignored the dynamic trade effects - the possibility that an
open US market might encourage Latin economies to move 'downstream' over
time, exporting less in raw materials and more value-added products.
Neither could it examine the other benefits - the insurance effect of being
allied to the US if the trading system degenerated into blocs and the
increased investment flows that would possibly emerge from the longer-term
stability in economic policy that would be inferred.
However, free trade agreements with the US or accession to the North
American Free Trade Agreement between the US, Mexico and Canada are unlikely
to be easy to achieve.
While US officials have privately raised the question of whether Mexico will
be willing to let other Latin countries into its exclusive Nafta club, the
US will in fact dominate decision-making.
In July, Washington will name those countries eligible to negotiate free
trade agreements with the US. The nomination does not commit the US to
negotiations and is silent on whether accession to Nafta or a bilateral
trade accord with the US is the right way forward. The list will be next
reviewed in 1997.
Trade will also be on the agenda for the Summit of the Americas meeting
planned for Miami in December, and the Clinton administration has repeatedly
indicated its willingness to talk next with Chile about free trade
agreements.
But it is far from certain that the administration, which expended much
political capital in pushing Nafta through, will want to spend more on a
relatively minor policy priority. Further, apart from Chile, it is not clear
that other countries meet the conditions the US now apparently believes
necessary to join the Nafta club - in particular labour and environmental
requirements.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940411

