FT944-14547

FT  22 OCT 94 / Ulster Peace Process: City defence to stay for two years


   By JIMMY BURNS


The Corporation of London yesterday said it expected security measures to
protect the City from IRA attacks to stay in place for 'two to three years'.
Mr Michael Cassidy, the chairman of the Corporation's policy and resources
committee, said: 'The intelligence we have is that the IRA is continuing to
move weapons and equipment around, and the City of London remains a prime
potential target.'
While there has been a relaxation of armed police checks in London since the
ceasefire, Mr Cassidy said that businesses and the police remained in favour
of making a restrictive traffic scheme permanent and of continuing lower
profile searches of suspicious vehicles entering the City.
Mr Cassidy said the annual cost of these security measures of between Pounds
3m and Pounds 5m were 'totally manageable'. The corporation has an annual
rate collection of Pounds 700m.
The position taken by Mr Cassidy reflects a private consensus in the
security forces that the possibility of IRA terrorism resuming in the future
cannot be ruled out. In the case of London, there is the extra consideration
being given to the resumption of violence in the Middle East and the threat
of terrorist action by extremist Arab groups.
The government's conciliatory announcement yesterday is thought to have been
based on advice from MI5, the intelligence service, that the IRA's internal
discipline is holding around the ceasefire although the possibility of
maverick units carrying out a terror-ist attack has not been ruled out.
One senior anti-terrorist officer said: 'The situation is still too fragile.
Much as we'd like to say it's all over we cannot risk lowering our guard.'
Of great concern is the IRA's large stockpile of arms, much of which remains
hidden in the Irish republic. The armoury includes several hundred rifles
and grenades, numerous mortars, and enough commercial and home-made
explosives to provoke considerable tactical destruction on both sides of the
Irish sea for years to come.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941022

