FT941-4006

FT  14 MAR 94 / Focus on the centre ground: Italian general elections


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


As Italy's general election enters its final two weeks, attention has
switched to the large, undecided vote caused by the collapse of the
traditional centrist grouping.
Polls published last week showed that neither of the two main alliances on
the right and left were capable of winning an absolute parliamentary
majority. This raises the spectre of the centre, composed of the reshuffled
remnants of the five parties that have governed post-war Italy, acting as
arbiters in the formation of the next government.
The polls, the last permitted before the election on March 27, also
suggested that the momentum had slowed behind media magnate Silvio
Berlusconi's Forza Italia movement.
Mr Berlusconi himself suffered embarrassment over the weekend after his
younger brother Paolo admitted he had paid L1.3bn (Pounds 520,000) to
Socialist and Communist local councillors to secure a golf club development
at Basiglio near Milan. In connection with these payments, Milan magistrates
searched the home of Mr Alessandro Moneta, a former mayor of Basiglio and
currently southern Italy co-ordinator for Forza Italia.
According to a poll conducted by Directa, the Berlusconi-dominated
right-wing alliance would obtain 295 seats in the 630 lower house against
242 seats for the Progressive Alliance led by the former communist Party of
the Democratic Left (PDS).
The Directa poll - broadly endorsed by another conducted by Telemontecarlo -
indicated that the PDS will get a maximum of 135 seats in the chamber of
deputies with Reconstructed Communism, the hardline rump of the old
Communist party, winning up to 35 seats. The strength of Reconstructed
Communism and its damaging programme proposals, such as raising taxes on
government bonds, are imposing severe strains on the Progressive Alliance.
The centre parties, composed mainly of the former Christian Democrats
reformed under the Popular party (PPI) and referendum leader Mr Mario
Segni's Pact for Italy, would get 68. The remaining seats would go to the
small parties.
Seven former members of Italy's domestic intelligence service (Sisde) have
been sent for trial for allegedly embezzling L60bn following an
investigation by Rome magistrates lasting over nine months.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940314

