FT941-5446

FT  07 MAR 94 / Corruption drive on cards: American leaders urged to give
priority to crusade


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN and STEPHEN FIDLER


Latin American leaders are expected to join President Bill Clinton in an
anti-corruption drive to be launched at the forthcoming Summit of the
Americas.
Mr Alberto Dahik, Ecuador's vice-president, has called on leaders of North
and Latin America to ensure that corruption, 'which has a direct impact on
democracy and economic development', be given priority at the planned
summit.
Mr Dahik is also chairman of the advisory council of Transparency
International, the Berlin-based body which campaigns against corruption in
international business transactions. His proposal, made after a meeting last
week of the group in Quito, Ecuador, already has White House support.
Leaders of the Group of Seven industrialised countries are also expected to
put corruption on their agenda at their meeting in Italy later this year.
A date for the Summit of the Americas, due to be held this year, has not
been fixed and the agenda is still fluid. The likely main topic will be the
extension of free trade through the western hemisphere.
The US administration is also anxious to use the summit to find ways to
improve the accountability and efficiency of government as well as reducing
corruption, but would prefer to see the issue raised as a Latin American
initi-ative.
The move comes amid growing concern about the impact of corruption on aid
and development, and efforts to promote democracy and human rights in Latin
America, Africa and elsewhere in the third world.
The US is almost alone among industrialised nations in outlawing the payment
of bribes in foreign countries. Its Foreign Corrupt Practices Act forbids
the making of illicit payments by US companies, a law seen by some US
businesses as weakening their ability to compete for international tenders
in some countries.
The US has in the past through the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development tried to persuade other industrialised countries to follow
its example, with little success.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940307

