FT942-16119

FT  12 APR 94 / Bankers propose guidelines on derivatives: International
task force tackles issue of disclosing credit risk in complex markets


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Economics Correspondent


A group of leading bankers will shortly produce a new framework for the
disclosure to regulators of credit risk in the derivatives markets.
The framework, which should be finalised within two months, will require
banks and securities houses to break down their exposure in the derivatives
markets by counterparty and by type of instrument.
The growth of derivatives products, such as futures and options, has caused
concern that banks may not be fully aware of the risks involved in dealing
in these complex markets. The Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) losses incurred last
year by the German oils and metals company Metallgesellschaft in oil
derivatives heightened fears that such losses might cause a breakdown in the
market.
Last year, Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy, then general manager of the Bank for
International Settlements, called for the drawing up of international
standards on risk disclosure for banks dealing in derivatives. Mr Lamfalussy
said that derivatives had reduced the transparency of bank balance sheets
and an International Monetary Fund study said derivatives had 'made it
extremely difficult' for regulators to assess the risk of default in the
system.
The new proposals have been drawn up by 15 of the world's largest players in
the derivatives market. They are members of a task force set up by the
Institute of International Finance, a Washington-based research and lobbying
group financed by 170-plus member banks from more than 40 countries.
The task force, formed last autumn, has already discussed its work
informally with regulators. Mr Charles Dallara, managing director of the
institute, said regulators had given 'an informal welcome to our efforts and
think we are headed in the right direction'.
Under the proposed framework, regulators will receive quarterly reports from
banks and securities houses. It is hoped the system will allow them to spot
when banking groups have become over-exposed to one particular counterparty.
Once the details of the new framework have been agreed by task force
members, Mr Dallara will talk to regulators about putting the proposals into
practice. While banks will not have a legal requirement to use the new
framework to report their credit risk, it is hoped that, if the leading
players use the system, other market participants will fall into line.
The task force's proposals deal only with credit risk, the danger that a
counterparty will fail to meet its debts. The topic of market risk - the
danger that sharp price moves may undermine the financial position of a
market participant - was not examined. However, Mr Dallara said the
institute hoped the task force would move on to deal with that question as
well.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940412

