FT942-14926

FT  18 APR 94 / Equity Markets: Continued stability in sight - New York


   By FRANK MCGURTY


Wall Street investors may have put the rough seas behind them. After safely
navigating the month's most important economic obstacles, especially the
potential hazards of last week's inflation data, stocks are picking up fresh
signals of stability from the catalytic bond market.
But a torrent of quarterly earnings to be released this week is sure to
raise a ripple or two. Disappointments could even lead to sell-offs in a
particular sector, as Motorola demonstrated last week when its results
sparked a rout in technology stocks.
'With most of the major indicators now out of the way, I see the market
continuing to stabilise,' says Mr Peter Cardillo, director of research at
Westfalia Investments.
Last week, share prices held fairly steady and activity returned to a
measured pace after a fortnight of staggering volume and sharp swings in the
key market indices. The bellwether Dow Jones industrials finished with a net
fall of 11 points on average daily NYSE volume of 271m shares, against 323m
the previous week.
But the jitters which have dominated since the Federal Reserve tightened
monetary policy for the second time on March 22 have not dissipated
entirely.
'Investors have tied themselves in knots about the economy's strength, the
inflation outlook and about the prospects of another Fed rate increase,'
says Mr James Solloway, chief investment strategist at Argus Research in New
York. He believes the market is 'extremely oversold' at present but doubts
many investors agree with him.
Mr Solloway questions the perception among many analysts that the market's
valuation remains excessive. Earnings and share prices are in line with
historical levels when special charges for restructurings are excluded from
corporate results, he argues.
Last Wednesday afternoon revealed the market's potential for upset. The
NYSE's uptick rule, which restricts programme-guided selling, was tripped
near mid-day when the Dow plummeted to a 50-point decline. The sudden drop
came amid further weakness in the US Treasury market, in a pattern that has
characterised the two-month-old 'correction' in share prices.
Stocks were rattled because bonds had fallen despite tame consumer and
producer price data. Traders were speculating that the Fed may raise
interest rates on the heels of Friday's report on March capacity
utilisation, which provides clues on long-term inflationary trends.
In the event, the data showed factories, mines and utilities had operated at
83.6 per cent of capacity, a slight gain which fell short of forecasts. The
news cleared the way for two uneventful sessions to close out the week.
Mr Solloway sees the likelihood of continued choppiness until the anxieties
over interest rates subside. There is no question the mood remains
pessimistic, he says.
But even if the market falls anew, he is confident the worst is over.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940418

