FT942-14313

FT  21 APR 94 / North Korean threat tests Japan's resolve: The Pyongyang
problem has put Tokyo on the defensive


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


Two or three times a month, a ferry leaves the port of Niigata, on Japan's
western coast, and crosses the Sea of Japan to Wonsan, in North Korea. The
boats carry Koreans living in Japan to relatives and friends in a country
which is suspected of secretly developing nuclear weapons and with which
Japan has no formal relations.
About 700km north of Niigata, on the island of Hokkaido, Japan's Defence
Agency has stationed Patriot missiles to defend the country against any
possible aggression. North Korea denies it is developing nuclear weapons,
but earlier this month its ambassador to India warned that if it did so they
would be 'primarily designed to contain Japan', rather than aimed at South
Korea or the US.
The ferries and the missiles are vivid symbols of the conflicting feelings
of guilt, uncertainty and fear that have shaped Japan's uneasy relationship
with its communist neighbour.
The Koreans crossing to Wonsan are members of a 700,000-strong Korean
community who have found themselves living in Japan as a result of its
imperialist past.
The Patriot missiles, which are a less sophisticated version of the missiles
used during the Gulf War and are incapable of targeting missiles in the air,
are testimony to the weakness of Japan's independent defence in the face of
the growing perceived threat North Korea has come to pose in the region's
shifting security environment.
As tensions threaten to grow on the Korean peninsula, Japan is having to
face up to the legacy of its imperialist past, rethink its defence
arrangements, and clarify its vision of the role it hopes to play in the
region's long-term security.
The arrival in Tokyo today of Mr William Perry, US defence secretary, will
impress on the Japanese public the importance of doing so. Mr Perry is
scheduled to meet ministers to discuss North Korea as well as the US-Japan
security arrangement.
Japan's coalition government this week took a significant first step towards
putting these issues on the public agenda by formulating a unified stance on
Japan's response to the Korean problem. The coalition agreed that Japan
would follow United Nations policy on North Korea and would prepare for any
emergency within the framework of Japan's constitution and in close
co-ordination with the US and South Korea.
But the accord papers over differences its members have on the issue.
Reaching a national consensus on the difficult questions North Korea poses
for Japan will be an extremely painful process.
Japan's historic guilt about both Koreas, and geographic proximity to the
Korean peninsula, have caused an uncanny silence in Tokyo about the
implications of North Korea's supposed nuclear ambitions. That silence has
masked Japan's dilemma in choosing between its inclination to follow the
international line as much as possible and domestic circumstances that make
doing so very difficult.
For example, while international concern has been raised about the flow of
funds from Japan to North Korea through Korean residents such as those
travelling from Niigata to Wonsan, the official response has been dictated
by sensitivity towards Japan's Korean community.
Japanese officials insist that 'Korean residents in Japan should have the
same rights as Japanese people to travel, to return to their country or to
send money they have earned to relatives,' as one foreign ministry official
says.
The issue is complicated by suggestions that owners of pachinko (pinball)
parlours also regularly transfer funds to North Korea. About 40 per cent of
Japan's 18,000 pachinko parlours are linked to the Chosen Soren, a pro-North
Korean organisation, says Mr Toshio Miyatsuka, associate professor at
Yamanashi Gakuin University.
And on Tuesday Japanese police searched the offices of a trading company on
suspicion that it secretly paid Dollars 118,860 (Pounds 81,411) into the
bank account of a North Korean trading house based in Pyongyang in breach of
Japan's foreign exchange law. The trading company, Mitaka Boeki, is
suspected of illegally transferring the money to the Pyongyang company by
fabricating a contract to import North Korean marine products.
Japan's complicated North Korean connection raises questions about how far
the country is prepared to go to enforce UN decisions. Although government
officials underline the Japanese commitment to abide by UN decisions, if the
UN decides to impose economic sanctions, given its policy of protecting the
rights of all Koreans living in Japan, the country will face a difficult
decision on whether to stop the flow of people to North Korea.
Such concerns are aggravated by the coalition government's own lack of a
clear stance on North Korea amid the political turmoil that has rocked the
country over the past eight months.
On the one hand, the Social Democratic party, which is the largest coalition
partner, has traditionally had close ties with North Korea's Workers' party,
with 119 SDP Diet members belonging to the Japan-North Korea Committee, an
organisation which aims to improve relations with North Korea.
The SDP is also strongly opposed to amending Japan's pacifist constitution,
which allows military activity only for the purpose of self-defence.
On the other hand, right-wing members of the coalition, such as the Japan
New party, favour a more active role for Japan in supporting UN decisions,
even if it means amending the constitution.
Such divergent views will undermine Japan's ability to respond effectively
should the international community adopt a more hardline stance.
At the same time, developments on the North Korean peninsula have posed
questions about Japan's long-term regional security arrangements. 'For the
first time Japan is having to think about the issue of nuclear weapons as
something that could directly affect its own security,' says Mr Masao
Okonogi, professor of international affairs at Keio University.
While the country's constitution gives Japan little choice but to rely on
other countries, any more tangible signs of a real security risk are likely
to raise calls both domestically and internationally for Japan to strengthen
its defences.
'Japan has to have the means to deal with threats of a missile attack.
Otherwise, its foreign policy will be dictated by the whims of countries
that have developed nuclear weapons,' warns Mr Hiro-omi Kurisu, a specialist
on international affairs and defence.
The North Korean situation will be a crucial test of Japan's willingness to
overcome its past and play a new, more assertive role on the international
stage. Given its keenness to join the UN security council, and growing calls
to assume an international role more commensurate with its economic
strength, it will be more difficult for Japan to continue to insist that it
prefers to live in the shadow of its guilt and the US military shield.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940421

