FT942-14572

FT  20 APR 94 / World Trade News: UK-led group to construct Lisbon bridge


   By PETER WISE


   LISBON


Portugal yesterday chose a group led by Trafalgar House of Britain to build
and operate a Es180bn (Pounds 714m) toll bridge over the river Tagus near
Lisbon, one of Europe's largest privately-financed infrastructure projects.
The consortium, Lusoponte, is to complete the 12km bridge, Europe's longest
continuous fixed river-crossing, by March 31 1998, in time for Expo '98,
which is to be held in Lisbon.
The group's proposal for a 30-year concession remains to be ratified by the
Portuguese cabinet.
Mr Joaquim Ferreira do Amaral, public works minister, said the European
Union was committed to pay about half the cost of the project, which has
been calculated at projected 1998 prices, out of the cohesion fund for
aiding the development of poorer EU member states.
The remainder of the investment will be made by Lusoponte, which has the
financial backing of five Portuguese institutions and 11 international
banks. The contract for the new bridge includes a concession to operate the
existing April 25 toll bridge in Lisbon.
Lusoponte was chosen over one other short-listed consortium led by Bouygues,
a French construction company. 'Small differences over the technical
specifications of the bridge clinched the deal,' said Mr Jose Manuel Serrao
of Gattel, the state-owned concession company. 'The two proposals were
otherwise very similar.'
Trafalgar House, owns 25 per cent of Lusoponte. H. Hagen, a Portuguese
subsidiary of the French company Campenon Bernard, also holds 25 per cent
and will handle construction.
Bento Pedroso Construcoes of Brazil owns 13 per cent of the consortium. The
remainder of the capital is divided equally among four Portuguese companies:
Edifer, Mota & Companhia, Somague and Teixeira Duarte.
The four-lane bridge will cross the Tagus estuary from Sacavem on the
eastern outskirts of Lisbon to Montijo on the southern bank, where the river
is 10km wide. The central section will be a cross-stayed span 400m long and
35m-high between two towers. Lusoponte will build 6km of approach roads as
well as the 12km bridge.
Shares in the Portuguese companies with a stake in Lusoponte rose sharply on
the Lisbon bourse yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940420

