FT942-14328

FT  21 APR 94 / UK monetary disclosure wins no converts: Eddie George's
European Union confreres take a fairly dim view of transparency


   By DAVID MARSH


Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England, is accustomed to taking
decisions that do not meet the universal approval of European central bank
colleagues.
When he agreed last summer a five-year freeze on his Pounds 200,000-plus
salary to show anti-inflation commitment, one foreign central banker
telephoned to chide him for setting an unfavourable example.
Mr George expects that last week's decision to publish minutes of his
monthly monetary meetings with the Treasury may also encounter some
criticism. Nowhere else in Europe are there any signs of other central banks
wanting to make monetary decisions more transparent.
The Treasury-Bank minutes released last week revealed interest rate policy
differences between Mr George and Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor of
the exchequer, in recent months.
Britain has now moved broadly into line with practice in the US, where the
minutes of the federal open market committee meetings are released after a
six-week interval. The Bank of England, unlike the US Federal Reserve, does
not have monetary policy independence, since responsibility for setting
interest rates rests with the Treasury.
Mr George backs publishing the details of his discussions with Mr Clarke to
underline his efforts to press monetary rectitude upon the government.
Elsewhere in Europe, however, no moves are on the horizon towards lifting
secrecy surrounding interest rate decisions. A spokesman for the statutorily
independent German Bundesbank called the Treasury-Bank move 'a courageous
step to improve credibility'. But he said the Bundesbank had no plans to
follow suit.
At present, edited minutes of the fortnightly meetings of the Bundesbank's
policy-making council are published only after expiry of 30 years. Although
roughly 35 copies of the minutes are circulated to senior Bundesbank
officials and to ministries in Bonn, details of the central bank's interest
rate-setting gatherings rarely find their way into the press.
The Bundesbank's view is that publication of these minutes after a shorter
time lag could constrain the frankness of discussions among its 16 council
members. Additionally, publication could damage the tradition under which
the bank's top officials try to present policies to the public with a united
voice, the spokesman said.
Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, governor of the Bank of France, said last week his
bank did not plan to follow the initiative by the Treasury and Bank of
England.
Since the beginning of the year, the Bank of France's nine-strong monetary
committee has set interest rates independently of the government. However,
the central bank regards the deliberations as secret. Even relatively
trivial matters such as whether or not decisions are taken by vote are kept
confidential.
Mr Trichet, who presents the Bank of France's annual report to President
Francois Mitterrand today , will later make oral presentations to the
finance committee of national assembly and senate.
Members of the bank's monetary committee have been asked not to talk in
public about their fortnightly discussions. Mr Michel Sapin, the former
finance minister, has probably been the most vocal member of the committee.
His most notable public comment so far has been a declaration in January
opposing competitive devaluation.
The Bank of Spain, too, will not lift the veil over its policy-making
procedures. 'The situation here is entirely different from what Mr George is
planning,' according to a bank spokesman. Mr Lus Angel Rojo, the governor,
sees Mr Pedro Solbes, the economy minister, 'fairly frequently'. 'They talk
a lot on the phone but nobody takes any minutes,' the spokesman says.
Under current guidelines, the government is responsible for monetary policy,
and the Bank of Spain executes it, although legislation before parliament is
designed to give the central bank Bundesbank-style autonomy.
A Bank of Italy spokeswoman said yesterday her bank, too, had no plans to
publish details of decision-making, made by the central bank in consultation
with the Italian Treasury. 'Every day we have discussions. It is very
informal,' she said.
An official at the Netherlands central bank, which, after the Bundesbank,
has the most orthodox reputation in Europe, pointed out that the bank was
specifically excluded from Dutch legislation on open government. When the
bank's five-man directorate makes a monetary policy decision, the governor,
Mr Wim Duisenberg, 'phones the (finance) minister to tell him,' the official
said. 'The minister is normally more enthusiastic when interest rates go
down than when they go up.'
Making details of such conversations public 'has never been a matter for
discussion', the official said. He added that sterling's non-membership of
the exchange rate mechanism helped the UK to follow a more open policy. The
Dutch view is that publishing details of George-Clarke conversations might
risk sterling's stability - a matter that, if Britain were in the exchange
rate mechanism, would have repercussions on other European currencies.
Additional reporting by John Ridding in Paris and Tom Burns in Madrid

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940421

