FT942-14503

FT  20 APR 94 / Arts: A most bizarre bazaar - The Milan Antiques Fair


   By SUSAN MOORE


Will Italy ever realise its potential as a major international art market?
On the evidence of Milan's 12th Internazionale dell'Antiquariato, the notion
of even an Italian international antiques fair remains something of a
contradiction in terms.
Italian art and antiques fairs are quite unlike any other. No dealer would
dream of exhibiting exceptional stock - anything that stood the remotest
chance of being 'notified' as of national importance by the Soprintendenza
alle Belle Arti. Vetting is perfunctory; descriptive labels are rare
commodities, and listed prices unheard of. An attribution might depend on
how much the client knows, the price on from where the money is coming. At
these most bizarre of bazaars, there is a positive reluctance to do serious
business. That is done elsewhere, and invariably not in Italy.
Crucially, despite the removal of trade barriers within the EC, it is no
easier legally to export works of art from Italy. No foreigner can be sure
he has the right to take his purchase home.
Unsurprisingly, most of the relatively few outstanding works of art at the
Milan fair were shown by foreign dealers who can import works on a temporary
licence. Italian trade fielded far better applied and Oriental arts than
pictures, reflecting the Belle Arti's relative lack of interest in the
former. Visconteum offered impressive silver; Emil Mirzakhanian a ravishing
Khmer female torso in Angkor Wat style, dated to the first half of the 12th
century; and Milan boasts a surprising number of the world's leading rug and
textile dealers.
With a question mark hanging over the future of its rival antiques fair at
the Palazzo Strozzi in Florence, Milan could have pulled out the stops to
establish itself as the pre-eminent Italian antiques fair. The city is,
after all, the country's financial capital and its purpose-built fairground,
like the exhibition centre used by the hugely successful European Fine Art
Fair at Maastricht, provides almost limitless flexible space.
Unlike the Maastricht fair, however, there is no foundation or board to run
the Milan fair. The overall quality of the exhibits was mixed, organisation
was eleventh hour, and the presentation undistinguished.
Arguably, these are the least of the problems facing the Italian art trade.
If the unbelievably complex Italian art market is to become more ethical,
decades of punitive taxation, ponderous bureaucracy, and the effective
'criminalization' of the dealer will have to be reversed. The old communist
notion that the possession of works of art by the individual is a crime
against collectivity still lingers on in Italy.
A perfect example is provided by the empty display cases in the fair itself.
These were to house a choice selection of applied arts and musical
instruments from the renowned collections at Milan's Sforza Castle. The
evening before the fair's gala opening, the Ministry of Culture in Rome
declared it unsuitable for a public collection to be exhibited at a
commercial venue. The Russians had no qualms about lending treasures from
the Hermitage to the Maastricht fair earlier this year.
Dealers - and collectors - are subject to police-state scrutiny by the
combined forces of the Belle Arti and the tax authorities. The former are
obliged to pay VAT at 19 per cent, a rate also charged on both imports and
exports. The Belle Arti not only monitors these and the sale of 'notified'
works of art from one individual to another, but exercises the right to buy
for the given price. If VAT were reduced to 6-7 per cent, one dealer assured
me, half of the more creative methods of accounting and moving works of art
would disappear overnight.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940420

