FT942-14892

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (18): Long-life engines
keep the costs down - Alan Bunting studies trends in truck making


   By ALAN BUNTING


For many of Britain's road transport operators, fleet renewal is being
considered for the first time this decade. Vehicle replacement programmes
which were effectively frozen in 1990-91 as the recession took hold, are now
being reinstated.
Trucks bought in 1986/7, which in normal times would have been traded in two
or three years ago, are only now being replaced. Some of the long-haul
38-tonners among them have 800,000 kilometres (500,000 miles) of fleet
service behind them.
Received wisdom has repair and overhaul costs of heavy chassis rising
unacceptably beyond about 500,000km. But the recession's enforced stretching
of service life by 60 per cent or more has brought some pleasant surprises.
Fleet engineers have become aware of the remarkable improvements in
durability, as well as in day-to-day reliability, achieved by commercial
vehicle and component manufacturers.
Thanks to new, often computer-aided, technology, vital components are giving
less trouble and lasting longer, while proving at the same time more
efficient. Heavy-duty diesel engines built by companies such as Volvo,
Cummins and Mercedes bear witness to a progressively greater understanding
of why engines wear and fail and how to slow down ageing.
Remarkably, those demonstrable improvements in life and quality have been
achieved by engine makers who, at the same time, have had to meet the
technical challenges of ever tougher legal exhaust emission limits. The
regulations now effectively limit consumption of lubricating oil, which if
allowed to get past the pistons or valves into the combustion chamber is
burned, adding to particulate (soot) emissions.
DAF, Mercedes, Cummins, Volvo, MAN and Scania are now offering engines which
meet so-called Euro 2 emission laws some 2 1/2 years ahead of the October
1996 deadline. By so doing they score environmental 'Brownie points', though
there are more commercial motives at work. In Holland and Germany financial
inducements encourage the purchase of Euro 2 compliant trucks ahead of time.
Some of these 'cleaner' trucks are being offered in the UK, but the price
premium, of Pounds 1,500-plus, is expected to deter all but the most
public-spirited or image-conscious buyers.
For the truck industry's diesel engineers, the competitive challenge is not
so much to reduce pollutant emissions to regulated levels, but to do so with
the least possible effect on fuel economy and performance.
Volvo's new-generation FH12 chassis, introduced last year, powered by the
first European-designed engine with full electronic injection control, is
already showing its meanness on fuel against key rivals. The latest
technically-similar Cummins Celect engines, built in Scotland and fitted in
ERF, Foden and now DAF chassis, are also proving to be significantly more
economical than their non-electronic predecessors.
Evidence of new technology is apparent in other benefits for fleet operators
 -and their drivers. For example, gearshift systems have in the past five
years become a more critical area of competition between truck
manufacturers. In the 1980s, the choice was straightforward: between
American-style constant mesh, which called for driver skill, and continental
syncromesh which demanded strength from the driver's arm.
But transmission development has moved on apace, with gear changing made
easier in skill and strength senses by the proliferation of compressed
air-assisted but electronically-controlled shifting. Life is made easier for
the driver, and the electronics block the kind of potentially
gearbox-wrecking changes caused by inexperience or carelessness.
All the systems seen so far feature conveniently-placed finger-tip switches,
replacing manual 'brute force' gear levers.
But from the driver's standpoint, the Eaton, Mercedes, Scania and Volvo
systems' shifting techniques vary considerably. If you can handle one, it
will not help you to cope with the others. A degree of training - or at
least familiarisation - is needed to be sure of fast, smooth shifting, both
up and down through the box, in different road and traffic conditions.
Transfleet, the Lex Group truck rental company, has recently commissioned a
batch of new 38-tonne trucks equipped with Eaton's SAMT (semi-automated
mechanical transmission) for its London-based spot hire operation. A finger
switch on the steering column effects gear changes and clutch release and
re-engagement is automatic other than for starting away and stopping.
Even in the hands of drivers who, by definition in a rental operation are an
unknown quantity, premature gearbox and/or clutch failures have largely been
eliminated. The timing of shifts remains in the driver's hands, so he can
practise traditional anticipation in the light of changes in gradient or
traffic conditions ahead.
As a result, fuel consumption is not adversely affected, as it tends to be
with fully-automatic transmissions, either of the familiar torque
converter-based type or more recent derivatives of manual boxes.
Though their numbers are declining, many truck buyers in Britain reflect the
still prevalent attitude among their North American counterparts, of deep
suspicion about new technology in general and electronics in particular.
They equate technical simplicity in a truck with reliability and are
reluctant to specify 'new fangled' equipment until it has proved
trouble-free - in someone else's hands - for some years.
They nevertheless welcome less newsworthy but evolutionary change in vehicle
specifications. Better corrosion resistance in cabs is an example. New tough
plastics are now widely employed instead of steel for bumpers, wing valances
and other non-structural parts, with Mercedes and Fiat's Iveco truck
division leading the way. Elsewhere, galvanised steel is now widely used for
load-bearing cab panels exposed to moisture and salt spray.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940418

