FT942-15840

FT  13 APR 94 / UK Company News: FR share boost on dividend rise - Profits
fall 11% to Pounds 21m but prospects described as 'encouraging'


   By TIM BURT


Shares in FR Group rose 25p to 290p yesterday after the manufacturer of
in-flight refuelling equipment surprised the market with a 7.6 per cent
div-idend increase despite falling profits.
Mr Gordon Page, chief executive, said that encouraging prospects and a
number of firm orders had persuaded the company to increase its final
dividend to 5.1p (4.74p) - making 7.56p (7.2p) for the year ended December
31 - even though pre-tax profits fell by 11 per cent, from Pounds 23.6m to
Pounds 21m.
He blamed the downturn on problems at three subsidiaries affected by
shrinking sales and production difficulties.
Of the subsidiaries, Flight Refuelling, the largest company in the group,
was hit by procurement delays which forced the company to embark on a
wide-ranging restructuring, involving a 30 per cent cut in the workforce to
820.
In the Netherlands, the company closed part of its Markhorst business as
demand dried up for ammunition containers.
In the US, the entire senior management of Stanley Aviation, the engine
equipment supplier, was replaced following prolonged technical problems on
orders for McDonnell Douglas.
Together, these subsidiaries contributed to falling turnover on continuing
operations, although new acquisitions lifted total sales to Pounds 185.4m
(Pounds 182.8m).
Earnings per share fell from a restated 21.74p to 18.23p, and losses
overseas led to an increase in the overall tax charge to 35 per cent.
Nevertheless, Mr Page said an increased dividend was justified by recent
orders and improved efficiency following the restructuring of subsidiary
operations.
Those prospects were enhanced yesterday by the announcement of three
contracts involving a Dollars 12m (Pounds 8.2m) order from McDonnell Douglas
for refuelling equipment; a Pounds 4m component deal with Westland
Helicopters; and a Pounds 12m order from Saab for aircraft environmental
control systems.
COMMENT
Few suppliers of aerospace or defence equipment are crowing about prospects,
but FR at least has grounds to be optimistic. It has weathered one of the
industry's worst recessions and has now begun to pick up contracts - albeit
deferred ones - to shore up this year's profits. With orders worth Pounds
300m under its belt, it can now turn its attention to the disposal of
Markhorst and complete the renegotiations of Stanley Aviation's complex
contract with the US Air Force. It has also brought three new aerospace
subsidiaries under its wing which should help profits increase this year to
about Pounds 24.5m. On a forward multiple of 12.3, the shares appear
attractive, although constraints on civil and military spending could yet
delay take-off.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940413

