FT943-13146

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (9): The fever of liberation - Peasants
sweep away collectivised farming


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


The eye is a better guide to the new reality of rural life in
post-collectivisation Albania than dry and inadequate statistics. But, for
the record, the IMF estimates that agricultural output rose by 14 per cent
last year and forecasts another 8 per cent gain this year.
The ministry of agriculture offers a 15 per cent overall increase, according
to its own statistics, or at least 30 per cent according to satellite
photographs.
A sceptical attitude to the statistics is merited above all by the sheer
scale of the changes which have taken place following the decrees abolishing
collective farms three years ago and the redistribution of their lands to
nearly half a million peasant farmers with an average holding of around 1.4
hectares.
Decollectivisation was followed by an orgy of looting and destruction as
farm and machine tractor station buildings, irrigation systems, greenhouses
and other collective properties were torn down brick by brick and pane by
pane in many areas. Orchards and forests, and even tall roadside poplars
were also cut down, as an angry and distrustful peasantry showed its bottled
up hatred for the regimented farming of old.
But the destruction also had a more practical side as the new landowners
scavenged for the materials with which to build primitive hen-coops, pig
sties and storage space and where possible to acquire a tractor or combine
harvester.
'A neighbour tore down a piece of the irrigation system, broke it into
pieces and laid a solid floor in place of the mud in his yard. The rest of
us waited to see if he was punished. He wasn't, so we all took what we
could,' a farmer explained beside a pool of water from the broken irrigation
canal used as an al fresco car wash by enterprising youngsters.
The avidity of the search for building materials coincided with relief at
the end of an absurd agricultural system. The former regime drove an entire
nation to near starvation by banning private rearing of animals of any kind,
from draught animals to the humble chicken.
Three years later rural Albania, where 65 per cent of the population still
lives and works, is still poor relative to the rest of Europe, especially in
the mountainous areas which cover two thirds of the country. But the rural
towns and villages have taken on a new liveliness.
On the fertile coastal plains which stretch south for 150kms from the
capital Tirana and the country's main port of Durres, the fields sub-divided
into small strips are full of hard working women cropping wheat and alfalfa
with scythes. On the reclaimed marshland closer to the sea many of the
fields of the former state farms remain large and wheat is being cut by
Fortschritt model combine harvesters made in former East Germany and
'appropriated' from the former centralised pool of agricultural equipment.
Roads for so long virtually empty of traffic are now clogged by hay wagons
pulled by donkeys or oxen while children and old women lead cows along mud
tracks or lie with them under make-shift straw sun shelters.
Outside village houses, or glimpsed inside courtyard interiors, mounds of
wheat are piled up to dry in the sun after winnowing, while children and old
people shoo chickens, gaggles of geese and flocks of turkeys away from the
inviting grains.
With unseasonable rain compensating for broken irrigation systems and bread
prices at world market levels following the removal of subsidies last July,
farmers are getting ready to sell surplus grain to the state or private
traders.
Politically and economically, fulfilment of the never honoured Leninist
slogan 'land to the peasants, bread to the workers' has been a determining
factor in the success of post-communist stabilisation policies.
Allowing peasants to grow their own corn, bake their own bread, raise
livestock and grow crops for own consumption and sale has relieved the
government of its inherited obligation to provide bread and basic foods.
On the demand side, the elimination of food subsidies, compensated for by
higher wages, has drastically reduced the demand for bread which was often
simply thrown away or, latterly, fed to animals when sold at the old
subsidised price.
Now, hobbled live sheep and freshly skinned sheep carcasses are offered for
sale by the roadside outside many villages and the increased supply of meat
and the influx of a wide range of imported foodstuffs, including luxury
items, has further reduced the demand for bread and added variety to a once
monotonous and rationed diet.
The last three years have proved that a return to virtually medieval strip
farming and free markets is more productive than enforced collectivisation.
But not all are enamoured by what Marx once called 'the idiocy of rural
life'.
The government and aid agencies expect a big exodus from rural areas into
towns and into new service industries like tourism as the Albanian economy
moves towards a more conventional pattern. The future of agriculture lies in
a consolidation of strips into larger units once peasants are permitted to
buy and sell their land. This was denied for the first two years.
Meanwhile, a Dollars 42m agricultural sector adjustment credit funded by a
Dollars 20m loan from the World Bank, Dollars 20m from Japan and Dollars 2m
from the Dutch government, is helping to finance priority projects.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940721

