FT942-15508

FT  14 APR 94 / Italian allies split over key posts


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


The parties of the Freedom Alliance in Italy are deadlocked over the choice
of candidate for the key positions of speaker for the chamber of deputies
and Senate in the new legislature.
The disagreement underlines the serious differences that continue to dog the
formation of a new government in the wake of the Freedom Alliance's
overwhelming victory in the general elections held at the end of last month.
A meeting to resolve the deadlock, due to be held yesterday, was postponed
at the last moment without explanation.
The postponement was preceded by a meeting between President Oscar Luigi
Scalfaro and Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate. Mr Berlusconi is the
man considered most likely to be asked to form the next government after the
strong polls performance of Forza Italia which he heads.
The choice of speakers for the two houses of parliament is the essential
first step in the opening of the new legislature. This will take place
tomorrow and precedes the formal consultations of the president on the
formation of a new government.
The most difficult choice concerns that of speaker for the Senate, where the
Freedom Alliance failed to obtain an absolute majority of the 320 seats.
The Alliance won 154 seats. It consisted of three main parties - Forza
Italia, the populist Northern League and the neo-fascist MSI/National
Alliance - plus the rump of the former Christian Democrat party, the
Christian Democrat Centre (CCD).
The League has been arguing that the choice has to come from within the
Alliance and has been proposing its own senator, Mr Francesco Speroni.
However, Mr Berlusconi and Forza Italia have been reluctant to endorse Mr
Speroni, both because he comes from the League and because he is seen to
lack the diplomatic talents necessary for such an institutional role. The
Senate speaker automatically steps in for the president of the republic.
Mr Berlusconi has also been looking for someone capable of attracting some
eight small party senators, including the two Radicals, to ensure an upper
house majority.
This has led to talk of Mr Giovanni Spadolini, the outgoing Republican
speaker and former prime minister, being asked to stay on. But the League
has placed a firm veto on Mr Spadolini.
Alternatively, Forza Italia has suggested a senator from its ranks - Mr
Cesare Previti. However, yesterday the MSI proposed its own candidate, Mr
Giulio Maceratini, a member of the national executive and a deputy in three
legislatures.
In the case of the chamber, the League has again been touting one of its
leading figures, Mr Roberto Maroni. However, Mr Maroni seems more likely to
be earmarked for a senior position in the new cabinet.
This could leave the way open for one of the veteran politicians who has
changed sides to back Forza Italia such as the long-time Liberal deputy, Mr
Alfredo Biondi.
These difficulties also reflect the intense bargaining going on over the
composition of the next government.
Mr Berlusconi is under pressure to draw his ministerial team from within the
Freedom Alliance but he has discovered in recent days a paucity of
ministerial talent. This has led him to look elsewhere, including an
approach to some members of the government led by Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi
such as Mr Piero Barucci, the Treasury minister. The latter is understood to
have turned down the overture.
It is now thought unlikely that President Scalfaro will formally request Mr
Berlusconi to form a government until after April 25.
This is because big demonstrations are being planned for April 25, the day
celebrating the anniversary of the liberation from fascism. The
demonstrations are expected to have a special poignancy, given the likely
inclusion of MSI members in the new government. The party is still inspired
by the ideals of Benito Mussolini against whom together with Nazi allies,
the liberation was directed.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

940414

