FT942-12746

FT  28 APR 94 / Accountancy Column: Companies yet to give the green light -
Roger Adams, Tessa Tennant and Lucy Varcoe look at the growing interest in
environmental reporting


   By ROGER ADAMS, TESSA TENNANT and LUCY VARCOE


The last four years have seen an explosion of activity and interest in
environmental reporting. A genuinely committed movement has emerged, but one
with no definite direction and therefore no destination.
Since Norsk Hydro first came out of the closet with an environmental report
in 1990, more than 30 UK companies have begun to make extensive disclosures
in stand-alone reports, and many hundreds more are putting statements into
their accounts. In other countries, Dow Chemicals, Danish Steelworks, Kunert
and BSO Origin are among those that have experimented with green reporting.
In a market economy, ways must be found to convey the financial and economic
consequences of corporate environmental practice as well as the bald details
of the performance itself. Reporting progress towards sustainability -
virtuous and admirable though it is - may be insufficient.
For better or worse, financial reporting has long had the accounting
profession as its guide and shaper, and the Stock Exchange as its
destination. The environmental reporting movement has no such single
channel, largely because the audience has remained resolutely elusive and
obstinately unresponsive.
Such research as exists seems to indicate that the provision of
environmental data is hardly ever demand-led. In principle, potential users
are similar to those for financial reporting, except the order of priority
is different. Financial reports are normally assumed to be for the benefit
of shareholders first and the financial markets second, with others, like
employees and business contacts, lagging behind.
By contrast, most companies producing environmental reports claim to be
doing so primarily for their employees. It seems unlikely that they are
doing it for shareholders, since little attempt is made to communicate the
issues through the traditional channels of the annual report or summary
statement.
Bringing up the rear are the fund managers and investment analysts. Few,
when questioned, admit to having much interest in environmental information
being reported in increasing quantities. They are not told if or why it is
important and they are given no financial clues on the costs and benefits of
being green. Equally, they are not apparently bothering to ask.
There are some exceptions. In the UK, there are now about 40 investment
products bound by ecological or ethical criteria with a combined value of
over Pounds 650m. But these funds are the exception, and their operations
are hampered by the lack of financial detail in current environmental
reports.
A recent survey of the environmental reporting practices of the European
chemical industry by Andrea Spencer-Cooke suggested that in the near-total
absence of such information, analysts could do little more than act by
exception: downgrading companies that were not publishing such reports.
They only sat up and took notice when companies started including provisions
in their financial statements for land remediation costs (like ICI), or
disclosing contingent liabilities in the small print (like BP).
When specifically asked what they want from corporate environmental
statements, analysts suggest a mixture of items that are deliverable, that
would prove useful if only accountants could deliver them, and that because
of commercial sensitivity are unlikely ever to be delivered.
Among the deliverable items are clean-up provisions and contingent
liabilities, green accounting policies, statements of corporate
environmental policy, the results of internal environmental audits and a
statement of assurance from management of compliance with standards across
the company.
Among those items dependent on the accountants are disclosures of historical
and prospective environmentally-related capital and revenue expenditures,
ideally broken down by business segment. Rhone-Poulenc is one of the few
European companies providing this information, although the figures are
highly subjective because an increasing proportion represents unavoidable
rather than discretionary expenditure.
Value for money measures also come into this category. Given the extent to
which these techniques are in place in local and central government, it
seems barely credible that private sector companies have not yet adapted
them to monitoring their environmental activities to determine the net cost
or benefit.
The third category of information to which analysts would wish to be privy
but is likely to stay beyond their grasp includes cash flow and market share
projections as a result of environmentally-related expenditure. It also
includes the financial consequences of sustainability: how future planned
actions would have to be changed if the company was to claim it was
operating on a sustainable basis. BT and BP are among the British businesses
that discuss sustainability, but do not attempt to quantify the cost.
In the absence of a regulatory framework like that covering financial
reporting, we believe preparers should investigate the scope for including
more disclosures of the items in the first two categories of information. If
it is auditable, it should be contained in the financial statements subject
to audit. If it is subjective, it should be included in the financial
statement but remain outside the scope of the audit report.
We suggest as a minimum that companies should disclose provisions for clean
up costs, the basis for their calculation, data on contingent liabilities, a
summary of any environmental audits along with external verifiers' reports,
a corporate environmental policy statement, a statement of compliance with
all external standards, and a reference to where more detailed disclosures
can be obtained.
We would also like to see disclosure of the historical and prospective
annual spending driven by environmental needs, disaggregated historical
environmental performance measured against established indicators, value for
money data, and a statement in which management summarises its views on how
the company stands regarding foreseeable changes in environmental
legislation.
At present, even companies with the best environmental reports spend little
time discussing the financial and economic consequences of the frenzy of
environmental activity they have undertaken. It may be they discuss
sustainability in all good faith, or it may be they use such earnest
discussions to camouflage their short-comings in quantifying their
activities.
A concerted strategy is needed to narrow the gap between what the investment
community wants from companies and what companies feel under an obligation
to provide. The accountancy profession, the investment community and
companies need to work together to identify and deliver on improved,
consistent environmental reporting.
Roger Adams is with the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants,
Tessa Tennant is with Jupiter Tyndall Merlin and Lucy Varcoe is with
Business in the Environment.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940428

