FT941-3999

FT  14 MAR 94 / Looking forward to a plan in Naples


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


Finance and employment ministers from the Group of Seven leading industrial
nations gathered in Detroit last night for a two-day brainstorming session
on ways to tackle the persistent unemployment in their economies.
US officials hosting the jobs conference insist there will be no final
communique and no attempt at formal policy co-ordination, but President Bill
Clinton wants to use the conference's conclusions as the basis for the July
summit meeting of G7 leaders in Naples to agree a jobs plan.
For Mr Clinton, who will open the conference this morning, the meeting
offers a chance to focus on themes close to the heart of his administration,
after much distraction by the Whitewater affair.
Ministers from other G7 countries expect the Detroit meeting to agree on the
need for labour market flexibility, investment in education and training,
and open trade.
'We find we are talking from the same agenda,' said Mr David Hunt, UK
employment secretary.
Mr Larry Summers, US Treasury under-secretary for international affairs,
says the employment issue is of critical political importance for all the G7
countries.
But the seven nations are not unanimous on how big a role economic stimulus,
in the form of lower interest rates or tax cuts, should play in an overall
jobs policy.
US officials do not want to turn the Detroit meeting into a shouting match
with Germany's Bundesbank, but they continue to argue that Europe needs
further interest rate cuts to spur growth and job creation.
Ms Laura Tyson, chief White House economist, told the Financial Times that
she is yet to be convinced that Europe's unemployment problems can be as
much explained by structural problems, such as rigid labour market rules, as
her European counterparts argue.
'Between 1986 and 1990, the European G7 countries added about 5m jobs and
the unemployment rate went down from about 9 per cent to about 6.9 per cent.
Since 1990, the unemployment rate has gone up to about 9.2 per cent and the
level of employment has gone down by about 2m,' she noted.
"Unless you are willing to make the case that structural rigidities improved
a lot between 1986 and 1990, and then got worse again, a lot of that
deterioration has to be cyclical.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940314

