FT941-12842

FT  28 JAN 94 / Patten set to dilute student reforms


   By JAMES BLITZ and JOHN AUTHERS


The government yesterday looked set to water down plans to restrict the
rights of student unions amid growing pressure from Tory peers to abandon
key parts of the education bill.
Mr John Patten, the education secretary, yesterday held a 25-minute meeting
with Tory peers opposed to the legislation in an attempt to win support for
his proposals.
These would end the closed shop over student union membership and give the
government a greater say in deciding how unions spend their funds.
However, leading Tory peers told Mr Patten that they refused to give up
their plans to alter the bill. Earlier this week four leading Tory peers
tabled amendments to the legislation that would in effect give university
authorities - and not the government - a greater say in how students spend
their funds.
Mr Patten assured the peers that the long-delayed committee stage of the
bill would take place very soon. However, ministers cannot look forward to
the debates with any confidence.
The bill was attacked at its second reading last month by a number of Tory
peers as an infringement of the rights of student unions. That was followed
by a second challenge from a Lords procedure committee which complained the
bill had been poorly drafted.
Even if the bill moves to the Commons in its present form, it would probably
be opposed by two former education ministers - Mr Robert Jackson and Sir
Rhodes Boyson - and by the Conservative chairman of the Commons education
committee, Sir Malcolm Thornton.
Mr Jackson said recently that the proposals to restrict the rights of
student unions were so unjust that they might infringe the European
Convention on Human Rights.
National curriculum tests now seem certain to take place in most schools
this summer, following advice from the National Association of Head Teachers
that its members should implement the tests, John Authers writes.
Last year, NAHT members jeered and hissed Mr Patten at their annual
conference, and supported the three main teachers' unions which boycotted
the tests.
The ATL and NASUWT teachers' unions have advised their members to abandon
the test boycott. However, advice by the two unions to continue boycotting
teacher assessments which create excessive workload means that heads must
try to ensure that the workload is reasonable.
The NAHT also recommends that test results should not be published if they
do not 'reflect properly the performance of the schools'.
Heads have been advised that there may be no point in trying to set the
tests in some schools if the NUT, the largest teachers' union, continues its
boycott.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940128

