FT942-15790

FT  13 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: EU hopes for budget windfall
from fruit reform - The European Commission will be looking to save money as
it sets out to cut more controversial agricultural support regimes down to
size


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


When producers' groups destroy more than 600,000 tonnes of fruit and
vegetables in a typical year as part of the Common Agricultural Policy,
European consumers are understandably enraged. Finding a more acceptable way
of stabilising these markets is one of the trickiest challenges facing the
European Union this year as itsets out to reform its controversial policy on
fruit and vegetables as well as its support regimes for wine and sugar.
These three sections of the CAP were left out of the 1992 MacSharry reforms,
which began the process of weaning European farmers off state aids. The
three programmes will receive similar treatment to the rest of European
agriculture this year as the Commission tries to trim the budget and
eliminate over-supply.
The fruit and vegetable regime has come in for much criticism for the highly
visible waste incurred  - 430,000 tonnes of peaches were trashed in 1992.
But fruit and vegetables along with sugar and wine are not as expensive to
bankroll as other parts of the CAP such as cereals and beef.
In fact, the three programmes under review make fairly modest demands on the
European taxpayer.
Sugar is the most expensive of the three, costing Ecu2bn (Pounds 1.57bn)
last year, but even this accounts for just 6 per cent of the farm budget,
while cereals support takes up 21 per cent. The sugar regime is also largely
self-financing since producer levies help pay for subsidising exports of
surplus sugar.
The continual strains on the farm budget, however, mean that the Commission
will be looking to save money by reform, or at least stop the costs of the
three programmes from getting any bigger. The cost of the wine regime has
almost doubled since 1990, to Ecu1.53bn, and the fruit and vegetables
support bill has gone up from Ecu1.25bn to Ecu 1.48bn.
In debating possible reforms, the EU's agriculture ministers face the
perennial dilemma about whether price support has encouraged
over-production.
The intervention system for fruit and vegetables, which allows producer
groups to withdraw produce from the market when the price falls to a certain
level and later to destroy most of it, has been widely criticised. Critics
say it distorts market signals and keeps inefficient growers in business,
leading to surpluses. Almost half of Greece's output of peaches, for
example, is regularly withdrawn from the market and dumped.
Farm ministers from all member countries agree that intervention must be
overhauled, but some are pushing for it to be extended to cover additional
products. It is unlikely that the system will be scrapped altogether, even
though this is being advocated by some growers and Britain's National
Farmers' Union.
Demands from southern countries are expected to keep intervention in place
as a safety net, but the Commission is considering ways of reducing its
influence. It could do this by lowering prices as has happened for beef or
even introducing a ceiling for the amount of produce growers can withdraw.
Farm ministers may also consider a 'grubbing up' scheme, which would offer
grants to producers for leaving the business. However, a previous scheme
which ran out last year, did little to eliminate persistent over-production
and the Commission is reluctant to introduce another one.
Wine reform could also focus on 'grubbing up', but it will be up to
individual member countries to run their own schemes. The Commission is
proposing the setting of required production levels for all member countries
and allowing them a transitional period to reach that level.
Member countries will be able to work out their own ways of cutting output,
which is likely to see winemakers channelling their efforts into boosting
quality.
Farm ministers are under less budgetary pressure to reform the sugar
programme as it helps to pay for itself and changes have already been put
off for 5 years. But the demands of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade deal for cuts in subsidised exports will force the EU to initiate
reforms this year.
Analysis of the Gatt requirements indicates that the EU must cut subsidised
exports of sugar by more than 10 per cent  - 340,000 tonnes out of annual
exports of close to 3m tonnes. Ministers can do this either by cutting
production quotas or making price cuts which reduce the amount of subsidy
needed for exports.
Indications are that the Commission will propose a small price cut of 2.5 to
3 per cent as quota cuts would be extremely unpopular.
However, the UK is likely to push for its share of the sugar production
quota to be increased as part of any reform. British Sugar, which processes
beet, has a quota to supply just over half of the UK market.
The UK's quota was cut in 1981 when it was not filling it, while other
countries still have production quotas far exceeding their own needs.
Belgium, for example can produce 180 per cent of its market requirements.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, UK agriculture minister, is expected to push hard for
some quota revisions. But these will inevitably come at the expense of
trade-offs elsewhere. The UK government is pushing hard for reform of these
three areas in the hope of achieving cuts in the agriculture budget and it
will be unwilling to sacrifice success for more sugar.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940413

