FT942-12194

FT  30 APR 94 / Markets: Low-key, derivative approach - The Bottom Line


   By DAVID WIGHTON


Gerrard & National has a slight image problem.
In spite of the constant television appearances of Professor Tim Congdon and
Brian Reading, who head its Lombard Street Research subsidiary, the group's
public profile is very low key. More importantly, most people in the City
who think of it at all think of it as a discount house, one of the City's
more arcane and venerable institutions.
Yet last year almost half its profits came from its GNI Holdings subsidiary,
a leading light in the new and exciting world of derivatives. Probably
Europe's biggest broker in futures, options and other derivative products,
GNI must be one of the City's fastest growing businesses.
Since 1985 GNI has increased its profits by an average of 45 per cent a
year, jumping 75 per cent to Pounds 12.5m in the 12 months to January 31.
In contrast, profits from the discount house Gerrard & National Limited,
were just Pounds 2.6m in the year to April 5, or barely 10 per cent of the
group total. Admittedly, it was a difficult year for discount houses which
are traders in short-term money market instruments and tend to do well when
interest rates are falling. The previous year, which included the aftermath
of the UK's withdrawal from the exchange rate mechanism, the discount house
made Pounds 8.2m.
Discount houses should be able to damp this volatility with the use of
derivatives but, in common with its rivals, Gerrard & National's strategy
has been to reduce the discount house's importance within the group by
expanding into businesses driven by fees and commissions.
In 1982 it formed a joint venture with a private client commodity broker in
order to participate in the London International Financial Futures Exchange
which opened in September that year.
Both Liffe and GNI have been extremely successful. Much of GNI's growth has
matched the underlying growth in derivatives markets, but GNI has also
expanded into other fields and brokes products traded on the London oil,
commodities and metal exchanges and international commodity exchanges.
Since 1985 GNI's profits have increased from Pounds 600,000 to last year's
Pounds 12.5m and the group expects strong growth to continue, particularly
in fund management. Institutional investors are making increasing use of
derivatives and GNI now has more than Pounds 234m of funds under management,
up almost tenfold in three years.
Gerrard & National has fund management activities elsewhere in the group,
notably in its stockbroking arm, Gerrard Vivian Gray, which manages about
Pounds 2bn, and the desire to create a more integrated approach to fund
management was one motive behind last week's acquisition of the 32.4 per
cent minority shareholding in GNI.
In sheer financial terms it also looked a good deal. The group offered
shares valued at Pounds 34.7m for the minority which represents only 13.5
times GNI's earnings last year. And GNI has continued to grow so fast that
the prospective multiple may be in single figures. Although Gerrard's own
shares are on a low earnings multiple, that means the deal will not dilute
its earnings this year and should enhance them thereafter.
The group also announced it was pulling out of gilt-edged market-making,
where it has lost money recently, though remaining in gilts trading, where
it has been profitable.
Last week's figures, showing profits of Pounds 25m (Pounds 25.2m),
represented a milestone for the group which for the first time paid for its
dividends from the profits of its broking division alone.
Having increased every year since 1969, dividends were edged up to 22p
(21.5p) paid out of group earnings of 34.7p (38p).
Because of the volatility of discount house earnings, the City has
traditionally valued their shares on the basis of their yield alone. But
given the transformation of the group in recent years, the yield of 6 per
cent on Gerrard & National shares suggests its image is lagging well behind
events.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940430

