FT944-14391

FT  22 OCT 94 / UK Company News: ASW in talks over French deal


   By ANDREW BAXTER and JOHN RIDDING


   LONDON, PARIS


ASW Holdings said yesterday it was in talks which may lead to it buying a
majority stake in Societe des Aciers d'Armature, the steel reinforcement
operations of Usinor Sacilor, the state-owned French steelmaker
A deal with Usinor would give the Cardiff-based steel products and
construction systems group its first steel plants outside the UK, ending a
long search for a sizeable European acquisition. It would increase its
workforce by more than 50 per cent to 3,400.
No price was disclosed, and ASW said a further announcement would be made
'when appropriate'.
Usinor, Europe's largest steelmaker, said the disposal of SAM, which
manufactures wire and rods for use in reinforced concrete, was part of its
strategy of concentrating on core activities.
Over the past few years, Usinor has been restructuring SAM, which suffered
losses of FFr270m (Pounds 32.4m) last year on sales of FFr2.3bn. The losses
partly reflected the depressed state of the construction market in 1993 and
the costs of renovating the company's furnaces.
The French group said SAM's results would show an improvement in 1994, while
industry observers said the subsidiary should come close to break even for
the year.
SAM has a total workforce of about 1,150 and produces concrete reinforcement
steels at two plants, one near Paris and the other in the Lorraine region.
It also controls several European wire mesh manufacturers, including Ludwig
of Germany, Ilro of Italy and Trefilarbed Gent of Belgium.
The negotiations with ASW are expected to involve the sale of a majority
stake in SAM, rather than the entire Usinor holding. The British group would
take management control.
Purchase of a stake would extend ASW's presence in the steel reinforcement
business, one of the products within its Allied Steel and Wire business.
A deal is likely to be followed by cost-cutting at SAM, observers believe.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941022

