FT944-11107

FT  08 NOV 94 / Heseltine tells business it must invest more: CBI conference
told expectations on returns are excessive; Doubt cast on prospect of tax
breaks


   By PHILIP COGGAN and PAUL CHEESERIGHT


Businesses are not investing enough, because of their excessive expectations
of investment returns, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary,
told the CBI conference yesterday.
The criticism cast doubts on the likelihood of the chancellor granting
further tax concessions on investment in this month's Budget.
Mr Heseltine said: 'The CBI tells me that businesses look for steady demand,
for a decent return on new investment. You now have these conditions. But
you are still not investing enough.
'The CBI tells me that the majority of firms continue to require rates of
return above 20 per cent. A senior banker last week told me his bank
habitually asked for 30 per cent returns on capital. These figures speak for
themselves. They have a chilling message built into them.' A 30 per cent
return implies that projects have a pay-back period of only about three
years.
Sir Bryan Nicholson, the president of the CBI, acknowledged that 'clearly
there is the case for companies re-examining their rates of return'.
Mr Heseltine's criticism was an indirect rebuttal of the argument by Mr
Howard Davies, director-general of the CBI, that the government's
competitiveness white paper contained a gap on the tax question. Mr Davies
said: 'There is too little recognition of the importance of a tax
environment sympathetic to investment.'
Small-business lobby groups have been calling for the chancellor to give 100
per cent capital allowances on the first Pounds 100,000 of investment.
Higher targeted rates of return, which Mr Heseltine criticised, are more
common among medium-sized and larger companies.
The CBI's national manufacturing council has identified consistently
sluggish investment as a major factor behind the UK's productivity shortfall
relative to its competitors.
Mr Heseltine said yesterday: 'We are not investing enough yet in either
people or products; in the workforce, in innovation.'
The trade and industry secretary joined the CBI president in warning against
excessive pay rises for directors. 'Wage levels must reflect performance, in
the boardroom as well as on the shop floor' he said.
In an effort to align his department with the concerns of business
rationalised by recession Mr Heseltine said his first objective was to
reduce the size of the department of trade. It would employ a significantly
smaller number of people in two years time than it had when he took office,
he said.
Mr Brian Wilson, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, said: 'It sounds
suspiciously as if Michael Heseltine is again playing to the right wing of
his party by adopting the Michael Portillo line on the role of the DTI.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941108

