FT944-14471

FT  22 OCT 94 / EU averts budget crisis with compromise on fines


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


European Union finance ministers reached a compromise yesterday over fines
due from Italy for cheating on its milk production quota.
The settlement resolves the crisis over the union's planned budget increase
and means that enlargement, due to bring in Austria, Finland, Sweden and
Norway next year, can proceed according to plan.
It should also avoid a disruptive delay in the appointment of a new European
Commission next January, which will include nominees from the four candidate
member states, assuming referendums in Sweden and Norway back EU entry.
Failure to proceed with the expansion from 12 to 16, and, as a knock-on
effect, to achieve European parliament ratification of the new Commission,
could have paralysed the union.
The crisis arose because Italy had refused to ratify the increase in EU
revenue agreed two years ago unless it was let off part of its fines for
exceeding the milk quota. Spain, one of the main beneficiaries from
increased union spending, in turn said it would not ratify enlargement
unless the revenue decision was adhered to.
Germany, currently president of the EU and the greatest enthusiast for
expanding the union, effected a compromise that increased the level of fines
on Italy, and to a lesser degree Spain, for breaking quota targets.
Under EU rules, total liability for both countries should have been Ecu4.3bn
(Pounds 3.38bn), but the Commission had halved that to Ecu2.1bn, provoking
the UK to appeal to the European Court of Justice, and prompting outright
opposition from the Netherlands and Denmark.
Total fines on the two were set yesterday at Ecu3.2bn, of which Italy will
pay Ecu1.9bn in four equal instalments between 1995 and 1998.
Significantly, ministers did not vote on yesterday's deal. Mr Theo Waigel,
the German finance minister chairing the meeting, merely announced unanimous
support for proceeding with the revenue increase, and the required majority
for the milk quota compromise.
That enabled the Dutch and Danes to claim they were outvoted. The UK had
been concerned that an overt vote, in which the Netherlands and Denmark
stuck to their guns, and the British government appeared to cave in, would
leave it vulnerable to criticism from Euro-sceptic MPs over the revenue
increase.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, UK chancellor, insisted 'there was never a snowball's
chance in Hades of getting over Ecu4bn', in fines even if Britain had won
its case.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941022

