FT942-12751

FT  28 APR 94 / Boardrooms retain old school ties


   By RICHARD DONKIN, Labour Staff


Evidence that the old-school-tie approach to the selection of non-executive
directors still persists among many of Britain's biggest companies emerged
yesterday in a survey by a leading firm of accountants.
The report by KPMG Peat Marwick into the role of non-executive directors
also found that many non-executives were not receiving vital information in
spite of the recommendations of the Cadbury report into corporate
governance.
Chairmen's appointments have traditionally drawn from the old-boy network
whereas the Cadbury report suggested that non-executive appointments should
be made via a nomination committee.
Evidence also emerged that the number of individuals with multiple
directorships remained high even though the changing role of the job is
creating greater demands on time and expertise.
The report, compiled from 235 responses to questionnaires sent to 430 of
Britain's biggest companies, found that more than half of all non-executive
appointments of directors surveyed were made by the chairman alone.
'It will be interesting to see if, in the future, the chairman's influence
wins in this respect,' said Mr Gerry Acher, KPMG's head of audit and
accounting.
The report found that while companies were good at providing financial
information to non-executives they often failed to provide other business
details.
This was most evident in some of the newer, yet strategically important,
non-financial areas such as customer satisfaction, quality and management
performance.
More than half the directors said they did not receive information on senior
management appraisals, quality indicators or comparisons with companies
recognised as best-practice leaders. Most of those questioned rated all
three as important in fulfilling their roles.
'There are clearly areas where matters of strategic importance and the
receipt of vital, pertinent information need to be brought into line,' said
Mr Acher. 'The non-execs' role should be to add to shareholder value rather
than just protect shareholder value.'
More than 60 per cent of respondents held more than three non-executive
posts, 18 per cent holding more than five. Only 18 per cent held just one
post. The highest number of directorships recorded among the replies was 13.
On average respondents were spending 20 days a year on the role and a third
of this time was spent in preparation.
The survey indicated that women still have little impact on boardrooms.
Compilers said female non-executives comprised less than 10 per cent of the
named replies.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940428

