FT942-14918

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (2): PAP secure despite protest votes -
People's Action Party retains a firm grip on power


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL


Last August, Mr Ong Teng Cheong was elected to Singapore's presidency, which
carries limited executive powers, with 58.7 per cent of the popular vote.
Most noteworthy about the poll, however, was that 670,358 people, or 41.3
per cent of voters, chose not to support the former deputy prime minister.
Instead, they voted for Mr Chua Kim Yeow, a relative unknown who was
reluctant to run - he did so in order to make a contest out of what was the
first presidential poll - and barely campaigned. He said Mr Ong was 'a far
superior candidate.'
The poll appeared to be the latest of a series of protest votes against the
People's Action Party, which has governed Singapore since the island became
independent in 1965.
This in no sense represented a crisis, since the PAP appears still to enjoy
wide popular support on key issues and retains a firm grip on power. But it
did suggest that the party needs to ensure that it stays in tune with the
views of Singaporeans, who are quite prepared to register their disapproval.
The PAP is seen as a secretive organisation, run by planners rather than
politicians, and to some extent as lacking a sense of what is important to
ordinary people.
In the last general election in 1991 - the first contested as prime minister
by Mr Goh Chok Tong - the PAP won its lowest ever share of the popular vote,
61 per cent, continuing a steady slide from a 76 per cent share won in 1980.
Opposition parties won four of the 81 elected parliamentary seats. This was
taken seriously by Mr Goh, who said then: 'In my view, life cannot be as
before. Certain things have to change now. How they will change I do not
know.'
Mr Goh, whose predecessor, Mr Lee Kuan Yew, is still an active patriarch and
Senior Minister in his cabinet, has subsequently managed to restore his
position.
Gone is his initial emphasis on more 'consultative' government, which
appeared not to play well with more conservative voters. His latest cabinet,
appointed last December, was interpreted by local analysts as further
establishing his seniority.
Also assisting him has been internal dissension within the leading
opposition party, the Singapore Democratic Party, which has three
parliamentary seats. Following its expulsion of Mr Chiam See Tong, its
founder and parliamentary leader, the party became embroiled in factional
wrangles in the courts.
Another SDP politician, Mr Chee Soon Juan, has encountered difficulties
which are more normal for the opposition in Singapore. Mr Chee, dismissed
from his post as lecturer at the National University of Singapore for an
alleged financial irregularity, was then sued for defamation by his
department head, a PAP member of parliament. In February, Mr Chee abandoned
his defence against the suit.
The US government's 1993 human rights report on Singapore says that 'the
government has used its broad discretionary powers to hinder the creation of
support organisations for the opposition parties.'
It also notes that 'the PAP attributes the lack of an effective opposition
to disorganisation, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative policy
programmes.'
According to one foreign diplomat: 'The PAP takes the view that Singapore is
a small country with limited talent available, and that it cannot afford an
opposition - it needs all the talent in government.'
However, even if the PAP faces no immediate threat, Singapore's voters have
clearly been sending it a message. Prof Chan Heng Chee, an expert on the PAP
and former ambassador to the United Nations, says that in general
dissatisfaction is not on issues of individual liberty. 'For the majority of
people, the cost of living is the burning issue.'
The costs of housing and cars have been rising sharply, although inflation
in the prices of other goods has been far less steep.
Moreover, says Prof Chan, the quality of goods and services has increased in
tandem with rising income, pushing up the cost of living.
Some Singaporeans fear that such is the speed of Singapore's development,
younger people will have ever-rising expectations but also less personal
incentive to succeed because of greater family wealth relative to that of
earlier generations.
Prof Chan says: 'There is a group of young people who would like a much more
liberal society, but they are not in the majority.' She says the average
Singaporean would have little sympathy with, for example, avant-garde
theatre companies which recently got into trouble after an actor made
himself vomit on stage after reading a local newspaper, and another cut his
pubic hair on stage.
Other analysts saw this incident, and another in which a playwright was
found to have attended a US workshop in which a Marxist was involved, as a
warning by the authorities against the raising of popular political
consciousness through cultural activities.
Prof Chan nevertheless acknowledges there will be a desire for changes in
political style and says the task will be to respond to expectations
'without weakening the fabric of society' - that is, lapsing into the sexual
promiscuity, drug use and press irresponsibility which Singaporeans see
afflicting western societies.
With Mr Goh now expected to lead the government beyond the next general
elections due by mid-1996, his more immediate task will be to ensure the
continued appearance of fresh talent in government as experienced
politicians retire.
His latest cabinet, though it involved an extensive re-shuffle, did not
introduce a single new face.
Singapore's politicians are among the world's best paid but the appeal of
the private sector and of less high-profile but still lucrative government
posts is considerable. A recent trend has been increased use of the armed
forces as a talent pool from which to draw PAP leaders.
One such leader is Mr Lee Hsien Loong - known as 'BG' (for
Brigadier-General) Lee - deputy prime minister and son of Mr Lee Kuan Yew.
Only 41, he is expected eventually to take over the reins from Mr Goh,
having apparently made a good recovery from lymphatic cancer. However he is
thought not to be as popular as his father, and will find it difficult to
follow in his footsteps.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940418

