FT941-3546

FT  16 MAR 94 / Mandela enters Bophuthatswana in triumph


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   MMABATHO


Mr Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, yesterday made a
triumphal entry to the Bophuthatswana capital, Mmabatho, congratulating the
people of the black 'homeland' for ousting President Lucas Mangope, and
issuing a veiled warning that the same might happen to Zulu Chief Mangosuthu
Buthelezi.
Some 40,000 people cheered wildly as Mr Mandela entered the futuristic
'Independence Stadium' built to commemorate Bophuthatswana's granting of
independence from South Africa in 1977, a sovereignty which only Pretoria
recognised. He had harsh words for Chief Buthelezi, leader of the KwaZulu
black homeland, saying last week's events in Bophuthatswana would 'send a
signal' to him and to the white right-wing.
'The people have risen and tyrants have fallen. This message will not be
lost on people living under other toy tyrants in this country,' he said, a
comment which bordered on a direct invitation to the people of KwaZulu to
revolt. His remarks will not improve the political situation in Natal, where
at least nine people were killed yesterday in fighting between the ANC and
Chief Buthelezi's Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom party.
Nor do they improve prospects for the success of talks later this week
between Mr Mandela and Zulu King Goodwill Zwelethini, aimed at ensuring
Inkatha's participation in the first all-race elections in April. The king
has strong links to Inkatha, through Chief Buthelezi, who is chief adviser
to the monarchy.
Mr Mandela denigrated the threat from Inkatha, saying he would suffer 'no
sleepless nights' over its promise to disrupt elections. The right wing, and
by implication Inkatha, were 'no more than those who bark without being able
to bite,' he said.
ANC leaders, who previously expressed grave concern at the right's ability
to disrupt elections, have gained confidence since armed right-wing whites
were chased out of Bophuthatswana on Friday, after briefly occupying the
capital. This new confidence is likely to undermine the ANC's commitment to
negotiate a deal to bring Inkatha, the only remaining party boycotting the
poll, into a constitutional settlement.
Mr Mandela arrived in Mmabatho yesterday morning to a low-key reception in
the streets, with very few people turning out to greet his motorcade. Later
in the day, the largest crowd ever seen for a public event in Bophuthatswana
turned out at the Independence Stadium, but it remained about a third empty.
The stadium, visible across many kilometres of the flat Bophuthatswana veld,
is widely seen as a symbol of President Mangope's rule: the upper sets of
seats are set at angles which form attractive silhouettes against the sky,
but make it impossible to see the pitch from anywhere but the central
stands.
Mr Mandela condemned looting that destroyed Mmabatho's shopping district,
but ANC officials made clear to business people an ANC government would not
compensate them for what officials implied was a necessary part of the
liberation struggle. Still, Indian business people, many of whom lost all
their stock, turned out to greet and garland the ANC leader. One Asian
businessman said after the meeting: 'The Indian community are jumping on the
bandwagon. They used to support Mangope, now they support Mandela.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940316

