FT944-14608

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (19): Simpler
charges, wider markets - Trusts continue to benefit from Peps, and low
interest rates have helped to win many savers from building societies. But
deregulation means potential upsets lie ahead


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


Like the classroom weakling, who suddenly grows to tower over his
classmates, unit trusts are enjoying their relatively new-found stature.
The industry looks set this year to beat its own record Pounds 9.1bn of net
investment, set in 1993. By the end of August, net investment since January
had totalled Pounds 6.75bn, fractionally up on the Pounds 6.28bn for the
same eight months of the previous year. This is all a far cry from the
dismal years following the 1987 stock market crash, when net investment over
the five years (1988-1992 inclusive) amounted to Pounds 9.5bn - only
slightly above the total up last year.
Although the investment numbers are now getting better, from the point of
view of the industry, it faces three main challenges in the coming year.
The first test will be to deliver better performance. As Barry Riley
explains on page 31 of this Review, the average unit trust has delivered a
return of 29.4 per cent in the five years to the end of September against
the FT-SE Actuaries All-Share Index's total return of 55.3 per cent.
Secondly, unit trusts will be under pressure to sustain demand from new
investors as interest rates move back up again. It is no coincidence that
the popularity of unit (and investment) trusts has occurred against a
background of low interest rates - at the beginning of 1993, base rates
stood at 6 per cent, falling further to 5.25 per cent before the half
percentage point rise onSeptember 12.
Private investors have turned to equity-related investments over the past
few years, in the hope of bettering the modest returns they have been
getting at the building societies. For the first time, the number of
unitholder accounts rose to more than 6m in August - an increase of more
than one-third on January 1993.
Mr Philip Warland, director-general of Autif, does not appear too worried by
the building-society threat, arguing that saving habits have changed, with
more people investing for the long-term - such as for school fees or to pay
off the mortgage.
Finally, moves towards deregulation have led to greater flexibility for unit
trusts on charges and the range of markets in which they can invest. There
are more changes in the pipeline, which the industry hopes will give it
greater marketing flexibility and appeal to new investors. The difficulty
will be in making sure that this turns out to be the case, and that
investors are better off as a result.
The most important measures, which are to be implemented from next week,
include:
Exit charges: These have been in existence on some personal equity plans,
since Pep rules differ from those for unit trusts. Fidelity introduced a
tapering withdrawal charge over three years on its Peps in 1992, in
combination with an initial charge of only 2 per cent - instead of the more
common 5.25-6 per cent.
However, this early experimentation with exit charges has not proved
entirely successful. Fidelity and Gartmore removed them earlier this year
after they found that few investors were cashing in their Peps early;
instead, they pushed up their initial charge to 3 per cent.
Since investors tend to hold on to unit trusts in Pep form for longer than
their other unit trusts, investment houses may use their new-found freedom
to levy exit charges on short-term, rather than on long-term holdings, such
as on emerging-markets trusts.
Cancellation price: From November 1, unit trusts will no longer have to show
the 'cancellation price' - the lowest price at which units can be bought
back by the unit trust company - in the national press.
The move is seen as the prelude to 'single pricing', whereby unit trusts
will quote one mid-market price instead of the present 'bid' and 'offer'
prices - the prices at which investors sell and buy their units.
The idea behind this is to simplify, and make more user-friendly, the
terminology, in an attempt to have wider public appeal.
Wider choice of markets: Fund managers are being given more freedom with the
relaxation of some investment restrictions. Authorised unit trusts have had
to keep 90 per cent of their money in markets that are on an 'approved' list
kept by the Securities and Investment Board (SIB), the City's chief
financial services regulator. Only 10 per cent could go into unapproved
markets, which tend to be in the fast-growing markets of south east Asia and
South America.
From November 1, the responsibility for deciding which markets are suitable
for inclusion in the 90 per cent safe rule will shift from SIB to the fund
manager. Ultra-cautious investors should, therefore, watch to see which
countries the fund manager decides to put on his or her 'eligible' list.
One change that has already taken place, and which has important
implications for those seeking income, is the permission given by SIB in May
to unit-trust companies to take their management fees out of income rather
than capital growth. This allows income funds to post a higher yield
overnight, without any change to their investment strategy.
Although the management companies are obliged to explain their
capital-charging strategy in their promotional literature, and will need to
point out that capital may be eroded, investors looking down a page of
yields will not know which companies have opted for this practice.
In any case, some income-seeking investors may prefer to go for total return
by taking income from capital growth and making use of their annual capital
gains tax allowance, currently Pounds 5,800, instead of paying income tax at
their marginal rate on the income received.
For most investors, the question of charges or the investment freedom of
fund managers will be less important than trust performance. And on page 27
of this review, John Cuthbert, who believes that most fund managers achieve
their returns through luck or relatively high risk, describes his method of
choosing a trust based on the investment skill of its manager.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

941021

