FT943-716

FT  28 SEP 94 / Shelter is sought for winter homeless


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


A leading construction industry charity is struggling to find empty London
office buildings to provide temporary winter shelters for the capital's
homeless people. This is even though there are many vacant buildings in
central London.
Construction Industry Relief and Assistance for the Single Homeless (Crash),
sponsored by some of the industry's biggest companies, provides materials,
skills and finance to turn empty buildings into shelters under the
government's Rough Sleepers initiative.
Mr Tony Denison, Crash co-ordinator, said landlords who lent unlet buildings
would save on rates because the buildings would not be unoccupied. The
charity would meet heating, maintenance and security bills.
The four-year-old scheme is having particular difficulty this year in
finding suitable buildings, although estate agents estimate there is 8m sq
ft of vacant office space in the West End alone.
Mr Denison said: 'Perhaps it is a sign that the property market is starting
to improve. It has always been hard to find space but this year it is the
worst I have known.'
The trust is looking for five empty buildings in the W1, WC1, WC2, SW1, SE1,
NW1, E1, EC and EC1 postal districts to convert into temporary winter
accommodation.
In previous years Allied-Lyons, the drinks and food group, has donated half
its former headquarters building in Islington for a temporary shelter. Last
year Land Securities property group allowed Crash to take over Neville
House, an empty building close to the Department of the Environment
headquarters in Marsham Street.
Mr Denison said advertisements in national and London newspapers this autumn
had produced only one building.
Sponsors of Crash include the building materials groups Redland, RMC, Rugby
Group, BPB Industries and Caradon, as well as contractor John Laing. Other
supporters include publishers The Builder Group and Barbour Index, the
research group.
Crash can be contacted on 081-994 9195.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940928

