FT941-12920

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (18): Dried milk for Egypt's onions - Helen
Mingay describes some of the intricate multilateral deals, involving several
countries, pulled off by international traders / Countertrade focus / Trends
in east-west trade


   By HELEN MINGAY


Six years ago, David Little had 15 colleagues dealing with countertrade. Now
he sits alone, holding the title of managing director of countertrade at
Rank Xerox, but managing and directing just himself.
Before the collapse of communism in eastern Europe, Rank Xerox organised
extensive countertrade transactions in the area, particularly in Poland and
Bulgaria. However, political and economic changes across eastern Europe have
resulted in Rank Xerox establishing a network of dealers covering the entire
region, who sell and service copying machines on conventional commercial
terms.
There have been a few countertrade deals in Romania, but generally Rank
Xerox has found that the east European purchasers are able to provide hard
currency to purchase their machines. 'We have had an extremely good year,'
says Mr Little. 'Our sales have gone up dramatically, well over what we
planned.'
Even in Romania, where there is a chronic shortage of hard currency, Rank
Xerox finds that buyers are often somehow able to convert their money
locally into hard currency. There are always exceptions. Rank Xerox has, for
example, arranged countertrade agreements with Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan,
where it made counterpurchases of raw cotton as the basis of payment for
copying machines.
Maurice Banfield, formerly of Rank Xerox Kazakhstan office, described the
project as being '60 per cent goodwill and 40 per cent for profit'.
Meanwhile the food company Salads Etcetera Holdings has set up complex
arrangements in Poland, which meet its individual needs.
The company, based near Hull, is setting up an office in Warsaw, and expects
to export Pounds 10m of produce in the next two or three years. Although the
Poles will pay in hard currency for some of the products, managing director
Paul Wright has been able to expand the size of the contract by securing
countertrade arrangements.
Salads Etcetera has contracts with Egyptian suppliers, who ship salad
onions, new potatoes and oranges to the UK. Egypt needs to buy milk powder,
and Mr Wright has arranged for Polish producers to supply the Egyptian
market with dried milk powder in exchange for UK products.
This arrangement allows the UK company to make full use of its transport
fleet. Lorries will drive to Poland full of salad produce and return with
dried milk powder. Vessels then leave Hull for Egypt laden with milk powder
and return to the UK with Egyptian produce.
'We are interested in developing a serious long-term business in Poland,'
says Mr Wright. 'We have the technical expertise to help the Poles. If we
did not have a market for the products we could not do it. The Egyptians are
required to buy the milk powder, and we are also very interested in
developing some business there.'
Mr Wright is looking to develop further business in Poland, possibly through
joint ventures and in other areas of the food distribution business. He adds
that the initial contract has full financial guarantees. The Polish office
is seen as a springboard for business in other east European countries,
particularly Ukraine, which has large-scale capacity in salad production, as
well as Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria.
Currency instability in the countries of the former Soviet Union has also
fuelled some countertrade in the region. Over the past two years, Russian
businessmen have organised the exchange of aluminium for sugar and
countertrade in raw materials, such as titanium, bauxite and timber. Many of
these commodities found their way out to the west through the extremely
porous Baltic borders. The Russian government has increased border controls,
and as the stockpiles of these materials diminish, supplies could begin to
dry up.
Bill Newman, assistant general manager at Moscow Narodny Bank, pointed out
that western bank deposits from the former Soviet Union doubled last year
from Dollars 9.1bn to a recorded Dollars 17.9bn in June 1993. 'My personal
guess is that most of that is legal', he says. 'In the past hard currency
was retained outside illegally, but now people can put it into bank accounts
in Russia. If they stabilise the rouble, then I think the money would go
back quite quickly as investment.'
Illegal or not, the scale of this outside investment indicates that hard
currency has been generated, which should reduce the need for countertrade
in the future.
Meanwhile, Moscow Narodny Bank has been instrumental in organising an
innovative countertrade deal with Russia secured by the British Health Care
Consortium, under the chairmanship of Sir Ronald McIntosh in Ekaterinburg.
After the break-up of the Soviet Union, Sir Ronald saw opportunities for
financing required imports to resource-rich regions, through the sale of
local commodities.
Export licences have to be acquired for such exports, but the consortium
deals directly with the Urals regional government, rather than going through
Moscow. The collapse of the Soviet Union means that local enterprises do not
have to send all their output to fulfil state procurement orders as in the
past.
This was where Moscow Narodny bank came in. The bank advises on the
selection of the most saleable products, obtains the most advantageous
prices and handles the hard currency management on behalf of the regional
government. The consortium, is then paid through the hard currency generated
by the sale of precious minerals and metals.
Mr Newman says that the bank is now trying to broaden the allocation of
goods to service the contract for 1994, as stockpiles of the non-ferrous
metals are beginning to run down. The bank has gained the regional
government's trust and is able to secure the best prices for their goods
because of the expertise in the market, he says. The consortium consists of
six core companies: Glaxo, Wellcome, Zeneca Pharma, Amersham International,
Smiths Industries Medical Systems and Vickers Medical, which also does
business elsewhere in the former Soviet Union, on their own behalf.
For instance, Glaxo does limited countertrade in other countries in the
region, but generally through a third party. Jane Penn, the operations
manager for the consortium says that the group is now discussing new
contracts in the Greater Urals and Kazakhstan and will be venturing into
Eastern Siberia this year.
But problems arise when organising countertrade. The British Food
Consortium, for example, has attempted to instigate contracts in Ukraine, to
be paid for by the export of steel, but it was unable to by-pass internal
supply problems. Now the group is looking at three regions in Russia and
also in Kazakhstan, where it hopes to establish contracts on a similar basis
to those enjoyed by the British Healthcare Consortium.
Countertrade is still used for trade between east European countries, but
the collapse of the Soviet Union has led to severe difficulties. At the
Hungarian International Bank's countertrade subsidiary in Budapest, Hibex,
an official confirms that deals are scarce. 'We do get enquiries for spare
parts, but when we ask if they can pay or exchange a commodity, then there
is no answer,' he says. 'It is very difficult to obtain reliable offers.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940127

