FT942-16280

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (11): 'Not yet emerging,'
is the verdict - Central America


   By EDWARD ORLEBAR


Central America has come a long way from the investors' wasteland of a few
years ago. But opportunities are thin compared to other emerging markets,
and bureaucratic obstacles can be formidable.
'Not yet emerging,' is how one financial analyst describes Guatemala the
largest economy in the region, where a guerrilla conflict persists after 33
years.
The removal of former President Mr Jorge Serrano, who failed to seize
dictatorial powers last May, has slowed privatisation plans, and the new
government has lurched from one political crisis to another.
The recent elections of two social democrats, Mr Jose Maria Figueres in
Costa Rica, and Mr Carlos Roberto Reina in Honduras, in the region's most
stable countries, suggests less future emphasis on liberalisation, and more
on social spending.
In El Salvador, Mr Armando Calderon Sol of the governing right-wing Arena
party, who will probably win a presidential run- off this month, is expected
to continue the liberalising policies of his predecessor which have awakened
investor interest.
But serious problems on implementing a United Nations-sponsored peace
agreement could threaten political stability.
Seemingly chronic instability in Nicaragua, which has not recovered from the
divisive affects of a civil war in the 1980s, has even put off Central
American investors. Last year was the first in almost a decade that the
Nicaraguan economy grew.
In Panama, which has recovered its importance as a financial centre
following the US invasion to oust general Manuel Noriega in 1989, the
favourite to win presidential elections in May is Mr Ernesto Perez
Balladares, a former finance minister, from General Noriega's party.
But most countries are undergoing World Bank structural adjustment
programmes, and have standby agreements with the International Monetary Fund
which have reduced inflation, cut tariffs, and moved towards more
market-driven economies with freer exchange rates.
Mainly repatriated private capital has flowed into the region, attracted by
high interest rates, more stable currencies, and more fluid currency
regulations, to underwrite the large trade deficit.
But the fledgling markets are dominated by government paper, and few
companies have ventured beyond issuing short-term debt. A number of
privatisations, mainly of small state companies, have taken place over the
past few years.
There is residual suspicion towards Central America whose high political
risk, with the exception of Costa Rica, has limited long-term capital
investment. But some niche opportunities providing high margins exist, says
Jeffrey Erkelens from the Grupo Antigua, an investment consultancy. 'You
can't sell Central America to large institutional pension funds, but there
are opportunities for venture capital and private equity funds.' The local
private sector is lobbying for privatisation of energy generation,
telecommunications and transport services, which would help to develop
capital markets, and provide opportunities for foreign investors.
In El Salvador, Mrs Mirna Marques de Lievano, the planning minister, says
Dollars 1bn is needed to invest in the energy sector over the next five
years. There is a perception in governments throughout the region that
foreign private capital will be needed to modernise poor infrastructure.
The Honduran government is making moves to privatise Hondutel, the state
telephone company, one of the few public utilities that makes a profit.
There are similar intentions in Nicaragua, and in El Salvador. But in
Guatemala a recent proposal for securitisation of future account receivables
of international calls, broke down through a combination of government
indecision and union pressure.
For Mr Gerardo Zepeda, a senior official at Sieca, a regional technical
organisation which promotes integration, recent advances towards free
movement of goods and capital within the region is a new incentive. 'The
market is bigger now - about 30m people with combined GDP of Dollars 35bn,'
he says.
But Mr Zepeda admits that capital intensive industry is unlikely to locate
to Central America, until infrastructure and services are improved. And in
spite of progress, for example on intellectual property rights, laws and
incentives for foreign investors are still inadequate or unclear in most
countries, he says.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940411

