FT943-990

FT  27 SEP 94 / World Trade News: US car industry in Asian mission


   By VICTOR MALLET


   BANGKOK


US motor manufacturers and parts suppliers yesterday embarked on a campaign
to increase their business in South-East Asia, where the vehicle market is
dominated by Japanese corporations.
The 11-company US mission to Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia - sponsored by
the big three US carmakers Chrysler, Ford and General Motors and supported
by the US administration - comes at a time when US automotive companies are
attempting to increase their presence in the region after years of neglect.
'We're looking at how we can become members of the supplier community,' said
Mr Christopher Bates of the Motor and Equipment Manufacturers' Association,
'in order to position ourselves for the growth that's going to occur over
the next decade.' Critics say they are arriving 20 years too late and have
allowed Japanese corporations to dictate policy to South-East Asian
governments on everything from industry standards to import tariffs.
In Thailand, for example, Japanese manufacturers supply more than 90 per
cent of the local vehicle market, with European luxury carmakers making up
most of the balance. 'We plan for the next quarter. The Japanese plan for
the next quarter-century,' admitted one executive for a US car company.
But some US businessmen are bullish about their chances in Asia. They point
out that South-East Asian markets are only now becoming big enough to enjoy
important economies of scale.
They also say some Japanese manufacturing operations in Asia and their local
parts suppliers are profitable only because of high tariffs which may be
reduced as Asian countries liberalise their trade regimes; just as the
Japanese successfully seized a big share of the US market after 1970, US
executives say, so it should be possible for US manufacturers to break
Japanese dominance in Asia today.
US car component makers, furthermore, see opportunities for supplying parts
to Japanese assemblers in Asia as they do in the US. In the past two years,
Chrysler has begun operations in Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand to
assemble the Jeep Cherokee and has tussled with its Japanese rivals to
ensure that its products are not discriminated against in national tariff
systems.
General Motors has re-entered the Indonesian market. Ford, which closed its
assembly operation in Thailand in 1976, is conducting a feasibility study on
whether to produce pick-ups in Thailand with Mazda. Thailand is the second
largest market in the world for pick-ups after the US.
This week's trade mission is supported by a US Commerce Department export
promotion programme announced by Mr Ron Brown, commerce secretary, in June.
The six-nation Association of South-East Asian Nations took Dollars 28bn of
US exports in 1993.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940927

