FT941-3519

FT  16 MAR 94 / Paramount may trigger payout delays


   By ANDREW JACK


Insolvency practitioners yesterday warned that payments to creditors of
companies in receivership and administration could be substantially delayed
as a result of the Court of Appeal's ruling on Paramount Airways.
The concern came in spite of the government's decision on Monday to
introduce emergency insolvency legislation in the next two weeks to reduce
employment obligations in the future.
In a Commons statement, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary,
said new legislation would provide that only the limited costs of wages,
salaries and pension contributions of staff would rank as secured creditors
to companies in receivership or administration.
His comments came in response to lobbying by the insolvency profession after
the court's ruling earlier this month suggested that administrators were
deemed to have adopted the contractual employment obligations of the company
after 14 days.
Practitioners said yesterday they were waiting to study the small print in
the draft legislation, expected over the next few days, and had concerns
about residual obligations.
Some argued that it would have been better had Mr Heseltine proposed that
receivers and administrators would not be deemed to have adopted the
contracts of employment of staff in companies if they issued no new
contracts within 14 days of their appointment.
The statement will have no effect on additional contractual employment
claims which may be triggered on companies entering administration or
receivership before this week.
Mr John Alexander, an insolvency partner with Pannell Kerr Forster, said he
was likely to ask for indemnities to any banks before authorising further
payments, so that he could reclaim the money if necessary.
Mr Mark Homan, president of the Society of Practitioners of Insolvency, said
it would take 'many months' to quantify potential additional employment
costs.
Additional employment claims could be triggered in many cases, including
Swan Hunter, Leyland Daf and Ferranti, although they are less likely where
the company has been bought as a going concern and the obligations taken on
by the purchaser.
The Paramount creditors' committee, which met on Monday, has until Friday to
decide whether to take the Court of Appeal's ruling to the House of Lords.
It has agreed provisionally to proceed, but needs to prepare a legal case
and raise at least Pounds 100,000 from the insolvency profession to cover
the costs.
Other insolvency practitioners are considering whether other cases might be
taken through the courts and interpreted more favourably.
Meanwhile, Michael Mayes, the Rotherham-based textile company which was
highlighted as the first large business to be affected by the Paramount
ruling, was preparing yesterday to lay off all but 15 of its 140 staff. The
receiver has given the management until Monday to prepare a buy-out offer.
It will have to raise tens of thousands of pounds for the purchase, and meet
a large additional working capital requirement.
The employment obligations are believed to exceed the value of the company's
assets. There was no sign last night of an external buyer.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940316

