FT941-12785

FT  28 JAN 94 / Arts: Energy on a grotesque scale - The latest exhibition at
the Saatchi gallery


   By WILLIAM PACKER


We may judge our fellows by their wit or politics, or even their husbands or
wives, but we damn them for their taste in curtains at our peril. So it is
with their pictures.
Yet in Charles Saatchi we have a man who has been buying the art of his own
time, which is bad enough, and by the yard, which is worse; and he has set
up for himself the most spectacular gallery in London in which to show it
all off. For nine years he has been parading his judgment, from Andy Warhol
to Damien Hirst, to decidedly mixed applause. How, we ask ourselves, can he
be so persistent, so public-spirited, so, well, insensitive?
Since 1992, every other show has been given to the work of younger British
artists in his collection, this the third in the series. Now again, it
seems, that once one work has caught his eye, he has bought the lot. Good
luck to him, that he can command what he wants, and good luck to the artists
and their dealers. But it remains a disconcerting procedure.
We may well be happy to see the work of any particular artist, shown in
depth and beautifully presented. Yet there is to it all, even so, something
decidedly remote and arbitrary. We miss any sense of a collector's personal
engagement with the particular work, cherished for itself and set against
something else, no less treasured. So it is with the three painters in this
show. Individually they have their points, for and against. They may hang
together without mutual interference, but collectively they make no sense.
The best of them is Simon Callery, the only one who is not concerned with
the human figure. His work is also the most abstract: large canvases of
closely modulated greys and pinks, greens and violets, with simple linear
motifs lightly worked over them in oil-pastel. Strongly horizontal in
emphasis, they inevitably conjure up landscape by association: wide
seascapes, marshes, estuaries. These beautiful works sit comfortably within
a modern tradition that links early Mondrian to Diebenkorn and Agnes Martin
and yet looks back to the 17th century, to Koninck and Ruisdael.
Simon English's work is less happy - his paintings of the figure, set for
the most part on a epic scale, strive for symbolic significance before ever
properly establishing a convincing human presence. Naked, Bacon-esque
shadows stand in line, set into box-like cubicles that fall away in crude
perspective, all cast in a fierce, romantic, highly theatrical chiaroscuro.
So far, so good, for there is nothing wrong in the promise of some
old-fashioned visual drama. The problem is that the promise is all. Come
closer and we find that the technicalities of realisation have been ducked -
look, no hands, no feet, no face. There is the world of difference between
something left undone or removed by choice, and something unattempted,
evaded.
The work of Jenny Saville, at 23 by ten years the youngest of the three, is
superficially the most remarkable in the show, as much for its energy and
scale as for its quality. Her canvases are very large, conventionally so,
but that she should then impose upon them out-size images of the figure that
are often even too big for them, is rather less expected. That these images
should then be positively outrageous - fat, bloated, distorted female nudes,
scratched and scrawled with slogans and graffiti, gleefully flouting all
normal canons of taste and decency - only compounds the visual shock.
But whatever their feminist or fattist programme might be, they are more
interesting for their formal and practical qualities. Simply to control the
paint and sustain such images across these extensive surfaces is to declare
Miss Saville a painter of considerable natural ability. Certainly she
deserves better that to be celebrated only for her imagery. When the
paintings, at their most grotesque, get out of hand, dominated by the image,
they are least successful. The best is the simplest, a nude back-view cut
off at head and legs, subtly observed, delicately modelled and, in certain
passages, almost abstract.
It is a pity she does not show some working drawings. And we must hope she
soon escapes the tyranny of scale and the easy shock.
Young British Artists III: The Saatchi Gallery, 98a Boundary Rd, NW8 until
July: open Friday to Sunday, 12-6

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940128

