FT942-14834

FT  19 APR 94 / South African Elections (April 26-28): The new S Africa
rises in Boer heartland - Patti Waldmeir finds Afrikaner and ANC learning to
live together even before the poll


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


'I told my friends at the golf course on Saturday, 'Mark my words, on the
26th of May (a month after South Africa's election) we will be sitting here,
having a beer, nothing is going to disappear'.' Mr Kobus Botha, golfer,
lawyer, and right-wing town councillor in Viljoenskroon, one of the
country's most conservative towns, has made his peace with the new South
Africa.
He still believes in apartheid, he still thinks Afrikaners should have their
own homeland - but he is preparing to live under the African National
Congress government which will almost certainly be elected in the all-race
poll on April 26-28. And the ANC in Viljoenskroon, which will soon control
the council of this small Orange Free State town, is not only willing but
eager to learn to live with Mr Botha.
On the face of it, little has changed in this classic town of the Afrikaner
platteland, the rural hinterland where white hostility to black is
supposedly at its highest. Road signs marking the entry to Viljoenskroon are
plastered with right-wing stickers declaring 'This is our volkstaat
(homeland)'; and the wide, impeccably maintained streets of the white town
still contrast sharply with the rutted, near-impassable dirt roads of
Rammulotsi township, where nightsoil buckets provide the only sewerage for
many residents.
Yet Viljoenskroon is about to experience its own local revolution to rival
any that the national politicians can deliver. By election day, the town's
all-white council (dominated by the ultra-right Conservative party by a
ratio of six to one) will in effect be replaced by an interim body in which
whites and blacks will split the seats between them.
Though this body is merely a 'negotiating forum' charged with hammering out
a new local government structure before local elections later this year, it
marks the first step to integrated local government, and crucially, the
first move toward sharing Viljoenskroon's (white) tax base between its
30,000 to 40,000 black and 2,500 white residents.
Other, less conservative towns, took steps months or years ago to integrate
local government. Viljoenskroon held out. Even the decision to set up the
new 50-50 body was not voluntary: under new legislation, the white council
would have been removed if it had not accepted this option.
But if the white council's public stance is reluctant, even obstructive,
local ANC officials say there is considerable co-operation behind the
scenes. The head of the ANC's local government section in Rammulotsi, Mr
Lucky Phooko, says he believes four out of the seven white councillors will
co-operate with the ANC. Some are already offering advice, in a clandestine
fashion, by telephone.
'The CP (Conservative Party) guys have acclimatised with the law. It's now
that they respect us and treat us as human beings,' Mr Phooko says, adding
that the ANC wants to draw on the expertise of white councillors, especially
in budgetary matters.
'We're going to utilise these guys, the Boers (right-wing Afrikaners),
because of their expertise in local government. Most of the Boers have been
misinformed about the ANC. If we explain clearly to them . . . if we can
work together . . . you will see a transformation in our township,' he says
with the enthusiasm of a man who believes that all of Viljoenskroon's people
 -white and black - will be happier, more prosperous and more secure living
together than living separately under apartheid.
Mr Phooko knows that, even after the elections, whites will still have a
statutory 30 per cent share of the council (though they make up less than a
tenth of the population). This will give them what will in effect be a veto
over the budget. But he seems happy with the compromise, which was offered
by the ANC in the last stages of constitutional negotiations to calm white
fears.
He seems more concerned at persuading Rammulotsi residents to resume rent
and service payments after a long boycott: 'For one to get something you
have to give something up - that is what we are going to teach our people,'
he says.
Things could still go badly awry. Kobus Botha draws a bottom line below
which he will not compromise. 'Religion, a basic education for my kids, a
chance to do a job, a decent living - not necessarily in the same luxury,
we've lived like kings] - personal safety.
'If you can't go on holiday without running into an impi (Zulu war party) at
Pietermaritzburg . . . then you have to say, is it worth it? Perhaps you'd
be better off in a bachelor flat in New Zealand.'
Ironically, Mr Botha says he hopes the ANC scores a big win at the polls.
'I'd like the ANC to win 75 per cent and immediately restore law and order:
get back capital punishment, get out the army and shoot them (perpetrators
of violence and crime) to pieces.'
He has an unlikely ally in Mr Louis Botha (no relation), the local chairman
of the ruling National party, who also hopes for an ANC triumph. 'We need a
very strong government which must have the ability to rule in a very strict
way,' he says, adding the ANC must wield even more power than the National
party.
But if this seems an unlikely fan club for the ANC, some Viljoenskroon
residents provide a more predictable response to the upcoming elections. Mr
Kerneels Dercksen, a local farmer and militant member of the Afrikaner
Volksfront, is always ready with the cliches of the right: 'The Afrikaner
will not tolerate the ANC to govern. This country will go up in smoke.'
He says he will not pay taxes to the new government, has installed a large
generator to cope with retaliatory interruptions in electricity supply and
has erected a formidable security fence around his farm to keep out the ANC.
He says his phone and home are bugged by the security forces which used to
serve apartheid and which are now preparing to serve the ANC.
Will he disrupt the elections? Not personally, he says. Will he move to a
volkstaat? No, but he will buy a plot there as insurance against the future.
Lawyer Kobus Botha probably comes closest to summing up the local mood:
'It's business as usual here. People are worried, they're concerned, but
they're not nervous. They're buying tractors, not Krugerrands.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940419

