FT943-810

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (2): The old champion
is still on his feet - Philip Coggan considers Europe's long-term economic
problem, and the possible solutions


   By PHILIP COGGAN


Europe stands condemned, in many economists' eyes, as an ageing boxer,
flabby with age and made soft though luxury, ripe for a bruising from
younger, hungrier challengers such as the countries of south-east Asia.
Accountants Coopers & Lybrand have predicted that Europe's share of world
GDP will fall to 17 per cent in 2010, from 22 per cent in 1990, while Asian
developing countries' share rises from 18 to 28 per cent over the same
period.
There are two broad schools of thought in dealing with this long-term
problem. The free-market, British approach is to argue that European labour
markets are too rigid, and that the costs of employing workers, in
particular in the form of additional social benefits are too high. Non-wage
labour costs were estimated by a House of Lords report to be 44 per cent of
total labour costs in the European Union, against 28 per cent in Japan and
24 per cent in the US.
'Europe's manufacturing cost-base is too high,' says Mr Stephen King, deputy
chief economist at brokers James Capel. 'The main problem countries, such as
Germany and Belgium, have high unit labour costs with a big government
element, in terms of employers' social security contributions. Clearly,
Europe will have a declining share of world markets if those high costs
continue, and we will tend to see a shrinking of the manufacturing sector.'
Mr Giles Keating, chief economist at CS First Boston, says: 'The problem
with the European economic system is not just that we're more expensive; we
are set up too inflexibly. Institutions were set up which worked well under
the old system but which aren't appropriate any longer.'
Among the problems that Mr Keating cites are regional concentrations of
heavy industry, strong trade unions, and a generous system of social
protection 'which was set up to look after workers who made temporary moves
in and out of a static employment profile.'
It is not just labour-market rigidities that impose a cost burden on
European countries. The steady ageing of European populations means that
those in work will face ever-increasing social costs of looking after the
elderly.
Around a fifth of the European Union's 320m citizens are aged over 60. Some
20m of those are aged over 74. By the year 2040, the proportion of those
aged over 60 is expected to grow to 25 per cent; Ireland which has more than
one child for every person of working age is one of the few exceptions to
this greying trend.
The burden of supporting the future elderly is increased, because most
countries have followed a 'pay-as-you-go' pension system, in which benefits
are met from current taxation rather than funded by contributions made
during the beneficiary's during working life.
CS First Boston has calculated that, as a proportion of GDP, unfunded
pension liabilities are higher than conventional debt in every EU member
except Belgium. Adding in unfunded liabilities, the only EU country with
total debt below 100 per cent of GDP is the UK; five countries (Belgium,
Greece, Italy, Netherlands and Portugal) have debt totalling over 200 per
cent of GDP.
Such drastic problems require radical solutions, according to the
free-market view. Flexible labour markets are needed before Europe can adapt
to the competitive challenge posed by Asia and other developing areas.
Proponents cite the success of the US in creating jobs, while Europe has
seen inexorably rising unemployment.
Critics of this approach refuse to countenance the social costs implicit in
freeing up labour markets in this way. They argue that the US has only
succeeded in creating low-quality jobs, and that real wages in America have
been stagnant for 20 years.
They also point out that the high-cost argument is too simplistic. Germany -
on many counts, one of the highest cost centres of all - is leading the way
out of European recession through an export boom. Its costs are evidently
outweighed by high productivity or the high quality of its products.
Nevertheless, such economists do believe that the challenge for Europe is to
emphasise technological development, education and training. The continent
cannot compete in commodity-style products, where the low wages of Asia will
be an insuperable barrier. Instead, it must try to maintain its comparative
advantage in high-quality, value-added goods.
'High labour costs are only part of a complicated equation,' says Mr Albert
Edwards, global strategist at Kleinwort Benson. 'When you're producing
sophisticated capital equipment, which can be differentiated, you can
command a premium price.'
However, there are worrying signs that Europe is falling behind in the
technological race. In 1991, the European countries devoted just under 2 per
cent of GDP to research and development, compared with 2.74 per cent in the
US and 2.87 per cent in Japan. And even the development of high-technology
industries may not improve the unemployment problem, nor make Europe's
citizens more prosperous. 'What essentially is causing Europe's problems is
structural unemployment caused by technological change,' says Mr Kit Juckes,
international economist at SG Warburg. 'Europe has to cope with the fact
that capital has become materially more competitive compared to labour. The
hit is going to take the form of minimum growth in real wages.'
The scale of the problem can be exaggerated, however. Some economists argue
that countries and continents do not compete against each other in the
manner of corporations. Growth in Asia will bring prosperity to Europe as
trade increases; Asia may catch up in terms of income per head, but both
continents will grow richer.
'The need in Europe is to be able to grow modestly at 2-3 per cent per
annum, while the Pacific rim is growing at 7-8 per cent per annum,' says
Kleinwort Benson's Mr Edwards.
'Over the long term,' says CS First Boston's Mr Keating, 'the adjustment
will occur in the form of a gradual rise in Asian real exchange rates.
European purchasing power will gradually fall, but its exports will become
more competitive.'
But in the short term, Europe's high costs may cause severe problems for
individual countries. 'Sweden is a classic case: far too generous a social
security system, whose weakness has been chronically exposed because they
didn't cut back quickly enough in the 1980s,' says Mr Keating.
The European boxer may not yet be knocked out, but he will need some nimble
footwork to stay on his feet over the next 30 years.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940927

