FT941-13099

FT  27 JAN 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Hanson mini-epic
returns


   By DIANE SUMMERS


There was a time when Charles Forsyth King ruled Wall Street. Or, as he once
put it: 'Ruled Wall Street? I am Wall Street.' He built his financial empire
from nothing, only to see it crumble with the collapse of the market.
After his death, friends and associates attempted in interviews to explain
where he had gone wrong. Said one: 'King's mistake was in preferring paper
money to paper itself - he should have invested in timber.' There were those
who considered he should have gone for other basics such as bricks or coal.
Some thought the clue that explained King's failure lay in his single dying
word . . . Hanson. It was the one thing he wished he had had.
This fictitious drama, clearly inspired by the 1941 Orson Welles movie
Citizen Kane, unfolds at break-neck speed in an 80-second commercial - the
first corporate television advertising from the Hanson conglomerate since
1988. The ad, supported by press advertising, has already run in the US and
is now being shown in the UK.
For those who may be confused about what Hanson is trying to achieve with
the ad, Steve Cooper, account director in London with Hanson's agency Lowe
Group, explains: 'We were looking for stature and impact. The use of any
outside cultural reference tends to raise the stature and impact of a film.
There's already a frame of reference people have which establishes a
rapport.'
The contrast between the financial speculator - King in the advertisement -
and Hanson's interests in bricks, coal and timber, is intended to underline
the conglomerate's solidity and its enduring interest in the companies it
acquires, says Cooper.
Hanson's corporate spokesman puts it more succinctly: 'This is an
advertisement that is likely to attract attention, rather than be passed
over by people who see an awful lot of advertising. And it's entertaining,
too.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940127

