FT941-12915

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (24): A rude awakening in Britain - European law
on of commercial agents is finally in force in the UK. But many companies
have been slow to grasp the changes and, in doing so, have had a rude
awakening / European law and the UK / Commercial agents' status


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


Since January 1, commercial agents throughout the European Union have never
had it so good. That was the date the UK became the last EU country to
implement a 1986 directive harmonising agency law.
The changes relate to people or companies selling goods on commission.
Suddenly, all such agents in Europe have comparable levels of job security,
rights under law and compensation for loss of office to those enjoyed by
employees - and possibly better. In many cases, they are now entitled to be
paid commission before their principal has been paid by the customer.
They also have more right to inspect a principal's books than the
principal's employees or shareholders. The changes fit with the trend in the
last 30 years for European laws which formally protect the individual
against the state, corporation or any other institution with power to impose
upon people's lives.
Under old UK law, most agents had the thin end of the stick if anything went
wrong, facing costly legal process if they sought redress through the
courts. Other EU countries, however, have long since seen being an agent as
similar to employment, particularly if the agent was an individual.
The implications have taken a long time to sink in with many British
companies. Despite warnings from the Institute of Export and seminars run by
several leading commercial law firms, many senior managers have seen the
changes in the law as technical and nothing much to worry about.
When the message started getting through, therefore, it came as a shock.
There was telling evidence of this at the seven NatWest/FT Exporter meetings
held around the UK during the October and November. Lawyers from Laytons,
which specialises in export markets, elicited gasps of dismay and anxious
questioning from every audience. Articles in the FT since have brought many
phone calls and letters from disbelieving, sometimes anxious readers, who
have been urged to see their solicitors.
If the government believes it carried out a successful consultation process
on the new laws, this apparent ignorance throughout UK industry and commerce
should give pause for thought. Even the final form of the directive -
published two weeks before Christmas - complicated the regulations on
compensation for sacked agents and was sprung on industry too late for
amendments. The Institute of Export has protested to the DTI about
inadequate consultation. The root of the problem is that the DTI's consumer
affairs and small firms section handled the process - most agents are small
businesses - instead of the trade section, where more attention would have
been paid to exporters.
Many companies realised in the nick of time they should look carefully at
all existing agency agreements - including those in UK domestic markets -
tear them up if necessary, and take specialised legal advice to redraft and
agree them before January 1 so the new laws should operate fairly for both
sides if there is a dispute in future.
Michael Thornton, of the Manchester office of Laytons, is co-author of a new
edition of Schmitthoff's Agency and Distribution Law, which has been
published jointly by Sweet & Maxwell and the Institute of Export at Pounds
26 to bring everyone up to date on the changes. He frightened many in the
audiences at the Leeds, Newcastle and Manchester forums when he spelled out
what they meant.
'Many companies don't want to spend money on their lawyers because we don't
come cheap,' he says. 'But the consequences of not doing so could be very
much more expensive. Many British sales managers have been content to
appoint agents on the basis of an oral agreement and handshake or at most an
exchange of letters. This may be OK, but not if there is a disagreement, and
especially not now.
'The law is now codified and weighted much more towards the agent. The
cheapest option is to get things as right as possible from the outset
because it will be much more expensive if you end up in dispute later,' Mr
Thornton says.
For any companies which have not yet realised the potential problems, it is
now probably too late to terminate existing agency agreements and start
again without buying their way out if they cannot obtain mutual consent.
Agents are now protected against being unilaterally fired. Since January 1,
they have been entitled to one month's average commission for each year they
have acted for a principal, up to a three-month maximum if they sue in the
UK, up to seven months if they operate in Italy and take action there.
This latter point emphasises one value of specifying in any agreement that
disputes will be dealt with under UK law. Now, if an agent suspects a
principal of secretly doing business directly with customers the agent
originally brought in, the agent can demand to inspect the principal's books
to check - and then claim commission on the sales. Even if an agency
agreement has been terminated, former agents can still claim for continuing
sales to any customers they introduced years before.
What has troubled many companies is the timing of payments of commission.
Under the new European law, commission is due when a transaction has been
completed, but 'completion' now means delivery of the goods, not when the
customer has paid. It can even mean when delivery should have been made: if
the principal is late on delivery, or puts the order to the back of the
queue to do something else, or even fails to deliver at all, the agent is
still entitled to commission from when the order would otherwise have been
completed. If the customer never pays, then a principal may be able to
demand repayment from an agent, but whether the debt turns out to be good or
bad, there are cash-flow implications for the principal.
Patrick Kelly, who is in charge of Layton's European practice in London,
also points out another serious potential problem. If an agent buys new
equipment, sets up an office or makes any other sort of capital investment
to carry out duties for his or her principal, then the principal now has to
pay any outstanding amortisation costs if the agency agreement ends. 'You
must be very careful about agreeing to your agent buying anything - even
though the agent pays - in order to carry out your agency agreement,' he
warns.
All of this assumes, of course, that things will eventually go wrong between
agent and principal. In many cases, they will not. Many principals have
happy, longstanding arrangements with agents that have worked to their
mutual benefit for years. Nevertheless, this did not stop many companies
from tearing up all their agency agreement worldwide before January 1 and
starting afresh by codifying and standardising their own approach.
This process of re-evaluation has generally been beneficial all round, often
strengthening relationships with good agents and improving prospects. In
some cases, agents have been dropped because companies have decided agency
is not the best way to carry on. Others, though, have been taken on as
employees, or offered distribution agreements instead. This has appealed
where regular sales of relatively low-value items have been involved.
Distributors take risks where agents do not - they pay for goods and take
title to them, assuming responsibility for bad debts in the process. Agents
earn commission, do not take title to the goods they sell and bear no risk
from bad debts. Distributors make their money by selling for higher prices
than they themselves paid for the good they took.
Lawyers say the problem with many agency agreements is that they are made by
sales managers, often without legal advice, and with no assessment of
downside financial risks for the company as a whole. Solicitors say they
must be part of mainstream general management's function, with vetting of
agreements, whether in-house or bought-in.
One company at a NatWest/FT Exporter forum woke up to this, but had no
budget for it in 1993. It has made a provision for next year's budget, which
runs from April - too late for the December 31 deadline when the cheapest
option expired.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                OECD EXPORT CREDIT INTEREST RATES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Minimum rates for officially
                     backed export credit (%)
                                                Jan 15-    Dec 15-
                                                Feb 14     Jan 14
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Australian dollars                               7.17       7.36
Austrian Sch.                                    6.91       7.08
Belgian franc                                    7.42       7.85
Canadian dollars (to 5 years)                    6.05       6.35
Canadian dollars (5 to 8+ years)                 6.80       7.00
Canadian dollars (over 8+ years)                 7.35       7.50
Danish krone                                     7.20       7.60
Dutch guilder (to 5 years)                       6.10       6.25
Dutch guilder (5 to 8+ years)                    6.35       6.50
Dutch guilder (over 8+ years)                    7.0        7.20
Ecu                                              6.56       6.83
Finnish markka                                   7.25       7.50
French franc                                     6.50       6.73
German mark                                      6.17       6.29
Irish punt                                       6.95       7.10
Italian lira                                     8.58       8.94
Japanese yen                                     3.30       3.30
N. Zealand dollars                               6.65       6.96
Norwegian krone                                  6.27       6.33
Spanish peseta                                   9.08       9.34
Swedish krona                                    7.73       7.93
Swiss franc                                      5.25       5.32
UK pound                                         6.71       7.21
US dollar (to 5 years)                           5.54       5.50
US dollar (5 to 8+ years)                        6.15       6.06
US dollar (over 8+ years)                        6.48       6.45
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: OECD
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page XX

940127

