FT943-13337

FT  20 JUL 94 / Arts: Accent on French charm - Cabaret


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Sacha Distel is the short Frenchman famous for being an early lover of
Brigitte Bardot, and for a sad reflective smile: perhaps there is a
connection between the two.
In the days when Saturday night television was incomplete without a variety
spectacular he often popped up between the dancing girls, singing love songs
in a disarmingly Gallic style. Now Distel is briefly back in London, for his
first cabaret performance in 15 years.
He seemed nervous on opening night, unsure whether the twinkle of a man now
in his 60s could still brighten the lives of the loyal ladies who crowded
most of the tables.
He need not have worried. Distel has very little voice but beaucoup de
charm. He also has a surprising amount of musical talent: after all, his
uncle was the bandleader Ray Ventura and Distel was a skilled jazz
guitarist, good enough to play with Stan Getz and the Modern Jazz Quartet,
before the women started drooling and his career went commercial.
He can still liven up his act with impressive solos, especially a
sympathetic version of Django Reinhardt's 'Nuage', which brought respectful
looks from his backing trio. He also admits to having written 'The Good
Life', the doleful ballad not the sitcom, and includes a snatch in a medley
of French hits, or rather hit: the greatest French contribution to popular
culture will always remain Claude Francois' 'My Way' and it was good to hear
it in its triste original.
Distel keeps his cute accent well under control, only milking it during a
skilled impersonation of that professional Frenchman, Maurice Chevalier. For
the most part he performs the American standards - 'My funny Valentine',
'Just one of those things' - with style and grace.
He showed his new maturity by hardly bothering to feature his excruciating
hit 'Raindrops keep falling on my head' and only really tripped up when
trying to be contemporary with a mangled, tentative, version of Prince's
'Most beautiful girl in the world', which he had rashly added to his
repertoire that morning.
It is probably better to have an ingenuous Distel rather than a smug one,
but you hope that he gains enough in confidence during the run, which ends
on July 30, to confront the audience more energetically.
If he can get the critics' table 'dadedadeda-ing' to 'Song Sung Blue' there
is no reason why he should not leave the stage to work the room and perch on
a few welcoming laps, which will have paid Pounds 20 for 70 minutes or so of
this close-up cabaret, or Pounds 45 if they took dinner, too.
Green Room, Cafe Royal.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940720

