FT942-14279

FT  21 APR 94 / Business encouraged by stronger recovery: Service and
manufacturing sectors more confident - Export sales and orders up in first
quarter


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


Britain's economic recovery is strengthening after disappointing growth in
recent months, the British Chambers of Commerce said yesterday.
The chambers said their latest survey of 7,492 companies showed that
domestic output, export sales and export orders rose in both services and
manufacturing in the first quarter of this year.
Mr Christopher Stewart-Smith, president of the organisation, said: 'Most
indicators are now moving fractionally but consistently upwards.
Particularly encouraging is that the intention of firms to recruit and
invest is more positive than it has been for the last four years.'
The poll, carried out between March 4 and March 25, showed the balance of
manufacturers reporting a rise in domestic orders in the first quarter, over
those reporting a fall, was 27 percentage points, up from 26 points in the
previous quarter.
The balance of companies seeing improving order books rose from 21
percentage points to 27 points, reversing the decline in orders seen in the
final quarter of last year.
But the chambers said they were concerned that, although the improvement was
seen across all indicators in the service sector, there remained one or two
areas in manufacturing where growth had been static or slight.
Growth had been particularly strong in the Thames Valley and Home Counties
regions, but it had slowed in the north-east and north-west and it had been
particularly slow in Merseyside and the south.
The balance of manufacturers reporting a rise in export order books rose 4
percentage points, while there was a 6 point rise in the balance of service
exporters seeing an improvement in orders.
The chambers said the resumption of the upward trend in sales had improved
investment intentions. The balance of manufacturers planning to increase
their investment in plant and machinery over those making a downward
revision was the highest since the fourth quarter of 1988.
However, capacity utilisation remained low with just one quarter of all
manufacturing companies working at full capacity in spite of the higher
rates of sales.
The chambers said employment remained static in the manufacturing sector
with equal percentages of companies both taking on and cutting staff. Large
companies continued to cut staff, while small companies were increasing the
size of their workforce.
However, employment expectations for the second quarter are improving. A
balance of 8 per cent of manufacturers expected to increase the size of
their workforce in the next three months. Service-sector employment
continued to grow at a faster rate.
While manufacturers were more confident about improving turnover, they were
less optimistic about their profitability. The chambers said that confidence
could be hampered by next month's tax rises.
Economic indicators, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940421

