FT944-14558

FT  22 OCT 94 / Blair to pledge pensions overhaul


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


Mr Tony Blair will next week attempt to shake off Labour's image as the
party of high welfare spending by embracing plans for a radical overhaul of
the state pension system and significant changes in social security
benefits, Philip Stephens writes.
A proposed shake-up of state pensions would allow the Labour leader to drop
previous spending pledges while sticking to a commitment to raise
substantially the income of the poorest pensioners.
Mr Blair plans to endorse the main principles of a report prepared by the
independent Commission on Social Justice which calls for a new drive to tilt
the benefit system towards work incentives and for the integration of the
tax and benefit systems for pensioners.
The report, commissioned by the late John Smith, will be published on Monday
after two years of study by a group led by Sir Gordon Borrie.
It will coincide with the publication by the government of its plans to
channel more people back to the jobs market through the replacement of
Unemployment Benefit with a Job Seekers' Allowance. The new benefit will be
paid for only six months and will carry a much tougher obligation on the
claimant to seek work.
Mr Blair will indicate that detailed plans must be subject to wide-ranging
debate within the party.
The plans include the taxation of child benefit for those in the higher-rate
tax band and an extension of student loans as well as endorsement of
Labour's plans for a minimum wage to prevent employers 'bidding down' wages
for benefit recipients.
But Mr Blair will embrace the central conclusion that a Labour government
should concentrate resources on moving people from welfare dependency to
work.
The planned pensions change, involving the establishment of a 'minimum
retirement income' for those entirely reliant on the state, would allow the
party to drop its past commitment to re-establish a link between state
pensions and earnings. That pledge involved several billions in additional
public spending.
By focusing on providing a 'top-up' for the poorest 2m pensioners through
the guaranteed minimum income, Mr Blair could justify downgrading the role
of the state pension in meeting the party's social ambitions. The proposed
switch, however, will attract Conservative claims that all pensioners will
be means-tested because everyone would be obliged to complete a tax/benefit
form on retirement.
The recommendations on promoting work rather than welfare are intended to
smooth out the poverty traps which discourage claimants from re-starting
work.
Pension mis-selling, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941022

