FT941-4038

FT  12 MAR 94 / Travel: A Tuscan history lesson - The Arno and Tiber valleys


   By LESLIE GARDINER


In the forest you walk on velvet. The only sound along paths of deep-piled
leaf-mould is that of a beech leaf or prickly chestnut detaching itself.
Here in middle Tuscany you see no bird or animal, nothing on the move until
next Thursday when the forestry vehicle passes by. The occasional woodcutter
stares in amazement: 'What are you doing up here? Looking for mushrooms?'
You cross a clearing, the fairy ring of the charcoal- burners, a vanished
trade. You come to a silent village which has sprouted off the rock, under
the woodland canopy, as harmoniously as a clump of flowers.
The pink marsiglia pantiles, all askew, are reinforced with flagstones, the
lintels pitted with chisel marks, the doors tied up with old stockings and
the cracks in the bulging walls strapped with iron bands. A woman in peasant
black stares at you.
We are on the horseshoe curve of hills which encloses the Casentino, the
valley of the infant Arno river. From one side you might almost see the
domes of Florence, from the other the tower blocks of Rimini. Up the valley
a road and a light railway crawl this way and that, looking for the Arno's
source. One or two roads struggle up to the watershed and, at summit level,
you can park your car and walk into that rarest of modern Italian qualities
 -solitude.
History ancient and modern is locked up in these hills. On a small road
above Arezzo we explored La Verna's rock-cut monastery, important in the
life of St Francis of Assisi. Displayed here are his staff, rope girdle,
sandals and flagella. On Sundays the place is thronged. Several hundred sit
down to lunch which, being prepared by the monks, is cheap and ghastly.
I walked the Pratomagno or 'Great Meadow,' starting at Vallombrosa where
Milton played the organ. The switchback trail along the tops begins at a
lonely rifugio where huntsmen, at 8am, were drinking brandy and cursing the
mist. It was misty all the way. Long before I saw it I heard the wind
whistling through the latticework of the Croce di Pratomagno.
Nearby I located the stone which commemorates Bert Hinkler, long-distance
aviator and native of Queensland. A wreath of flowers lies there,
camouflaged in fallen leaves. The Australian ambassador had been up there a
few days earlier in a helicopter, marking the 60th anniversary of the night
when Hinkler in his Puss Moth, en route from Croydon in England to Sydney,
crashed into the mountains. Two months later, when the snows had melted, a
shepherd found the wreckage and a search party found the body, some distance
away, partly eaten by foxes.
From heights like these you look down on the Casentino with its steady
stream of traffic and a rail-car which stops at every wayside halt. Down
there, promiscuous housing spreads over the fields where Dante fought in the
last battle of the civil wars. Down there, light industry pollutes the
Casentino brooks which, in Dante's Inferno, tormented souls longed for.
Italy's economic growth has transformed rural Tuscany. It is hard in that
semi-industrial scene to pick out the box-like 12th-century towers of the
Guidi counts which dot the course of the Arno.
Never mind. It is still haunted, hallowed ground. This district was the
seed-plot of Renaissance genius. Pratovecchio, terminus of the little train,
gave birth to Paolo Uccello, whose Battle of San Romano used to hang over
Lorenzo de' Medici's bed.
Masaccio, enfant terrible of the Florence art scene (his name meant 'Wicked
Tom'), was born at Loro Ciuffenna on the Pratomagno. Vicchio, just beyond
the horseshoe of the hills, was the cradle of Giotto. From the valley towns
came Vasari and Petrarch (Arezzo), Luca Signorelli and Fra Angelico
(Cortona).
Both the Arno and Tiber rise in these hills. On a green-topped hill between
them sits Caprese Michelangelo, crowned with a feudal castle. I walked into
the bar and asked the barmaid, aged about 12: 'Who is this Michelangelo?'
'I don't understand you.'
'You have a Michelangelo birthplace, a Michelangelo bar. Who is he? Some
politician?'
The child took a deep breath. 'He was no less than the greatest artist who
ever lived. If you could see his works, signore, you would say they were
done not by the hand of man but by the hand of God.'
He was born there by accident; he does not really belong to the local
pantheon. His mother was making her way to Rome when a thunderstorm
frightened the horses. The carriage overturned and she went into labour. The
Buonarotti family owned the local castello, so she stayed there until the
baby was born. In the 1920s the government started dignifying place-names
with the names of native celebrities - Sasso Marconi, Arqua Petrarca, Torre
del Lago Puccini. Caprese became Caprese Michelangelo.
The local hero, however, is not Michelangelo but Piero della Francesca, born
at Sansepolcro. His works are scattered over the countryside in churches,
cemetery chapels and dusty municipal halls. Often they are protected by
nothing more than a frayed rope and the jealous piety of villagers. When
Charles de Gaulle persuaded the mayor of Monterchi to lend Piero's Madonna
del Parto for a Paris exhibition, women lay in the road and refused to let
it go.
Sansepolcro has Piero's Resurrection, which Aldous Huxley considered the
finest painting in the world, but this artist's supreme legacy was the
series of frescoes which illustrates The Legend of the Cross at Arezzo, on
the walls of what looks like a disused barn but is really the old church of
San Francesco.
The Casentino and upper Tiber valley, popular with Italian weekend tourists
and art students, are not much penetrated by foreigners. A bungaloid rash,
and the quarries and new roads which disfigure the Pratomagno slopes, do not
encourage exploration. In 20 years this has become a different world, but a
few communities remain intact. The flagged lanes of Poppi; the perfect
defensive ring of Anghiari's walls; the whole town of Sansepolcro inside its
gates and the upper town of Arezzo haven't changed in seven centuries.
The stone sockets of town houses blossom with banners on days of
celebration. At weekends the crossbowmen and flag-jugglers sustain ancient
rivalries in explosive encounters; for the rest of the time the citizens
move serenely and aimlessly about - 'Like fish in an aquarium,' I suggested.
'Like characters in Piero's paintings,' said my guide.
Arezzo's hotels are cheaper and less sophisticated than those of Florence;
nevertheless, at the Minerva, Etrusco or Continentale you may pay up to
Pounds 60 a night. Sansepolcro's best, in a picturesque setting, is La
Balestra, about Pounds 40 a night. There are serious parking problems in
this town.
Most villages of the Casentino have adequate small hotels, sometimes
attached to gourmet restaurants, sometimes closed in winter. Notable among
them are Parc Hotel at Poppi (Pounds 40), Buca di Michelangelo at Caprese
(Pounds 26), Fonte della Galletta at Alpe Faggeto (Pounds 28), Oliver at
Anghiari (Pounds 36) and Croce di Savoia at Vallombrosa (Pounds 45). All
these places are in red Michelin.
For walkers and cyclists among the hills, almost every hamlet has its
locanda (private lodging house) at under Pounds 12 a night, including food.
All Casentino and Tiber valley localities have bus connections with Arezzo
and Sansepolcro, at least once a day.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

940312

