FT942-12594

FT  28 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Strong close to an optimistic trading
session - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The closure of US securities markets for the funeral of former President
Nixon left markets in Europe to focus favourably yesterday on interest rate
trends in Germany. UK equities put aside their fading hopes for a cut in
domestic rates, and also some mild disappointment with the outcome of the
day's auction of British government bonds, to move higher across the range
of the market.
The tone of the market was particularly firm at the close, with the FT-SE
Index 24.7 up at the best of the day, with both gilt-edged and stock index
futures also in good form. The FT-SE Index closed at 3,150, regaining
another important market benchmark.
Takeover speculation played an active part in the market advance, with the
oil sector agog with excitement as Lasmo topped the active stocks list and
the share price ran well above the level at which Enterprise Oil, one of the
suggested bidders, yesterday ruled itself out of the listings.
After a cautious start, UK equities turned higher with other European bond
and stock markets after the Bundesbank repos tender disclosed a further
reduction in yields of 11 basis points. This set a favourable tone for
today's meeting of the Bundesbank's policy council, although the markets
would be pleasantly surprised to see any further move this morning.
The Footsie quickly added more than 18 points, although prices topped off
with UK gilt-edged stocks after some specialists reacted negatively to the
yield of 7.46 per cent and cover of 1.7x on the Pounds 2bn of bonds
auctioned yesterday. Bond prices soon recovered their poise, however, and
provided support.
Already reflecting the absence of a lead from Wall Street later in the day,
activity in UK stocks slackened at mid-session, and the gain on the Footsie
was reduced to around 14 points in the second half of the session. However,
increased business towards the close brought widespread gains among the
second line stocks. At the close, the FT-SE Mid 250 Index was 16.2 ahead at
3,793.9 and the Footsie 100 stocks found renewed support. Bid speculation
enjoyed a revival after some weeks of absence from the market scene.
The day's Seaq total of 618.8m shares, boosted by more than 40m shares
traded in Lasmo, was more than 18 per cent down on the previous session;
Tuesday's 753.6m shares represented Pounds 1.56bn in retail worth, at the
higher end of recent daily averages.
This week has brought some signs that economic recovery is beginning to show
itself in company profits and dividends. The corporate list was less heavy
in London yesterday , but ICI stood out strongly as dealers waited to see if
the profit figures, due today, will reflect the improved earnings trend
reported already by such global leaders as Hoechst, Bayer and Du Pont.
While wary of expressing too much optimism after a session lacking a lead
from Wall Street, and well aware that a further tightening in Federal
Reserve credit policy remains a fact of life, analysts commented on the
improved confidence shown in the UK market.
When the US markets re-open today, they will face a list of important
Federal data on US gross domestic product and unemployment claims, as well
as a bond auction. The UK stock market showed earlier this week that it can
still be highly vulnerable to developments in credit markets on the other
side of the Atlantic.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

940428

