FT942-12325

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (23): Trivial
transgressions draw heavy punishment - Current accounts / Banks' biggest
public relations task is to explain to customers why they face such tight
restrictions / High Street Investment


   By ROBERT MILLER


Opinion pollsters and market researchers rarely have a problem finding
people with an opinion to express about banks. But given that 97 per cent of
the population have some form of banking account, that is hardly surprising.
Figures from the British Bankers' Association show that there are 52m
current accounts in the UK. Of these, 18m are non-interest-bearing personal
accounts, and 34m are current accounts which pay interest and offer free
banking facilities to customers in credit.
But the rate of interest paid on credit balances is now negligible.
According to MoneyFacts, the monthly guide to investment rates, interest on
straightforward current accounts, as opposed to high-interest cheque
accounts, could be as low as 0.25 per cent gross on Pounds 1,000. Even
balances of as high as Pounds 50,000 could be earning less than 4 per cent
gross.
However, the public relations battle which the banks have to win is not in
explaining why interest rates are so low on current accounts. Most customers
accept that better rates are available if they are prepared to put their
money in a notice account. The real problem lies in the ever-tighter
restrictions that banks place on current accounts, and which leave customers
facing draconian charges for even the smallest transgression.
Charging anything from Pounds 7.50 to Pounds 20 for a bank letter to tell
you that you are overdrawn by as little as Pounds 10, and then charging
another Pounds 20 to bounce the cheque, is guaranteed to alienate customers.
This type of complaint is widespread, particularly among customers with
interest-bearing current accounts. Many banks have failed to make it clear
enough to these customers that the downside to earning interest on a current
account, and enjoying free banking facilities, is that going overdrawn, even
inadvertently, will often attract higher charges than a non-interest bearing
current account.
Bank customers who do need an overdraft facility should arrange an
authorised version. This is likely to cost at least Pounds 14 or Pounds 15 a
year in fees, and often much more, depending on how often it is used.
Monthly interest is then levied at around 1.4 per cent. Unauthorised
overdrafts will cost twice as much.
Over the past decade, customer demands have changed radically. In order to
keep pace with the increased expectations, the banks have simply bolted on
more and more services to what were originally basic current accounts.
Geoff Ellerton, a general manager at Midland Bank, admits: 'Banks have to
put their own house in order first. But we also have to get across the
message about what we offer. And that is free banking for current accounts
in credit, interest payments, access to cash machines, cheque guarantees,
standing orders and direct debits. The collective cost of money
transmissions alone is Pounds 4.5bn a year.'
Sooner, rather than later, the high street banks will make a move to claw
back the money being spent on current accounts. Charges will be extended
even to those customers with credit balances. The banks have considered the
idea very seriously a number of times. All that is holding them back is that
none of them wants to be the first to put their head above the parapet. Once
the first one breaks rank, the others will follow swiftly.
Linda Skelton, senior marketing manager at Yorkshire Bank, says: 'The first
move to introduce general charges for current accounts will most likely come
from one of the big clearers. It definitely won't be us. The majority of
current accounts do not keep large balances, and it costs the banks money to
run them.'
Skelton believes that the smaller banks, with their lower overheads, are now
well-placed to capture a bigger share of the current account market. She
explains: 'Yorkshire has about 4 per cent of the banking market, which is on
a par with the Co-operative Bank. But we have less bureaucracy than the
bigger banks, and therefore we can offer a more personalised degree of
service. In future it is the genuine level of service which banks offer with
their current accounts that will attract customers.
'Customers want efficiency, particularly if a complaint or a mistake is
made. They also want a quick response to any request for help or advice,
whether it is about mortgages, savings or investments. Increasingly,
customers who do shop around will look at how different banks interpret the
banking code of practice. The good banks will go far beyond just adhering to
the basic principles of the code.'
One current account service that is often overlooked, but is becoming
increasingly popular, is a Money Market account, although these tend to have
much higher minimum opening balances. Midland, for example, insists on
Pounds 5,000 and others will want at least Pounds 25,000. The advantage is
that the interest rate payable on these accounts is the equivalent to that
earned by bankers on the overnight money markets. The most sophisticated
accounts will even conduct a daily sweep of all the customers' accounts and
put any surplus cash on the market to earn interest overnight.
But in spite of such innovations, by far the biggest change, and the one
most likely to broaden customer choice in the personal current account
banking market, has been the growth of telephone banking.
The market leader is Midland's First Direct telephone bank, which is open 24
hours a day, 365 days a year. Although it was the first genuinely branchless
telephone bank, First Direct customers can still pay in their cheques for
nothing over the counter at Midland branches. Competitors to First Direct
now include Bank of Scotland, Girobank, Co-operative and, from this month,
Royal Bank of Scotland. The RBS Direct Banking operation will be able to
draw on the experience gained from the bank's successful and hugely
profitable telephone-based Direct insurance arm.
Kevin Newman, chief executive of First Direct, which was launched in 1989
and has nearly 406,000 customers, says: 'We believe that telephone banking
appeals to about 20 per cent of the market. But we have to explain to
potential customers what we offer against other types of banking services.
It is not just the fact that we can save people time, although the average
call takes about three minutes. It is the overall range we provide, from
mortgages, savings, investments, share-dealing and even foreign currency.'
As the bank current account market moves towards the introduction of charges
for different levels of service, many customers will take stock of what they
actually want from their banks. As Pauline Hedges, of the British Bankers'
Association, points out, the range of services, the interest rates paid and
the charges levied all boil down to much the same, even if the wrapper is
slightly different. At the end of the day, she says, 'customers must choose
the account which suits them personally.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940429

