FT943-818

FT  27 SEP 94 / London Stock Exchange: FT-SE 3,000 lost as selling of shares
continues - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


Renewed selling in the UK stock market yesterday drove the FT-SE 100-share
Index down to its first close below 3,000 since mid-July as fund managers
backed away ahead of the meeting today of the Federal Reserve's Open Market
Committee. Although views on the chances of a rise in US interest rates were
divided, and London closed well above the worst after US bonds opened
firmly, sentiment in equities remained negative.
Traders said that European funds had continued to switch out of UK equities
and into bonds. SG Warburg, reducing its portfolio weighting on
international equities to neutral, from overweight, warned clients that some
equity valuations look 'modestly stretched' and that markets may have
underestimated the chances of interest rises in the final quarter of the
year.
However, Warburg continues to favour 'an overweight of equities' on a twelve
month view, noting that equities can rise even when both interest rates and
bond yields are moving higher.
Equities opened lower and were hit hard at mid-session by another sizeable
sell programme, which took the Footsie 100 Index down by more than 40 points
to the day's low of 2,987.8.
Last week saw a series of equity sell programmes which, traders believe,
resulted from portfolio deals by fund managers who unloaded equity stakes to
marketmakers who were then left with the problem of passing the stock on
through the market; such deals were, as has become normal practice,
spearheaded by selling of the stock index future. Government bonds held
steady yesterday, reinforcing belief that cash was moving from equities to
bonds.
The Footsie recovered as yesterday's trading programme was unwound and,
spurred on by firmness in US bonds, cut its loss by nearly one third. The
final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,999.8 for a net loss of 28.4. The
FT-SE Mid 250 Index also suffered yesterday, falling 39.5 to 3,521.4.
Seaq volume, slow at first, speeded up towards the close when the delayed
trading programme was reported on City trading screens. The final total of
515.8m shares through the Seaq network compared with 550.5m on Friday when
retail business, at Pounds 1.16bn, was moderate. A good value total of
retail business, contrasting with fairly average Seaq share totals, has been
a feature of recent sessions and also implies that the big institutions have
been active in equities.
A number of special situations enlivened the day's trading. Some analysts
took a cautious view of Reckitt & Colman's Pounds 1bn purchase of Eastman
Kodak's household products business, suggesting that Reckitt had overpaid.
Shares in the UK group also paid the price for inflicting a large rights
issue on a market now clearly feeling less confident than it was only a few
weeks ago.
Consumer and retail issues remained badly unsettled by growing fears of
increased competitions and pressured margins. Bass and Tesco fell away and
most of the store groups ran into selling pressure again. The banks, with
their bad debt portfolios in the firing line if interest rates move higher
and hurt their customers, also gave ground.
Yesterday's fall below the Footsie 3,000 mark has left equity chartists
hoping to see for support for the market in the Footsie 2,970 area.
However, most UK analysts remain fairly confident for the equity performance
in the final quarter of the year, and point out that this week - the final
week of the third quarter - is unlikely to bring much new investment money
into the London stock market. Many market analysts still stand by forecasts
that the FT-SE 100 Index will move upwards towards the 3,500 mark by the end
of December.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

940927

