FT942-12180

FT  30 APR 94 / Finance and the Family: No Indian tonic - The bulls have
fled the Bombay market


   By SHEKHAR DAS and BETHAN HUTTON


A couple of months ago investors were bullish about investing in Indian
shares. Now the mood is subdued. The Bombay Stock Exchange's Sensitive Index
has fallen by about 12 per cent to around 3,750 since the end of February.
It may lose another 200 points or so before the rally resumes.
The mood began to change when it became clear that Bombay's antiquated
settlement system could not cope with the sudden inflow of foreign funds.
Clients were told that their orders could not be processed; new clients were
turned away. The number of India funds has more than doubled over the past
year - European and US institutions bought what they could, usually global
depository receipts (dollar-denominated parcels of shares) of Indian
companies at inflated prices. After this frustrated enthusiasm, a drop in
the market was inevitable.
Another problem has been the breakdown in relations between brokers and the
regulatory body, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). In an
effort to curb excessive speculation, and make the market more transparent,
SEBI banned badla, a method used by brokers to carry shares forward.
Whatever its shortcomings, badla provided liquidity to a market in need.
The macro-economic environment has also deteriorated over the past couple of
months. The budget, at the end of February, revealed an alarming expansion
in the government's fiscal deficit - 7.3 per cent of GDP. Inflation has
risen to more than 10 per cent. The steady fall in interest rates, which
investors had been expecting, no longer looks likely. Worst, the government
seems to be slowing the process of reform in the run-up to elections in some
southern states, due this winter.
For the marketing men of the fund management industry, these developments
have taken some of the fizz out of India, which not so long ago was being
hailed as the emerging market of the decade. But investors should have
guarded against such hype - it is rarely sensible to invest during bull
runs. By the same token, it is often a good time to invest when markets are
depressed.
The main reason for expecting Indian shares to provide a good return remains
as cogent now as it was a few months ago: a huge market is opening in the
country for everything from television programmes to toothpaste, and the
companies that are well placed to meet its demands should prosper.
Moreover, the political risk is minimal for an emerging market. True, the
pace of reform has slowed, but it should pick up at the beginning of the
next electoral cycle. A fund manager with experience of the Indian market,
and not under pressure to invest, ought to do well over two to three years.
The latest India fund on offer to British investors is the first UK-listed
investment trust to specialise in India, writes Bethan Hutton.
The investment of the money raised by the Fleming India Investment Trust
will be handled by the Hong Kong team already responsible for the JF India
fund, a unit trust run by Jardine Fleming, part of the same group as the new
trust's managers, Fleming Investment Management. Jardine Fleming also has a
Bombay office, where 18 analysts carry out on-the-ground research.
Unlike some India funds, this one will not include Pakistan, Bangladesh or
Sri Lanka, partly to simplify the investment rationale, but also to avoid
offending investors of Indian origin who might not want their money to be
invested in other parts of the sub-continent. For investment details, see
page VIII.
Shekhar Das is the editor of India Business Intelligence, a Financial Times
newsletter.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940430

