FT942-15834

FT  13 APR 94 / International Company News: A costly lesson on German TV -
Vox is limping off the air


   By QUENTIN PEEL and MICHAEL LINDEMANN


For anyone who dreamed that a private television licence in the wealthy
German market would be a licence to print money, the demise of Vox
television should provide a salutary awakening.
The Cologne-based infotainment station, launched with great fanfare just 14
months ago as the thinking German viewer's TV ('Television for university
graduates,' according to one close observer), went into liquidation on April
1. It is limping off the air over the coming weeks with only the faintest
hope of rescue.
For the mighty Bertelsmann group, Germany's largest multimedia empire and
second only to Time Warner on the world stage, the failure of Vox is a blow
to its pride, rather than its bank balance. The group had a stake of 24.9
per cent, alongside comparable shareholders including the Suddeutscher
Verlag, publisher of Munich's leading newspaper, and WestLB, the bank. .
Mr Mark Wossner, Bertelsmann's chief executive, who estimates probable total
losses for the six shareholders at around DM400m (Dollars 234m), describes
them as leaving no more than 'a relatively small skidmark' in the group's
annual DM1.5bn profits. It is the fact of having made a mistake, in a
company with a reputation for careful and conservative planning, which
hurts.
One question is whether the demise of Vox will herald a further shake-out in
Germany's overcrowded television market. Another is whether it calls into
question the long-term future of private television in a market tightly
regulated by the close interest of the German political establishment in all
16 federal states.
Most observers believe the answer to the first question may well be yes, but
to the second, no.
Bertelsmann is certainly adamant that its own heavy investment in the
sector, through its Ufa television and film subsidiary, remains well
justified. It is the largest shareholder, with 38.9 per cent, in RTL, the
single most successful private television station, which last year overtook
both ARD and ZDF, the two public broadcasters, to become Germany's most
popular channel.
It also has 37.5 per cent of Premiere, Germany's first pay-TV channel, and
7.8 per cent of RTL-2, the most successful new generation downmarket private
station.
Mr Manfred Lahnstein, president of Bertelsmann's electronic media division,
admits that 'after 10 years of private television in Germany, there is only
one station which has earned back its initial investment: that is RTL.
Everybody else is losing money.'
He says that any new private station must expect to lose money for at least
six years, because of high start-up costs. But investors have still piled
into the nine private broadcasters (including Vox) because of the perceived
long-term potential. 'These last 10 years have changed the world
completely,' Mr Lahnstein says. 'The public broadcasters will continue to
lose market share. In five years they will be much less important.
'Advertising through television is a very attractive proposal for the
advertising industry, and the proportion in Germany is still quite low. The
advertisers need opportunities to advertise.' He estimates that by the end
of the decade, gross advertising revenues could reach DM13bn, compared with
DM7.5bn to DM8bn today. The trouble is that the plethora of new stations has
led to drastic rate cutting and squeezed everybody's margins.
The other major investor in German private television, Mr Leo Kirch's group,
is exploiting another asset, its library of old Hollywood films. Even if the
TV stations in which it has a stake may not be making money, the film
leasing business is highly profitable.
If the big investors are well aware of the inevitability of losing money for
a lengthy start-up phase, the question remains why Vox has been forced to
close.
Most analysts believe the reasons for failure lie in flawed original
concept, disagreement among the shareholders, and the tight regulations
preventing any one group from controlling too many stations.
'They misjudged the market,' says Ms Rebecca Winnington-Ingram,
international media analyst at Morgan Stanley in London. 'There is not
enough advertising in Germany to support ill-defined entertainment
channels.'
An insider is more blunt. 'They dreamed up the idea in 1990, at the height
of the euphoria over German unification, the excitement of the Gulf war and
the break-up of the Soviet Union. There was an extraordinary desire for
news. They assumed it would always be like that.'
Instead of 6 per cent of the television audience Bertelsmann said it needed
to break even, it could only manage 0.7 per cent after three months, and
barely 2 per cent after a big shift away from news to entertainment last
summer.
It was the decision of the Suddeutscher Verlag to pull out which marked the
beginning of the end. 'They simply got cold feet about the extent of the
losses,' the insider said.
Mr Wossner and Mr Lahnstein searched desperately for another shareholder,
without success. Bertelsmann itself is prevented by the television licensing
regulations from increasing its stake above 24.9 per cent, because of its
RTL and other shareholdings.
'We may not, cannot and will not take over Vox up to 100 per cent,' Mr
Lahnstein said. He admitted that for the time being, advertisement-financed
television in Germany may have reached its limits.
But Bertelsmann has recently launched two strategic projects: a joint
venture with Deutsche Telekom and Leo Kirch called Media Service, to act as
distributor for the expected new generation of pay-TV channels; and a
co-operation deal with Canal Plus to market pay-TV Europe-wide. That is
clearly where the group believes the future of private television lies.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940413

