FT944-6103

FT  30 NOV 94 / Markets Report: Sterling stays firm after predictable UK
Budget


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Sterling traded steadily on the foreign exchanges yesterday after a UK
Budget in line with market expectations, writes Philip Gawith.
Analysts said the Budget, which was described as cautious and prudent,
provided a marginal boost to sterling. The pound was trading around DM2.4535
at 17.30 GMT, compared to DM2.4470 before the Budget. It ended on Monday at
DM2.4453.
The dollar was firmer on the expectation of higher US interest rates, after
consumer confidence rose to 101.3 in November, up from 89.1 in October, and
the highest level since July 1990. It finished in London at DM1.5612, but
later rose to DM1.57, compared to Monday's close of DM1.5643. It ended New
York trading at DM1.5701 and Y98.975.
Earlier in the day the market had focused on Norway, with the initial
response to the referendum vote against joining the European Union positive.
After touching a low of NKr4.3850 per D-Mark, from NKr4.36 at Monday's
close, it recovered to end at NKr4.356.
The krone's upward move was a function of the removal of political
uncertainty, and a belief that in the short term a No vote could actually
improve the state of Norway's public finances.
Sterling firmed slightly during Asian trading, after the successful passage
of the controversial EU finance bill, but then traded steadily until the
time of the UK Budget.
Mr Jonathan Griggs, economic adviser at Barclays in London, described the
Budget as 'reasonably positive' for sterling, but added that 'an awful lot
of it has already been discounted'.
Likely to be more important, he said, was the forthcoming parliamentary vote
on VAT, where the possibility of a government defeat will reignite political
uncertainty, and the December monthly monetary meeting. 'The base rate
outlook will still be the most important factor,' added Mr Griggs.
Mr Avinash Persaud, currency strategist at JP Morgan in London, said the
chancellor's commitment in the Budget to a low inflation strategy had
'clearly heightened expectations of an early interest rate rise'. He
predicted a 50 basis-point increase, around the December 7 meeting, and said
this would support sterling. UK core inflation remains around the lowest in
Europe, so raising interest rates would be favourably interpreted as a
pre-emptive strike against inflation.
Mr Persaud further added that he expected sterling to rise to DM2.46, 'but a
move beyond that depends on a further monetary tightening'.
Commenting on the Norwegian EU referendum, Mr Kjell Tangen, head of trading
at Christiana Bank in Oslo, stressed that the market's response was a short
term one, 'because the short term outlook is even better with a No than a
Yes'.
This was a function of a large issue of political uncertainty being removed
from the market. Also, the government had given indications ahead of the day
that a No vote might require it to make enhanced effects at reducing the
budget deficit. Some traders also felt that not being an EU member would
mean Norway avoided a net drain of finance.
Mr Tangen said that in the short term Norway's good economic fundamentals -
better external balances, an improving budget deficit and low inflation -
might support the krone. Good economic prospects were also seen as likely to
attract inflows of foreign capital, supporting the krone.
For investors to be convinced that this was sustainable, though, would
require Norway to develop more of a track record of economic probity, said
Mr Tangen.
In the longer term, he said, it was more difficult to assess the economic
impact of staying outside the EU.
Mr John Torklet, senior currency analyst at Den Norske bank in Oslo, said
one factor behind the currency optimism was the expectation that interest
rates would fall. He predicted that Mrs Gro Harlem Bruntland, the prime
minister, would anyway 'succeed in conducting a typical EU economic policy'.
One factor which may cause the krone to weaken in the months ahead will be
the narrowing interest rate differential with Germany. Currently around 175
basis points, in Norway's favour, Mr Torklet predicts that this could shrink
to 75 basis points as Norwegian rates fall.

The Financial Times


London Page 58

941130

