FT941-16913

FT  07 JAN 94 / Insolvency firms predict sharp fall in failures


   By ANDREW JACK


Two leading firms of insolvency practitioners yesterday predicted that the
number of company failures would fall sharply this year.
Touche Ross, the accountancy firm, said the number of receivership and
administration appointments during 1994 would fall to as few as 2,000
compared with more than 3,200 during 1993 and 5,100 in 1992.
Separately, Coopers & Lybrand, the UK's largest accountancy firm, forecast
that there would be 2,500 appointments during the year, with the total
number of failures including liquidations falling to 57,000 compared with
70,000 last year.
Mr Christopher Morris, senior insolvency partner with Touche, said the
projected decline reflected the benefits to business of economic recovery
without the normal risks of inflation.
Traditionally failures have continued to rise after the end of a recession
as companies 'overtraded' or expanded without the finance to support their
increasing activities.
Mr Morris said the decline in failures last year was the result of the end
of the recession, combined with more sympathetic handling of companies in
financial difficulties by bankers and accountants.
In January last year Coopers predicted that total failures for 1993 would be
about 70,000, which appears to be broadly accurate although final official
statistics have not yet been published.
Mr Steve Hill, a partner with the firm, said the difference between the
prediction and actual figure reflected tougher requirements under Scottish
insolvency law introduced last year.
The firms also commented on the government's consultation document on reform
of insolvency law as they prepared their responses for the Department of
Trade and Industry.
Mr Morris called for pressure to ensure there were changes in the law this
year or next in response to the document. 'We need sensible legislation so
that we have the tools to deal with the next crop of failures,' he said.
Many of the proposals in the 1986 act that had been designed to rescue and
rehabilitate companies had had little effect, including the introduction of
administration orders and company voluntary arrangements, he added. 'All too
often there have been annoying practical problems that have prevented their
full application.'
However, he welcomed the regulation of insolvency practitioners and the
individual voluntary arrangements allowing potential bankrupts to negotiate
with their creditors. A modest improvement in construction output is
expected this year, says a survey published today of 180 construction
companies, building material producers, building professionals and private
and public-sector customers.
The survey, conducted by New Builder magazine and Bristol contractor JT
Design Build, said there was still substantial over-capacity in the industry
but the situation was no longer worsening. Customers were prepared to invest
more in building.
The survey also showed that 60 per cent of construction companies, building
material producers and consultants were operating in continental Europe, a
higher proportion than previously thought.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940107

