FT942-12230

FT  30 APR 94 / UK Company News: Profits warning hits Canadian Pizza shares


   By SIMON DAVIES


Shares in Canadian Pizza fell 46p to 120p yesterday, when the management
issued a profits warning just five months after the company's flotation.
Mr Andrew Dare, chairman, said that sales to UK retail customers had 'seen a
significant slowing', while its largest client, J Sainsbury, had indicated
it would axe purchases of pizza crust for its delicatessen operations. These
accounted for about 10 per cent of last year's turnover.
Last November, a grinning deputy chairman, Mr Harry Kent, unveiled a pizza
crust with the price 200p written in pepperoni. The share price has since
fallen 40 per cent.
The collapse underlines the uncertainties of investing in flotations,
particularly when the track records of companies and management are
relatively short and the issues are heavily promoted.
Hoare Govett, Canadian Pizza's stockbrokers, were brokers to the recent
flotation of Maid, the on-line business information supplier, whose shares
fell 45 per cent within weeks of its launch.
As one fund manager said yesterday: 'To have one flotation nearly halve in
value is unfortunate. To have a second, smacks of carelessness.'
Mr Tim Potter, of Smith New Court, said: 'It was over-priced, and the market
is now learning just how exposed Canadian Pizza is to the whims of the
supermarket trade, and their impact on its one product.' However, he said
there was no evidence that the management could have foreseen the
difficulties.
Canadian Pizza announced its results at the end of February, saying that
although there was some pressure on profit margins for sales of pizza crusts
to retailers, it had picked up new accounts.
Mr Peter Woodall, chief executive, said the company had only heard about the
likely loss of Sainsbury's business last week. As a result previous
expectations of growth had vanished, and the company was no longer certain
it would exceed 1993's profits of Pounds 3.2m. However export sales, which
account for 30 per cent of turnover, were above budget.
The company said that subject to unforeseen circumstances, it would maintain
its dividend.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940430

