FT942-14652

FT  19 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Peru's mining giant offers
tempting challenge - Sally Bowen reports on the problems and rewards
awaiting Centromin's new owner


   By SALLY BOWEN


Nearly 1,000m above sea level, on the barren, treeless plateau of the high
Andes, the humble houses of Cerro de Pasco cluster around a gaping open-cast
pit. Way below the rim, front-loaders scoop up ore while lorries trundle to
the top to disgorge their loads. Miners, lamps on their headgear blazing,
emerge from the warren of tunnels beneath the mountainside.
Though the technology and work practices look antiquated, this is one of
Peru's richest lead and zinc mines. It has been continuously worked for 90
years, yet proven reserves assure another 20 years of output and potential
reserves maybe 40 more.
Cerro de Pasco is the largest and most coveted of the seven production units
owned by Centromin, Peru's state mining and refining giant, which goes on
the auction block at the end of this month. Besides these mines  - six of
them polymetallic, one, Cobriza, copper only - Centromin's new owner will
inherit four hydro-electric power stations, 270km of railway, more than
11,700 workers, 12,000 dwellings and four dozen schools.
Not surprisingly, few companies have seriously contemplated this daunting
challenge. Chief interest has come from Britain's RTZ, Mexico's huge silver
producer Penoles and Gencor of South Africa. Canada's Cominco, and Sweden's
Boliden, as well as Frisco, a medium-sized Mexican mining concern, have also
made recent evaluations.
Centromin produces some 45 per cent of all Peru's lead and zinc, 40 per cent
of its silver and 16 per cent of its copper. Annual sales are about Dollars
400m, with 70 per cent of production exported.
The base price for the complex but intimately interrelated operation has
been set at Dollars 280m. Bidders will have to put up another Dollars 60m in
debt papers (at today's secondary market prices, that means an outlay of
Dollars 30m).
Additionally, at least Dollars 240m must be pledged in fresh, long-overdue
investment over three years. The La Oroya smelter and refinery complex is a
notorious polluter and studies indicate expenditure on the most basic
environmental improvements will run to Dollars 120m-plus.
So is Centromin a bargain or not? Mr Hernan Barreto, a private sector
businessman who has presided the past two years of company restructuring, is
Centromin's keenest salesman. He stresses it is 'very much a going concern',
with 1991 losses of Dollars 174m transformed into Dollars 19m profits in
1992. Despite higher productivity, last year's profits fell slightly to
about Dollars 15m - low 1993 international prices cost Centromin Dollars
100m, says Mr Barreto.
'We also boast a positive cash flow, quality products that command premiums
on world markets, excellent professionals and a prestigious mining
tradition,' he says. There have been no strikes for three full years.
A hefty plus for the eventual buyer could be the four hydro-electric power
plants, whose 183 megawatt capacity and 910km of transmission lines could
easily be expanded and the surplus sold - as already happens on a moderate
scale - to the national grid. Peru's energy deficit has aroused keen foreign
investor interest and Centromin's generating plants alone have been valued
at around Dollars 300m.
Then the company has accumulated losses of Dollars 240m which could prove a
'very interesting tax shelter', according to Mr Barreto.
But the heart of this grand old company - born in 1902 as US-owned Cerro de
Pasco Corporation and nationalised by Peru's left-wing military government
in 1974 - is its mines and refinery complex. Of the former, Cerro de Pasco
is the star. Last year it produced 310,000 tonnes of zinc concentrate, out
of the company total of 500,000 tonnes, and 116,000 tonnes of lead
concentrate (total company output was 148,000 tonnes).
Cerro's open pit has proven reserves of some 10m tonnes, enough for just
seven years operation. Future expansion is likely to focus on the
underground mine's 47m tonnes of proven and probable reserves. A promising
deposit called Matagente, part of the same orebody, has a possible 37m
tonnes more.
Of the remaining six mines, most require substantial investment in new
machinery. The copper-only Cobriza mine is nearly exhausted and the huge
copper deposits of Antamina - formerly owned by Mineroperu - have been
included in the Centromin package to replace it. Development costs for
Antamina could top Dollars 300m.
The multiple smelter and refinery complex of La Oroya, meanwhile, is one of
the world's largest and most complicated. It refines copper, zinc and lead
and produces a grand total of 20 mineral and chemical by-products including
antimony, bismuth, tellurium and selenium.
Centromin's new owner will also inherit a varied portfolio of mining
concessions totalling 256,000 hectares (632,000 acres). Among them are
promising but only superficially explored deposits such as gold-bearing
Quiqai, near Cerro de Pasco. Mr Barreto says the disseminated deposit, still
at the 'grass-roots stage', has similar characteristics to Newmont Mining's
hugely profitable new Yanacocha venture.
Whoever eventually acquires Peru's giant will find it a friendly one.
Management and, in general, workers welcome privatisation. They have
soldiered on for years on shoestring modifications - a brand-new Dollars 25m
oxygen plant, mainly financed with an Andean Development Corporation loan,
is almost the only major recent investment - making up in ingenuity and
commitment for the absence of cash.
'My hope is that the new owners will transform Centromin into a great
employer once again,' says Mr Jose Carrascal, general manager at La Oroya.
That hope is fervently echoed by the 60,000 or so Peruvians who directly
depend on Centromin for their livelihood - and by tens of thousands more in
Centromin's mini-kingdom of the high Andes.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940419

