FT942-16007

FT  12 APR 94 / Warning as China executes fraudster


   By REUTER


   BEIJING


China, stepping up its drive against corruption by officials, yesterday
executed the businessman who masterminded one of the country's largest
frauds, Reuter reports from Beijing.
Shen Taifu, the 39-year-old founder of the Changcheng machinery and
electronics company, was executed by order of the Supreme People's Court
after his appeal against conviction was rejected, the official Xinhua news
agency said.
The court also upheld a guilty verdict against Li Xiaoshi, a former
vice-minister, who was sentenced to 20 years in prison for bribery in
connection with the case, Xinhua said.
Liu Jiachen, vice-president of the Supreme People's Court, urged all
officials, 'especially those with power', to learn proper lessons from the
Changcheng scandal.
Shen's execution, and the government's lengthy case against him, were
prominent items on the national radio and television news yesterday,
reflecting Beijing's hopes that its tough line will bolster its
anti-corruption image.
The Changcheng scandal broke last year after officials revealed the company
was really a pyramid-style scam which sucked up Yuan 1bn (Dollars 114m) from
unsuspecting small investors through temptations such as offers of 24 per
cent interest.
After a period of tension, during which thousands of Changcheng investors
feared for their savings, Beijing announced that most had recouped most of
their money. It denied using state funds to bail them out.
Li Xiaoshi's involvement in the case had been rumoured from the beginning.
Changcheng was launched amid praise from a number of well-known political
personalities.
Li was found guilty of accepting Yn52,000 in bribes and pocketing Yn20,000
in public money while in office.
The former vice-minister's 20-year term marks a departure from China's
traditional way of dealing with errant members of the Communist party elite,
who usually get retired or transferred.
But anger at government corruption during economic reforms is rising. Li has
become one of the highest-level officials ever publicly brought down on
corruption charges.
Shen had no such status to protect him and a death sentence was widely
expected as soon as he was taken into custody.
Shen's wife and accomplice, Sun Jinhong, formerly head of accounting at
Changcheng, was given 15 years.

The Financial Times


International Page 7

940412

