FT941-16878

FT  07 JAN 94 / Arts: Small stages deliver the goods - Theatre in 1993


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


If there was a theme to theatre in Britain in 1993 - and there is absolutely
no reason why there has to be - it was diversity. I remember all sorts of
pleasures, but there was no pattern. The main impression is how much theatre
there is: old plays rediscovered, imports from Europe and America, and the
odd new talent at home.
Quite the best production of anything I saw in Britain this year was the
Deutsches Theater performing Heinrich von Kleist's Der Zerbrochne Krug (The
Broken Jug) at the tail-end of the Edinburgh Festival. As a play, it is
relatively slight: a genial expose of the law in a Dutch village at the
beginning of the 19th century, and indeed of the law in general. It borrows
from Falstaff and foreshadows Kafka. Yet the direction by Thomas Langhoff
showed how much can be done with a light piece by paying loving attention to
detail and bringing out even the smallest characters. This is the standard
of excellence one needs to have in mind while watching home-made products,
however good.
Some of the most enjoyable indigenous performances were also light in touch.
The funniest was Anorak of Fire by Stephen Dinsdale, which came straight to
the Arts Theatre in London from Edinburgh. The piece is simply the ramblings
of a Yorkshire train-spotter who spots a lot else besides.
Yorkshire shone again when the Yorkshire Theatre Company brought Brian B
Thompson's Derby Day to the Cockpit, which has emerged as one of the best of
London's small theatres. The company mixes modern acting styles with
old-fashioned humour: the actors play the horses as well as the people.
What Anorak and Derby Day have in common is that they are good-natured plays
about unlikely subjects, and unusually well done. They bring the welcome
effect of surprise. In a similar way I admired The Lion by Michael
Abbensetts at the Cochrane. This is a political play, but the politics are
those of the Caribbean, exiled in England: the style might be drawn from
Noel Coward. The Talawa Theatre Company, which produced it, is bringing new
voices into the English theatre.
There was a different surprise at the Bush, where Keyboard Skills by Lesley
Bruce, was not unduly hostile to the Conservative Party and treated Tory
women with sympathy: rather more respect than Tory men. Laughter, but not
cruel laughter, is coming back.
There were more serious matters, of course. One of the outstanding
performances of the year was Penelope Wilton as Hester in the revival of
Terence Rattigan's The Deep Blue Sea at the Almeida. The scene where her
husband comes back, they talk affectionately, but she still rejects him, is
among the most emotional in English drama.
Equally welcome was the triumph of Robert Stephens in Adrian Noble's
production of King Lear at Stratford. This is a quiet Lear who knows he is
going mad and does so at times with a beatific smile. After his performances
as Falstaff in the same theatre a year ago, Stephens has re-emerged in the
forefront of British acting.
The up-and-coming star is clearly Alan Cumming who has had two consecutive
successes, first as Hamlet, now as the master of ceremonies in Cabaret which
is still running at the Donmar Warehouse. Cumming has a light frame, a
strange gnome-like face and body which he knows how to use. Playing Hamlet
with a Scottish accent was a perfect way of showing how the Prince of
Denmark differs from everyone else in the court. Cumming is probably the
Alec Guinness of the future.
There is also something about the place: the Donmar seats less than 300
people. It is one of the very few small theatres in a relatively smart part
of London. But perhaps it is the size rather than the location that matters.
Nearly all the best productions in the last year or so have come from the
smaller stages, whether the Almeida in Islington, the Gate in Notting Hill,
the Bush at Shepherd's Bush or the Orange Tree in Richmond. There is a
string of others slightly less well-known.
The two main subsidised theatres - the RSC and the RNT - are also using
their smaller stages well. Schiller's Wallenstein would never have found an
audience in the main Barbican; at the Pit it played to perfection - and to
near capacity. Tony Kushner's Angels in America is playing, again to
capacity, at the Cottesloe, not one of the RNT's bigger arenas.
Angels is one of a number of American pieces that caught the eyes and ears.
David Mamet's Oleanna, first at the Royal Court and now at the Duke of
York's (with a new cast from January 11), achieved what must be a
playwright's ultimate dream - making people talk about it long after they
had seen it. Arthur Miller showed in The Last Yankee at the Young Vic that
he is writing as well in his late 70s as he was nearly 50 years before when
he produced Death of a Salesman.
The Americans, at their best, have a talent for dialogue which eludes most
living Englishmen, save perhaps Harold Pinter, who directs Oleanna, has
experience of screen-plays and gave us his own new piece in Moonlight. Well
done, this first Pinter play of any length for 15 years is terrific: a lot
depends on the timing and an audience ready to listen.
The contrast between American and English writing comes up again in the
RNT's bold decision to stage two national epics more or less simultaneously:
Kushner's Angels alongside David Hare's trilogy about the established
church, the law and the Labour Party in Britain. Perhaps America simply is a
livelier place. Anyway, where Kushner scores is in his ability to be both
witty and moving. The waltz between the two male lovers at the end of
Millennium Approaches is pure pathos. Hare builds big scenes on a big stage,
but is ultimately short on feeling. His characters are what E M Forster
would have called 'flat'.
There were other, extraneous delights. Two big American musicals, Crazy for
You and City of Angels, fought it out for audiences and unfortunately the
better one lost, though not without winning a reprieve. When it was
announced that City was closing, there was a sudden rush for tickets, which
kept it going for another few weeks.
Shakespeare returned to Shaftesbury Avenue with an uproariously funny
production of Much Ado About Nothing where Benedick (Mark Rylance) was a
plain blunt Ulsterman. Maggie Smith made a little bit of theatre history in
The Importance of Being Earnest at the Aldwych by letting the famous handbag
line go through to the wicket-keeper, then hitting the next one ('the line
is immaterial') for six.
Donald Sinden (who must be knighted if a theatrical tradition and a proper
use of honours are to be maintained) is still playing in a thoroughly
enjoyable revival of She Stoops to Conquer at the Queen's, and it was
pleasing to see Oliver Goldsmith's other play, The Good Natur'd Man,
appearing at the Orange Tree. I would like to believe that this was an act
of cooperation between a West End theatre and a smaller place slightly out
of town, but I think it was coincidence.
A final note: by the standards of most activities in Britain, the theatre is
remarkably efficient. Yet sometimes a little more co-ordination between who
is doing what and when might be helpful - not Macbeth at the RNT and the
RSC, and not too many openings on the same night.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940107

