FT941-4215

FT  12 MAR 94 / Treasury urges prompt sale of nuclear power industry


   By ROLAND RUDD and MICHAEL SMITH


The Treasury is pressing hard for Britain's nuclear generation industry to
be privatised before the next election, with incentives for managers to keep
down the huge costs of decommissioning power stations.
In the run-up to the nuclear review, which the Department of Trade and
Industry hopes to announce in the next few weeks, the Treasury has thrown
its support behind privatising Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear within
two years.
It believes new legislation would not be needed for the nuclear industry
sell-off, which could be covered by electricity privatisation measures
approved by parliament in the late 1980s.
Britain's nuclear power stations were withdrawn from privatisation five
years ago because of fears that shareholders could face big liabilities from
the cost of decommissioning plants and dealing with waste.
Nuclear Electric was subsequently established to manage the English and
Welsh generating industry in the public sector while Scottish Nuclear was
set up to run the two Scottish plants.
Treasury ministers reject the need to separate out from Nuclear Electric the
older Magnox stations, the first to be withdrawn from the sale of the
electricity industry.
They want Nuclear Electric to be sold off as one unit, although they may
consider reallocating some of its plants to Scottish Nuclear to make it more
viable as a stand-alone company in the private sector.
There are strong doubts in the City that the industry can be privatised with
Magnox liabilities, particularly as a way still has to be found of splitting
the decommissioning and waste costs associated with the public sector from
those of the private sector.
To minimise costs, running into billions of pounds, the Treasury is looking
to the nuclear review to generate 'innovative measures' to build in
incentives to keep liabilities to a minimum.
Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, is known to be more cautious than the
Treasury. Although he believes the future of the nuclear industry is in the
private sector, he is understood to question if a quick privatisation is
practical.
After the abrupt halt called to the sale of the nuclear industry 1989, the
DTI wants to ensure that the second attempt to get the industry into the
private sector is not bungled by being rushed.
The Treasury which believes the government will gain nothing by standing
still, wants a decision to sell off Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear to
be made by the summer.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940312

