FT944-2866

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (7): Call for greater innovation -
United Arab Emirates


   By ROBIN ALLEN


Capital increases over the last two years have brought most Gulf Arab banks
above the eight per cent capital-to-risk-weighted assets guidelines set in
1988 by the Basel committee of the Bank for International Settlements. The
average capital-to-assets ratio of the top 30 Gulf banks at the end of last
September stood at 11.96 per cent.
However, other issues of supervision and control still cause concern to
central banks. So much so, say many Gulf bankers, that Gulf monetary and
other authorities are ignoring important areas that affect Gulf financial
institutions' long-term interests.
Two recent conferences illustrate these contrasting attitudes. In the first,
central bank auditors from the Arab League's 22 countries meeting in Abu
Dhabi at the end of November under the auspices of the Arab Monetary Fund,
showed how monetary authorities are still pre-occupied with banking
supervision and haunted by other problems left over from past crises,
including the 1982 unofficial stock market crash in Kuwait; the seven-month
Gulf war of 1990-91; and the 1991 collapse of Bank of Credit & Commerce
International. It was the last of these which finally spurred Gulf Arab
central banks to implement the Basel committee's guidelines.
Central banks' auditors' priorities still focus on the need for quarterly
reporting and inspection of banks' financial statements, stronger central
banks' initiatives to persuade domestic banks to merge, more open disclosure
in bank reports; all standard issues which need to be respected before the
GCC banking system can mature. In the UAE, an extra element of control was
added last year with the imposition of apparently stringent but in some
cases still undefined lending limits, to a financial market which is the
most bouyant of the six GCC countries.
According to the UAE's central bank governor Mr Sultan Al-Suweidi, UAE
financial institutions increased their combined profits last year by 65 per
cent compared with 1992.
A central bank report on 27 November showed credits from the country's 47
banks had increased 13.1 per cent to Dh81.6bn (Dollars 22.4bn) to the end of
September this year, compared with the first nine months of 1993.
Dubai contains some of the most adventurous of the Gulf's financial
entrepreneurs; and the UAE as a whole, because of its federal structure, is
certainly the most difficult of the six GCC countries to regulate. So it is
not surprising that it is the UAE's central bank which has been the most
authoritarian. However, UAE and Gulf bankers insist that, instead of
concentrating solely on tighter control over banks in their own national
back-yards, what the central banks and other authorities should be concerned
about is the fragmentation of Gulf financial institutions within highly
protected country zones.
For example, in all of the GCC, only one local bank, Bank of Bahrain &
Kuwait, has a franchise, excluding representative offices, in as many as
three of the six GCC states.
By contrast, British Bank of the Middle East, among foreign banks, has a
franchise in five of the six.
Restricted in the UAE to eight retail outlets and generally deprived of
large and cheap government deposits, foreign banks have to work a lot harder
for their profits.
Speakers at a recent financial forum in Dubai staged by Emirates Bank
International , constantly returned to this theme of national banks'
fragmentation and protection. They included the former Kuwait central bank
governor Mr Abdul-Wahab Al-Tammar; the UAE's assistant under-secretary for
revenue and budget, and chairman of Emirates Industrial Bank, Dr Khalfan Bin
Kharbash; Mr Henry Azzam, chief economist from Saudi Arabia's National
Commercial Bank; Citibank's UAE manager, Mr Ahmed Bin Brek; and the former
chairman of Arab Banking Corporation, Mr Abdullah Saudi.
These and other prominent Gulf bankers have focused on the need for greater
innovation in the financial services' sectors, with backing from 'the powers
that be,' to match up to competition from western international banks, whose
innovation skills and constant range of new products were leaving Gulf banks
further and further behind.
'Who manages the huge private sector institutional and individual
portfolios?' asked one speaker. The answer: international investment houses,
because domestic banks were not equipped to offer the same range of
products.
'Our market is liquidity-rich,' said another speaker, and this liquidity 'is
being parked abroad.'
Governments had to establish credibility by setting up transparently fair
'practices, procedures and policies' - so banking, business, and judicial
processes worked effectively and equally. Individual GCC country markets had
to be big enough for serious investments to be made. Either governments
provided these - and recent events had shown that governments no longer
wanted to continue to be the primary investor - or entrepreneurs took up the
slack.
For that, the authorities had to set the banking sectors free by privatising
their shares in commercial banks and allowing in foreign competiton; by
establishing country and regional stock-markets (in the UAE a purely
national stock-market has been in the 'study-stage' for almost 13 years); by
allowing banks to operate freely across GCC national boundaries; and
allowing them to adapt to compete with non-bank financial interests which
were entering the market to do many of the things, such as credit cards and
auto-leasing, that only banks used to do.
The private bond sector should also be encouraged to help cater for regional
funding requirements through the establishment of an Arab credit rating
agency. In this way, domestic Arab institutions would be encouraged to issue
their own bonds for marketing across GCC national boundaries.

The Financial Times


London Page 44

941215

