FT941-5658

FT  05 MAR 94 / Reforms that sunk two premiers passed


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS and JOHN BURTON


   TOKYO, SEOUL


Japanese political history was unobtrusively made yesterday when plans for
the most radical change to the political and electoral system in post-war
years became law.
Revisions to four political reform acts were approved without debate by the
upper house of parliament, spelling the end of Japan's unique multi-seat
constituency system, held to be a big factor in fostering the corruption
which has discredited Japanese politics in recent years.
This brings to an end a five-year struggle, which brought the downfall of
two governments, caused the end of 38 years of Liberal Democratic Party rule
last summer, and then nearly killed the new coalition government of Mr
Morihiro Hosokawa.
The plans had to be revised after the upper house voted against them in
January, forcing Mr Hosokawa to agree a watered down version with the LDP.
Japan's new political laws stipulate that the lower house, the more powerful
of the two chambers, must have 500 seats - down from the present 511 - of
which 300 will be chosen from single seat constituencies and 200 by
proportional representation. The upper house is chosen through the same
mixed voting system.
Corporate donations will not be banned, as Mr Hosokawa had originally
wanted. Instead, companies will be allowed to donate Y500,000 per year to
politicians and fund raising organisations.
The next stage will be for an independent panel to draw up the new
parliamentary constituency boundaries. This is politically sensitive because
many politicians will have to rebuild support from scratch in new
constituencies as a result. New boundaries are expected to take between six
and nine months to prepare, paving the way for a general election under the
new system by next autumn at the earliest.
John Burton adds from Seoul: The South Korean parliament yesterday passed
political reform legislation meant to reduce corruption in election
campaigns.
The new election law is the latest measure by President Kim Young-sam to end
corruption among politicians and bureaucrats.
Lower spending limits will be imposed on candidates, including won 22.5bn
(Pounds 18.6m) for presidential campaigns and won 53m for parliamentary
elections. An election will be nullified if a candidate exceeds the campaign
spending limit. Government subsidies to political parties will also be
increased to reduce the dependence of candidates on outside contributions.
The use of campaign donations to bribe political candidates has been a
common feature of South Korean elections.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940305

