FT944-14597

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (30): Post Script


   By BARRY RILEY


Unit trusts are heading once again for something of a performance crisis.
Their high and rising costs are no longer being obscured by bumper returns
on equities. Currently their performance numbers are looking soggier than at
any time since the 1987 crash dropped out of the five-year performance
records in late 1992.
Here's how the numbers look now for UK General trusts, on the basis of
statistics from HSW. The FT-SE Actuaries All-Share Index (the broadest
measure of the London stock market) has produced a passable, if not
inspiring, total return of 55.9 per cent over the past five-year period to
the end of September. Yet the average unit trust in the general category has
returned only 29.9 per cent to the investor.
In fact, only one fund out of 80 in this category has beaten the All-Share
return over this period. It is the Schroder UK Equity fund.
The underperformance relates mainly to the steep cost burden being faced by
unitholders. There is a front-end charge of 5 (and sometimes 6) per cent and
an annual management charge of often as much as 1.5 per cent. Other costs,
such as those relating to portfolio dealing, are borne by the funds, and
often the managers in any case appear to lag behind the index because of
unfortunate stock selection.
Consequently UK general unit trusts have on average underperformed the
All-Share Index return by, in all, 3.9 per cent a year during the past five
years.
The average annual All-Share return has been an unexciting 9.3 per cent over
this period. Take off the 3.9 per cent and you are left with a bare 5.4 per
cent as the return enjoyed by the average unitholder - on typical funds such
as TSB General and Mercury General, which come just about in the middle of
the pack for performance.
Moreover, given that this total return includes income, the capital value of
the average UK unit trust has risen very little since 1989. Curiously, many
of the overseas funds appear to have performed slightly better than the UK
funds, perhaps because they have been able to exploit some better-performing
stock markets in the Far East and Europe.
But the World Index, held back by a dismal Japanese performance since the
end of 1989, has performed overall no better than the UK All-Share.
None of this appears to have greatly discouraged unit trust investors,
although the flow of net new money into units has eased a little in the past
few months. But they might bear in mind that the average annual net return
on a high-rate building society account has been 6.4 per cent during this
five-year period.
It is true that a period even as long as five years may not be
representative of the long-term picture. Only over terms such as 10 or even
20 years will the bumps be ironed out. But unit trusts need better market
conditions than this.
Curiously, the UK equity funds can no longer even keep up with the
Cinderellas of the unit trust sector, the fixed-income funds which invest in
gilt-edged and other bonds. The best fixed-interest fund, Framlington Gilt,
has outpaced even Schroder UK Equity over five years, and the average gilt
fund has beaten the average UK equity fund.
Should investors have been in boring government bonds all this time? Those
hot equity fund managers in the unit trust business have got a lot to prove.

The Financial Times


London Page XXXI

941021

