FT941-13064

FT  27 JAN 94 / Arts: Old attitudes challenged by young playwrights -
Malcolm Rutherford is impressed with 'The Body Politic' at the Cockpit
Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


A little-noticed change has come over the British theatre: new plays are no
longer noticeably left-wing. While one hesitates to say that there has been
a shift to the right, young playwrights are becoming much more detached.
They are also looking for new subjects.
Mike Cullen's The Cut, a play about British miners which was reviewed in
Monday's FT, is a case in point. The author did not take sides: he simply
wrote a very good piece about how the coal industry looks from the inside
and underground.
There are half a dozen examples at the Cockpit where the Soho Theatre
Company is presenting 15-20 minute extracts from potential full-length plays
by young writers under the umbrella title The Body Politic.
The body is more relevant than the politics. Medical science, and the
ethical questions raised by its advances, are one of the big subjects of the
future. Why not explore some of the implications on stage? This is exactly
what the Soho Company attempts. Some of The Body Politic is funny; some of
it is sad.
Quite the most brilliant piece in the compendium is about DNA and cloning.
Indeed, On the Strand by Paul Goetzee is one of the wittiest revue sketches
I have seen in a London theatre since the young Dr Jonathan Miller was
performing in Beyond the Fringe. Here is a genetic engineer so in need of a
friend like himself that he places an ad. in the lonely hearts column of
Scientific American. He finds a clone: they have their magic moments in song
and dance, squash, scrabble and chess, but look-alikes and are-alikes do not
always get on for ever.
It would take a genius to extend On the Strand into a viable full-length
play; as a sketch it is the tops. Darren Tunstall as the premier genetic
engineer has a marvellous way of communicating directly with the audience.
The saddest, though no less estimable, exhibit is Grin and Bear It by Sara
Clifford. The national health service has plainly done its best in adverse
economic circumstances. An old couple have one pair of spectacles and one
set of dentures between them. They swap every hour so that one of them can
read the Daily Express while the other eats.
'Which do you prefer, the teeth or the glasses?' Neither is quite sure, but
it is not a bitter dispute. They even dance together quite happily. Still,
there is menace outside: a knocking on the door - the gasman perhaps? The
knocking subsides. The triumph of the piece, performed by Hilary Sesta and
John Crocker, is that it is played absolutely straight without overt
political or social harassment.
The other outstanding contribution is Skin by Neil Biswas, who left
university only a year or so ago and must be a writer to watch. Skin is
about a Bengali family in the English Midlands considering a return to
Calcutta on retirement: the daughter (Nina Wadia) has become Europeanised.
It is both moving and comic and the only part part of the programme that can
be easily envisaged as a full-length play. I look forward to seeing it.
Meanwhile, the formula of a collection of short pieces is very effective.
Most of them stand in their own right at their present length. The influence
of television is strong: they would go down equally well on the small
screen. The advantage of the theatre is that they can be done together. The
Body Politic should be seen as a new kind of stage review, and copied. Alex
Perrin directs in a place that has become one of the liveliest theatres in
London.
Cockpit Theatre, London NW8. (071) 402 5081

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940127

