FT942-16201

FT  12 APR 94 / De-regulation body 'needs powers'


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


The committee of MPs which will oversee the parliamentary implementation of
the government's de-regulation initiative should have tough new powers, an
influential Commons committee has recommended.
The government has accepted that a watchdog Commons committee be set up to
ensure parliamentary procedure to accelerate the scrapping of burdensome
regulations is not abused.
The Commons procedure committee recommended last night that the committee be
given new powers which could impede some of the more controversial aspects
of the government's de-regulation programme. It proposes that a new select
committee of 16 MPs - five more than the select committees which examine the
operations of government departments - should be able to take decisions
affecting the parliamentary timetable.
If the proposals are approved by the Commons, the committee could recommend
outright rejection of a de-regulation order, or approval subject to
amendments.
When the government disagreed with amendments suggested by the committee, it
would be required to stage a three-hour debate on the issue in the Commons.
Parliamentary orders are normally debated for one and a half hours and
cannot be amended by MPs. Where a de-regulation order gained the unanimous
approval of the committee, the government would be able to secure its
passage through the Commons without debate.
Another recommendation, which may not appeal to the government's business
managers, is that MPs should have 60 days to consider controversial
de-regulation orders instead of the 40 proposed by ministers.
The primary role of the new committee will be to ensure that health and
safety and other concerns are not adversely affected through regulations
being abolished without the checks and balances provided by all the stages
of primary legislation.
The new committee will be able to take evidence from ministers and civil
servants, appoint special advisers and, when appropriate, work in
co-operation with a similar scrutiny committee appointed by the House of
Lords. The scope of the new powers available to ministers under the
de-regulation bill now before parliament extends to 29 general headings, and
an initial programme envisages the repeal of 55 regulations.
The new committee will probably first consider draft orders so that
amendments acceptable to the government can be made before the final version
is submitted for the approval of the Commons and the Lords.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940412

