FT942-16047

FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (5): Rehabilitation is only a start - The
banking sector


   By PATRICK BLUM


After more than a year of reform, Mr Marko Voljc, chairman and chief
executive of Ljubljanska Banka (LB), Slovenia's largest and most powerful
bank, feels he can relax a little.
Its rehabilitation - the process by which its balance sheet has been partly
cleaned of bad debts, and the start of a long term programme of
modernisation and improvements - has already brought tangible results. The
bank, which still dominates Slovenia's banking sector, returned to profits
in the middle of last year. It has sharply reduced its stock of
non-performing loans by exchanging tolars 90.59bn (DM1.4bn) of bad debts for
government bonds, and operating costs have been cut by 15 per cent. 'The
results have justified the government's intervention (in the bank).
Ljubljanska Banka's rehabilitation has reduced the threat of a banking
crisis,' Mr Voljc says.
Most bankers would agree, although few may share Mr Voljc's optimism.
Rehabilitation is only the first stage in official efforts to establish
banking on a normal commercial and profit basis. The process is likely to be
painful, and accompanied by mergers and closures among the smaller banks.
'It's a long term project that will last eight to 10 years,' says Mr Jamko
Dezelac, managing director of the Bank Rehabilitation Agency (BRA)
responsible for cleaning up balance sheets and setting banks on the path of
reform.
New regulations coming into force in January 1995 will increase competition
and, it is hoped, efficiency. The central bank will make sure that banks
adopt western standards of capital adequacy and risk assessment. Monopoly
practices and cosy cartel arrangements to maintain high margins will no
longer be tolerated. From January 1995 a full banking licence will require a
minimum DM60m in capital - double the current DM30m. All this will force the
banks to sharpen up. From today's 32 banks, it is also expected to lead to a
dramatic reduction in the number of institutions. Almost everyone agrees
that Slovenia has too many banks, and that productivity is too low. When the
authorities judge that the moment is right, the banks will be privatised.
Several foreign banks have shown interest. Austria's Creditanstalt and Bank
Austria, and Societe Generale of France have already established
subsidiaries, al though foreign banks are waiting for the rehabilitation
process to be completed before entering the market.
'I expect that in one or two years we could sell some banks (to foreign and
domestic investors) at an honest price,' says Mr Dezelac. Initially, the
state will keep 10-20 per cent holdings, although the government does not
want to be a permanent owner.
Originally the LB group, which consisted of several banks, had a market
share of more than 85 per cent for domestic savings and more than 90 per
cent for international operations. Its predominance in the sector impeded
reform and undermined efforts to control inflation. 'It made it difficult
for us to lead a monetary policy,' says Mr France Arhar, central bank
governor. To modernise the whole sector, LB's weight in the system had to be
reduced.
'We can't have one huge bank which controls everything. In the future, we
expect that we'll have five or seven banks with a general licence, and lots
of other banking institutions operating mainly as savings and
co-operatives,' says Mr Dezelac.
Daughter banks of the LB group are being hived off. Kreditna Banka Maribor,
based in eastern Slovakia, and Komercialna Banka Nova Gorica, near the
Italian border, are undergoing rehabilitation.
Public debt and bad loans in the Slovene banking sector have been estimated
at about DM3bn, of which more than DM2bn are in the banking system, and
DM800m in foreign exchange deposits with the former central bank of
Yugoslavia. There are also claims on frozen assets in Croatia. Deposits with
the former central bank of Yugoslavia are unlikely to be recovered.
Domestic bad loans remain a big problem. Mr Dezelac says that while the BRA
can help the banks to restructure portfolios, it will be up to them to
improve performance. 'We can solve the solvency issue, but there will still
be problems of cash flow and liquidity.'
Privatisation and foreign investment will help, although Mr Voljc sees only
a limited role for foreign investors. 'I don't see Slovene banks being
dominated by foreign investors. My own preference is (foreign investment of)
up to 25 per cent,' he says. In February the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) signed a DM50m loan agreement with SKD
Banka, to be used in funding SKB's sub-loans for capital investment
projects, start-up working capital and acquisition of shares in companies
being privatised.
But in an open market the weight of foreign banks will depend on the
domestic banks' ability to remain competitive. This will not be easy, admits
Mr Voljc. 'Companies and individuals are becoming increasingly choosy. If
they can't get what they want here, they can go elsewhere, or abroad. So we
have to modernise.'

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940412

