FT941-5499

FT  05 MAR 94 / Books: A Balkan tragedy


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


SEASONS IN HELL: UNDERSTANDING BOSNIA'S WAR by Ed Vulliamy Simon & Schuster
Pounds 6.99, 370 pages
BOSNIA: A SHORT HISTORY by Noel Malcolm Macmillan Pounds 17.50, 340 pages
WHY BOSNIA: WRITINGS ON THE BALKAN WAR edited by Rabia Ali and Lawrence
Liftschultz Pamphleteer's Press
Some might see a glimmer of hope in developments in Washington this week.
But Ed Vulliamy's accounts of the brutal killing and destruction by the
Croats of the western Bosnian city of Mostar suggest that the prospect of
peace between Croats and Moslems is remote.
His unremitting catalogue of evil and deception races through the war zones
in eastern Croatia, where Serbs and Croats pounded each other's villages and
towns, to central Bosnia, where Vulliamy joins a crowd of dispossessed
Moslems forced to join the thousands of other Moslems and Bosnian citizens
fleeing the war zones. His images hark back to the second world war when
Jews, gypsies and communists were sent to the concentration camps.
Vulliamy, more intent on conveying the horror of war than explaining why the
former Yugoslavia collapsed into chaos, blames the Serbs and the
'international community' for starting and prolonging the killing
respectively.
This view is shared by Noel Malcolm, whose book, though sometimes uneven in
judgment, is nonetheless an excellent account of the political culture
underpinning Bosnia. It was, as he explains, a land caught between the
ambitions of the old Serb, Ottoman and Habsburg Empires, a situation which
helped to create a rich and exotic range of dialects and traditions.
Nowhere was this more obvious than in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia. For
centuries the inhabitants of this cosmopolitan city of Moslems and
Catholics, Orthodox and Jews, Turks and Bulgars, co-existed. This apparent
oasis of tolerance, as well as the economic potential of Bosnia, was quickly
recognised by Benjamin Kallay, the enlightened Habsburg minister of finance
sent from Vienna to run the country after it was placed under
Austro-Hungarian rule in 1878.
Kallay also recognised the emerging tensions between the prosperous, largely
urban Moslem middle-classes and the rural Serbs, many of whom had migrated
from other parts of the Balkans, but his administration failed to stem the
rise of nationalist sentiment. It was this sentiment which sparked off the
first world war after the assassination of the Archduke Ferdinand by Gavrilo
Princip, a Serb nationalist, in 1914.
As to the current war, Malcolm - like Vulliamy and the contributors to
Writings on the Balkan War - falls short of tackling its causes and the
potential instability of Bosnia.
All three books suggest that the disintegration of Bosnia was due largely to
external factors. But it is Vulliamy who comes closest to showing how
Croatia, as well as Serbia, had designs on carving up Bosnia. Once Germany
pushed through the recognition of Slovenia and Croatia in January 1992, any
chance of a negotiated settlement for the peaceful disintegration - or
redefinition - of the Yugoslav federation collapsed.
In the event, Bosnia not only became the chosen pawn of President Slobodan
Milosevic of Serbia and President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, but its
legitimacy was undermined since its territorial integrity had been
inextricably linked to the existence of the Yugoslav federation.
There are many reasons, not fully explained by these books, as to why the
European Union did not act sooner. One was the persistence of historical
alliances. Paris, London, and Athens were sympathetic to the Serbs, while
Germany, in an uncomfortable echo of its wartime support of the Nazi-backed
Ustasha regime in Croatia, backed Zagreb, capital of the Croat Republic.
This prevented consensus on how to deal with the first break up of a
multi-ethnic state in the post-communist world.
The European Union and the US also held the misguided view that the Yugoslav
federation had to be kept together at all costs, for fear that its
fragmentation would serve as a precedent for the Soviet Union, then still in
existence. But as Malcolm rightly asks: why did Europe, when it finally
recognised the independence of Bosnia, do nothing to defend it?
There is another, more complex explanation as to the EU's failure to
interpret the nationalist signals from Belgrade and Zagreb as early as 1987,
when Milosevic was catapulted into power as head of the Serbian communist
party.
Since 1945, the role of memory, underpinned by guilt and shame, had helped
to shape European culture. The countries of western Europe slowly came to
terms with what happened in the second world war and memory was gradually
merged with the politics of forgetting. In communist-dominated eastern
Europe, however, history was re-written and memory became a tool of regimes
which manipulated the past and destroyed the region's weak democratic
traditions.
The war in the former Yugoslavia was about the revival, and selective
exploitation of memory, juxtaposed with western Europe's profound need to
forget. The clash of these two psychological processes have tragically
prolonged the war in Bosnia. Western Europe, as these books rightly
conclude, is paying the price for failing to provide assistance to ensure
that post-communist Europe could reclaim its painful memories quietly.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940305

