FT943-1024

FT  27 SEP 94 / EU presidency success gave boost to Claes


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


Mr Willy Claes, who is virtually certain to be the next secretary general of
Nato, is a hard-driving politician with more than 20 years' experience in
the Belgian government, latterly as foreign minister. Though Mr Claes has
little direct experience of military affairs, he probably owes his present
job to a highly effective performance during the Belgian presidency of the
European Union between July and December 1993.
Despite an occasional short fuse, Mr Claes coaxed and cajoled his colleagues
into compromises on trade, budgetary matters and institutional affairs which
reinvigorated the EU after the debilitating debate over ratification of the
Maastricht treaty.
'Willy Claes is an exceptionally talented individual. He is open-minded,
efficient and well organised, with strong administrative skills,' says Mr
Karel Van Miert, the Belgian commissioner for competition policy in
Brussels.
Born in Hasselt, in north-east Belgium, Mr Claes was initially torn between
following in his father's foosteps, as a professional musician, and
launching a career in politics.
He entered parliament at the age of 30 and became one of Belgium's youngest
ministers, in 1972, at the age of 34.
Often tipped as a potential prime minister, Mr Claes, 55, would probably
never have made it to the top in Belgium. Like Mr van Miert, he comes from
the Flemish Socialist party, the minority partner in the coalition
government.
Some suspect that Mr Claes's appointment to succeed Mr Manfred Worner was
indirectly boosted after the Belgian prime minister Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the
Franco-German favourite to succeed Mr Jacques Delors as president of the
European Commission, fell victim to a British veto last summer.
But other observers believe that Mr Claes stands as a serious contender for
the top Nato post in his own right, having proved to be a 'safe pair of
hands' as foreign minister for the past 2 1/2 years handling many tricky
diplomatic problems not only in Europe but also in the former Belgian
protectorates of Rwanda and Burundi and in the ex-colony of Zaire.
Though a long-standing advocate of deeper European integration, Mr Claes is
also an avowed Atlanticist. As he remarked in a speech to Chatham House in
London last February, Europe's strategic defence 'will remain in Nato'. But
he also noted increasing US enthusiasm for Europe taking greater
responsibility for security issues on the continent.
At one point, he asked: 'Why not make peacekeeping into a common European
policy?'
His initiative stemmed partly from his own disillusionment with the European
Union's failure to deal more decisively with the crisis in former Yugoslavia
in its early stages, though he points to the significant humanitarian aid
effort which the Union has since mounted.
In future, Mr Claes will need all his negotiating skills - as well as his
musical instinct for harmony - to succeed in bringing all of Nato's partners
together.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940927

