FT944-2839

FT  15 DEC 94 / Nato sees big force for Bosnia pullout


   By REUTER


   BRUSSELS


General George Joulwan, Nato's senior military commander, has said he may
need up to 45,000 troops backed by three aircraft carriers and as many as 70
extra aircraft to cover a possible withdrawal of United Nations troops from
Bosnia, alliance officials said yesterday, Reuter reports from Brussels.
The officials, who asked not to be identified, stressed that Nato defence
ministers, meeting in Brussels, had not approved any final plan to cover a
withdrawal of UN peacekeepers from Bosnia if the world body ordered such a
move. However, they told Reuters that Gen Joulwan, Nato's Supreme Allied
Commander in Europe, had outlined 'worst case' needs for a massive alliance
force in a letter to members countries last Friday.
US officials have said privately that Washington could provide at least half
of such a force to bring out perhaps all of the 23,000 UN forces in Bosnia.
Gen Joulwan wrote that at least seven to nine brigades of troops -
representing 30,000 to 45,000 troops - could be required, including
mechanised infantry, light armour, engineering battalions and at least three
sophisticated communications battalions.
The officials added that Gen Joulwan's letter also called for three aircraft
carriers along with up to 70 additional aircraft and both attack and
reconnaissance helicopters if UN troops had to be removed in a hostile
environment.
One of the officials said it was likely that only one of the three aircraft
carriers would be supplied by the US, suggesting that Britain and France
might supply the others if they were required.
Western diplomats, who also asked not to be identified, said the operation
could cost up to Dollars 270m to begin and Dollars 100m per month once under
way. They said it could require up to 6,000 trucks and Jeeps, 1,600 armoured
vehicles and 180 helicopters.
While alliance defence ministers discussed the potential pull-out at the
start of a two-day meeting yesterday, US officials told journalists earlier
that momentum was growing rapidly among Nato countries to keep UN
peacekeeping troops in Bosnia despite widespread harassment from Bosnian
Serb forces.
The Nato officials said that alliance military officers stressed to defence
ministers at yesterday's meeting that western political leaders had to give
clear guidelines for the scope of any withdrawal if it were ordered by the
UN. 'For example, do we pull out of all of Bosnia or just part of Bosnia?'
asked one official.
They said that Gen Joulwan suggested that the commander of such a protection
force should have control over ports in Croatia in case they were needed for
troop ships to carry UN forces.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941215

