FT944-5882

FT  01 DEC 94 / UK Company News: Dairy Crest suffers from pricing pressures


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


Dairy Crest, the processing arm of the former Milk Marketing Board, reported
a 28 per cent drop in interim operating profits from Pounds 19.5m to Pounds
14m, following pressure on milk prices and cheese margins in the run-up to
market deregulation.
The company is now owned by the residuary body charged with winding up milk
board business, and speculation about its future has been rife for many
months.
Mr John Houliston, chief executive, said the body had two years to make a
decision about Dairy Crest's fate, but it had to consider the feasibility of
a stock market flotation as a first option.
Flotation was initially planned for this autumn, but was put off because of
uncertainty over milk prices in the new competitive market. 'Who would sell
a dairy company now? We're in no hurry to be sold,' said Mr Houliston.
He said profits had been halved in recent months after milk prices rose
substan-tially in the new market which started on November 1.
'But the really difficult time will come next year when we will see if price
rises for cheese stick and whether the higher prices suck in more imports.'
The dairy industry must recover an additional Pounds 450 to Pounds 500 a
tonne on cheddar cheese if it is to cover higher milk costs. That means
consumer cheese prices must rise by at least 40p a lb - 10p has already been
passed on, with an extra 30p to come in the New Year, taking the price for a
pound of mature cheddar to Pounds 3.
Mr Michael Landymore, food analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite, the London
brokers, said: 'Dairy Crest has been powering away at the mature end of the
cheese market as a source of profit, but that is predicated on demand
holding up in the face of higher prices.'
The company has completed an extensive rationalisation to shape up for
market liberalisation. And other dairy companies, such as Northern Foods and
Unigate, have yet to announce substantial rationalisation plans. The number
of Dairy Crest plants has been cut from 28 to 10 in the past three years and
the workforce reduced from 13,000 to 4,200.
Recent closures and rationalisation of the company's transport interests
resulted in exceptional costs of Pounds 16m (Pounds 21.9m) in the half-year
to September 30 which, along with net interest receivable of Pounds 900,000
(Pounds 1.6m payable), took the pre-tax profit to Pounds 1m (Pounds
600,000).
Dairy Crest is basing its strategy on concentrating on higher value consumer
products, such as its Clover spread and recently launched Frijj milk drink,
but the bulk of its turnover still comes from liquid milk and cheese sales
which are under strong competitive pressure.
Doorstep sales accounted for Pounds 235m out of a total turnover on
continuing operations of Pounds 403.4m (Pounds 409m), but are declining at a
rate of 15 per cent a year.
The drop in milk deliveries is likely to continue for several years. Mr
Houliston said the deterioration could stabilise with 80 per cent of sales
in supermarkets, compared with the current 55 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941201

