FT942-14753

FT  19 APR 94 / First steppes to a consumer culture: Western companies are
overcoming obstacles and penetrating the Russian market


   By LEYLA BOULTON


In post-communist Russia, political satire has been replaced by jokes about
western consumer goods, while propaganda on television and street billboards
has switched from praise of communism to the promotion of the products of
capitalism.
A consumer society, built largely on imports, is emerging from the ruins of
a state-run economy, which for decades produced some of the world's most
sophisticated weaponry while imposing on its citizens severe shortages of
consumer goods - whether shoes or washing-powder.
Mr Victor Naishuller, an entrepreneur who set up Office Club, Russia's first
discount warehouse for office supplies and furniture, says that of the 8,000
products it sells 3,000 - for instance, cardboard storage boxes - had never
been seen in the country before.
Russians, used under communism to hunting for months to find a pair of boots
or a sofa, are proving fussy consumers. When a Russian trader recently
arrived in New York to buy a container-load of women's underwear, he
insisted they should be labelled 'made in the USA' as his customers would
buy nothing else.
The emergence of western-style consumers, however, is threatening to fuel a
political backlash against the growing social inequality and industrial
decline which have accompanied market reforms.
Many Russians feel humiliated by the inability of their industry to compete
with cheaper, better-quality, or simply better-marketed imports, including
vodka. The adjustment of domestic production to the needs of consumers has
been delayed by high inflation, which makes short-term trading in ready-made
goods more attractive than long-term investment.
The government has reacted to growing protectionist pressures by clamping
down on imports, with tariff increases making some staple foods more
expensive. A symptom of popular resentment is the way western goods - from
Snickers bars to imported Smirnoff vodka - are the butt of a spate of
hostile newspaper articles and quips. One of several anekdoty by cosmically
minded Russians about the chocolate bars made by Masterfoods, the US food
company, relies on a TV advertisement claiming its Milky Way chocolate bars
are so light they never drown in milk. Snickers see Mars crying and asks:
'Why are you crying?' 'Milky Way has drowned,' says Mars.
This example of humour at the expense of western companies goes hand in hand
with more serious difficulties. Public hostility pales in comparison to
problems posed to western companies by high taxes and Mafia extortion. But,
despite these teething troubles in the development of a consumer society in
Russia, 150m people remain a tantalising market for western producers.
Mr Michael O'Neill, regional manager for Coca-Cola, which entered Russia
after its rival Pepsi-Cola but claims to be catching up fast, says that the
'potential . . . is quite fantastic'. Though western companies account for
only 20 per cent of the Russian soft drinks market, 'it's just a matter of
making the product available' for them to win the bulk of sales, he says.
Competition between western companies is so fierce that some pioneers are
reluctant to talk publicly about how they built up a presence for fear of
helping the competition learn from their experience.
Mr Larry Anderson, a partner at the Moscow office of Coopers & Lybrand, the
accounting and management firm, says every company must devise its own
solutions in Russia's tough business environment. But enthusiasm, he says,
is a crucial component of success: 'If you have the attitude that Russia's
glass is half empty you are never going to get anywhere. You have got to
start with the belief that the glass is half full.'
The potential for companies with a popular product to attract consumers
whose monthly salary averages Dollars 85 is shown by Masterfoods'
transformation of its Mars and Snickers chocolate bars into household names
in less than a year. In late 1992, only 5 per cent of Russians knew of
Snickers, according to a Gallup poll; now the figure is about 80 per cent.
Establishing such awareness of a brand image calls for widespread
distribution and aggressive advertising. The latter is helped by low
advertising costs - western style TV air-time slots cost 10 cents per 1,000
viewers in Russia, against Dollars 6 per 1,000 in the US. Masterfoods' reach
was illustrated by the concierge in a dilapidated hotel in Russia's
breakaway Chechnya region. Her first question, after apologising for the
hotel's broken window panes and lack of heating, was: 'Will you have
Snickers with your tea?'
The second factor, distribution networks, which did not exist five years
ago, have been forged through the joint efforts of western companies and
Russian entrepreneurs, deploying methods that range from primitive to
sophisticated.
On the primitive end of the scale, Mr John Bailey, managing director of the
Russian subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, the US pharmaceuticals group, says:
'We had to start our distribution from scratch, with Russian enterprises
banging on our door and us sending people out banging on Russian
organisations' doors. We've had people coming to us in trucks from the far
east of Russia to collect things.' Although trucks keep coming from
far-flung corners of Russia, he can now use domestic wholesalers.
At the more sophisticated end is Mr Naishuller's Office Club. He opened the
edifice on the edge of Moscow after abandoning negotiations with Office
Depot, the US office supplies chain, to open branches for them in Russia.
Frustrated by the 'very bad' terms they were offering, he decided to go it
alone, with the help of two former Office Depot employees from the US. Later
this year, he hopes to open three more Office Club stores - in St
Petersburg, Siberia and in the rich southern Volga region.
However, despite progress, distribution is uneven and prices are high in
what remains a sellers' market. To promote the growth of a consumer society,
many western and Russian companies believe manufacturing operations must be
set up to generate jobs, local wealth and goodwill.
With only 85 of Office Club's 8,000 product lines made by Russian companies,
Mr Naishuller says he plans to encourage Russian companies to produce more
by investing in a number of them.
Some western companies are already making strategic investments in Russian
industry. MasterFoods, for instance, is negotiating to build three
food-processing factories near Moscow. Others are buying into and upgrading
existing plants through the government's privatisation programme, which aims
to put 80 per cent of Russian manufacturing in private hands by July 1.
With the aim of acquiring a controlling stake, Procter & Gamble, the
consumer products group, last November bought 15 per cent of a Russian plant
which has been making its Ariel washing-powder since 1992. Western cigarette
manufacturers were also among the first to take up opportunities offered by
privatisation. Mr David Geovanis, director of a joint venture involving the
US's Liggett & Myers tobacco company, says its Moscow factory is now
producing US-style brands using Virginia-blend tobacco. But it will still
make cheaper local brands because they have a 'big market'.
Yet the fact is that western investment is mainly designed to promote the
sale of western goods. In addition to stimulating popular hostility, it is
also generating an increasingly influential protectionist current among
Russian businessmen. Their argument for measures to shelter nascent Russian
free enterprise also has a political dimension. Mr Vladimir Gussinsky, a
Russian with large banking and construction interests, warns that, unless
more is done to help domestic industry, 'a backlash under the influence of
(ultra-nationalistic) patriots, who ask why we should drink foreign vodka,
could well create a fascist state in Russia'. While such warnings are
motivated by a strong element of self-interest, they highlight a trend
foreign companies will be increasingly unable to ignore.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940419

