FT944-5898

FT  01 DEC 94 / JP Morgan wins Polish bond issue


   By NICHOLAS DENTON and CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


   LONDON, WARSAW


JP Morgan, the US bank, has won the highly prized mandate to lead Poland's
first sovereign bond issue since the country defaulted on its debts.
Intense competition between investment banks to handle the debut issue and
the appetite of investors for Polish paper promise attractive terms for
Poland.
JP Morgan is understood to have indicated pricing which would have yielded a
spread of about 200 basis points (2 percentage points) over US Treasuries.
That would allow Poland, a defaulter, to borrow more cheaply than Hungary,
which serviced its borrowings throughout the debt crisis. An analyst said:
'It means that markets are looking at outlook rather than history.' The bond
issue, which is expected to take place around next March, would mark
Poland's full financial rehabilitation after it reached agreement with its
creditors earlier this year.
JP Morgan emerged from a initial field of 17 investment banks which narrowed
to a shortlist of the five pre-eminent US bond houses: CS First Boston,
Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, as well as JP Morgan.
Debut sovereign issues are prestigious and JP Morgan has won the most sought
after transaction since South Africa in November hired Goldman Sachs and
Swiss Bank Corporation to handle its first bond issue since the end of
apartheid. Morocco, Slovakia and Pakistan are believed to be considering
similar transactions.
JP Morgan has also lead-managed CEZ's Eurobond issue, priced yesterday at
110 basis points over Treasuries, in which the Czech electricity utility
became the first investment-grade corporate issuer on the Euromarkets.
The Polish decision, which is expected to be announced today, is a
disappointment for CS First Boston which is understood to have undercut JP
Morgan on the spreads it indicated. CSFB is strong in the eurobond market
and in eastern Europe but has won few mandates to lead sovereign debt issues
from the region.
Poland intends to seek ratings from Standard & Poor's and Moody's and the
market expects it will receive an S&P rating of about BB+. That would put it
just below investment grade and three notches below Czech sovereign debt,
which carries a rating of BBB+. Investment bankers believe the prospects for
further expansion may lead rating agencies to give Poland a positive
outlook.
Capital markets, Page 34

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941201

