FT941-4067

FT  12 MAR 94 / Gardening: And Squirrel Nutkin got the blame . . . - . . .
unjustifiably, says Robin Lane Fox, who is worried about his yew hedge


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


Hedging has been blamed for a lot recently, but I do not feel the blame has
gone far enough. In 1989, I made an investment; now, I have lost the lot. It
has cost me Pounds 600 and five years of my time.
In 1989, I planted two long yew hedges. The yews came through a Yorkshire
king of garden-centre stocking who sourced them, as he put it, in Belgium.
They arrived - strong, bushy and far from cheap. They went in 2ft apart in a
staggered line.
A year earlier, however, I had begun with another line of smaller and
cheaper yews, bought in transit from Gloucestershire's Batsford Garden
Centre in the gardens of Batsford Park. The manager did warn me that these
yews were small and had just arrived from Cornwall. So, having a few Belgian
spares, I used these in 1989 to thicken up the 1988 line.
During the summer, one of the 1988 intake turned bronze, not green, and I
blamed the drought and academic pressure on the hosing schedule. In 1990,
eight more of the Batsford batch turned bronze, too. Perhaps they had been
dry, I thought, and the drought was taking a year to show the effect. They
were not dead, though, and they were showing some green shoots.
In 1991, however, they were bronze all over. This started to bother their
big Belgian brothers; by 1992, most of this hedge was burnished to a height
of 2ft. And the trouble was spreading at a T-junction where a second Belgian
hedge began, previously unscathed and bushing healthily.
In January 1993, I consulted the experts at the Hillier Arboretum. Burn the
lot, they told me, with cheerful confidence. First, though, pack up a rooted
specimen and send it to a laboratory. I returned from Hillier and
compromised. I took out the totally-tanned yews and substituted my next-best
evergreen, osmarea. Belgian buttresses remained, only slightly browned and
set thickly with leaves.
The osmarea grew throughout the summer but the Belgian buttresses turned
bronze. At the T-junction, the upper growths of their brothers began to look
twisty and thinly-needled. I have an eye for sickness, and it told me they
were ill.
I have watched them throughout the winter. No-one now can complain of
drought, except for a water authority, and my Cotswold soil drains quickly;
it is not waterlogged. But nothing has improved and I have just removed the
last of the 1988-89 intake. I have lost Pounds 500 of yew and Pounds 100 of
labour and preparation. When we dug up the plants, they were not rooted very
widely - but there were no visible scars or infections.
This week, I have consulted more experts, beginning at the Royal
Horticultural Society's Wisley headquarters where Pippa Greenwood, in plant
pathology, is celebrating her promising debut on the BBC's Gardeners'
Question Time.
At Hillier, the experts mentioned phytophthora: could they have been right?
Unlikely, Greenwood told me, because the RHS had been pestered by the public
with just this problem since 1990; and, although it had tested clinically,
traces of phytophthora turn up only seldomly. Anyway, if you have it, bark,
branches and leaves turn brown, not bronze.
Then what? I asked her. The answer, she suggested, was cultivation. The yews
might have been planted badly - too dry, or perhaps too wet, or possibly
both. Probably they were put in too deep, so the roots could not find
oxygen. She said she saw this problem often on yews sent in by members of
the RHS.
I protest. I have been taught how to garden. I am actually rather good at
it. You would never catch me planting yews too deeply.
Please do not take it personally, she reassured me: the RHS met lots of
people who were obviously very good gardeners but still could make trifling
 -and common - mistakes.
What about the National Trust? I asked. Did it not have a problem with old
yew hedges which were showing brown patches halfway up? Yes, she agreed, but
it could well be rodents: it was amazing how squirrels, for instance, could
climb up a hedge and ring its bark at quite a height. Greenwood will see
that diseased specimens are examined if sent to Wisley by members of the
RHS.
On Greenwood's advice, I then rang the Forestry Commission's David Rose, at
Alice Holt Lodge, Wrecclesham, Farnham, Surrey GU10 4LH. While the
commission usually contracts its knowledge for a fee, Rose will be willing
to consider investigating yew trees if enough readers write in with evidence
of a similar problem.
First, he absolved the National Trust rodent. At Buckland Abbey, the trust
lost an old yew hedge and some younger plantings of yew, but the cause was
diagnosed as phytophthora which is, in Rose's view, 'by far the commonest
cause of death in yew'.
This, of course, does not suit my problem: I have bronzing, not browning,
and my plants are not actually dead. So, Rose asked, what about the
cultivation? Too wet, too dry, too deep? Or might it be the climate: cold
winds (and they are cold in the Cotswolds) or sudden frost?
Ask an expert and you almost believe him. But wait. The bronzing began on
only one plant and spread first to only one batch. It took six years  - yet,
all the yews face the same wind, the same drought and the same old Adam in
the gardener. How can they be the cause?
At this point, I think I trust my common sense. I believe that Batsford gave
the disease to Belgium and the others are fighting infection. And I think I
know where it came from: across the Channel. It infiltrated Cornwall on
imported Eurostock and spread to London with people who buy plants in
transit to sell them.
Before you plant a yew hedge, be clear that the stock is clean, its source
reputable and do not plant it too deep. Meanwhile, if you know of trouble,
write to Rose and give details. Something other than phytophthora is abroad
and I refuse to believe that the culprit is Squirrel Nutkin.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940312

