FT943-12623

FT  23 JUL 94 / Minding Your Own Business: The right direction - A business
which succeeded from day one


   By JAMES BUXTON


Edinburgh Financial Publishing was a success from the word go. According to
Jeremy Salvesen, its co-founder: 'It is the only business I've known where
one put in an amount of capital on day one and never for a single day was
the bank balance less than the capital.'
The company started life in 1990 as Directus. Angus MacDonald, a 26-year-old
fund manager in Edinburgh, had, like others, noticed that when directors of
a quoted company bought or sold its shares this often signalled it was a
good time for others to follow suit.
A company in Birmingham named BRI had long provided a rudimentary service
mailing brokers and fund managers with details of these transactions based
on stock exchange announcements. MacDonald had the idea of providing a
better, computer-based service, and took it to Salvesen, a computer expert.
'Angus used to come to me with ideas on a regular basis,' says Salvesen,
aged 30. 'This struck me as a good one and would combine my computer skills
with his as a salesman.'
Directus would fax customers with full details of directors' dealings within
hours of the announcement. It entailed creating a database that would enable
it to put the transactions in context.
'The actual transaction is meaningless if you don't know the background,'
says Salvesen.
'A director may sell Pounds 10,000 worth of shares but keep Pounds 1m, or he
may be selling to fund a divorce settlement. We would get details from the
company and fax customers a graph showing the share price with previous
directors' dealings marked in.'
The two men began Directus from a large cupboard in Salvesen's office in
Edinburgh. Salvesen says it did not actually need start-up capital because
clients would buy a year's subscription in advance. However, to indicate
their commitment each of them put in Pounds 10,000.
While Salvesen processed the information and issued the faxes, MacDonald,
who had earlier served a short commission in the army and is described by
some as a 'selling machine', toured brokers, signing them up to the service,
for which Directus was asking twice as much as BRI was charging.
It was an immediate success. Directus met its first year's sales target in
three months and within a year had acquired BRI. In its first 10 months of
trading, turnover was Pounds 137,000; a year later it had reached Pounds
437,000.
Directus began contributing a weekly summary of directors' dealings to the
Weekend FT, and still does. And it produces weekly and monthly editions of a
newsletter, The Inside Track, for private investors.
Colin Rogers, a stockbroker, has joined the company and Salvesen has left to
buy Duncans of Scotland, a chocolate bar maker, becoming non-executive vice
chairman of EFP under MacDonald.
The directors' dealings service now makes up only about 10 per cent of the
turnover of Edinburgh Financial Publishing, the company's new name. Turnover
reached Pounds 2.2m in the year to March and its flagship product today is
the Estimate Directory.
Fund managers had grumbled to MacDonald about the immense volume of research
material poured out by analysts which they were expected to digest daily.
The company came up with a summary of brokers' profit forecasts, listed by
company and updated every month with changes highlighted.
Some 300 subscriptions to the Estimate Directory were sold before the first
edition went to press and it now sells more than 2,500 subscriptions a year.
It competes with two online services, but MacDonald says many brokers prefer
looking up the data in a book.
Soon, said Rogers, brokers were crying out for directories covering other
markets. EFP decided to start with the Pacific Basin, an English-speaking
area with strong market potential. It recognised that the main market for
the new directory would be in the region itself.
MacDonald went to Hong Kong in late 1992 with 30 copies of the first issue
of EFP's Estimate Directory - Pacific Basin, covering more than 1,000
companies in Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Australia and New
Zealand.
'Within two months it had taken Hong Kong by storm,' Rogers says. MacDonald
recruited a salesman and started selling in Singapore, Malaysia and
Thailand. He also found plentiful new publishing opportunities in the Far
East.
EFP (Asia) now produces a daily digest of the business press in Pacific
countries, which is compiled in English at dawn each day, and faxed to
brokers and investors in the area and in Europe.
The Hong Kong company recently launched a handbook of Hong Kong companies,
and is working on handbooks for Singapore and Malaysia.
Meanwhile the Edinburgh operation, run by Rogers, launched The Estimate
Directory - Europe, covering European companies, and recently opened a sales
office in Paris. It now has one in New York and is working on ways of
delivering its services electronically.
What strikes one about EFP is its can-do mentality and its youth. Its oldest
director is 33. Its sales staff work on commission and offer ingenious
discounts. When it celebrated the opening of new offices in Edinburgh a few
months ago virtually none of the old guard of the Scottish financial
community was in evidence.
It now employs about 25 people in Edinburgh and a similar number in Hong
Kong. Its Hong Kong turnover is expected more than to double from Pounds
650,000 in 1994 to Pounds 1.3m in 1995, while its UK sales should grow from
Pounds 1.56m to Pounds 2.2m.
Nevertheless, MacDonald says a stock exchange quotation for EFP is a long
way off. 'I'd love to run a quoted company but the only reason to do so
would be to make acquisitions. We can't find anything that isn't very
expensive and the stock market doesn't give small companies proper
treatment.'
Edinburgh Financial Publishing, 16 Randolph Crescent, Edinburgh EH3 7TT.
Tel: 031-220 0468.
Directors' transactions, Page IV

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940723

