FT942-14427

FT  20 APR 94 / International Company News: Steady performances from Merck
and Warner Lambert


   By FRANK MCGURTY


   NEW YORK


Recent acquisitions and joint ventures contributed to steady first-quarter
performances by Merck and Warner Lambert, two of the biggest US
pharmaceutical companies. American Home Products, a third leading drug
concern, showed little improvement during the period.
At Merck, net income in the first three months of 1994 climbed 10 per cent
to Dollars 675.2m. Earnings per share were flat at 54 cents a share, due to
the dilutive effect of stock issued to complete the acquisition of Medco
Containment Services, a drug distribution business.
It was the first quarter in which the Medco operation was included in
Merck's results.
Dr P. Roy Vagelos, chairman and chief executive, linked the growth in
profits to strong unit volume gains in US and international markets. Merck's
most profitable products include Vasotec, an enzyme for treating
cardiovascular disorders, and Proscar, a treatment for benign prostrate
enlargement.
Dr Vagelos said the unfavourable effects of foreign exchange rates, higher
tax rates and other factors were offset by cost controls and better
productivity.
Revenue growth, thanks largely to Medco's contribution, was even more
impressive. Sales reached Dollars 3.5bn, up 48 per cent.
If the effect of the acquisition and the sale of the Calgon water-management
business is taken into account, sales were up 19 per cent.
Warner Lambert, which markets personal care products and confections as well
as pharmaceuticals, said net income advanced 5 per cent to Dollars 190m, or
Dollars 1.42, compared Dollars 182m, or Dollars 1.35, a year ago.
Worldwide sales were up 10.5 per cent at Dollars 1.47bn. The company said
the gains reflected growth strategy last year, which included the
acquisition of the Wilkinson Sword operations and alliances with Wellcome,
Glaxo and Jouveinal.
By comparison, American Home Products had a lacklustre first quarter. Net
income edged 4 per cent ahead to Dollars 415m, or Dollars 1.34 a share on
sales up 2 per cent at Dollars 2.14bn.
The company blamed 'competitive conditions' in the US and certain foreign
markets.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940420

