FT942-16039

FT  12 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): Market
forces leave UK research in limbo - Funding cuts have left a yawning gulf
between pure and applied agricultural science


   By DAVID RICHARDSON


The name of John Innes will always be associated chiefly with garden
compost. But an equally important contribution to agricultural science from
the founder of the firm that originated plant nutrient analysis for that
growing medium was his endowment of the research institute bearing his name.
For many years the institute has been under the management of the UK
Ministry of Agriculture and a few weeks ago the Cambridge Laboratory and the
Nitrogen Fixation Unit were incorporated into it under the umbrella title of
The John Innes Centre.
Situated on the outskirts of Norwich, the centre is now a power house of
basic, strategic research into all aspects of agriculture and its scientists
co-operate closely with the Sugar and Food Research Institutes and
University of East Anglia, which share the same science park.
Last Friday Mrs Gillian Sheppard, the Minister of Agriculture, visited the
centre to review some of its work. In particular she looked at pioneering
plant breeding methods that may enable oilseed rape to become one of the
most versatile plant species in the world.
Scientists told the minister how, by using transgenic techniques, they hoped
to be able to create several new varieties of the crop. Each would have its
own characteristics, which would enable the oil produced to be used in
particular industrial processes from lubricants and industrial nylon to
cosmetics and detergents. Furthermore these oils could replace the
non-renewable, fossil feed stocks now used for such processes and both the
agronomic and industrial implications are environment friendly.
'It is our job,' one scientist told the minister, 'only to develop the
technology.' And he conceded that the ministry was funding this basic
research to the tune of Pounds 1.4m. Having developed the technology,
however, under the terms of its remit the centre is forced to rely on
industry to exploit and commercialise the science.
In the case of new oilseed rape varieties there is no shortage of commercial
interests ready to take on the exploitation. But when new technology fails
to indicate almost immediate economic opportunities, or when a promising
product is so new that there is no immediate market for it, the work is not
always developed to full potential.
Previous ministers of agriculture have seen fit to cut expenditure on
agricultural research and in particular that sector of the work dubbed 'near
market'. In other words to concentrate on basic research but to leave its
application to commercial interests.
Since 1985, for instance, Pounds 58m has been lopped off the ministry's
annual research budget - most of it from the 'near market' sector. That has
also included cuts in expenditure on extension and advisory services, which
previously assessed and disseminated scientific developments to both farmers
and the wider agricultural industry.
Ministry expenditure on agricultural research remains substantial at Pounds
128m a year. But many scientists and farmers now believe that the virtual
removal of the applied sector from government funding has left a yawning
gulf between scientific ivory towers, like the John Innes Centre, and the
people on the ground who could benefit from their work.
Attempts are being made to bridge that gulf by farmer-funded schemes that
concentrate on applying research. Cereal growers, for instance, contribute
to such work via a statutory levy on all grain sold; and sugar beet growers
fund the vast majority of research work on that crop through a long standing
R & D levy.
This week milk producers will be invited to vote for or against a levy on
all milk sold after the winding up of the Milk Marketing Board. The levy,
which is likely to be fixed in the first instance at 0.04p per litre, would
raise some Pounds 4.5m per year for research and market development and fund
a new Milk Development Council.
There can be no doubt that the new body is necessary and it is almost
inconceivable that milk producers will vote against it. But many farmers
have grown used to free access to research over the years and it now offends
them to have to pay. Such feelings are exacerbated by the fact that even
ADAS, the government's advisory service for farmers, has now gone
commercial. Even to have the right to telephone an advisory officer, who, a
few years ago, would have given his full management or agronomic services
free of charge, now costs an annual subscription of Pounds 225.
That, of course, is the reality of market forces and undoubtedly farmers
will have to get used to the change of culture. Nevertheless if, as seems
probable, valuable and expensive government funded basic research is failing
to be applied because of the lack of a co-ordinated approach it may be
necessary, in order simply to get value for money, for the ministry to
reinstate some of its 'near market' activities.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940412

