FT943-12957

FT  22 JUL 94 / Dollars 10,000 coin 'passed to consultant': Standard
Chartered to continue to investigate alleged payments


   By ROBERT PESTON and CHRISTINE HILL


   LONDON, KUALA LUMPUR


A Dollars 10,000 gold coin which Standard Chartered gave to a Malaysian
former deputy finance minister disappeared after he had passed it on to a
Malaysian-based consultant, the international bank said yesterday.
Standard Chartered has been investigating the disappearance of the coin as
part of its probe into allegations that employees of its Mocatta gold
trading division may have made payments to officials in the Philippines and
Malaysia to win business.
The bank said yesterday that in 1991 it had given the coin to Mr Abdul Ghani
Othman, the then deputy finance minister who is now Malaysia's youth and
sport minister. He had been given the coin as a 'sample', during discussions
with Mocatta on whether Malaysia should impose a 10 per cent tax on gold
imports, according to a Standard Chartered banker.
At the time, the bank was considering setting up a bonded warehouse for gold
in Malaysia. Mr Abdul said that during the meeting with Mocatta he had been
shown a sample of gold coin which was to be used to ascertain whether it was
legal tender or gold bullion. 'If the gold coin was considered legal tender,
then it should not be taxed.'
On Tuesday, the Financial Times disclosed that the coin had disappeared.
Standard Chartered has now been told by Mr Abdul Ghani that he returned it
to Dr Stephen Goh, who was a consultant to Mocatta based in Kuala Lumpur.
Mr Goh has told Standard Chartered that he misplaced the coin. Standard
Chartered said Mr Goh had recompensed the bank for it.
'That is the end of the matter,' Standard Chartered said yesterday. However,
the bank is continuing to investigate other alleged payments by Mocatta
employees to officials in the Asia Pacific region.
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minister, said yesterday Standard
Chartered had a right to investigate the matter, and that his government
would not comment until the investigation was completed.
The disclosure of Standard's investigation into the disappearance of the
coin came at a sensitive time for Anglo-Malaysian trade relations. The UK
Foreign Office is hopeful that Malaysia will soon lift a ban on UK
participation in Malaysian government contracts, which was imposed in
February because of Malaysian fury with British press reports of the Pergau
Dam alleged arms-for-aid deal and allegations of bribes offered to Malaysian
politicians.
Mr Abdul said it had been 'presumptuous on the part of the British media to
say that a Malaysian minister could be bought with one gold coin'.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940722

