FT944-14578

FT  22 OCT 94 / Greek central bank proves no place for a politician: A look
at events leading up to bank governor's forced resignation


   By KERIN HOPE


A clash of personalities rather than policies caused the downfall of
Greece's central bank governor, Mr Yannis Boutos, a former economy minister
forced to resign last week in a dispute with the government over the future
of the loss-making Bank of Crete.
'The lesson for everyone is that you mustn't put a politician in charge of
the Bank of Greece,' said a senior economy ministry official.
The new central bank governor, Mr Loukas Papademos, promoted from deputy
governor, presents a model technocrat's image after 10 years at the central
bank, mainly as an influential but low-profile economic adviser.
Mr Boutos came out of political retirement to take over as head of the
central bank 11 months ago when the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok)
returned to power. But his personal friendship with prime minister Andreas
Papandreou failed to offset the mistrust his conservative background
inspired among senior socialists.
At one level, Greece's central bank enjoys considerable autonomy, setting
interest rates without interference from the government and managing
monetary and foreign exchange policy on its own terms. However, the need to
co-ordinate policy on financing Greece's huge public debt, amounting to more
than 110 per cent of gross domestic product, and the development of its
fast-growing but still primitive capital market means the central bank must
co-operate closely with the economy ministry.
'The governor shared our view on reducing inflation and gave us all the
backing we needed on curbing monetary expansion,' one government official
said. 'But he wasn't part of banking culture.' Tact is also needed to
maintain relations with the state-controlled National Bank of Greece, the
country's largest commercial bank which has a market share of close to 50
per cent of deposits but a heavy burden of non-performing loans. Senior
managers at National Bank, which issued currency until the Bank of Greece
was set up in the late 1920s, persist in seeing the central bank as a
comparative upstart.
Mr Boutos, a blunt-spoken economist from Sparta, had little in common with
Mr George Mirkos, governor of National Bank, a Pasok appointee whose family
have been executives with the bank for more than a century.
He recently rejected Mr Mirkos's demand for a Dr15bn (Pounds 40m) cash
reward for National Bank from the central bank for helping defend the
drachma during last May's currency crisis by raising short-term interest
rates above 60 per cent and turning down new loan requests.
Mr Boutos also raised difficulties over another attempt by Mr Mirkos to
boost his bank's balance sheet. The latter demanded that the central bank
should adjust exchange rates in National Bank's favour on foreign currency
deposits made by Greeks working abroad, dating from the time when the
central bank kept a tight grip on exchange controls.
The request was considered reasonable by central bank advisers, who are keen
to sort out apparent irregularities with Greek commercial banks in
preparation for meeting the Maastricht requirements for a single European
currency.
However, concern was voiced over the inflationary effects of injecting some
Dr300bn of liquidity into the banking system as a result of a one-off
exchange rate adjustment.
It was Mr Boutos's decision last month to liquidate Arab Hellenic Bank, a
struggling consortium bank set up in the 1970s by National Bank with Libyan
and Kuwaiti partners, that particularly irked Mr Mirkos.
The state-owned Libyan Arab Bank had offered to cover a planned Dr3bn
capital increase for Arab Hellenic Bank. This would have given the Libyans
control of a Greece-based bank, enabling them to open branches in the EU
under single market rules while remaining under Bank of Greece supervision.
The deal hung fire for more than a year before the US precipitated Mr
Boutos's intervention by threatening to include Arab Hellenic Bank in its
ban on financial transactions with Libyan nationals.
While Mr Boutos's abrasive style annoyed other bankers, his decision-making
could not be faulted until it came to privatising the Bank of Crete, under
central bank supervision as a Dollars 200m (Pounds 126.5m) embezzlement
scandal had been revealed there in 1988.
The socialist government is particularly sensitive about the Bank of Crete
because its owner, Mr George Koskotas, now serving a prison sentence for
fraud for his part in the scandal, claimed he was blackmailed by Pasok
officials into providing funds for the party. The allegations contributed to
the socialists' fall from power in 1989.
Ignoring advice from Pasok, Mr Boutos sacked the commissioner of the bank,
Mr Kostas Kalivianakis, on the grounds that he was obstructing the
privatisation process. Moreover, Bank of Crete's losses had soared from
Dr1.2bn in 1993 to Dr3.2bn for the first half of this year.
A government official said: 'Because of its past, decisions on the Bank of
Crete disposal have to be reached by consensus and carried out
transparently.'
Mr Boutos's mistake was to appoint as the new commissioner, without
consultation, Mr Michalis Sortikos, a private-sector financier reportedly
involved in an attempted takeover of a private Greek bank earlier this
month. This raised questions over a conflict of interest. When news of the
decision reached the premier's office, Mr Boutos was asked to resign.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941022

