FT943-911

FT  27 SEP 94 / Leading Article: Casting a smaller net


While the authorities continue to ponder a death sentence, the Net Book
Agreement is dying of its own accord. Opponents of the 37-year old pact will
applaud Hodder Headline's announced withdrawal from the NBA. But defenders
should also welcome the news: the more voluntary the agreement appears to
be, the weaker the case for abolishing it.
Pricing agreements of some kind or another have been a part of the UK book
trade for nearly 100 years. Minimum price-setting by manufacturers was
banned in other industries in 1956. But books, it was argued, were
'different': and the Net Book Agreement survived.
Abolitionists argue that the only thing which is different about the book
industry is that it is better at scaring the competition authorities into
inaction. The 1956 decision has withstood repeated re-investigations. Last
month, Sir Bryan Carsberg, the director-general of fair trading, ushered in
another one, deciding to refer the agreement to the Restrictive Practices
Court. The NBA's detractors will be hoping that this time will be different.
Yet the argument for banning it has never been entirely clear-cut.
First, and most important, it is voluntary: publishers signing it are free
to apply minimum ('net') prices to some, any or all of their books, as they
see fit. Second, it does not necessarily impede competition: indeed, the
object of the exercise is to keep as many book retailers in the market as
possible.
Why, after all, would any self-respecting manufacturer want to stop
retailers from cutting the price of their product? Once goods have been sold
to the retailer, the producer generally has an interest in the volume of
sales, not the price the retailer charges. Companies claiming that their
industries are different are generally up to no good.
Silent intimidation
But the fact that publishers have long freely opted to pursue a policy which
would lose them money in most other businesses has always been a good reason
to give the 'difference' claim a little more weight.
Opponents, however, have always countered that the agreement is not really
voluntary, and it is not really in the industry's self-interest. Some
publishers are allergic to change, and their silent intimidation of newer
members means that the industry is trapped in the past. They would rather
hold on to a restrictive practice than be forced to think of other,
potentially more lucrative ways of doing business.
As long as publishers feared publishing non-net books, the case for
abolishing the NBA as a restrictive practice was a reasonable one. But over
the past few years, a growing number of publishers, large and small, has
decided to stop netting their books, or to do so only selectively.
Guaranteed margins
Hodder Headline, which controls around 10 per cent of the most important,
trade-book, market, is one of the biggest players to have discarded the
practice. Smaller companies who may have feared leaving may be encouraged by
their decision.
But so should the NBA's remaining supporters. As long as the decision to net
is solely a business judgment by publishers, and not collusive price-rigging
exercise, they should be allowed to make decision by themselves. The number
of shops is important to the sales of books, as is the standard of service
and choice offered in each bookshop. This may have led publishers to protect
small retailers in the past by using guaranteed margins: they should be
allowed to opt for this in future.
But there may be other ways to protect small bookshops. Hodder Headline
claims it has no desire to see small retailers go to the ropes as a result
of its decision. It will merely adopt other means of subsidising them,
through special discounts instead.
This may prove a more efficient, and more profitable way of recognising that
books are different. But small bookshops are facing tough competition from
larger outlets, with or without the NBA. The world is changing: possibly,
the UK book trade has resisted change too long. Slowly, change is taking
place. It would be better for all concerned if, as seems likely, the NBA
withered away without being heavy-handedly uprooted by the Restrictive
Practices Court.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940927

