FT942-14376

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (8): City airports are just the ticket /
A look at the benefits - and the drawbacks


   By PAUL TAYLOR


As the main airport hubs become more crowded, a niche market has opened up
for city centre airports such as London City and Berlin which cater mainly
for the business traveller. The growing importance of these 'close-in'
airports is underlined by the above-average passenger growth which they are
achieving in Europe despite the recession.
For example, about 500,000 passengers used Florence's Peretola Airport in
1993, up from just over 100,000 four years ago, while passenger traffic at
Belfast City Airport has increased from 546,000 in 1991 to 880,000 last
year. Meanwhile, London City Airport in Docklands handled more than 245,000
passengers last year, a 31.5 per cent increase over 1992's total. The surge
in passenger traffic appears to be continuing.
The extension of its runway to 1,199 metres in 1992, the opening of the
Limehouse link road into London and the improvement in reliability of the
Docklands Light Railway have all helped London's newest airport. So far this
year, passenger traffic at London City Airport is running 92 per cent ahead
of last year, well ahead of a budgeted 60 per cent increase.
Mr William Charnock, London City's managing director, says the airport is
doing 'tremendously well' and should comfortably pass the 400,000 passenger
mark this year. With that level of passenger traffic the airport, which was
developed by and is majority-owned by Mowlem, the construction group, should
break even this year for the first time since it opened in 1987.
Such passenger growth suggests that some of the advantages offered by city
airports are finally being recognised. Among these advantages are the
substantial savings in time (and stress) which they offer the business
traveller because they are usually more conveniently located for business
meetings, and because formalities such as check-in have been kept to a
minimum.
For example, both London City Airport and Berlin's Tempelhof Airport are
much closer to the business districts in their respective cities than either
Heathrow or Tegel. London City Airport is only six miles from the City and
an undisputed 15 minutes by road from the City financial district and 20
minutes from the West End, thanks to the opening last year of the Limehouse
Link.
In addition, city airports are smaller and less congested than their much
larger counterparts. Parking is directly outside the London City Airport
terminal building, check-in time is 10 minutes before the flight compared
with the 30 to 60 minutes demanded by most airports and for incoming
passengers it usually only takes five minutes to reclaim baggage and clear
customs from the time the aircraft touches the runway.
Despite these advantages, some city airports have also suffered from a
number of perceived drawbacks including restrictions imposed because of
environmental concerns and a lack of comprehensive flight scheduling.
Regulations such as restricted operating hours and specialist requirements -
such as the steep 5.5 degree approach at London City - have been imposed to
protect the environment but reduce the number and type of aircraft that can
use the airports.
As a result of these limitations, most large airlines have avoided the city
airports, leaving them to smaller or niche airlines which operate less
frequently and to fewer destinations than their larger competitors. Even
among the smaller operators there has been considerable 'churn'. For
example, at London City British Midland, one of the pioneers, pulled out in
1991 after losing Pounds 10m and Brymon, the first airline ever to use
London City, halted its operations there in March last year.
Nevertheless, the economic arguments in favour of using city airports are
steadily improving - particularly as delays, both in the sky and on the
ground, become more commonplace at the large hubs.
At London City early operators had to put up with the restrictions imposed
by a short runway which meant that only small turboprop aircraft, such as
the Dornier 228 and the De Havilland Dash-7, with seating for up to 30
passengers could use the airport.
The lengthening of the runway in 1992 opened the airport up to a new family
of regional jets including the 90-seater BAe 146 which has a range of up to
1,000 miles, putting 95 per cent of the European Union as well as
Scandinavia and eastern Europe within reach.
As a result, London has recently been attracting new carriers, and gradually
building its list of short-haul destinations. Last year VLM, the Belgian
airline, began new services from London City to Antwerp and Business Air
launched flights to Frankfurt which connect with Lufthansa's international
network.
Since the start of this year, VLM has become the first airline to take
advantage of domestic deregulation to operate a service between Liverpool
and London City, and Virgin Cityjet has launched a new service from Dublin
to London City which ties in with Contiflug's flights from London City to
Berlin Tempelhof. Meanwhile, Air France operates eight flights a day to
Paris, Sabena runs flights to Brussels, Flexair serves Rotterdam and
Crossair flies to Zurich/Lugano.
With new routes and improved passenger yields has come a renewed confidence
in the concept of city airports. As Mr Charnock notes, 'nothing breeds
traffic like traffic'. He suggests that London City represents a role model
for the future of air travel - a future which he believes lies in central
airport locations, easing airport congestion, reducing waiting time and
offering a stress-free environment.
Since its inception in February last year Mr Charnock has also been chairman
of the Conference of City Airports which initially grouped together London
City, Stockholm Bromma, Berlin Tempelhof, Belfast City and Toronto Island
and has since been expanded to include Florence, Edmonton (Alberta) and Tel
Aviv.
These eight city airports share three common features - they are used
'preferentially for scheduled air carriers and corporate traffic', they
practise 'efficient environmental technology and operational procedures to
the mutual benefit of the community and the airport' and they are 'located
within and serving the city business community'.
The conference members have held four or five meetings so far, each
concentrating on a single issue of collective interest. The next meeting in
Toronto next month will focus on relationships with the airlines.
'I suppose city airports share a threat from environmentalists,' says Mr
Charnock, but he adds: 'We faced up to that threat at public inquiries.' He
insists that subsequent events have proved that the airport 'is not a threat
to the quality of life'. London City Airport, he says, 'gets very few noise
complaints'.
As a result he believes other city airports, particularly those which still
face environmental challenges to their very existence or development, can
learn from London's experience. 'We want to show people that city airports,
properly operated and managed, can be friendly neighbours and an enormous
asset to local businesses.'

The Financial Times


London Page V

940420

