FT943-1030

FT  27 SEP 94 / Reckitt pays Dollars 1.55bn for household group in US:
Colman's mustard brand goes on sale to finance deal


   By RODERICK ORAM, Consumer Industries Editor


Reckitt & Colman is breaking with 185 years of history by putting its
mustard business up for sale to help finance its drive to become one of the
world's leading suppliers of lavatory cleaners and other household products.
It announced yesterday its Dollars 1.55bn (Pounds 980m) purchase of L&F
Household from Eastman Kodak, and offered for sale Colman's mustard and
other UK food and drink businesses, including Robinson's barley water.
Sir Michael Colman, chairman and last family member in the business founded
five generations ago in a Norwich mill, said it was a difficult decision to
sell Colman's.
He believed, however, that the business would be better run by a group with
a strong food strategy now that Reckitt was concentrating on disinfectants,
cleaners, air fresheners and insecticides.
The acquisition of L&F, a big US household product supplier, will be
part-financed by a one-for-eight rights issue at 500p a share to raise
Pounds 230m. It will enhance Reckitt's position in the US with leading
brands such as Lysol, the disinfectant.
Mr Vernon Sankey, chief executive, said: 'We will have the capacity to
compete globally against the majors and more effectively in the US.'
Reckitt will rise from about eighth to the top four in the US and global
household products markets, he added. In its product categories, it will be
on a par with companies such as Colgate-Palmolive, Procter & Gamble and
Unilever.
The City welcomed the purchase for its strategic value, given Reckitt's
second-string status in the US. Its shares closed 43p down at 555p because
of the deeply discounted rights issue price and some doubts over Reckitt's
assertion that the deal would enhance its earnings in its first year.
With the sale of L&F, Kodak has almost completed the Dollars 7bn disposal
programme launched in May by Mr George Fisher, its new chairman. L&F's other
arm - manufacturing do-it-yourself products such as wood finishes - is the
last main asset to go.
To pay for L&F, Reckitt is increasing its debt from about Pounds 300m,
including a convertible capital bond, to Pounds 1.1bn, which will raise
gearing from about 50 per cent to 160 per cent. It emphasised, however, that
its interest costs would be covered more than five times by operating
profits.
Moreover, it expected to bring debt back down to pre-deal levels within
three years, thanks to some Pounds 400m from piecemeal disposal of the UK
food and drink businesses and Pounds 400m of cashflow.
Sir Michael said likely buyers for Colman's and the other UK activities were
companies with a strong European food business but keen to increase their UK
presence.
The price paid for L&F, at about twice its sales and 20 times pre-tax
profits, broadly matched expectations. But until Reckitt has shown it can
exploit the purchase, it is unlikely to change City perceptions that - in
the words of one analyst - it is a 'slightly stodgy, conservative company in
boring products'.
Lex, Page 20
Cleaning up its act, Page 21
London stocks, Page 40

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940927

