FT941-12874

FT  28 JAN 94 / Disquiet over CFA franc fall: The lament within France's
'Africa lobby'


   By DAVID BUCHAN


Many in France's 'Africa lobby' of traders, investors and a few older
politicians are still fuming about the 50 per cent devaluation two weeks ago
of the CFA franc, used by 13 French-speaking countries of west and central
Africa.
Politically, they accuse the French government of betraying its old colonies
and friends in Africa. Economically, they see an end to a good market in
which African ability to purchase French goods was kept artificially high by
a parity unchanged since 1948. Financially, they are reeling from the
implications of having their African assets halved and cash flow severely
disrupted.
'Two categories have been cheated - the African people and French
companies,' says Mr Jean-Pierre Prouteau, head of the Conseil des
Investisseurs Francais en Afrique (CIAN). He has complained to the prime
minister, Mr Edouard Balladur, that the devaluation's damage to the French
private sector will amount to FFr10bn. The Balladur government's failure to
provide speedy help to French companies is, according to Mr Jean-Louis
Vilgrain, head of the French employers' Africa committee, 'deeply damaging
because it gives the impression that there is more devaluation to come'.
The general French reaction seems to be along the lines that 'Africa was
living above our means', that French aid to the CFA countries was doing
little good in economies whose currencies had got so out of line with their
real competitiveness, and that devaluation was, if anything, overdue.
But the speed with which Mr Balladur, within five months of coming to power,
set about altering a parity between the French and CFA francs that had not
changed for nearly 50 years, has disquieted some Gaullists around the party
leader, Mr Jacques Chirac.
Nonetheless, Mr Michel Roussin, who came to the job of aid minister after
serving Mr Chirac and a spell in the French secret service dealing with
francophone Africa, insists that overtly France took no sides in the
devaluation decision which was one for sovereign African states.
But the alternative to devaluing was not rosy. French aid would have been
entirely swallowed in helping CFA states to service their foreign debt
because without devaluation these states would not have got fresh credit
from the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and other donors. The
relationship between CFA members and France would have been increasingly
like 'that of Cuba and the old Soviet Union', says a Roussin aide.
Since the devaluation on January 12, however, Ivory Coast, Senegal, Mali and
Niger have signed 'letters of intent' with the IMF on adjustment programmes,
and other CFA states are due to follow. France, for its part, is increasing
its budgetary aid (as distinct from aid for development projects) to CFA
countries from FFr3.4bn (Pounds 382m) last year to FFr5.2bn this year, while
writing-off of FFr25bn of CFA debt to France will be a budgetary cost to
Paris of FFr1.5bn a year over the next three years.
In addition to setting up a FFr300m 'social fund' for CFA countries, Mr
Roussin is also trying to persuade French pharmaceutical and publishing
companies to reduce the now much-raised cost of imported drugs and school
books to francophone Africa.
But there are other adjustment costs for the French private sector, which
employs 45,000 expatriates in the CFA zone. Devaluation will not affect
petroleum sector employees of Elf-Aquitaine and Total who are paid in
dollars or French francs. In the latter category are French government aid
workers, and Mr Roussin has said they will have to take a pay cut in
solidarity with the Africans who carry only CFA francs.
Speaking for CIAN, whose 100 member companies have more than 1,000
subsidiaries in CFA countries, Mr Prouteau says the devaluation has halved
the value of their FFr10bn local assets, which will force many of them into
making extra provisions on their 1994 balance sheets.
Similarly halved is the value of unpaid CFA commercial debts to French
companies, which Mr Prouteau puts at the equivalent of Dollars 7bn-Dollars
8bn. Increasing CFA central bank restrictions and liquidity shortage in the
local banking systems has much delayed repayment of these debts, which are
now caught by the currency change.
'Many smaller French traders could now go to the wall,' says Mr Prouteau.
But for all his protestations, he is not hopeful of getting much redress
from a French government that insists the devaluation was not its doing.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940128

