FT944-2276

FT  16 DEC 94 / Markets Report: Italian lira firms in spite of political
uncertainty


   By PHILIP GAWITH


The Italian lira yesterday finished firmer on the foreign exchanges in spite
of lingering political uncertainty in the country, writes Philip Gawith.
The currency closed in London at L1,039 per D-Mark from L1,042. It was
buoyed by rallies in the futures and equity markets, where foreign buying
was evident. The lira was also helped by some D-Mark selling, as investors
took profits following the recent rally.
Although Italy appears most likely to provide some sort of currency move in
the Christmas period, markets are showing increasing signs of having shut up
shop for the year.
The only scheduled events now likely to shift foreign exchanges from their
torpor are the US Federal Open Market Committee meeting next Tuesday, and
the Bundesbank council meeting on Thursday.
The dollar had a very subdued day, finishing little changed at DM1.5718,
from DM1.5691, and at Y100.31 from Y100.26. It ended in New York at DM1.5710
and Y100.375.
Sterling also traded in a very narrow range, with the trade weighted index
unchanged all day at 80.3. It closed at DM2.4542 and Dollars 1.5615.
In Europe, Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, governor of the Bank of France, said the
franc had room to appreciate. He added that the Bank was determined to keep
the franc stable during the coming presidential elections. It recently
touched a 12-month low.
Financial markets appear now to be working on the premise that Italian Prime
Minister Silvio Berlusconi and his government will not survive. Not only is
opposition outside the government intensifying, opposition from within the
coalition has picked up.
Political analysts have also interpreted negatively the length - seven hours
 -of Mr Berlusconi's meeting, earlier this week, with magistrates
investigating corruption.
Mr Giorgio Radaelli, international economist at Lehman Brothers, said he
felt fairly sure that Italy would have a new government by early February.
The implications of this scenario for the lira, however, are uncertain.
Mr Radaelli comments: 'I think the lira has pretty much discounted all bad
news. The foreign component of the market particularly would like to see a
new prime minister. There was a clash between Berlusconi and Bossi (a
coalition partner) which made this government very unproductive over the
past three months. The bond market also did not like Berlusconi's populism.'
On the other hand, markets are worried about a possible government hiatus
lasting a few weeks. Mr Radaelli said these concerns had the potential to
take the lira lower, although this could be offset by the passage of the
budget.
While the dollar is trading steadily, the short-term risks appear to be on
the downside. The price component of the Philadelphia index was weaker than
market expectations. It was the latest of a string of figures suggesting
that the Fed might leave interest rates on hold when it meets next week.
The March Eurodollar contract rose to 92.81, from 92.76, reflecting the
market's increasing conviction that rates may not rise until the new year.
Mr Peter Luxton, analyst at MMS, said: 'The dollar is a bit vulnerable to
that. It has been built up on expectations of a Fed tightening.'
The dollar has rallied since late October. It has risen by around 5.5 per
cent against the D-Mark, and 3.5 per cent against the yen. While many
observers have wondered whether this might mean the dollar has bottomed,
dollar bears remain unrepentant.
A Swiss Bank source said the dollar was more likely to see Y80 before Y120.
Contrary to analysts suggesting that the US's current account deficit had
peaked, he said the 1994 figure could get close to the 1987 record, with
1995 perhaps exceeding it.
Also bearish is SG Warburg, which remains 'fundamentally negative about the
dollar . . . our view is that the late 1994 recovery in the dollar
constitutes little more than a pause in its downtrend and renewed
depreciation to around DM1.40 and Y93 lies ahead over the next several
months'.
On a 12 to 18-month view, however, the investment bank believes a cyclical
recovery will take the dollar back to around DM1.65 and Y112.
In its daily operations, the Bank of England cleared a Pounds 1.35bn
shortage at established rates. Overnight money traded in the 4 to 6 1/2 per
cent range.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

941216

