FT943-12634

FT  23 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: The options option - Some advice for
stock market speculators


   By PETER JOHN


Speculators face a potential blow under rolling settlement, the new stock
exchange method of paying for shares (see page III). Under the old system of
account trading - which covered 10 to 15 per cent of stock market deals -
they could buy and sell shares for a quick profit without having to put up
any money or take physical possession of them. Now, each deal will have to
be settled - either in cash or share certificates delivered - 10 business
days later.
What, then, should the speculative investor do? He has two natural choices.
One is to engage in margin trading, borrowing money to buy shares. The other
 -to which Liffe, the London derivatives exchange, hopes investors will turn
 -is traded options. Like margin trading, buying traded options is a geared
investment: you make more money than you would in the underlying shares if
the share price moves in your favour - but you can lose everything if it
moves against you.
A buyer of a traded option has the right, but not the obligation, to buy or
sell particular shares at a fixed price at any time up to a specific expiry
date. Calls (the right to buy shares) and puts (the right to sell them) are
available in 70 different companies, with a range of different prices and
periods available for each.
Traded options relate mainly to FT-SE 100 companies and most are traded only
in blocks representing 1,000 shares. There are also traded options in the
FT-SE index itself. At the moment you can, for instance, buy Glaxo options
which expire this month (July), or in October or next January. The share
price is around 580p; available options give you the right to buy at, for
example, 550p or 600p.
Not unnaturally, you pay for this right. An option lasting until October,
and which gives you the right to buy at 600p, will cost 26 1/2 p - but one
for the same period, giving the right to buy at 550p, will cost 54p. If the
Glaxo price remains unchanged during that period, the 600p option will
expire worthless while the 550p one has intrinsic value of around 30p. But
if the share price slips to, say, 560p, that intrinsic value will be cut to
10p.
The point about traded options, however, is that you can buy and sell the
option itself - you do not need to use it to buy the underlying shares. So,
if the Glaxo price were to move up smartly, the options probably would rise
even more sharply and you could take your profits by selling the options.
Here is a real example of what might have happened. Say, earlier this
summer, an investor noticed that pharmaceuticals had underperformed the
broad London market and that Glaxo had done particularly badly. Indeed, on
June 27, Glaxo shares had underperformed the falling market by 13 percentage
points over the previous six months and stood at 533p.
One response could have been to buy 1,000 shares. In that case, Pounds
5,333, which could be earning interest in the building society, would have
been tied up. Alternatively, a January 500 call - that is, the right to buy
the shares up until January 1995 at 500p each - would have cost 63 1/2 p a
share, or about Pounds 635 (plus costs) for a contract.
The 63 1/2 p option price (known as a premium) is made up of two elements:
intrinsic value and time value. Intrinsic value is the amount by which the
option is below the underlying share price. (Not all options have intrinsic
value). Time value is the difference between the intrinsic value and the
actual cost of the option. Working it out involves a complex mathematical
formula but, essentially, the longer the option's period, the greater the
time value - because the chances of it acquiring intrinsic value in the
interim are greater.
The intrinsic value rises or falls with the value of the shares. But it
exaggerates the movements in the underlying share price. The time value does
not decrease in a straight line in proportion to the time involved. Often,
it remains relatively high until shortly before expiry, especially when the
market swings the way it has done recently. In fact, by Wednesday this week,
Glaxo shares had reached 584p and the price of Glaxo January 500 calls was
96p. An investor could have sold the Pounds 635 contract for Pounds 960.
The two main advantages of calls over shares is that (a) they are a geared
play offering the potential for much greater gains, and (b) the amount that
can be lost is limited to the cost of the option. Puts operate in the same
way as calls except that they allow investors to SELL shares at a fixed
price up until the expiry date. They allow investors to insure or hedge
against falls in the market.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940723

