FT943-13340

FT  20 JUL 94 / Business and the Environment: Root of a problem - A look at
a tree-saving code for digging up pavements


   By ANDREW TAYLOR


As Britain fretted last week about air quality in its towns and cities, a
conference on protecting endangered street trees was taking place in Norwich
under an oppressive heat haze made more unbearable by traffic fumes. The
opportunity to score a point was not lost on environmentalists who described
trees as providing air conditioning for cities - 'and one of the few
realistic counter-measures against traffic pollution.'
Yet many of the trees lining busy streets and suburban avenues in the UK
will be dead within a few years unless cable television companies can be
persuaded to be more careful about the way in which they plan to dig up an
estimated 60,000 miles of pavement.
Gas, electricity, telecommunications and water companies can be just as bad,
but they are less busy digging up streets as cable companies which have just
begun to install their services. Most of the tree roots, which provide vital
oxygen, water and anchorage, lie close to the surface and are severed when
even shallow trenches are dug, says the Arboricultural Association.
The threat is enormous: cable companies, under the 120 licences granted so
far by the Department of Trade and Industry, are expected to have reached
12.5m homes within the next four years. This works out at 288 miles of
trenches a week or a staggering 40 miles a day, according to Chris Baines, a
Wolverhampton-based environmental consultant.
Baines is campaigning to change the law which exempts utilities and cable
companies from local authority planning controls, leaving them virtually
free to dig when and where they like.
He says: 'Companies at the moment only have to satisfy the requirements of
the Highway Authority, which is solely concerned about traffic management.
They are delighted when companies dig up pavements rather than roads.
'Unfortunately, most roots run under pavements where there is more moisture
and oxygen than under concrete roads and where they can find their way into
front gardens. The damage currently being inflicted on street trees is worse
than the ravages of Dutch Elm disease or the great storm in 1987.'
It is not all bad news. Gas, electricity, water and telecommunications
companies will this autumn launch a national code of conduct governing the
way in which streets should be dug up, in a bid to protect the trees.
A draft code has been prepared jointly for the Arboricultural Association
and the National Joint Utilities Group by a working party led by the
environment department which included the Cable Television Association
and local authority tree
officers.
The code is expected to call for small bore tunnelling close to trees.
Trenches will be expected to be hand dug to protect tree roots where
tunnelling is not possible. Repair techniques, such as pushing new pipes
through damaged old ones, means that pavements do not always have to be dug
up.
The cost need not be exorbitant. A study by Midland Cable in Wolverhampton
revealed that the city's 16,000 street trees affected less than 5 per cent
of the trenches that the cable company planned to excavate. The company,
advised by Baines, agreed to train contractors to hand-dig around the roots.
'The company, which previously had not realised the danger, recognised that
it was in its own interests not to damage the local environment and
antagonise potential customers,' says Baines.
Midland Cable has financed a video by the Black Country Urban Forestry Unit
showing how to install and repair services without destroying street trees.
This has been sent to chief executives of every local authority and cable
company in the country. 'It is a beginning,' says Baines, 'but there is much
more to be done if the trees are to be saved. It is too late for some
already.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940720

