FT942-12463

FT  29 APR 94 / Ebb, and ebb, of the tide


   By JOE ROGALY


Here is a confident prediction. You will not see long snaking queues of
voters threading through grass huts and leading to the polling stations of
Britain next Thursday. The typical turnout at elections to the oldest
democracy's local councils is around 40 per cent. So there will be no
last-minute extra print runs of ballot papers, no extension of the poll
until the following day, no stickers showing the beaming face of a
spear-waving late entrant (Richard Branson?). Absent a miraculous
intervention by the Virgin king, next week's contest will pass us by
quietly.
This is hardly surprising. The local councillors due to be elected will sit
in chambers of impotence. Housing, health, education and locally-raised
taxation are among the many areas in which local authorities formerly
reigned, but in which they now lie supine before Whitehall. True, the
overall shares of the local vote won by the national parties may tell us
about the present mood of the electorate. The value of that will be
short-lived. Calculations about how much support has fallen away from the
government may affect the prime minister's chances of staying in office, but
whether Mr John Major stays or goes is of little relevance. What counts is
the evident disintegration of his party.
In short, next week's elections will not answer the central political
question of the day - to wit, will a resurgent economy lead to a surprise
fifth Tory victory in the general election of 1996 or 1997? The question
assumes that economic factors alone determine the outcome of a poll - that
the issue is always, in the words of the Clinton campaign, 'the economy,
stupid'. This might be true, but it is not universally accepted. Two or
three years hence factors other than how good the punters feel may have a
strong influence on the outcome. Voters have begun to notice the clumsiness
of this exhausted government. In office too long, the Conservatives have
forgotten how to avoid mistakes. Fearful of what may lie ahead, they seem
unable to take decisions. When the government does reach a conclusion, it is
nowhere. The faintest zephyr of unpopularity dissolves its stated intent.
All of which is another way of saying that many Tories have lost the will to
govern. The component parts of what in other countries would be a coalition
have forsaken their unity of purpose. They have forgotten that the desire to
win is the cement that binds them. When this proposition is put to
Conservatives, the reply from ministers and backbenchers alike is that all
the new thinking is taking place on the right. It is among Conservatives
that you find political debate. The Liberal Democrats have projected a set
of national policies but these are not seriously debated. Labour is silent.
There is something in this. The importance of political ideas was stressed
by Mr Peter Lilley in his recent Spectator lecture. He pointed out that if
elections were determined just by the state of the economy the Conservatives
would have lost in April 1992. That was the only contest fought at the
bottom of a recession since 1945. There was a sharp rise in living standards
immediately prior to the national votes of 1964 and February 1974, yet the
incumbent Conservatives lost both. The tide of ideas clearly matters.
Mr Lilley has a point, but it is not wholly convincing. It is true that the
Labour party will come a cropper if it continues to present a face of dumb
complacency to the public. In such circumstances it will deserve to fail.
Against that, prudence suggests that Mr John Smith may be believed when he
intimates that he is biding his time. Let us give him the benefit of the
doubt. We shall assume that, when he decides the moment is right, the Labour
leader will produce popular philosophies so wondrous in their beauty, so
marvellous in their intellectual clarity, that the ghosts of previous
thinkers from Plato to Marx will tremble. A synopsis will do. Post it.
Pulses racing, we will have a look at it.
Meanwhile the Conservatives propose to pursue the strategy that they
stumbled upon during the 1980s. Reduce the responsibilities of the state.
Promote competition, choice, and self-reliance. Privatise manufacturing and
service industries. Devolve the day-to-day management of the social services
to appointed boards, with budgetary responsibility. Steadily reduce handouts
of taxpayers' money to the undeserving poor. Mr Lilley, in common with
colleagues on the Conservative right, takes this theme as far backwards as
it will stretch. His faction is cautious-minimalist, anxious to limit the
role of government, but restrained by a sense of what is politically
possible.
Although Labour lacks the imagination to say so, that is what is wrong with
the Tory strategy. The new job-seeker's allowance is close to the American
notion of workfare. Expecting those on the dole to take work was inherent in
the Beveridge report. Labour could offer more radical reform of unemployment
benefit than the Tories, simply by going back to Beveridge. There are other
opportunities. The new trust hospitals, budget-holding practices and
opted-out schools, Mr Lilley reminds us, are based on the principle of the
money following the customer. This is not working. In health, patients are
chasing the money. There is no clamour for grant-maintained schools.
These new marketised institutions are expected to provide 'value for money'.
This is a useful Thatcherite concept, but insensitively applied it destroys
trust and distorts professional standards. The case is argued by Mr Micheal
Power, in The Audit Explosion, a pamphlet available from Demos (9 Bridewell
Place, London EC4V 6AP). Mr Power demonstrates that audit-mania plus
performance-related pay can reduce the quality of public services. Here too
Labour has an opening. Put the money in the purchasers' hands, or give them
vouchers. Armed with health vouchers NHS patients would have the status of
frequenters of Harley Street. Distribute education vouchers to parents, and
all schools will compete on quality of education. As to democratic control,
Labour has the edge. Its likely proposals for local and regional elected
authorities cannot be matched by government-averse Conservatives.
Yet no major British party promises salvation today. Join a queue to vote
for one of them? I'd sooner vote Inkatha.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940429

