FT944-14618

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (8): Profit-hunters
stalk the Celtic tiger - Ireland has returned 17 per cent over the past
year, as overseas investors take a growing stake in the Dublin market. And
this was before any possible peace dividend in the north


   By DOMINICK COYLE


Against a poor performance in Europe in the third quarter, the Irish market
 -the second oldest in the world after London - turned in an impressive
total return of more than 10 per cent for sterling-based investors. The
quarter also saw the Provisional IRA's ceasefire in Northern Ireland,
raising the tantalising question as to whether there could be a peace
dividend for investors in Ireland.
The Dublin stock exchange - still part of the London market until next
April, when there will be a legal decoupling - has turned in a more than 5
per cent gain in sterling terms this year, against a decline in London of
almost 11 per cent. Over a full year to end-September, Ireland has advanced
by 17 per cent, while London just about stood still.
Many non-Irish investors have caught the bandwagon. Overseas investors are
now estimated to hold some 40 per cent of the Dublin market, against only 10
per cent four years ago. Over the same period, some Irish funds have
inevitably lost out as they have reduced their domestic exposure following
the lifting of Irish exchange control.
The Irish switch to overseas markets initially brought about a sharp decline
in Dublin, but in the 15 months beginning October 1992 the market there rose
by more than 90 per cent, albeit aided by a currency devaluation following
the British exit from the ERM - of which Ireland remains a member. In the
current calendar year, Ireland joins Italy and three of the four
Scandinavian countries as the only gainers for sterling-based investors in
the FT-Actuaries European Index.
This outperformance, combined with encouraging projections for the Irish
economy, has prompted Morgan Stanley to focus on what the US investment bank
calls the 'Celtic tiger'. Dublin-based brokers report a steady flow of
American (and German) funds into their market, although its capacity to
absorb major flows is clearly limited.
There are just over 60 shares listed on the Irish market, where daily
turnover averages Pounds 25m. But the big players dominate, with roughly
half of the market's capitalisation represented by four companies - the two
big Irish banks (Allied Irish and Bank of Ireland); the global
paper/packaging operator, Smurfit; and Cement Roadstone Holdings. All four
also have listings in London, as do a number of other major Irish companies.
The Dublin market, which operates on a matched bargain basis, rather than
the market-making system in London, does have liquidity problems, especially
for shares in smaller companies. It operates currently within the same
regulatory environment as London, but there has been the occasional scam in
the smaller-company sector. The market will have an interesting new player
next week when the country's largest domestic mortgage provider, the Irish
Permanent, follows the Abbey National's demutualisation route and gets a
listing in both London and Dublin. Meanwhile, the National Westminster Bank
is trying to buy the state-owned TSB Bank and merge it with its Ulster Bank
subsidiary.
Competition for the TSB is coming from the National Australia Bank, which
already controls the small but aggressive National Irish Bank. Neither
bidder has missed the fact that, in the hitherto cosy world of Irish
banking, the return on equity is believed to be close to double the
mainstream European average.
Dublin stockbroker Goodbody now sees Ireland as a serious buy, pointing to
the 'excellent' long-term growth outlook for the Irish economy. Growth to
the end of the decade is put at an annual average of 5 per cent. On the
fiscal front, government borrowing is expected to average less than 1 per
cent of GDP over the next six years; while the debt-to-GDP ratio, says
Goodbody, is expected to fall to 58 per cent, or almost half the level as
recently as 1987. Corporate earnings are forecast to rise 15-20 per cent
annually.
All this is before any peace dividend that might arise from a permanent
ceasefire in the north.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

941021

