FT942-16120

FT  12 APR 94 / Forte and Accor fight for Meridien


   By JOHN RIDDING and MICHAEL SKAPINKER


   PARIS, LONDON


Forte, the UK hotels group, and Accor, the French travel group, are vying
for control of the Meridien Hotels chain, owned by Air France, the
loss-making state-owned airline.
Kempinksi, the German group, has also expressed interest in acquiring the
luxury hotels business.
The offer period for bids for the French hotel group closed last night and a
decision is expected to be announced following an Air France board meeting
on April 28. Air France, which holds a 57 per cent stake in the luxury
Meridien chain, is seeking to sell all or part of its holding in the hotel
operation as part of a restructuring package. The airline, which lost an
estimated FFr7.5bn (Pounds 870m) last year, has debts of about FFr38bn.
Officials at Air France and the prospective purchasers declined to comment
on the terms of their offers. But Forte is thought to have made the highest
bid with an offer that values Meridien at about FFr1.8bn. As it is not yet
clear what percentage of Meridien will be sold, the eventual cost of a
successful Forte bid could be considerably less.
Forte earlier this year failed in its attempt to gain control of Ciga, the
Italian luxury hotel group. ITT Sheraton, of the US, topped Forte's Pounds
270m bid for Ciga with an offer of L900bn (Pounds 376m).
Accor, which is seeking to merge its luxury Sofitel chain with Meridien's 58
hotels, is thought to have made a cash offer for 40 per cent of the group,
which values the whole of Meridien at about FFr1.4bn. Industry analysts in
Paris said that Accor may have to raise new capital to finance such a deal.
Accor's proposal is also thought to emphasise the benefits to Air France
that could flow from wider ticket distribution through its travel agency
chain, and from the combination of Accor's business travel activities with
those of Carlson, of the US.
Kempinksi, the third possible bidder, has been linked with Meridien before.
In 1992, Lufthansa, the German airline, which then held a 42.6 per cent
stake in Kempinksi, called off plans to merge the chain with Meridien.
Lufthansa subsequently sold part of its stake in Kempinksi to Advanta
management, a German investment group.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940412

