FT942-12292

FT  30 APR 94 / Daimler mixes business and diplomacy: Arafat visits German
conglomerate


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


When Mr Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation,
lands in Stuttgart on Monday, his hosts will no doubt provide him with the
very latest in protection. They are well-equipped to do so.
He is not coming to see the German government, nor any of his normal
counterparts in the political process, but that other German empire -
Daimler-Benz, manufacturer of the four-tonne armour-plated limousine.
Yet this is not, say Daimler's senior officials, an exercise in salesmanship
or self-promotion. Germany's largest industrial conglomerate claims it is
throwing its commercial weight into the Middle East peace process, in what
it says is an example of business diplomacy.
Mr Arafat will be shown a splendid display of all the main products of the
Stuttgart-based empire, from Mercedes limousines to Unimog trucks, buses,
Airbus and Fokker aircraft, helicopters, even the engine unit of an ICE
high-speed train, all set out in the piazza of the company headquarters. He
will visit the Mercedes plant at Turkheim, and the company museum, designed
to appeal to his background as an engineer.
But the company says the real purpose, promoted by Mr Edzard Reuter,
Daimler's chief executive, is to demonstrate the support of a business
empire for the political negotiations between Israel and the PLO.
The unlikely initiative has official blessing from Chancellor Helmut Kohl
and Mr Klaus Kinkel, his foreign minister, as well as Israel.
In talks in 1992 with both Mr Yitzhak Rabin and Mr Shimon Peres, Mr Reuter
spelt out his belief that a small, highly industrialised state like Israel,
would only have good economic prospects if its neighbours could be drawn
into a common market. He urged an intiative to promote cross-border
co-operation in the Middle East.
Now Daimler-Benz intends to get involved with projects supporting
development of the Palestinian territories, although nobody is talking of
anything quite so extravagant as new car or bus plants.
What Mr Reuter is proposing is help with analysing the infrastructure
problems, designing water supplies and transportation links, and assistance
with the education and training of the Palestinian workforce. What
Daimler-Benz is not expecting, is a hugely profitable return for its
immediate involvement.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940430

