FT944-5956

FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Civil service cuts 'to continue'


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


Mr Jonathan Aitken, chief secretary to the Treasury, last night forecast
further cuts in the size of the civil service as the constraints on public
expenditure were maintained.
He told the Commons, on the second day of the Budget debate, that the number
of civil servants had fallen by 10,000 since April. The civil service was
now smaller than at any time since Neville Chamberlain was prime minister in
1939, and the trend was set to continue, he added.
Mr Aitken attacked Labour leaders for advocating measures which, in sharp
contrast to government policy, would increase the size of the public sector
borrowing requirement.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, denounced the Budget as unfair, and
claimed it had failed to unite the nation and did nothing for its long-term
future.
To Labour cheers, he said the government had all the hallmarks of a business
on its last legs.
He likened the cabinet to the board of a company which had run out of credit
and ceased to operate as a viable entity. He said: 'This is a government in
need of liquidation and being wound up.'
Mr Aitken dismissed Mr Brown's attack as a 'pantomime performance' and
scoffed at his renewed call for a windfall tax on the profits of the
privatised utilities.
He said it would be a tax on earnings which certain utility companies -
already paying Pounds 2bn a year in corporation tax - paid out as dividends
to shareholders.
These included pension funds, which were paying them out as taxed income to
occupational pensioners.
Mr Aitken maintained that in effect Labour's windfall tax would be a new
impost on investment, an increase in corporation tax and a form of double
taxation on pensioners and shareholders.
He insisted that the main element in the Budget was the commitment to sound
public finances - a vital factor in maintaining Britain's standing in
international markets.
Mr Aitken said this was 'very important with regard to judgment on interest
rates and currency rates'.
Mr Aitken described it as a 'courageous, cautious and correct Budget'.
He questioned whether it was possible for government action to create the
so-called 'feelgood factor' which was supposed to be lacking among large
sections of the population.
There had been a revolution of change and public attitudes had yet to become
accustomed to low inflation and the shift in expenditure. Mr Aitken
acknowledged that it was particularly difficult to adjust to the loss of the
expectation of life-long employment in one job. He said: 'I believe that,
sooner or later, the electorate will come to see that the chancellor's
Budget does respond to the anxieties and insecurity factors I have
mentioned.'
Anxiety among Tory MPs about the government's refusal to reconsider
increasing value added tax on domestic fuel from 8 per cent to 17 1/2 per
cent from next April was underlined by Sir Andrew Bowden, MP for Brighton
Kemptown, and Mr Paul Marland, MP for Gloucestershire West.
Mr David Heathcoat Amory, paymaster general, sought to allay fears about the
adequacy of the compensation package to be provided for pensioners.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

941201

