FT944-14613

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (14): Gilts offer
hope among Europe's high yielders - Bonds / Calling the end of the market's
current bear run is proving more difficult than expected


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


The negative sentiment which has overhung the international bond markets for
most of the year shows little sign of subsiding in the final quarter. In
fact, the inflationary pressures which have dogged the market throughout the
year are if anything intensifying as Europe's economies follow the US out of
recession.
In general, economists appear to have underestimated the strength of the
world economy, and it now seems likely that monetary policy will have to be
tightened more swiftly than expected in many countries. Already, short-term
rates have been hiked in the US, UK, Australia and Sweden, while long-term
rates have shot up around the world.
International bond yields have risen as a result of several factors,
including the growth in inflationary expectations in most markets, which may
itself be linked to the sharp rise in commodity prices this year. In
addition, real yields (yields after inflationary expectactions have been
discounted) also appear to have increased. The poor performance of
index-linked markets in the UK, Canada, Australia and Denmark points to a
clear rise in real yields.
This rise in real yields was sparked not only by the increase in US
short-term rates, which started in February, but also by concern about the
supply of government borrowing, especially in Europe. The markets had
managed to shrug off funding pressures in 1993, partly helped by large net
purchases by US-based investors, including hedge funds; but when sentiment
turned sour, supply became a crucial concern.
'At the start of this year, these purchases from the US went into reverse,'
according to analysts at Yamaichi International. 'Not only did yields have
to adjust to a level which would encourage European investors to hold a
larger portfolio of bonds, but they also had to take into account the
possibility that future net flows of bonds would not be purchased by
dollar-based investors either.'
Further, risk premia have risen in most major bond markets since the start
of the year as the general level of nervousness has caused investors to
demand a higher level of nominal yields. Currency instability and inceased
volatility in bond markets have contributed to a vicious circle of
uncertainty and market gyrations.
Calling the end of the market's current bear run is proving more difficult
than had been anticipated: one lesson which has had to be learnt this year
is that economic fundamentals are not the sole determining factor of market
performance. Nevertheless, some analysts still believe that negative
expectations have been overdone.
In particular, despite the pick-up in economic growth this year, relatively
wide output gaps remain in most economies, and these are likely to hold back
inflationary growth. This means that inflationary expectations may have been
exaggerated. Further, bond market volatility has already subsided from the
highs seen earlier in the year, and this could encourage risk premia to fall
in time.
According to Yamaichi, 'the problems that beset bond markets earlier this
year are only being solved slowly, and fund managers' scars will be slow to
heal. But the fundamentals are getting better (at least outside of the US)
and, if such things matter, that should now be tending to pull yields
lower.'
Perhaps the greatest hurdle to any potential recovery is the US Treasury
market, where further rate hikes are expected. So far this year, the US
market has been a pervasive influence on the rest of the world's bond
markets, many of which have actually underperformed the US.
'European markets have been bravely trying to decouple but, with the
honourable (and recent) exception of the gilts market, have singularly
failed to do so,' says Mr Mark Cliffe, chief international economist at
Midland Global Markets.
The gilts market, one of the weakest for most of this year, is now returning
to favour. Mr Adam Chester, international bond strategist at Yamaichi, cites
subdued inflation and the government's well-advanced funding programmes as
reasons for a potential recovery in the market, despite the possibility of
further short-term rate hikes.
The German market is also expected to remain a relatively safe haven, with
some analysts still expecting the German authorities to cut rates further -
or at least not to start raising rates until well into next year.
The prospects for Europe's high-yielding markets remain shaky, with Italy in
particular unsettled not only by current political uncertainty but also by
the lack of confidence among international investors, many of whom have been
badly burnt this year.
Overall, the prospects for a healthy and prolonged recovery in bond prices
remain poor. According to NatWest Markets: 'The fear of last quarter - that
the global cyclical upswing is igniting inflationary pressures - has
intensified, as highlighted by the continuous weakness of bond markets. Yet
again economic growth is proving more robust than we thought, although, if
anything, inflation is proving a little more subdued.' Given that even the
most optimistic of commentators are hoping for only a modest recovery in
bond market performance, a cautious stance by investors is likely to
persist.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

941021

