FT942-12368

FT  29 APR 94 / International Capital Markets: VSNL pricing puts bankers and
investors at odds


   By SARA WEBB


By Indian standards, the international equity offering from Videsh Sanchar
Nigam (VSNL), India's international telecommunications group, is a
juggernaut.
VSNL hopes to raise up to Dollars 1bn through the deal, which has been
road-showing in Asia, Europe and the US. However, investment bankers are
haggling with investors over the actual pricing of the deal, due on Tuesday.
In general, it is in investors' interests to talk down the company's value,
while lead managers, who may have won the mandate by suggesting a price at
the higher end of the range, tend to argue in favour of as high a price as
possible.
In the case of VSNL, joint global co-ordinators Salomon Brothers and
Kleinwort Benson have indicated a price of between Rs1,400 and R1,600 per
share, where each global depositary receipt represents one half of a share.
With the Indian stock market trading at relatively-stable levels after its
February peak, it seems likely the VSNL issue will be priced towards the
lower end of the indicated range, based on a 'discounted cashflow' model.
The stock is already traded on the Bombay exchange. However, there is only a
small free-float of shares, corresponding to about 6 per cent (the
government owns 85 per cent), and the price is easily manipulated.
Bankers say the quoted share price has escalated from Rs150 last summer to a
high of Rs1,700 in January, buoyed by the prospect of the international
offering. However, the price has moved down quite sharply recently, from
Rs1,700 in February to Rs1,250 at the end of March.
Mr Roger Bade, emerging market fund manager at Commercial Union, says: 'I
haven't got a problem with the pricing: it's the Indian market that is a
problem.' He says the recent clampdown on domestic speculative trading, and
the glut of international equity offerings, have made the market background
tricky.
'Even if the price is lower (than Rs1,400), I'm not sure it will go well or
jump to a premium because the background sentiment is so poor,' he says.
Like many other fund managers, Mr Bade says 'Rs1,400 to Rs1,600 is too high.
I would tend to look at p/e ratios, rather than the cashflow analysis, and
on that basis it looks expensive'.
'I would be looking at a price of Rs1,000 as fair value,' said one US
analyst. 'Taking the average of the research notes, I think it is aggressive
pricing even for a dramatic growth stock.'
Mr Jim McAlear, vice-president of the Columbia International Stock Fund, a
US-based mutual fund, said: 'VSNL is an important stock; it fills a role as
a proxy for the Indian market, but I have a problem putting a price on it.
The problem is the growth rate will be very strong in the medium term, but I
think it is overpriced based on short-term growth prospects.'
While many fund managers regard VSNL as an interesting company with strong
growth potential, and like its 10-year monopoly on international telephone
traffic, they see the pricing as too optimistic.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940429

