FT943-13105

FT  21 JUL 94 / 'Semi-detached' called back home: A look at an ultimatum to
civil servants in private industry


   By DAVID BUCHAN


The French government is quietly rolling back the frontier of state
involvement in the private sector. It is giving senior civil servants in
privatised companies six months to rejoin the civil service or leave it
definitively.
The ultimatum yesterday by Mr Andre Rossinot, the civil service minister,
means that top flight civil servants, or members of the so-called grands
corps of state financial inspectors, auditors and lawyers, will no longer be
able to choose to work for years on 'detachment' in newly private companies
while retaining the option to return to the civil service without missing
anything in pay or rank.
In contrast to other countries which draw their elite from universities,
France has traditionally trained its elite in administrative schools.
Typical is the Ecole Nationale d'Administration (ENA) whose top graduates
pass into the grands corps of the Inspectorat des Finances, the Cour des
Comptes (the public audit body) and the Conseil d'Etat (which acts as the
government's adviser on legislation and top administrative tribunal).
After four years' service in these grands corps, these bureaucrats can seek
'detachment' to do whatever they want, but with an indefinite return ticket.
If for instance, Mr Edouard Balladur, the prime minister, should decide to
give up politics, he can always return to the Conseil d'Etat, as Mr Jacques
Attali did last year when he resigned as head of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development.
'By removing this safety net for fonctionnaires in privatised companies,'
said an aide to Mr Rossinot yesterday, 'we may be moving towards a more
Anglo-Saxon system, perhaps with golden parachutes' - large pay-offs to
tempt senior civil servants into business.
Mr Rossinot has given civil servants working for companies already
privatised until the end of the year to make their choice, though those of
10 years' or more standing in the civil service can remain 'at the
disposition' of the state with fewer privileges for a further six years.
This will affect those at Rhone Poulenc, the chemicals group, Banque
Nationale de Paris, and the UAP insurance group - all now in the private
sector.
Mr Rossinot's circular is moot in the case of the privatised oil group
Elf-Aquitaine, whose president, Mr Philippe Jaffre, has already resigned as
an inspecteur des finances and given his 60 colleagues in the same position
until May 30 to make their choice.
All but 10 have resigned from the civil service. Mr Jaffre argued it was
unfair for many top Elf directors not to share the same career risks as the
rest of the company's staff.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940721

