FT941-12935

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (5): Swings, roundabouts for sale - Denmark's
Kompan International is the world's biggest supplier of playground
equipment. Its 10 year-old subsidiary in Canada has captured 15-20 per cent
of the local market / Exporter profile / Kompan Canada


   By BERNARD SIMON


In the 10 years since Denmark's Kompan International started doing business
in Canada, it has garnered 15-20 per cent of the country's market for
children's playground equipment.
That is no mean achievement in a widely-dispersed, fragmented and highly
competitive market where many buyers, especially in the public sector, tend
to view foreign suppliers with suspicion.
Kompan, whose annual sales in Canada now exceed CDollars 4m, has gained a
reputation as a supplier of top-quality and innovative - though high-priced
 -playground apparatus. 'They've made phenomenal inroads,' says Mr Rolf
Huber, president of Sportbau Canada, which surfaces playgrounds for Kompan
and its competitors.
Kompan is the world's biggest maker of playground equipment. The Danish
parent has broadened its base in recent years by buying Speelhout, a Dutch
company which specialises in outdoor 'furniture' for young teens, and
BigToys Playstructures, a US-based manufacturer. Kompan Canada acquired a
BigToys agent (including a components factory) in British Columbia late last
year.
Mr Troels Engholm, Kompan Canada's general manager, says that a key to
success has been 'to stay closely in tune with local markets'. Although
Kompan has a total staff of only 25 in Canada, they are scattered in seven
sales offices throughout the country. With the addition of four agents, that
gives it a presence in each of Canada's 10 provinces.
Mr Engholm says that different regions require different marketing
strategies. French-speaking Quebec, for instance, has proved to be more
receptive to a foreign-made product. Similarly, day-care facilities are not
as popular or sophisticated on the west coast as in the industrial heartland
of Ontario and Quebec. Most of Kompan's business in British Columbia is for
municipal playgrounds.
The separatist movement in Quebec helped persuade Kompan to broaden its
presence in English Canada through the purchase of BigToys, based in a
suburb of Vancouver. The head office is in Gatineau, Quebec, on the
outskirts of Ottawa. But Mr Engholm says this location has created the
impression among customers elsewhere that Kompan's first loyalty is to
Quebec. 'It's important to make people understand that we're equally
committed throughout the country,' he says.
The Danish company has helped pioneer a transformation in children's
playgrounds over the past decade. Modern playgrounds are designed with a
more sociable dimension than their predecessors, shifting the emphasis from
children's physical prowess to social interaction.
The trend now is to divide play areas into separate zones, each with its own
cluster of relatively small, colourful structures, designed to be as
unintimidating as possible. Mr Engholm says the entire group has made 'a
relentless effort' to educate municipalities and child-care centres on the
need for higher-quality equipment for young children, aged eight and under.
Many of its sales representatives have a background in childhood education,
including one in British Columbia with a master's degree in child
psychology.
Kompan's product line includes a colourful den and castle for toddlers,
unusually small play-houses, and mini-seesaws. It has persuaded many (though
by no means all) municipalities and child-care centres to move away from
traditionally steel play equipment to wood.
Kompan's high prices deter some buyers, especially those which put their
business out to tender. Furthermore, some North American cities still prefer
installing vandal- and fire-proof steel structures rather than Kompan's wood
products.
Mr Kim Mullin, an engineering assistant at the Vancouver Park Board, has
high praise for Kompan's quality, calling some of its apparatus 'the
Cadillac' of playground equipment. But Vancouver has bought very little from
the Danish company. 'Often the Canadian and US product comes in a little
cheaper,' Mr Mullin says.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940127

