FT943-971

FT  27 SEP 94 / Labour supergun charge rejected


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


The Department of Trade and Industry has rejected Labour claims that a
director of Astra Holdings, the collapsed munitions company involved in the
Iraqi supergun affair, was spared disqualification because of
security-service links.
Mr Neil Hamilton, corporate affairs minister, said the DTI's decision not to
seek the disqualification of Mr Stephan Kock was 'derived exclusively' from
an inspectors' report into Astra's dealings.
Mr Michael Meacher, shadow open government minister, said last month in a
letter to Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, that the DTI's
decision to seek disqualification of six Astra directors was 'a significant
piece of the cover-up over arms to Iraq'.
Mr Meacher said it was 'obvious' that Mr Stephan Kock, a seventh Astra
director, had been excluded from disqualification proceedings because of his
publicly admitted security-service links.
Mr Hamilton said in a letter to Mr Meacher that Mr Kock 'did not entirely
escape criticism' by the inspectors. But the report did not contain
sufficient grounds to justify disqualification proceedings.
He said: 'No extraneous consideration, whether of the sort you suggest, or
any other, played a part in these decisions.'
Mr Meacher said the letter failed to answer his claim that the proposed
disqualifications were 'a shabby and sordid political vendetta' designed to
intimidate the six Astra directors because of their willingness to reveal
details of the arms trade with Iraq.
The DTI launched disqualification proceedings in August, nearly a year after
the inspectors' report, which focused on Astra's Pounds 22m acquisition in
1989 of PRB, a Belgian company.
Astra, which is in receivership, became involved in the supergun affair
after discovering that PRB had a contract to supply propellant. Customs
officers blocked the project by seizing giant steel tubes in 1990.
The DTI report criticised the directors for continuing with the PRB
acquisition in spite of warnings from advisers about PRB's financial
condition. They were also criticised for misleading shareholders about
Astra's financial situation.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940927

