FT942-15756

FT  14 APR 94 / Commission takes Greece to court over Macedonia


   By GILLIAN TETT


   BRUSSELS


The European Commission is to take Greece, current holder of the EU
presidency, to court to force it to lift its blockade of Macedonia.
But with Greece indicating that it will not back down, in spite of weeks of
diplomatic pressure, the real question now is how much authority the
European Court will be able to wield if Greece continues playing by
different political rules.
The Commission has applied to the European court for two separate legal
actions - the first, a full judgment about whether Greece's action infringes
the Maastricht treaty, is expected to take 18 months; the second, an interim
injunction to order Greece to lift the blockade, could be forthcoming in
three weeks.
Although the Commission has often taken member states to court for an
infringement of Community law, it has has rarely attempted an injunction of
this kind. And if, as seems likely, the court rules in the Commission's
favour, it is not clear what course the court could follow if Greece ignores
the injunction.
In theory, the Maastricht treaty gives the court power to fine a member
state for flouting a court ruling. In practice, legal experts point out this
power has never been used and say it remains unclear what its practical
scope would be.
In public, Commission officials say they hope that diplomatic pressure will
prevent a crisis. Mr Kiro Gligorov, the Macedonian president, said this week
he was willing to reopen negotiations on the sensitive subject of
Macedonia's flag and constitution and some diplomats hope the two sides may
be moving closer to a compromise. Meanwhile, Mr Christos Zaharakius,
secretary general of Greece's foreign ministry is due to meet Mr Cyrus
Vance, the United Nations envoy today.
Diplomats admit that the instability of Balkan politics leaves them doubtful
of any solution before the court ruling. As one said yesterday: 'Greece has
good domestic political reasons for wanting the whole thing to drag on for
as long as it can .. For the Commission, though, this means the
embarrassment will grow.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940414

