FT941-4110

FT  12 MAR 94 / World Stock Markets: Madrid to broaden its base with new
listings - Brokers see a profitable 1994


   By DAVID WHITE


You might excuse Spaniards for thinking that their stock markets were out of
touch with the real world.
The news has been of record unemployment, almost 24 per cent according to
the last quarterly survey and expected to rise; inflation edging up to 5 per
cent; a worrying growth in the public sector deficit; and a crisis in one of
the traditional pillars of the banking system. All this, apparently, has had
little impact on equity trends.
Last year, the Spanish economy shrank by 1 per cent, its worst performance
for 30 years, but stocks on the Madrid market increased in value by 50.7 per
cent, beating the main world markets including Frankfurt. In January, in the
aftermath of the Spanish authorities' dramatic intervention in Banco Espanol
de Credito (Banesto), the market rallied with an 11 per cent rise. The
December 1985-based general index scored an all-time high of 358.57.
Since then it has fallen back, but the level of about 335 around which it
has fluctuated in the past few days is still higher than the index attained
in 1993.
The market started last year, however, at a point analysts consider to have
been unrealistically low, with high interest rates detracting from the
relative attractiveness of equity investments. Recent increases in stock
prices have been closely linked to expectations of lower interest levels.
Bond rates, after an erratic period, have come down. And last week the Bank
of Spain unexpectedly cut its official benchmark interest rate by a full
half-point to 8 per cent.
Madrid's Bolsa is also strongly influenced by trends in other European
markets, especially Paris and Frankfurt. It is one of the few markets which
did not touch new highs in the preceding months. Until January, the record
for the general index had stood for over four years at 328.55.
In an atmosphere of cautious optimism about economic improvement, at least
in terms of a lower annual inflation rate later in the year and a
restoration of modest economic growth, some brokers forecast that the market
could brush the 400 level by the end of this year. Mr Paul Farrow of Ahorro
Corporacion predicts 380, although he believes that it could fall back in
the interim to about 320. He expects some Pta900bn (Dollars 6.6bn) of new
money to flow into the market through the growth of equity unit trusts.
Currently 2 per cent or less of Spanish mutual fund investments are in
equities, but Mr Farrow believes that this will expand to 8 per cent in 1994
because of the fall in interest rates.
Another leading broker, FG Inversiones Bursatiles, is more conservative,
forecasting about 365 for the year-end. But Mrs Monica Morales of Societe
Generale Valores says: 'The received wisdom is that it will go up by about
20 per cent.'
Subscriptions close today for the first big share offering of the year, in
which 15 per cent of the Continente supermarket group, controlled by
Promodes, is being brought to the market, where it will immediately join the
Ibex-35 group of blue-chip stocks. In the footsteps of the Carrefour
subsidiary, Pryca, it is the first significant entry by a private-sector
company for more than two years.
A series of other placings will follow. These include some Dollars 104m
worth of shares in the Aumar motorway company currently held by Banco
Central Hispano and around Dollars 300m worth in the privately-controlled
FCC construction concern - the latter the largest-ever operation of its kind
in the private sector.
A 10 per cent slice of Endesa, the state-controlled electricity generator,
is due to be placed by early June, worth some Dollars 1.4bn. Part of this
stake may, however, go to a European 'strategic partner'. A further 20 per
cent of Repsol, the partly-privatised oil group, is expected to be offered
for sale in the second half.
Cortefiel, a family-controlled retailer, is thought likely to come on to the
market in the coming months. The government is also expected to sell off its
24 per cent direct holding in Telefonica Internacional, the
foreign-operation subsidiary of Telefonica, the state-majority
telecommunications group.
The market remains a narrow one, however, with the vast bulk of trading
concentrated in 25 to 30 large companies, principally banks and utilities.
Banks have been particularly active in the wake of the crisis at Banesto,
for which a rescue package is being put together under the auspices of the
Bank of Spain. Another of Spain's leading institutions in the sector,
Central Hispano, has recently come under selling pressure after Moody's
announced that it was reviewing its ratings for the bank's certificates of
deposit.
However, Banesto, which faces a shareholders' meeting two weeks from today
to approve the rescue plan, is regarded as an isolated case. Its misfortunes
appear to have done little damage to market confidence.
The difficulties at the bank were widely known about by the time the crisis
came to a head in late December, and most foreign institutional investors
were already giving the stock a wide berth. 'If something similar were to
happen to another bank it would be very serious,' says one analyst. But as
long as it goes no further than Banesto, the market has shown itself able to
take the crisis in its stride.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940312

