FT941-12930

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (10): Oil states hit a sticky patch - The credit
standing of Iran and a number of other oil producers is being undermined by
low oil prices


   By JON MARKS


The slump in oil prices to a five-year low is bad news for companies doing
business with hydrocarbons producing countries. These include some markets
where the needs of growing populations and ambitious development programmes
have attracted substantial financing, but where ongoing or potential
payments problems are now driving some exporters away.
Oil price worries have compounded the concerns of exporters and creditors
about IRAN, whose backlog of letter of credit (l/c) payments continues to
mount. The weak oil market also bodes ill for NIGERIA'S mounting trade debt
arrears, as do recent reversals of market-based reforms which have upset the
International Monetary Fund and other lenders.
Low prices have cut ALGERIA'S projected oil and gas income for 1993 by an
officially-estimated Dollars 1.5bn, raising new doubts about the country's
ability to meet payments, despite Algiers' strenuous efforts to do so and
thus avoid a multilateral rescheduling. Even wealthy GULF STATES have seen
their credit ratings reduced. European export credit agencies (ECAs)
generally report tightening terms for major producers, such as SAUDI ARABIA
and KUWAIT.
IRAN has now arranged bilateral refinancings of its trade debt with France,
Germany and Japanese trading houses, but its payments problems look set to
drag on into 1994-95 with arrears now estimated by leading credit insurers
at Dollars 7bn on debts of around Dollars 20bn.
Delays of around one year are widely reported by banks and are affecting an
ever wider range of paper, including l/cs carrying central bank guarantees.
In recent negotiations, Tehran has asked for a two-year rescheduling of
bilateral debt repayments, compared with one-year in the first accords, with
French and German banks. It rejects a multilateral Paris Club rescheduling.
The situation, meanwhile is complex and experience is mixed: some arrears,
such as those insured by Japan, have been reduced recently.
While many exporters are losing heart over mounting arrears and ECAs
including Hermes of Germany have started paying indemnities, several
companies with regular export contracts report their payments remain on
time. However, they are concerned about their clients' ability to finance
future sales.
ALGERIA continues to make prompt payments on its Dollars 26bn external debt,
according to bankers in Paris, London and Tokyo. This is despite repayments
exceeding Dollars 9bn in 1993 and bankers' estimates of a prospective debt
service ratio of 83-85 per cent. According to a leading French bank, there
are, unusually, no arrears - indeed, payments have been brought up to date
in recent months.
Despite its good payments record, Algeria is being starved of credit as
banks and ECAs pull back. In the early 1990s the country accounted for an
estimated Dollars 3bn in annual l/c transactions alone and drew in much more
still from supplier credits. Many ECAs, like the UK's Export Credits
Guarantee Department (ECGD), have effectively suspended cover, or - like
major creditors such as Coface of France and SACE of Italy - have reduced
the amounts available.
Short-term credit is now the rule, with country limits generally
constrained. L/c confirmation is problematic, with leading French, Italian
and Belgian banks offering the service only in selected cases. In London,
UBAF Bank offers confirmation for deals of up to 360 days.
NIGERIAN external debt arrears have reached Dollars 6bn and are set to
continue to rise while oil prices stay low. This is severely constraining
ECA cover. Nigeria has long been difficult for exporters, with problems
including the presence of fraudulent l/cs, regularly offered to the market.
Despite these drawbacks, flows of short-term trade finance - usually on
restricted confirmed irrevocable l/c (CILC) terms - have been maintained to
established clients.
Maturities are short, with 180-day sight drafts and CILC business the norm,
Standard Chartered reports. Cash cover is usually required before
confirmation. Nigeria is on the list of UK national interest markets, which
are eligible for commercial short-term insurance (usually provided on CILC
terms) reinsured by the state. Confirmation is best through leading banks,
including Union Bank, United Bank for Africa, First Bank of Nigeria, in
which the UK-based Standard Chartered Bank has a stake, and Nigeria
International Bank.
ANGOLA'S interminable civil war has undermined the south-west African oil
producer's credit rating, but it is still considered a UK national interest
market for CILC reinsurance. Other national ECAs are active in oil projects,
as are Swiss and some other banks whose operations are structured as oil
major risk (rather than country risk) with payments secured against export
receivables paid into escrow accounts. Securing other forms of commercial
finance is highly problematic, with little appetite even among those most
interested in Angolan business, such as Portuguese and South African banks.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940127

