FT942-16282

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (9): Crucial test for
sleeping giant - Brazil


   By PATRICK MCCURRY


With a government anti-inflation plan and general elections, many analysts
believe 1994 will be a crucial test of whether Latin America's 'sleeping
giant' is prepared to wake up and reform.
While the rest of the continent has beaten back inflation, Brazilian prices
soared by about 2,500 per cent last year, twice the 1992 rise, and are now
running at a rate of more than 5,000 per cent a year.
Under the plan, the inflation rate will probably fall substantially, at
least temporarily. This stabilisation, although accompanied by high real
interest rates, is expected to increase consumer demand and help gross
domestic product to grow by 2-4 per cent this year compared with nearly 5
per cent last year.
The stock market is likely to be highly volatile, particularly in the run-up
to elections.
'Brazil is such a special case,' says Roger Palmer, director of emerging
markets at brokers Kleinwort Benson, referring to the uncertainties
surrounding the continent's biggest economy. He adds that anyone investing
there 'is taking a complete gamble on whether the plan works'.
Gambling on Brazil paid off last year, when Sao Paulo's stock exchange index
was among the world's best performers, more than doubling in dollar terms in
spite of the increase in inflation.
That could fall dramatically under the plan, which involves a balanced
federal budget and a proposed dollar-linked currency anchored by the central
bank's record foreign exchange reserves of about Dollars 37bn. The market
thinks the new currency will be introduced in June or July.
But the doubt is whether lower price rises can be maintained. Most analysts
believe that to achieve long-term stability Brazil must reform its economic
and political structure. For example, under the constitution the government
must pass on most revenues to states and municipalities. The resulting
deficits have been financed by short-term debt paper that fuels inflation.
For this to be changed and for reforms in the tax and welfare areas, as well
as more privatisation, the constitution must be altered. A constitutional
review began this year but seems likely to be postponed until 1995, partly
because of problems in obtaining congressional quorums in an election year.
If the review is postponed, structural changes will depend in large part on
who wins the presidency and whether he has support in Congress. The front
runner is Mr Luiz Inacio 'Lula' da Silva of the left-wing Workers' Party. Mr
da Silva is regarded with suspicion by the financial markets, which fear a
halt in privatisation and a slowdown in moves to modernise the economy along
neo-liberal lines.
The markets want finance minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso to run for
president, in the hope he can build an alliance against Mr da Silva. If the
plan works and Mr Cardoso looked set to win the stock market would
'explode', say brokers. Investment bank CS First Boston predicts that
equities could double again this year. On the other hand, problems with the
stabilisation plan and a strong campaign by Mr da Silva could lead to heavy
losses.
In the first quarter, Brazilian stocks appreciated but were then affected by
the increase in US interest rates and by a partial withdrawal from the
market by foreign investors. Despite this, net foreign investment in the
capital markets remained positive, if reduced, compared with record inflows
last year.
In 1993, foreign investment in the capital markets, mainly in equities, was
Dollars 5.5bn, compared with Dollars 1.3bn the year before. Eurobond issues
hit record volumes and there was a surge of capital into the fixed income
market thanks to interest rates of about 20 per cent in real annual terms.
Brazil's success in sealing the Brady plan debt restructuring agreement with
its creditor banks this year was seen as important in the long run in
integrating the country with world financial markets but, because of the
rise in US interest rates, an increase in the volume of Brazilian Eurobonds
is unlikely in the short term.
Mr Jose Eduardo Martins, a director at investment bank Patrimonio, predicts
that more Brazilian companies will seek to launch American Depositary
Receipts to raise capital this year since, with last year's stock market
growth, many shares are approaching or above the company's book value. Most
of the equities growth last year was fuelled by hopes for a broader
privatisation programme and confidence in Mr Cardoso along with a belief,
particularly by foreign investors, that Brazilian shares were undervalued.
Analysts point to companies like Telebras, the government-controlled telecom
company, whose shares are still quoted below book value.
Ms Cristina Vervloet, a director at brokers Socimer do Brasil, says the
local market has become much more influenced by foreign investors, even
though the foreign share of trading is comparatively low, at 15-20 per cent.
While being welcomed in the stock market, foreign investors have had the
door shut to many local fixed income instruments and the central bank is
expected to increase a new tax on fixed income instruments if there is a
flood of foreign capital attracted by ever higher interest rates under the
anti-inflation plan. In the first quarter, real interest rates on the
overnight market were 30-40 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940411

