FT941-12946

FT  27 JAN 94 / London Stock Exchange: Shares give ground following
gilt-edged auction - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


Nervousness in the government bond market undermined UK equities yesterday,
leaving share prices to drift to lower levels after another directionless
session. Selling pressure appeared fairly modest, although the latest
reports from the retail sector gave little evidence of the bounce in
consumer spending for which the stock market is still searching.
The market opened lower in the face of weakness in Hong Kong and New York
overnight, but was then spurred briefly ahead by determined buying of the
Footsie future by at least two big US houses.
The Footsie gained a net 6.3 in the first hour of official trading but this
proved to be the best of the day. Traders were quick to see the bond futures
weaken ahead of the auction of Pounds 2.75bn of government securities, a
slightly unusual development, according to several leading traders.
Negative signals from the bond market quickly appeared following the
announcement of the auction result. Equities held up fairly well, however,
until early in the afternoon when share prices began to come under some
selling pressure from overseas.
At worst the market was 11 points down on the Footsie scale, before a calm
opening on Wall Street and a steadier trend in other European bourses helped
London to rally at the close. The final reading put the FT-SE 100 Index at
3,436.1 for a net loss of 7.9 points.
The picture was much the same among the second line issues, where the FT-SE
Mid 250 Index continued its fall to register a loss for the day of 11.4 at
4,079.7. Seaq volume of 829.3m shares compared with 985m in the previous
session, with non-Footsie business consti-tuting 61 per cent of the total. A
slower trend this week in the market's second line stocks has contrasted
with the outperformance of the Mid 250 Index previously.
Retail, or customer, business was worth Pounds 2bn on Tuesday, indicating
that beneath a relatively calm surface the big institutional investors are
actively reshuffling portfolios, taking profits in a market now around 1.7
per cent off the trading peak reached less than a week ago. Technical
analysts suggest that some stocks may be overbought.
Uncertainty in UK government bonds is discouraging for the stock market,
where the currently very high valuations on share prices owe much to the
prolonged slide in bond yields. UK gilts gave investors returns of more than
20 per cent last year and some equity analysts fear that the sector may have
'seen its best for this cycle', as one trader expressed it.
The London market was helped by firmness among the international stocks as
sterling eased back from its recent strength; concern over the currency's
effects on export sales has surfaced over the past fortnight. Oil shares
looked steadier but the best features came among the global media stocks,
where Reuters continued to make headway.
There was little support for the retail sector, however, after the latest
round of sales reports did nothing to lift the clouds of uncertainty. There
were losses for the store sector leaders as fund managers appeared to be
lightening exposure to the conventional store leaders.
The rest of this week is expected to see London remaining somewhat on the
sidelines, with share prices vulnerable to bouts of profit-taking as global
markets respond to economic data from Japan and the US.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

940127

