FT942-12552

FT  29 APR 94 / Chinese tax reform 'collapsing'


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


Ambitious reforms of China's taxation system, introduced only at the
beginning of the year as part of Beijing's drive to re-establish control
over the economy, may already be failing.
Mr Gerald Segal, senior fellow of the International Institute for Strategic
Studies, said yesterday that reform of the tax structure had 'completely
collapsed'.
Mr Segal told a Financial Times conference on Asian capital markets that
Beijing had been trying for several years to regain power lost to the
provinces as a result of economic liberalisation, 'and each time they (the
central authorities) are made to look more and more foolish'.
The changes made in January included new tax-sharing arrangements between
the centre and the provinces, as well as a value-added and other new taxes.
However, mechanisms for central tax collection were not yet in place.
Introduced with financial and currency reforms, the tax reforms are part of
the government's plan to have better macroeconomic control so that the
economy ceases to swing wildly from boom to bust. They are also intended to
reduce the central government's chronic budget deficit.
Yesterday, Beijing received a welcome sign that attempts to slow rampaging
growth may be working, with news that annual inflation in big cities eased
in March to 24.5 per cent from 25.9 per cent in February.
'We have achieved initial success in curbing price rises, thanks to improved
market control at the central and local level,' the State Statistical Bureau
said in Beijing.
At the London conference, however, Mr Segal said both Beijing and the
provinces were complaining about implementation of tax reforms and there was
little sign of the new tax-sharing arrangements being put in place.
Mr Richard Margolis, managing director of stockbroker Smith New Court Far
East, agreed implementation of the new system had failed.
Mr Margolis felt the relationship between the centre and provinces would be
taken in hand after the eventual death of Mr Deng Xiaoping, China's
89-year-old leader, as part of an assertion of control by leaders needing to
build political stock.
Mr C G Wu, general manager of the London branch of the Bank of China, a
state-owned commercial bank, said the tax reforms 'will definitely go
ahead', since they were a key part of government policy.
They would take time because of the amount of work that had to be done in a
country of China's size.
However, Mr Francis Leung, managing director of Asian securities house
Peregrine Investments, said many foreign investors were worried about the
effect of new taxes on their investments, particularly the property and
value added taxes.
'Such uncertainty, if not properly and immediately addressed, will adversely
affect international investors' confidence,' Mr Leung said.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940429

