FT942-15326

FT  15 APR 94 / International Company News: Minister raises estimate of
losses at Air France


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


Air France, the state-owned airline, is expected to announce a loss of
between FFr8bn (Dollars 1.37bn) and FFr9bn for 1993, substantially higher
than previous estimates of a FFr7.5bn deficit, Mr Bernard Bosson, transport
minister, said yesterday.
Mr Bosson's estimate, made during a statement to the Senate, the upper house
of the French parliament, is the latest increase in losses forecast for the
airline.
Last September, Mr Bosson said the loss for 1993 would probably be about
FFr5.5bn. In 1992, Air France reported losses of FFr3.2bn.
The sharp increase in losses reflects the downturn in the international
airline industry. It also reflects the impact of industrial action last
October when the airline was brought to a standstill by a wave of strikes in
protest against a rescue plan. The strikes forced the withdrawal of the plan
and the resignation of Mr Bernard Attali, then chairman.
Air France declined to comment on last year's results ahead of an official
announcement which is expected later this month or at the beginning of May.
The airline has said that last October's strike cost FFr1.2bn in lost
receipts, but estimates of the overall impact of the dispute are complicated
by savings, such as fuel supplies, and additional costs relating to the
disruption of services.
The scale of the losses adds to the urgency of a restructuring package being
drawn up by Mr Christian Blanc, who replaced Mr Attali as chairman. On
Monday, Mr Blanc received strong support from the company's 40,000 staff for
a framework plan aimed at raising productivity by 30 per cent over the next
three years.
The French government has pledged a capital injection of FFr20bn over the
next three years to ease the burden of losses and total debts of about
FFr38bn.
However, the capital increase requires approval from the European Union.
Earlier this week, Mr Abel Matutes, the European transport commissioner,
indicated that approval for the financing could be linked to the sensitive
issue of deregulating the French airline market.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940415

