FT944-14440

FT  22 OCT 94 / Travel: Sweet-natured and time-warped - Nigel Andrews visits
Graz, an Austrian town that is closer to Italy than to vibrant Vienna


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


At 11am the two tall mullioned windows opened. A lederhosened man appeared
in one, holding high a foaming tankard. A dirndl-wearing woman appeared in
the other, clasping a white handkerchief. They danced on the window-ledges
to traditional Austrian tunes. Then, at 11.05, they went back in and the
windows closed.
Such is life in Graz, Austria. These two near-lifesize figures perform this
glockenspiel show - one of the most endearingly dotty in Europe -
twice-daily at 11am and 6pm. For us foreigners, watching it is just one of
those bizarre things we do if we have arrived by design or accident in
Austria's second city.
Graz, we soon discover, is a charmer. It has a bewitching old town and a
no-less bewitching access to surrounding villages landscaped as if by the
production designer of The Sound Of Music.
I had driven to the city from Venice, just to have a roundabout return route
to England after the film festival. Also, my Venice hotelier's wife came
from Graz and had waxed poetic. I booked in at the five-star Grand Hotel
Wiesler, which gazes across the pretty, fast-flowing River Mur into the
onion domes and steeples of the old town and - swivel your eyes to the left
from the Wiesler bay window - up at the majestic Schlossberg. This
inner-city crag is studded with bits of history and architectural oddity,
including what may be the most handsome clock tower in all the
German-speaking countries.
This is not the timepiece that boasts the eccentric dance: that is down in
the mazy town in Glockenspielplatz. The Schlossberg clock is set into a tall
creamy-white four-sided tower and was built so that the time could be read
across the city. It was one of the landmarks saved by the town - expensively
 -when conquering Napoleon made ransom demands. Graz also paid up to save
the elegant 115ft Glockenturm, across the way on the Schlossberg, with its
four-ton Liesl bell.
Graz is embossed with history. It spent 200 years holding out against the
Turks. It was an imperial seat of the Habsburgs from the 14th to 17th
centuries. Later it flourished in the 19th century under Archduke Johann,
who has a fountain named after him in the Hauptplatz.
Yet grandeur in Graz jostles with an endearing laidbackness. I became
convinced, as I puffed up the Schlossberg and down again and then wandered
through the alte stadt, that Napoleon would not have bothered to raze the
place anyway. It has such sweet-naturedness. The winding, imprecise lanes of
the old town match the winding, imprecise lines of the people's faces.
These are conservative Austrians lost in a provincial centre closer to the
wilds of alpine Italy, and to 'the former Yugoslavia', than to vibrant
Vienna. Walking the time-warped streets, you find yourself in a waking sleep
from which you are aroused now and then only by the shrill alarm of a
trolley-car, that silent panther of the streets, as it all but runs you down
in the middle of the road. A Graz citizen once saved my life by hissing a
helpful 'Achtung]'
The old town is a preserved marvel. In the pedestrianised main street, the
Herrengasse, every building has its own history or aesthetic signature. Seek
out Number Three, the 'Painted House', its facade a riot of 18th century
frescoes. Check out the Renaissance Landhaus, with its ornate Italian-style
courtyard; and next door the Landes-Zeughaus (provincial arsenal) with its
16th-17th century armour and weaponry collection: enough guns and swords
(30,000) to stock a Hollywood history epic.
And around the Herrengasse, take in the baroquely stuccoed Haus Luegg and
the threadwork of medieval streets around the Gothic Franziskanerkirche
(Franciscan church). For still-hungry culture vultures there is the
Landesmuseum, stuffed with Brueghels and Cranachs, and with furniture and
objects dating back to the middle ages.
Then take an afternoon off to leave the city altogether. We are of course in
Styria - Austrian, 'Steiermark' - where you expect Julie Andrews to prance
over every hill. Drive out to Thal, the nearest truly rural village, and you
have seldom seen anything so shimmeringly beautiful. The air is clear. The
grass is a hallucinatory green. Cows and horses dapple the flanks of rolling
hills. Plum and chestnut trees sway in late September under the weight of
late-summer produce.
I was lured to Thal by reports of a strange and beautiful church. The Ernst
Fuchs-designed chapel, cresting a gentle hill opposite Thal's only school,
is indeed a stunner. It is built in azure-blue corrugated metal. Its bold,
even kitschy postmodernism - the style is officially titled 'Phantastische
Realismus' - is all the more striking for being attached to a traditional
Austrian-style spire.
Inside, Fuchs has had several brainstorms. The floor and seats are impastoed
with pebbles, making the interior resemble some rioting country stream-bed.
Meanwhile rainbow colours beam from the ceiling and mystical murals (Samuel
Palmer out of Holman Hunt) brood around the altar.
This is not the only landmark Thal offers. If you come out of the church and
stare over the hills you may see, a mile away, a white three-storey house
without a number on it or any distinguishing mark. It sits across from a
hill covered with castle ruins. It is Arnold Schwarzenegger's boyhood home.
Not a lot of people know this: do not tell Arnold, if you meet him, that I
sent you.
Every summer, Thal's large lake, the Thalersee, swarms with visitors and is
heaven to sit by in almost empty September. You clutch a beer and gaze at
the ducks. You think that, good heavens, this was where young Master S first
started limbering up to become a bodybuilder.
Back in Graz, the sky is salmon-pink and copper over the old town and I
saunter out for supper. Seduced by location, I make the mistake of eating at
the foot of the stone stairway zig-zagging up the Schlossberg's sheer west
cliff.
The Cafe Tourist Trap, as we shall call it, serves a piece of rancid shoe
leather 'in the Styrian style'. This means in this case, wrapped in a
garlicky-sweet sauce of rare repulsiveness. Good Styrian food is available,
though, in other cafes and restaurants: one being the Hof Keller.
And you can always look forward to the Hotel Wiesler's buffet breakfast: an
outrageous largesse of bacon, eggs, ham, sausage-meat, cheeses, Danish
pastries, cereals, yoghurts . . . Later, too, I have a Wiesler club
sandwich, which is outstanding. If you have a dressed salad with it you can
taste the local speciality, pumpkinseed oil.
I am beginning to like Graz. But oh dear, it is time to go. The Wiesler will
soon be valet-ing forth my car. I go out for one last mental-snapshot walk
along the Herrengasse and then back over the purling Mur to the Hotel.
I have nearly lost my life to several trams. I have frequently lost my
breath climbing up Navarone-like cliffs. I cannot understand German, at
least as spoken with a Styrian accent. I have no regrets; I shall be
returning to Graz as soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

941022

