FT943-12980

FT  22 JUL 94 / Where Mr Jacques Santer stands on the burning political
issues of the Union


   By LIONEL BARBER


Will the real Jacques Santer please stand up? Those listening to the
Luxembourg prime minister perform this week before the European parliament
might easily find themselves confused about his political credo,
particularly his views on economic and political integration in Europe,
writes Lionel Barber.
In Britain, where the governing Conservative party risks splitting over this
issue, the question is vital. Just where he stands - and how he differs from
Mr Jacques Delors, outgoing Commission president - is of intense interest.
The question has taken on even greater importance since Mr Santer insists
that he is no different from Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the Belgian prime minister
and fellow Christian Democrat, who was vetoed by the British at last month's
European summit in Corfu.
So here is a rough guide to Mr Santer's political views as revealed during
statements and questioning during this week's inaugural session of the
European parliament in Strasbourg.
Mr Santer supports federalism, but not on the 'Napoleonic model' which means
centralising power in Brussels. Like the British (and the Germans), he
favours 'subsidiarity', the principle of devolving decision-making to the
lowest appropriate national, regional and local level.
Mr Santer shares the Anglo-German concern that some Euro-laws can damage the
competitiveness of industry. He would like to continue auditing such
legislation, though at national and European level. He also is an unabashed
free-trader.
Mr Santer likes the Maastricht treaty's social chapter, unlike Mr John
Major, who proclaimed Britain's non-participation as one of the triumphs of
the Maastricht treaty negotiations.
Mr Santer is adamant that he will not use subsidiarity to roll back EU
environmental laws, and he does not like the Maastricht treaty's innovation
of opting out of treaty obligations affecting the rest of the EU.
Mr Santer supports strongly the idea of a single European currency
complementing the single European market, but, in line with Germany, he
insists that Maastricht's convergence criteria must be applied rigorously.
He refuses to be drawn on whether he is committed to loose governmental
co-operation on foreign and security policy and judicial affairs, or whether
he favours a deepening of co-operation through a community approach, perhaps
by extending majority voting.
This will relieve Mr Major who is insistent on resisting efforts to
streamline decision-making and weaken the power of national vetoes. But Mr
Santer made clear, too, that he sees the Maastricht treaty's powers in
common and security policy as 'evolutionary'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940722

