FT942-12471

FT  29 APR 94 / Arts: 'XN Tricities' proves better than its label - Dance


   By CLEMENT CRISP


In the spring English National Ballet's fancy turns (not too lightly) to
thoughts of touring. Small-scale touring, with the company divided, so that
this week one group of dancers sets out on its regional journey, with a
quadruple bill and piano accompaniment, while next week another group, plus
orchestra and different ballets, also embarks upon a missionary round.
I think the scheme excellent. Dancers get new roles. Choreographers can make
small pieces and try their strength. Audiences see something other than
those splinters of the True Cross which they are gulled into believing are
'the classics'. Were there any coherent policy for ballet in this country,
both sections of the Royal Ballet would build upon the success of this
year's brief and small-scale Dance Bites tour and follow ENB's example.
ENB's tour started at the Wyvern Theatre in Swindon, where I saw its very
successful programme on Wednesday night. There were palate-ticklers of
course, and rightly so. Dinna Bjorn, illustrious Bournonville expert, has
made a clever version of the sextet and tarantella from last act of Napoli.
Eight dancers work like demons. The piano accompaniment is a bit thin, but
the dances are not, and I was most impressed by the men - Stephen Sherriff,
Lee Robinson, Yat Sen Chang, Glauco di Lieto - who brought a great deal of
verve to their steps. Not yet the most idiomatic Bournonville, but joyous -
and that is what the old master wanted.
The evening ended with Derek Deane's re-staging of the Paquita grand pas.
What I saw before train-time was well-reasoned, and challenged the dancers
in the right way, although Paquita's peaks are really only to be scaled by
Kirov dancers. In between these happy book-ends, two novelties. The first is
a revival of Deane's Impromptu, a duet he made in 1982 for Antoinette Sibley
and David Wall. Schubert's E flat major impromptu; a lovely dress for her,
dull tights for him; a shifting sequence of emotion; a dance language
lyrical, intense, and with beautiful manners. The piece is a small delight.
It needs, I think, artists as grand as its first cast to do it full justice.
In a debut, Josephine Jewkes and Christian Duncan sketched the outlines of
an attractive interpretation which I look forward to seeing when it has been
shaped by further performance.
And as the necessary change of mood for such an evening, a new piece by the
Italian choreographer Mauro Bigonzetti. Anything passing itself off under
the title XN Tricities has very serious problems, but in the event, the
piece is far better than its label. Bigonzetti has saddled himself with a
deeply tiresome electronic score, and some modish leather costumes - a
material about as suitable for dancing in as tin - but he has a quick eye
for the potential of distorted classicism, and for a hard-driven Forsythian
energy.
Six women, five men, confront each other, share bursts of dynamics, drive
movement off-centre and re-establish some kind of order, and the eye is
held, even as the ear rebels at the nonsense filling the air, and you wonder
what the hell is the point of two vast lenses on stage which serve to
enlarge various anatomical bits. (Nothing saucy; everything arbitrary). The
cast is excellent, tearing into the dance and coming out not only unscathed
but enhanced as artists - Yat Seng Chang, Denzil Bailey, Stephen Sherriff
and Lucy Smith notably good. It is an intriguing and by no means unworthy
addition to the repertory. The tour's programme book is notably well
designed and informative. The staging of the evening is exemplary. Other
companies please copy.
This English National Ballet programme can be seen in Newtown, Cambridge,
Barrow, Tunbridge Wells, Preston, Snape, during the next four weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940429

