FT941-5516

FT  05 MAR 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Where profits come second - Clive
Fewins visits a village run on businesslike lines for unbusinesslike
purposes


   By CLIVE FEWINS


From his prefabricated wooden office, with a glorious view of the top of
Danby Dale, John Durham presides over a Pounds 2m business - yet he draws no
salary. He does not own anything: no house, no car, no personal bank account
 -not even money for retirement tucked away in a pension fund.
Durham runs Camphill Products, the trading arm of the Camphill Village
Trust. There are 35 Camphill communities, four of which produce a range of
goods in sheltered workshops that realise a profit - they prefer to call it
a surplus - of Pounds 217,000 a year.
The money is ploughed back into the work of the trust, which assists people
with social and mental handicaps to work and play a full part in the
communities it runs.
Durham's product range comprises 100 lines from 13 craft workshops, half of
them based at Botton village, at the head of Danby Dale, 18 miles from
Whitby in North Yorkshire.
Durham's two assistants pack, distribute and handle all the marketing for
the goods, which range from wooden toys, cradles and bricks made from timber
grown at Botton, to candles, soft toys, engraved glass, pottery and
copperware.
Sales of these goods, half of which are exported, total Pounds 320,000, a
significant part of the total Pounds 2.1m sales achieved by the workshops,
food centre, gift shop and bookshop at Botton.
Botton opened in 1955 and, in common with 80 other Camphill centres in 19
countries, it is run on principles laid down by the Austrian philosopher Dr
Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925). Steiner's view was that therapeutic communities
should be run with, and not for, handicapped people. This is the case, it is
the world's largest village working with adults with a mental handicap.
Apart from housing the headquarters of Camphill Products, Botton produces an
award-winning cheese, nine organic breads, and 44 food lines. Many are on
sale in shops and other outlets as far away as Scotland and the south coast
of England.
Sixty per cent of the bread, cakes and biscuits produced in the bakery is
sold in shops in nearby villages and towns, and 90 per cent of the cheese,
yoghurt and curd cheese produced in the creamery goes to the outside market.
On a good cheese counter you will find the unpasteurised Botton hard cheese
on sale alongside the best Cheddars and Stiltons.
'The surplus from our trading operations goes towards our day-to-day running
costs,' said Durham, 52, who read geography and anthropology at Durham
University and worked in marketing at ICI before coming to Botton 17 years
ago.
The key to the commercial success of Camphill products is quality. 'When I
go out with my catalogue or attend craft fairs I do not make a point of
saying we are a sheltered workshop,' Durham said. 'I say: we have got these
products - buy 'em] Fortunately, people do. Ninety-five per cent of them are
sold outside Camphill communities.'
At Botton there are 155 mentally handicapped 'villagers' and 69 'co-workers'
or staff, who, like Durham, are unpaid but whose personal expenses are met
from common funds. There are 27 local staff who commute daily to the village
and draw a salary for performing tasks such as maintenance work, secretarial
duties, and working in the saw-mill alongside villagers.
Another key to the Botton economy is tourism. Drive up the dale to the
village centre and you will find a large car and coach park. Weatherproof
dispensers give out literature which explains the work of the community and
guides visitors to the gift shop, bookshop, coffee bar and grocery. At the
latter they can buy meat, reared on Botton's five farms, as well as cheese,
vegetables and Botton-packaged food ranging from jams and perserves to ice
cream, muesli, cordials, juices and sugar-free drinks.
Enter the coffee bar and you mingle with residents and co-workers, who live
communally in 30 houses in the 750-acre settlement.
The visitor pack lays a strong emphasis on the growing importance of fund
raising for building and long-term development.
Botton was founded in 1955, based on Botton Hall, a shooting lodge with 350
acres, and two farms acquired by the trust at nominal cost. The most recent
building is a strikingly modern Pounds 400,000, 150-seat chapel built
largely of timber. It replaced an annex to the community centre that had
served as a chapel for 18 years.
One of the other new buildings is the Pounds 250,000 print shop. Buildings
such as these come out of the community's capital fund, which is fed largely
by fund raising and donations, and which currently totals Pounds 1.2m.
The print shop is the home of a sophisticated mailing operation which
comprises nearly 50,000 'warm' donors and is the envy of many other charity
operations. It is handled by a Pounds 100,000 computer donated by Digital
Equipment Corporation. The print shop is increasingly undertaking outside
contract work.
'It costs about Pounds 200 to keep one of our villagers here for a week. It
is interesting that the Department of Social Security works on a figure
nearer Pounds 280 a week for someone with a similar handicap,' said Jeff
Balls, deputy chairman of the Camphill Village Trust who has been at Botton
for 22 years.
'Our villagers are largely supported by local authority grants. Together
with grants from the Department of Employment they comprise 65 per cent of
our total income. In a year Botton needs Pounds 1.7m to keep it going. We
reckon about 15 per cent of that comes from workshop sales, which includes
Camphill products, and 10 per cent from donations and fund raising. The rest
comes from other assorted sources.
'Fundraising keeps our capital projects account going. Currently this is
Pounds 1.2m. Without this we could not expand,' said Durham, who is also
chairman of the fundraising group.
'The important thing is that these figures should be set within the overall
context of our philosophy. Work here and at other Camphill communities is
carried out for the sake of the work itself and for the needs of the
community. We are working with people of limited talents and we aim to give
them an opportunity to contribute and to achieve some sort of fulfilment
through their daily work. Their fulfilment is probably greater than most of
us achieve on a day-to-day basis. We work not to generate cash but to meet
people's needs.'
Camphill Products, Botton Village, Danby, Whitby, North Yorks. YO21 2NJ.
Tel: 0287-660424.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940305

