FT941-5670

FT  05 MAR 94 / Thorp N-plant given go-ahead by High Court: BNF wins 17-year
battle to open reprocessing works


   By MICHAEL SMITH


British Nuclear Fuels won a 17-year battle to open and commission its Pounds
2.8bn Thorp reprocessing plant yesterday when the High Court dismissed a
challenge that the government acted unreasonably and irrationally last
December in approving its start-up.
The reprocessing of spent fuel at the north-west England plant, which has
contracts with Japan and Germany but is opposed by other countries,
including Ireland, could begin within the next month.
Yesterday's ruling on a challenge by Greenpeace, the environmental group,
and Lancashire county council, also clears the way for the government to
launch its long-awaited review of the nuclear industry. Terms of reference
may be published within the next month.
Although Greenpeace said the campaign against Thorp would continue, it and
Lancashire council are unlikely to appeal against the ruling. That means BNF
has emerged victorious from a legal battle that began in 1977 with a public
inquiry in Sellafield, Cumbria, where Thorp is located.
Mr Justice Potts decided against ordering Greenpeace and Lancashire to pay
BNF's legal expenses. He said it was an 'unusual and indeed exceptional case
of great public interest' and the two plaintiffs had won an important point
of law. That was a reference to his ruling that government lawyers had
'erred in law' when they argued that ministers were not legally bound to
justify the need for Thorp.
In fact, the judge ruled, the question of justification had been properly
considered and the court would not intervene. Even so, Greenpeace believes
his ruling will help them in future nuclear cases and in the nuclear review.
The judge also emphasised the need 'to properly inform the public' on
matters such as Thorp.
On the main issue, Greenpeace and Lancashire argued that the government
acted irrationally by not holding a second public inquiry. Without that,
they said, no authorising authority could properly agree to the proposed
'dramatic increases' in radioactive emissions which Greenpeace believes
could result in many deaths.
Dismissing the challenge, Mr Justice Potts said Mr John Gummer, environment
secretary, and Mrs Gillian Shephard, agriculture minister, had acted within
their powers when they authorised BNF in December to discharge radioactive
emissions from the thermal oxide reprocessing plant into the air and the
Irish Sea.
Mr Justice Potts said in a 78-page judgment: 'It may be thought that a
minister sensible to the scale of representations . . . and the desirability
of allaying public anxiety would have directed an inquiry.' That was not an
issue for the court.
Mr David Bonser, Thorp director, said the decision provided secure long-term
jobs for 500 employees. Thorp would make a profit of about Pounds 500m in
its first 10 years of operations, the company said. The decision was also
welcomed by the GMB general workers' union.
Tokyo Electric Power Company was delighted with the decision.
Mr Chris Rose, for Greenpeace, said Thorp was a threat not only to Britain
but to the safety of the world.
Page 8
Thorp decision likely to stir nuclear review
Lobby groups left to carry green banner

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940305

