FT942-12636

FT  28 APR 94 / International Company News: Agco clinches Massey takeover


   By ANDREW BAXTER and LAURIE MORSE


   LONDON, CHICAGO


Agco, the acquisitive US farm machinery group, yesterday clinched its most
ambitious deal yet with the Dollars 330m takeover of Massey Ferguson, the
UK-based group which is one of the best-known names in the world tractor
industry.
Agco, based near Atlanta, is paying Dollars 310m in cash and 500,000 of its
own shares to Massey's parent company, Buffalo-based Varity, which wants to
concentrate on its core interests in Perkins diesel engines and Kelsey-Hayes
automotive braking systems.
The deal thwarted a Dollars 350m offer from a European group of managers led
by Mr John Sword, a former chief executive of Massey.
But, as expected, Agco won the contest because of its close ties with Varity
following its 1992 purchase of Massey's North American marketing and
distribution operations.
The historic sale ends a long association between Mr Victor Rice, Varity's
ebullient chairman, and the farm equipment industry. Mr Rice led Massey
Ferguson, then based in Toronto during its financial restructuring and
retrenchments of the late 1970s and early 1980s. The parent company name was
changed to Varity in 1986.
Yesterday's deal was greeted with relief at Massey, which has seen Varity's
strategic priorities changing as it has become more deeply engaged in the
automotive industry. 'Agco is in the farm equipment business, which is our
business,' said Mr Dominic Chauvin, Massey's president.
The deal will more than double Agco's size, giving it sales of about Dollars
1.5bn this year. It will allow Agco to expand its North American farm
equipment distribution network worldwide, and give it a significant European
manufacturing base. Massey's last North American factories closed in the
1980s and its remaining plants are at Coventry in the UK and Beauvais,
France.
Massey has dealers in 140 countries, which Agco plans to use to market
equipment lines now sold principally in North America.
Mr Chauvin said the deal would reinforce Massey's position in North America,
and offer extra opportunities for the two European plants. He stressed that
Massey would continue as an entity and as a brand.
Mr Robert Ratliff, Agco's chairman, said it had agreed to pay a premium to
book value for the first time because of the high regard the Massey Ferguson
trademark commands. Agco intends to finance the purchase with an equity
offering or through subordinated debt.
Varity said it expected to use the proceeds to reduce debt and invest in
'high-return high-growth' product programmes at Perkins and Kelsey-Hayes. It
said Agco had negotiated a 10-year supply agreement with Peterborough-based
Perkins, whose engines are fitted on virtually all Massey's products.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940428

