FT941-12897

FT  28 JAN 94 / O'Reilly tables Pounds 32m offer for stake in Independent


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Mr Tony O'Reilly, the Irish businessman and newspaper publisher, formally
tabled an offer yesterday worth about Pounds 32m which could lead to a stake
of just under 25 per cent in Newspaper Publishing, owner of The Independent
and The Independent on Sunday.
The offer, from Mr O'Reilly's Independent Newspapers of Ireland, involves
Pounds 21m in convertible loan stock which can convert into ordinary
Newspaper Publishing stock at Pounds 3 a share.
If fully converted, this would give Mr O'Reilly's company a 24.99 per cent
stake in the British newspaper group.
Following the issue of the loan stock, the Irish company would make a
separate offer for 20 per cent of existing shares at Pounds 2.50 a share in
cash.
The Irish group said last night that following completion of the
subscription and the offer, the maximum stake would be 40 per cent.
The detailed offer was considered yesterday by Newspaper Publishing's
non-executive directors, who will meet again this morning.
It is likely that a rival bid will be put forward formally today by the
consortium which includes Mirror Group Newspapers, the main existing
shareholders of The Independent - El Pais of Spain and La Repubblica of
Italy - and Mr Andreas Whittam Smith, the main founder of the paper.
It is believed that the consortium, which has promised to make an offer for
the 52 per cent of the company it does not already hold, is considering
bidding between Pounds 2.40 and Pounds 2.80 a share.
The Independent's non-executive directors are understood to look favourably
on the O'Reilly offer, although it is not clear how much can happen without
the support of the two continental European groups.
The Irish group also believes it can reach a contractual deal with United
Newspapers, publisher of the Daily Express, to provide printing and other
back-up facilities for The Independent.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940128

