FT944-5951

FT  01 DEC 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Moving designs -
Lisa Bransten on plans to shake up transport advertising


   By LISA BRANSTEN


London Underground carriages may soon be completely wrapped in
advertisements designed to startle and impress consumers. William Apfelbaum,
head of the US company that now runs the newly privatised advertising
division of London Transport, aims to convince authorities it would be both
safe and profitable.
After 25 years in transport advertising, there are few things the chairman
and chief executive of New York-based TDI (Transportation Displays
Incorporated) likes better than putting ads on buses and trains. Now
Apfelbaum has nearly all of London to focus on since London Transport last
August sold London Transport Advertising to a 50-50 joint venture between
TDI - which manages the venture - and Hambros Group Investments, a
subsidiary of Hambros Bank Group.
London is only the beginning. The consortium is expected to announce today
that it has acquired the advertising rights for buses in at least five more
UK cities in the south-east of England, the Midlands and northern England.
Ultimately, the group would like to have a presence in the rest of the UK.
Transport advertising is already taking on a new look in London. There has
been a rush of advertising from US companies with which TDI does business in
the US - where it is the biggest transit advertising company. Popping up
increasingly on London buses, trains and Tube stations are advertisements
for fashion lines such as DKNY and Calvin Klein.
Apfelbaum would like to wrap buses and underground carriages with one
advertisement. Such total coverage has been extremely eye-catching in the
US, where, for example, TDI dressed a line of buses as sharks complete with
fin on top to promote a local sports team. Such full wraps have been carried
out on London buses, but never in the Underground.
He is out to capture consumers' attention and sees no better place than the
Tube, which he says reaches more relatively wealthy people than any other
medium. As soon as he has an advertiser willing to take on the cost, he will
propose a fully-wrapped carriage to transport officials. The idea is not
new, but this time industry observers and transport authorities believe TDI
is capable of carrying it out.
Michael Horne of London Underground says: 'This isn't the first time we've
heard these ideas, but Apfelbaum has put a lot of effort into putting
forward a structured deal. We will be looking at his proposals very
carefully and we hope we find a way of doing a deal. Personally, I'm
optimistic.'
Sales are up around 20 per cent at LTA in just the first three months since
privatisation, says Jeremy Male, the company's new managing director. The
increase is good news for the consortium which agreed to pay London
Transport more than Pounds 100m over the next six years as part of its bid
for LTA.
Previously, LTA generated sales of about Pounds 23m a year but observers
expect the TDI consortium to do rather better than that. One of Apfelbaum's
first moves was to increase the amount that sales staff could earn from
commission.
'There did not seem to be a motive for profit in this company before,
because they were just a division of a big governmental body,' he says. 'If
they made money it just disappeared, they didn't know where the money went.'
The commission strategy worked well for Apfelbaum after he was brought in by
an investor group in 1989 to salvage TDI. Company officials say 1994 should
be a record year for TDI.
Frances Dickens, head of posters at Zenith Media, the UK's biggest
media-buying company, senses new energy at LTA. Before the privatisation LTA
was 'terribly staid. If it wasn't in the rule book they wouldn't even think
about it', she says.
The TDI consortium, in contrast, 'brings a refreshing commercial way of
doing business. They are prepared to grow the business and listen to what
advertisers want'.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

941201

