FT942-12844

FT  27 APR 94 / Councils attack EU funds plan


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT and JOHN WILLMAN


Local authorities across England have banded together to contest government
plans to administer Pounds 1.19bn of European Union structural funds through
a new chain of regional offices controlled by a cabinet committee.
The local authorities fear that government policy flies in the face of
subsidiarity - the EU principle of taking decisions at the lowest possible
level.
They are worried that the commission in Brussels will delay the money
because the government's plans for spending it are not sufficiently
detailed. Their protests could lead to a new round of disputes between
Brussels and London over the funds used to help European regions arrest
economic and industrial decline.
'There is a broad structural issue of where the power of decision-making
should lie,' said Mr Mike Tappin, chairman of the West Midlands Regional
Forum of Local Authorities.
The commission has already criticised the government over structural funds
for the poorest areas that have Objective One status. Last month it rejected
the government programme for Merseyside, drawing attention to lack of local
authority input and the small involvement of the private sector.
The local authorities fear a repetition with Objective Two funds for
industrial and urban areas such as the West Midlands and East London.
Since 1988, these development programmes have been arranged and administered
locally. But West Midlands Forum officials said Mr Michael Heseltine, the
trade and industry secretary, no longer sees the need for a large number of
committees with influence over the management of structural funds.
'The regional offices will co-ordinate local authorities, the trade and
industry department said yesterday. 'We don't think that this will delay
funds - it will cut out bureaucracy.'
Mr Tappin said he had written to Mr Bruce Millan, the European commissioner
for regional affairs, expressing the anger of the local authorities. Nine
areas would be affected in 1994-96 by the decision to administer the
Objective Two funds through regional offices. The West Midlands will receive
Pounds 287m, Greater Manchester, Lancashire and Cheshire Pounds 255m,
Yorkshire and Humberside Pounds 243m, north-east England Pounds 239m, East
Midlands Pounds 62m, East London and Lee Valley Pounds 57m, Plymouth Pounds
22m, West Cumbria and Furness Pounds 19m and Thanet Pounds 11m.
The government has applied for Pounds 381m of European Union structural
funds for the development of six rural areas in England. The funds come from
the European Regional Development Fund.
The six regions are: East Anglia (Pounds 46m over five years), south-west
(Pounds 170m), Northern Uplands (Pounds 84m), the Marches (Pounds 31m),
Lincolnshire (Pounds 41m), and Midlands Uplands - Derbyshire/Staffordshire
(Pounds 9m).

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940427

