FT944-2302

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Company News: HK regulator cracks down on cash
commissions


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


The Securities and Futures Commission (SFC), Hong Kong's corporate
regulator, yesterday said it would outlaw the payment of cash commissions to
investment fund managers in cases where trusts and mutual funds are offered
to the public.
In a decision which Jardine Fleming, Hong Kong's biggest retail fund
manager, described as a 'sledge-hammer to crack a nut', the SFC said that
all cash rebates to fund managers would have to be credited to the funds
from July next year.
It said that fund managers could keep cash commissions, or rebates, where
they manage funds on a discretionary basis, such as pension funds.
In this case the client will have to consent to the fund manager retaining
rebates and be given a periodic quantification of the value of rebates
retained.
The SFC said that managers could retain 'soft dollar' commissions. These are
where a stockbroker provides free research, computer software for portfolio
analysis, and hardware such as Reuters services.
The test would be that the benefits received are demonstrably beneficial to
investors.
Mr Stuart Leckie, chairman of Wyatt, the pensions consultant, said: 'I
believe it is an outcome that is very satisfactory under all circumstances.'
Fund managers said they could live with the decision although it meant that
management fees would probably have to rise. Some also said the end to
rebates would put pressure on fixed commission brokerages in Hong Kong.
The SFC foreshadowed its inquiry into commissions and 'soft dollars' this
summer. It raised a storm of controversy in Hong Kong, pitting Jardine
Fleming (a recipient of rebates) against Fidelity which is not allowed to
accept them but which does take 'soft dollars'.
Mr Henry Strutt, Jardine Fleming's managing director, said: 'We'll have to
look at it carefully to see what steps we can take to mitigate the
consequences.'
Of Jardine Fleming's USDollars 23bn under management some USDollars 4bn is
managed in authorised Hong Kong trusts. About USDollars 2bn is subscribed
from abroad so the manager may have to de-authorise some funds, or seek to
place them outside the SFC's jurisdiction to avoid the ruling.
Mr Ian Boyce, managing director of Schroders in Hong Kong, said his firm
will have to look at the fees it charges if rebates are to end.
'It is not going to be the end of the world for us, rebates are not that
important to us. But we will be looking closely at our fee structure,' he
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941216

