FT941-5474

FT  07 MAR 94 / German pay deal averts threat of strike


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   HANOVER


Hopes for a round of low wage deals for German industry and the public
sector rose sharply at the weekend, after a last-minute pay settlement
headed off the threat of an engineering industry strike from today.
Agreement on an effective pay freeze for the 3.6m engineering workers was
reached on Saturday morning, after more than 13 hours of negotiations
through the night between trade union and employers' leaders.
The deal was welcomed yesterday as a clear signal to 3.5m public sector
workers, whose next round of pay negotiations opens on Wednesday, to accept
a low pay settlement. Their employers in the federal, state and local
governments want an outright pay freeze. Banking workers, printers and
construction workers are also in the pay queue.
The engineering workers will get a 2 per cent pay rise from June 1 - five
months late - but see a 10 per cent reduction in other fringe benefits for
the rest of the year. The wage rise amounts to an increase of 1.16 per cent
for the full year, but the net effect, according to the employers, is a zero
increase in wage bills.
A promised rise in Christmas pay has been postponed for a year, and fringe
benefits will be calculated at the current rate until 1996.
The deal also includes an agreement providing for shorter working hours in
companies facing a temporary slump in demand, as an alternative to job cuts.
Individual plants can negotiate a shorter working week within the national
agreement.
Mr Klaus Zwickel, the leader of IG Metall, the engineering workers' union,
said the deal was a trade-off between pay and job security.
'We decided to trade job security against money,' he said. 'In return for
these successes (on job security) we have been skinned on the wage increase.
It did not come easy.'
The deal on working hours does not amount to the full flexibility sought by
employers, who wanted to allow individual enterprises to negotiate longer or
shorter hours according to their needs. It only provides for shorter working
hours for those with severe overcapacity.
The agreement means that the strike by almost 11,000 engineering workers in
the state of Lower Saxony, due to begin at 6am today, has been called off,
although the workers will have to confirm the decision in another ballot.
The other 13 wage districts in west Germany must confirm the agreement
individually.
Warning strikes by public sector workers will go ahead today and the banking
unions plan similar action later in the week.
However, the deal will greatly increase the pressure on the public sector
unions to settle close to the nominal pay freeze sought by their employers.
Reprieve for bargaining, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940307

