FT944-10916

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (32): Coca-Cola is back - Foreign brands
move in


   By NAAZNEEN KARMALI


Foreign goods, once debarred by the government, are swamping Indian stores.
Liberal policies have attracted hordes of multinational companies to this
vast market. Though imports of consumer goods remain restricted, these
multinationals are banking on India's middle class of 200m people and their
fascination with Western products and foreign labels. Some companies have
discovered that the shortest route to reach potential consumers is to buy up
local competition.
Coca-Cola chose to enter India this way. In September 1993 it paid Dollars
40m for the trademarks of Parle Exports, a private company in Bombay.
Parle's 60 per cent market share in the Indian soft drinks industry could
have been a significant entry barrier. Instead, Coke became market leader
overnight by acquiring Parle's business of 60m cases annually.
Ironically, Parle owed its pre-eminent market position to Coca-Cola. In
1977, following the government's policy restricting foreign ownership of
companies to 40 per cent, Coca-Cola had shut down its Indian operations.
Coke's departure created a vacuum in the market that Mr Ramesh Chauhan of
Parle moved in to fill with his cola concoction branded Thums Up.
Since then, Mr Chauhan had defended his brands staunchly against
competition. Pepsico, which entered India four year ago, had to fight Mr
Chauhan every inch of the way to get to the number two position. Being a
shrewd businessman, Mr Chauhan negotiated with both Pepsi and Coke before
selling out to the highest bidder.
Mr Jaydev H. Raja, Coca-Cola India's president, says that 'India was one of
our last major frontiers. The question was always when, not if.'
Originally a resident of Bombay, Mr Raja joined Coca-Cola 15 years ago. He
was sent from Coke's headquarters in Atlanta to lead the comeback into
India. In 1992 the company announced a joint venture with a non-resident
Indian businessman. That plan was later abandoned in favour of a 100 per
cent subsidiary.
The government approved Coke's proposal in June 1993, allowing it to set up
a blending plant at Pune in the state of Maharashtra. Pepsi's project in
comparison, approved before the regulations were eased, was weighed down by
export commitments and other conditions.
Apart from brands, the Parle deal provided Coke instant access to an
existing infrastructure. Now 58 bottlers, all formerly with Parle, have
exclusive licensing arrangements with Coke. The bottlers have had to invest
in upgrading their production facilities and in new 'glass float' - 300 ml
refillable Georgia green glass bottles especially designed by Coke.
Carbonated drinks in India are sold not in cans but bottles, which, when
empty, are returned to the local bottling company.
Since its first launch a year ago in the northern city of Agra, Coke has
rapidly extended its presence to eight other cities.
Shortly after the Agra launch, crates of Coke found their way into the
'grey' market in Delhi where they were sold for a 100 per cent premium.
The curiosity of consumers to taste the real thing has ensured high initial
trial rates. By convincing bottlers to trade off an erosion in margins for
higher volumes, Coke offered a 300 ml bottle for Rs5 as against Pepsi's 250
ml serving priced at Rs5.50. Mr Raja says that this more-for-less pricing
strategy will drive sales forward in long term.
The biggest problem in this business is breakage and pilferage of bottles
which reduces the glass float with bottlers. Coke tackled this by
substituting Parle's shallow wooden crates with full depth, stackable
plastic crates which cover the bottles to the crown. Old rack body trucks
were replaced by a fleet of closed trucks that allow pallet loading. A fleet
of 6,000 pushcarts and tricycles mounted with bright red umbrellas are
taking Coke into congested city areas. These measures will make distribution
quicker and faster, says Mr Raja.
A year end stocktaking shows that Thums Up continues to be market leader in
the cola segment and Coke has sold an estimated 7.5m cases. Though
competitors have often accused Coke of buying Thums Up only to kill it, Mr
Raja says that Thums Up's unique spicy taste has its own following. Coke is
also planning to launch Fanta and Sprite shortly.
Pepsi has countered Coke energetically. It has installed 3,500 fountains in
major towns to increase its retail presence. It has offered price cuts,
special deals and free offers from time to time. Pepsi has also taken over
Dukes, a regional manufacturer in Western India, thereby boosting its market
share from 26 per cent to 34 per cent.
All this competitive activity will expand the market, says Mr PM Sinha,
chief executive officer, Pepsi Foods. The market growth rate is expected to
step up from 5 per cent to 15 per cent annually. Since Coke's launch, the
industry's annual sales have risen from 110m cases to 120m cases.
Both companies see an enormous potential. Indians are poor consumers of
fizzy drinks, with annual consumption being three servings per person. In
neighbouring Pakistan, per capita consumption is four times as much.
Mr E. Neville Isdell, senior vice president Coca-Cola Company and president,
Northeast Europe and Middle East group, says that the key to building market
share is growing the market. 'We're looking for incremental growth on top of
the brands that we've acquired', he says.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

941108

