FT942-12187

FT  30 APR 94 / Markets: Enterprise bid fails to set stocks aflame - London


   By MAGGIE URRY


The first Pounds 1bn-plus hostile bid in London for three years, Enterprise
Oil's offer of Pounds 1.45bn for Lasmo on Thursday, has done little to shake
the market out of its fixation with US interest rates.
This obsession is growing tedious. As the chart shows, gilt-edged yields and
the yield on the Footsie have been slavishly following the yield on the US
long bond this year.
The point was emphasised this week when the Footsie managed to rise on
Wednesday, the day Wall Street was closed for former president Nixon's
funeral, and again on Thursday morning, but reversed that afternoon when
Wall Street reopened weaker.
The fear that has coupled the markets together is that the UK economy will
follow the pattern of that in the US. There economic recovery is expected to
lead to inflation and yet higher interest rates.
There are several arguments against this. First, the US is hardly suffering
rampant inflation or oppressive interest rates as yet. And the suggestion
from the US this week was that economic growth is settling down, while
interest rates have only returned to a 'normal' level having been
artificially low.
In the UK the economic recovery is lagging behind the US. And while there
are some signs of inflationary pressures beginning to build once more, they
are only faint. The CBI quarterly survey said this week that there were no
signs of overheating.
SG Warburg Securities, which changed its base rate assumptions this week, is
fairly typical in believing that UK interest rates still have another  1/4
point to fall, to 5 per cent, though probably not until the summer, and are
unlikely to begin rising until 1995.
These issues will, no doubt, be batted back and forth between the Chancellor
of the Exchequer and the Governor of the Bank of England when they meet on
Wednesday to discuss interest rate policy.
The local elections on Thursday may figure in the talks too, although even
the Chancellor cannot think that an interest rate cut on Wednesday
afternoon, say, would reverse the expected poor performance by the
Conservative party, nor that the markets would believe such a cut was
anything other than politically motivated.
Another topic for them will be the impact on pay packets and the economy of
this month's tax increases, which monthly-paid workers are beginning to
feel.
This bears on one market trend spotted by Richard Jeffrey, equity strategist
at Charterhouse Tilney. He points out that from 1965 until 1992 the consumer
sectors of the market substantially outperformed the manufacturing sectors,
as Britain's industrial base declined.
But over the last 15 months the position has reversed. Consumer stocks have
been out of favour while manufacturing shares have risen. He puts this down
to better prospects for industry as sterling's fall has made companies more
competitive abroad, and the prospect for margin growth higher than for
consumer sectors.
The latter, after years of expansion, face overcapacity in sectors such as
supermarkets and pubs. But Jeffrey says the switch might have gone too far
the other way, with the historic p / e on the manufacturers almost twice
that of the consumer sectors.
While the markets are focusing on US interest rates, the message from the
corporate sector this week has been that now is the time to buy. The list of
deals, aside from the spat in the oil sector, is remarkably long, and
follows the Lloyds Bank / Cheltenham & Gloucester and Inchcape / Hogg deals
of the previous week.
Highlights of this week's list were BAT Industries' Dollars 1bn (Pounds
670m) purchase of American Tobacco from American Brands; Compass Group's
Pounds 308m acquisition of Canteen Corporation, also in the US; Williams
Holdings' Pounds 64m buy of a continental European business from Solvay;
Airtours' Pounds 74m purchase of Scandinavian Airline System's leisure
business and acquisition of a cruise ship; and Hobson's Pounds 111m takeover
of the Co-operative Wholesale Society's own label food manufacturing
business.
There are similarities between the deals. Most are UK companies buying a
business abroad. Most are purchases of subsidiaries, not aggressive bids for
whole companies. And most have been financed by share issues. Williams went
further, raising more than it needed through a Pounds 267m rights to give
itself the cash to do more deals.
The number of acquisitions suggests that there must be more to come, if only
because it would be a coincidence for all the deals being worked on to be
completed at once.
But while takeovers are generally a bull point for shares, what the equity
market needs is some big cash bids for UK companies. This would put some
money back into the market to fuel demand, rather than adding to investors'
liquidity problems through increasing the supply of new shares.
The trend of rights issues has another worrying aspect to it. It suggests
that issuers think their shares highly rated and want to take advantage of
an overpriced currency.
Flotations continue to suck money in too, with TeleWest, the cable
communications group, looking to raise Pounds 300m or so in its float.
However, Steve Morgan, founder and chief executive of Redrow, the
housebuilder, decided that the price he could get for his shares in a float
was not high enough and cut the number he aims to sell.
Meanwhile the trend in corporate profit news has been mixed. Associated
British Foods managed to increase operating profits by a creditable 13 per
cent in spite of the squeeze from its customers, and Imperial Chemical
Industries raised first quarter profits by 31 per cent, on a volume gain of
2 per cent and no price rises. But British Gas warned on Thursday of
declining profits as increasing competition and regulation bites.

The Financial Times


Weekend Page 2

940430

