FT943-13203

FT  21 JUL 94 / Companies hit by recruiting problems


   By PETER NORMAN and GILLIAN TETT


UK companies experienced growing difficulties recruiting staff in the second
quarter of this year, providing a first indication that Britain's economic
recovery might be running into supply side constraints.
In an otherwise upbeat survey of nearly 8,000 UK manufacturing and service
companies, the Association of British Chambers of Commerce found that
recruitment difficulties were at their highest level since late 1990.
The chambers' findings, to be published today, follow official retail sales
and bank and building society lending figures yesterday which provided
further evidence that the economy was growing steadily and shrugging off
April's tax increases.
City economists suggested yesterday's news of a 1 per cent seasonally
adjusted increase in retail sales volumes between this year's first and
second quarters and a surprise Pounds 2.9bn increase in bank and building
society lending last month was consistent with bank base rates being held at
5.25 per cent for a few months yet. However, some predicted higher base
rates by the year's end.
Publication yesterday of the minutes of the June 8 meeting between Mr Eddie
George, Bank of England governor, and Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor, showed
that the Bank was advocating a pre-emptive rise in interest rates if
stronger growth or increased costs threaten price stability in the years
ahead.
Data released yesterday suggested that British families and manufacturing
companies were developing an increased appetite for credit last month.
New mortgage lending by building societies rose sharply in June to reach its
highest level for almost two years.
Britain's nine biggest banking groups increased new consumer lending
substantially last month.
Manufacturers increased their borrowing from the banks by Pounds 162m in
June after several months of repaying debt.
Consumer spending shows steady growth, Page 12
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940721

