FT942-16314

FT  11 APR 94 / International Company News: Race for control of Banesto
enters final lap


   By TOM BURNS


   MADRID


The race to take control of Banesto, the troubled Spanish bank which the
authorities will auction to the highest bidder at the begining of next
month, has entered its final lap.
At the weekend Banco Central Hispano (BCH), which owns the biggest domestic
bank network, indicated it was not interested in Banesto. Argentaria, the
state-controlled financial group, said that it was, and Banco Zaragozano, a
medium-sized bank, spoke up for the smaller institutions saying it and
others like it might link with a larger group in a joint bid.
Mr Jose Maria Amusategui, BCH chairman, said a bid for Banesto was
'unlikely'. He told the bank's annual meeting: 'We should not divert our
attention from the merger process (BCH is the result of the 1991 union
between Banco Central and Banco Hispano Americano) and, much less, take on
risks.'
Mr Francisco Luzon , Argentaria's chairman, told shareholders the bank had
decided to study a bid for Banesto 'with the utmost detail'. He told the
annual meeting he was open to a single or joint presentation with other
institutions.
Banco Zaragozano shareholders, also at the annual meeting at the weekend,
were told that talks were being held with other medium-sized banks to form a
consortium with a larger bank to bid at the Banesto auction.
Banco Santander, the most profitable, and most internationally-based, of the
big domestic banks, officially kept quiet at the weekend as did a rival
contender in the auction, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya. BBV, the second-ranked bank
in terms of size, lent its senior executives to manage Banesto following its
intervention by the Bank of Spain at the end of last year.
The bidding banks have little time left in which to make up their minds.
Under the terms of the auction they must declare their intentions, and also
any consortia arrangements, on April 18. They must deliver their final bids
a week later. The Bank of Spain is due to announce a decision on the auction
on May 9.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940411

