FT942-12318

FT  29 APR 94 / Iran accused of terrorist links: Intelligence sources say
Tehran is backing IRA and Japanese Red Army


   By JIMMY BURNS and STEWART DALBY


Britain and the US joined yesterday in warning Iran over its alleged support
for international terrorism after obtaining intelligence information that
Tehran was stepping up its links with groups including the IRA and the
Japanese Red Army.
In London, Mr Gholamreza Ansari, the Iranian charge d'affaires, was summoned
to a meeting with Mr Douglas Hogg, a foreign office minister, and told that
the UK government had evidence of contacts between Iranian intelligence and
the IRA.
The US has long accused Iran of sponsoring international terrorism and
seeking to acquire nuclear weapons, and it has urged other countries not to
offer the Islamic regime economic assistance. The allegations will put
particular pressure on Japan, which has a relatively good relationship with
Tehran.
In London the Foreign Office said: 'We take the gravest view of any contact
which might assist or encourage terrorism.' Mr Hogg was said to have
requested an assurance at senior level that contact between Iran and the IRA
would be immediately and conclusively severed.
Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, emphasised Washington's
concern after contact with Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary,
Speaking in Cairo, Mr Christopher said: 'I would underscore my deep anger at
the continued terrorism projected by Iran not only here in the Middle East
but through other parts of the world.'
Mr Christopher said such these concerns were behind the US belief that that
Iran did not qualify for equal treatment with other countries in areas such
as financial assistance.
Mr Ansari last night emphatically denied any involvement by Iran in the
supply of arms or money to the IRA. He said: 'Iran has always strongly
condemned any terrorist action in any place in any form or any time.'
Asked whether Mr Hogg had produced any evidence at the meeting that there
had been contacts between the IRA and the Iranian intelligence service, he
replied: 'There was no evidence. I did not receive any evidence'
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said the government was
'quite satisfied' there had been contacts.
The IRA is thought to have been drawing on financial support from Iran and
may have been on the verge of securing a large shipment of arms. According
to western diplomats, Iran has also been training Japanese terrorists to
conduct assassinations in Europe and the US.
They say that in recent months the Iranian government has been providing
logistical and financial backing to the Japanese Red Army, a terrorist group
that conducted a series of spectacular terrorist attacks in Asia and Europe
during the 1970s and 1980s.
The allegations, if proved accurate, may embarrass Japan, which has been
conducting an independent foreign policy with Iran.
UK terror claim underlines prickly relations, Page 5
Editorial Comment, Page 15

The Financial Times


International Page 1

940429

