FT941-16975

FT  07 JAN 94 / Retail stocks depressed by static sales at Dixons


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


Dixons, the electrical retailer, sent a shiver through the retail sector
yesterday with the news that its Christmas sales were no better than last
year. However, Boots restored some confidence to the sector with news of a 7
per cent sales increase.
Dixons' comments contrasted sharply with reports of strong retail trading in
the two weeks before Christmas. It depressed many share prices in the stores
sector, although analysts said Dixons' comments were not unexpected, and not
representative of the rest of the high street.
Dixons shares fell 43p to 240p after the group warned that operating profits
this year were unlikely to match last year's. Kingfisher, owner of the Comet
electrical chain, fell 15p to 747p; MFI, the furniture retailer, lost 5p to
162p; and catalogue retailer Argos fell 3p to 374p. But clothing retailers'
shares were largely unaffected.
Mr John Clare, chief executive, said Dixons was unusual in that it had
enjoyed a 17 per cent increase in sales for Christmas 1992, when many other
retailers fared badly, due to huge sales of computer games.
A damaging price war this year in the games console market, started in
November by Kingfisher's Woolworths and Comet chains, had led to a sharp
fall in profit margins, even though sales volumes were similar.
While Dixons was selling Sega Megadrive consoles for Pounds 169 in December
1992, and expected to sell them for Pounds 129 this Christmas, it ended up
charging as little as Pounds 89 in some branches.
Camcorder sales were also weaker, but sales of television sets and video and
audio equipment were well ahead. Not counting games consoles, Dixons saw a 9
per cent increase in sales values over the seven-week Christmas period.
Statements from other retailers helped dispel the gloom. Rhino, the
specialist computer and video game chain, said Christmas trading was 'strong
and in line with expectations'. Boots, which makes up to half its annual
profits in the final three months of the year, announced a 7.2 per cent
increase in retail sales for the period.
Sales were 6.3 per cent up at Boots the Chemists, helped by a strong
performance by health and beauty care and gifts; 10.6 per cent up at Boots
Opticians; 10.1 per cent up at Halfords, helped by strong bicycle sales;
28.7 per cent up at Children's World, due to strong sales of baby and
fashion clothing; and up 1.1 per cent at A G Stanley, the decorating chain.
Boots shares closed down 5p at 582p.
Lex, Page 14
Dixons shares fall, Page 15
Background, Page 16
London stocks, Page 30

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940107

