FT942-16296

FT  11 APR 94 / Equity Markets: Switch to bearish stance may lift hedge
funds - Risk & Reward


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


As the US House banking committee begins its hearings on hedge funds this
week, and the first US banks report their first-quarter results, attention
will again be drawn to the heavy losses incurred by fund managers and market
participants during the recent sharp price declines in many of the world's
financial markets.
However, the worst of those losses may be over, as many traders have managed
to reverse their positions to take account of the switch from bullish to
bearish conditions.
During the first wave of price falls in February, the main sellers were
hedge funds (which were forced to liquidate positions, largely in bond
markets, because of their high degree of leverage) and proprietary traders
(dealers at banks and securities houses taking positions with their
institution's own capital).
Many mainstream institutional fund managers held their fire during this
initial period, convinced there had been no change in economic fundamentals.
However, in March many institutions were forced to reassess this view.
Many fund managers appear to have sold futures to hedge their long positions
in bonds, creating record trading volume on futures exchanges in the first
quarter.
'Hedge funds have probably got out of about 80 per cent of their positions
and indeed have gone the other way,' said one fund manager.
As a result, he believes 'there is still some cash selling to come, but it
will be against buying in futures'.
The theory that many fund managers have at least gone some way to reversing
bull market positions held at the start of the year is backed up by better
performance figures for March.
The Managed Account Reports (MAR) trading adviser index showed a decline of
just 0.01 per cent in March, with just over half of the advisers showing a
positive return, to give a first-quarter fall of 5.19 per cent. According to
Ms Lois Pelz, managing editor of MAR, 'the traders who were able to realise
a profit (in March) took short positions on financials and the dollar'.
TASS Management, which also tracks futures funds, found a range for March of
plus 20 per cent to minus 15 per cent among the top 50 managers - which
leaves them down around 5 per cent for the year to date.
Of the two hundred-plus hedge funds tracked by TASS, the average decline for
the year to date is around 7 per cent. 'In February and March people were
reducing leverage. Those who did well (in March) did it in bonds, by
flipping round positions,' according to Ms Nicola Meaden of TASS.
Nevertheless, there is little sign that any of this has helped restore
confidence. One reason is the shock waves caused by the collapse of three
hedge funds managed by Mr David Askin, with total equity of Dollars 600m,
mainly invested in mortgage-backed securities.
One reason for the concern generated by the funds' collapse is that they
were supposed to be risk averse. In addition, there appear to have been
difficulties in valuing the rather illiquid instruments held by the funds.
'They were supposed to have a market neutral strategy, which means you try
to hedge out volatility. A lot of banks are re-evaluating relationships with
other hedge funds as a result,' said one hedge fund specialist.
Meanwhile, for those fund managers and traders who have created short
positions in the bond market, the next fear is the markets will now start to
rally strongly, forcing them to buy back into the markets at a higher level,
thus incurring further losses.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940411

