FT942-16183

FT  12 APR 94 / Tecs get ready to grapple with wider picture: The question
of who looks after local schemes of regeneration


   By LISA WOOD


In the next few weeks South and East Cheshire Training and Enterprise
Council will take the unusual step of enrolling its 16 directors - most of
them senior business executives - in an intensive two-day course on economic
development.
This year the government intends the 82 Tecs, which deliver state-funded
training in England and Wales, to focus more clearly on their role in
fostering enterprise and economic development.
It is a complex task, not least because of the need for employer-led Tecs to
work in effective partnerships with the other agencies involved, including
local authorities.
Mr Richard Guy, chief executive of South and East Cheshire Tec, said:
'Economic development is a specialist skill. It is difficult for our
non-executive Tec directors, even though they have developed a broad
strategy for business growth and wealth creation in our area, to focus on
this bigger picture without going through a training process.'
The Tecs' progress towards fulfilling their economic-development role in the
three years since they were set up has been difficult to monitor.
For one thing, it has been hard to agree measures. Many bodies other than
Tecs are involved in promoting business growth.
Some Tecs have been active, while others have made slow progress, preferring
to concentrate on training where there are strict contractual arrangements
with the government.
This year for the first time the government will ask Tecs to draw up
detailed three-year corporate plans, involving details of partnerships they
are forging, as a prelude to detailed negotiations with the government over
priorities.
Some of the funds Tecs have been given in the past for business support have
been absorbed into the Single Regeneration Budget, which this year will have
Pounds 100m to dispense.
The SRB draws together enterprise and regeneration programmes from four
government departments. Tecs, local authorities and other bodies such as
chambers of commerce have been told their bids will be viewed more
favourably if they have formed partnerships, with agreed local priorities.
It is a high-risk period for Tecs, which already have faced tough
'territorial' wars in the areas in which they have tried to form
partnerships. Tecs and local authorities do not necessarily have the same
priorities. Tecs see their role as promoting business growth and improving
skills while local authorities are more likely to be involved in
regeneration - promoting infrastructure and tackling social disadvantage.
Tecs fear that local authorities will swallow up the small amount of funds
available for regeneration, while local authorities fear that Tecs will be
the agents of government in stripping away even more of their powers.
Trust between Tecs and local authorities has not been promoted by the fact
that government guidelines for bidding for the SRB has left fluid who should
be the lead partner - partly because the government wants maximum
flexibility, but also because government departments do not agree over the
Tecs' role in relationship to bids for the SRB.
The Department of Trade and Industry wants Tecs to be a key player, whereas
the Department of Employment believes they should be the main bodies
involved in pulling together bids.
Mr Guy says Tecs' roles will vary. In some areas, particularly inner cities,
local authorities and development agencies could have a strong handle on
regeneration as well as promoting inward investment. A Tec's role would be
to improve skills and providing business support activities. In others the
Tec might play a more active part in bringing partners together.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940412

