FT944-14426

FT  22 OCT 94 / Arts: Will the gods have the last laugh? - Nicholas Payne,
director of opera at Covent Garden, defends the company's new 'Ring'


   By NICHOLAS PAYNE


An old mate from my university days, still shaken from the previous night's
Rhinegold, admonished me before the start of Walkure: 'Nicky you really
should have stopped it. You know that, don't you?'. The next day I received
a card from another acquaintance: 'It was a really wonderful and such an
intelligent production of Rhinegold - the first serious thing of its sort in
England. If the critics throw rotten oranges, don't despair - carry on. I
can't wait for the next episodes.'
Opera inflames passions, and Wagner's operas more than most. The Royal Opera
House's new Ring has polarised opinion more than usual.
Why do we do it? Would it not be easier to revive an old production, or to
commission something from well-established practitioners who might be relied
upon to produce a more predictably acceptable result? Maybe. I have no
interest in controversy for its own sake. Productions which set out to shock
now bore me. Yet I suspect that there is something intrinsically disturbing
at the bottom of Wagner's Rhine, and that any attempt to dive below the
rippling surface and to dredge it up will upset people.
Our new-look Wagner, which began last year with Meistersinger, is borne of
my conviction that the record of Wagner staging in this country is a fairly
dismal one. I heard my first Walkure at Covent Garden in 1958, memorably
conducted by Rudolf Kempe.
Many magnificent, and some less magnificent, musical experiences have
followed with Rings in this country conducted by Kempe, Konwitschny, Solti,
Downes, Gibson, Davis, Goodall, Mackerras, Armstrong and Haitink, but to a
greater rather than lesser extent the productions which accompanied them
were unworthy.
For intellectual and visual stimulation one had to travel abroad. The
supreme imaginative responses to the Ring have been Wieland Wagner's last
attempt in 1965 and Patrice Chereau's centennial productions begun in 1976,
both at Bayreuth. Both productions were much derided when they first
appeared.
A storm of booing and some hostile reviews do not automatically signal a
good production, although at least they indicate that our wonderfully quiet
audience is alive. But, as the abuse rained down at the opening night
curtain calls on our brave production team, I remained convinced that they
had created something truly remarkable - a contemporary response to Wagner's
Ring which can stand alongside Wieland Wagner's and Chereau's in their day.
Richard Jones and Nigel Lowery, our director and designer, have devised a
Ring unencumbered by tradition. Drawing on a kaleidoscope of references and
images, they have yet fashioned something which is both original and wholly
theirs. Its overt theatricality is refined into a narrative directly told.
Jones asked us to print in the programme Hans Sach's 'Wahnmonolog', his dark
night of the soul before Midsummer's Day. In Meistersinger, 'Wahn', or
madness or folly, is succeeded by healing, the community restored to itself.
In the Ring, Man's folly, his vain pursuit of riches and power and love,
leads to death and destruction and disillusion.
The story is clearly but diversely told. This Rheingold is often funny and
irreverent, its texture deliberately light and transparent rather than
portentous of the tragedy to come. We begin in Arcadia or the Garden of
Eden. Despite the crimes committed the gods are still 'laughing children' at
the end. Only Freia, goddess of youth and beauty, is forgotten and the Rhine
despoiled.
The light-hearted mood has gone by Walkure, which by contrast is introverted
and intense, a symphony in blue. Such humour as remains is cruel and bitter.
The final scene between Wotan and Brunnhilde is enacted on a small square
centre stage, father and daughter driven to hurt each other terribly because
of their great love, trapped in an end-game of hope and despair. I find
these ambiguities very Wagnerian.
Bernard Haitink and I agonised for a long time over the commitment to a new
Ring. We chose Jones and Lowery in preference to five or six other
possibilities because we believed that deep down they had a truly Wagnerian
vision - despite the dangers and unconventionality, or perhaps because of
them.
There are other Wagner operas which I would not ask Jones and Lowery to
stage, despite their fine Flying Dutchman in Amsterdam. We chose Graham Vick
and Richard Hudson for Meistersinger, because we thought they would create
its community and realise the renewal that comes out of anger and loss. I
hope Vick will return for a Parsifal with Haitink at the end of the decade.
For Tristan we are still searching for the right team.
The Royal Opera's policy (pompous word for something which is really a
matter of feel) is to offer diverse and contrasted theatrical experiences
across the whole repertory. Unlike the pope, I cannot claim infallibility.
Our collective judgments may be subject to error, but I can claim that they
are not lightly reached. Long hours of listening, watching, thought and
discussion go into the choice of singers, conductors and directors to blend
into a team which just might capture that elusive phenomenon, the perfect
opera performance, or (to be more realistic) the opera season which on
balance may be judged a success.
It is not an accident that the start of our new Ring is followed by Gounod's
Romeo et Juliette.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

941022

