FT941-5657

FT  05 MAR 94 / Tokyo aid conditional, Zhu told


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Mr Zhu Rongji, Chinese vice premier, yesterday ended a 10-day visit to
Japan, with promises of continued economic support from Tokyo, but a tougher
line on aid.
Mr Tsutomu Hata, Japanese foreign minister, told Mr Zhu, the architect of
Chinese economic policy, that the size and terms of Japan's next package of
official yen loans would be conditional on Beijing's efforts to produce
environmental projects and clearer information on military spending. Japan's
current five-year Chinese aid package, worth Y810bn, runs out in 1995 and is
to be succeeded, on Tokyo's insistence, by two shorter term packages of two
and three years.
Japan's switch to making aid to China more conditional is line with a new
directness in Tokyo's attitude to China, especially on human rights, defence
spending and pollution. 'We are looking for a more mature relationship,'
said a foreign ministry official.
However, Japan is eager to support China's economic reforms and maintain
good relations with this increasingly powerful neighbour. As evidence of the
seriousness with which it views its China ties, Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the
Japanese prime minister is to visit Beijing on March 19.
The economic stakes are high. China is the fastest growing destination for
Japanese foreign investment, with 490 projects worth Dollars 1.07bn in 1992,
nearly double the Dollars 579m in the previous year, according to the
finance ministry. To this, Japanese businesses added another Dollars 695bn
(Pounds 476bn) in the six months to last September.
Mr Zhu, who met 240 senior executives during his visit, is widely seen in
Japan as a guarantor of Chinese economic stability and of the safety of
Japanese investment there. Trade is also growing fast, so that Japan last
year became China's biggest trading ally - with two-way trade worth Dollars
37.8bn - and China became Japan's second largest commercial partner after
the US.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940305

