FT942-14964

FT  18 APR 94 / Staying in front in a time of change: A culture shift at the
UK's largest fund management company


   By NORMA COHEN


Below a striking image from the world of sport runs the corporate message:
'We have what it takes.' The advertiser is Mercury Asset Management, the
UK's largest fund management company.
What surprises is not the message itself but the fact that MAM feels the
need, for the first time in its history, for this kind of image-building
exercise. The move reflects two realities: that the fund management industry
is undergoing fundamental change as long-term savings patterns shift and the
fact that MAM itself faces growing competitive pressure in its core
institutional UK pension fund accounts.
For blue-blooded MAM, 75 per cent owned by the investment bank, SG Warburg,
these challenges are bringing a culture shift, if not culture shock. When Mr
Richard Royds, managing director in charge of unit trusts, suggested
sponsoring a financial news slot on radio two years ago, 'Warburg people
just about choked on their coffee,' one MAM official recalls.
But MAM increasingly recognises that it must find new business, beyond its
solid base in consistent, successful management of assets for UK pension
fund trustees. 'The UK institutional market is and will remain tremendously
important to MAM,' says Mr Hugh Stevenson, MAM's chairman. 'But things
change.'
What Mr Stevenson forsees is a slow, but steady shift in UK pension fund
provision. Instead of the traditional defined-benefit scheme of pooled
provision, where retirees are entitled to receive a percentage of their
final salary paid from a pension scheme, companies will increasingly offer
so-called defined contribution schemes.
To this end, MAM last summer launched a new product, which incorporates
sophisticated stock options techniques, through its Mercury Life subsidiary.
The product is aimed at taking some risk out of money purchase pension
arrangements. The value of an individual's defined contribution pension can
be slashed by a drop in stock and bond markets in the years before
retirement and MAM says its product will cut that risk.
The advertising campaign is all part of the process of re-assuring pension
scheme members that their money is in good hands.
'In a defined-benefit scheme, people feel much closer to their fund manager.
It's their own little pot of money. It's increasingly important that the
person has a warm feeling about MAM,' says Mr Stevenson. 'We want MAM to be
a household name,' says Mr Colin Clark, a director of MAM's institutional
business.
Indeed, over the past few years, MAM has been building its private client
business, including a first foray into investment trusts. In 1993, MAM was
ranked as the UK's sixth largest unit trust company, a jump of three places
in the 18 months that Mr Stevenson has been in charge.
Mr Stevenson, who had been a director in the investment banking division at
SG Warburg and a MAM board member for many years, was considered by MAM
insiders to be a peacemaking candidate to succeed Mr Peter
Stormonth-Darling, who retired in 1992.
Former MAM officials said that the view inside the firm was that competition
between the two heirs-apparent to Mr Stormont-Darling, Mr Stephen Zimmerman
and Mr David Price, was too intense to allow either one to be appointed
chairman. Rather than face defection or discord, MAM chose someone from
outside its ruling inner circle.
While MAM officials dismiss talk of internal rifts, former employees say it
was clear that among Mr Stevenson's main tasks would be to keep the company
working as a successful unit.
By the end of March 1993, the last full year for which data is available,
MAM had Pounds 35bn in UK pension fund assets under management, Pounds 6bn
in retail funds which come from individuals and Pounds 9bn in international
funds. Of that, the institutional money had only risen by 15 per cent in the
previous year, while the retail assets had grown by 50 per cent.
By the time 1994 figures are released, the retail assets will have grown by
a further 50 per cent, boosted by the launch of two of the UK's most
successful investment trusts: the Mercury World Mining Trust and the Mercury
European Privatisation Trust.
However, there may be more to MAM's efforts to refocus the business than
forward planning in a changing market. According to pensions consultants who
advise trustees and therefore drive the institutional fund management
business, MAM is no longer finding it so easy to draw in big institutional
money. It needs new markets to retain its lead in domestic fund management.
In recent years, the company has been shaken by several well publicised
defections, most notably that of one of its star fund managers, Mr Leonard
Licht. But perhaps more damaging, consultants say, has been the less visible
departure of some more junior fund managers, whose talent MAM needs to
nurture to stay on top. Former MAM employees said that the inability of the
company to promote some of its most ambitious staff because senior positions
are unlikely to become available quickly had led to frustrations. Since Mr
Stevenson's arrival, MAM has been making an effort to motivate and retain
managers in this tier. For instance, senior MAM directors Mr Stephen
Zimmerman and Ms Carol Galley devolved asset allocation and stock selection
decision-making, allowing rising stars to test their mettle and share the
glory.
Also, the consultants say, MAM has historically been weak on client
servicing. 'Their cuddle factor isn't a strong point,' says one. 'Clients
respect them when they have good performance, but in their hearts they don't
really like them.'
This attitude has damaged MAM in some beauty parades. 'We felt they were
offering us a favour, not a service,' says the administrator of one leading
UK local authority superannuation fund who, after considering MAM, chose two
other fund managers. MAM has recognised this shortcoming and greatly
increased spending on client service.
In the mid-1980's when MAM was spectacularly outperforming its competitors,
client servicing did not seem such a great issue. But in recent years, its
overall performance, while generally above average, has not been as frothy
as before, forcing MAM to pay closer attention to client care.
Indeed, pension consultants say that in 1993, MAM's funds which are measured
by Combined Actuarial Performance Services, a performance measurement
agency, had a median return of 28.8 per cent, marginally below the industry
median of 29.2 per cent as measured by CAPS.
MAM's performance itself has become an issue, not because it is poor but
because the company takes the unusual step of refusing to disclose the
median return on the pools of money it manages.
Meanwhile, there has also been carping about the range of MAM's performance
on balanced pools where the fund manager has full discretion over how assets
are to be invested. Pension consultants say that MAM has a reputation for an
unusually wide range of results by its different fund managers - a
reputation which performance measurement agencies say is unfounded.
Mr John Williams, research analyst at WM Company, a performance measurement
service, says that over a five-year period, the disparity amongst MAM's
results, while not as narrow as that of some competitors, is 'not out of
line' with other large fund managers.
MAM officials bristle when questioned closely about their performance
figures on balanced accounts. Mr Stevenson says MAM's business consists
increasingly of 'specialist' accounts, where the client determines the broad
category of assets to be purchased and sets a performance benchmark to be
met by the fund managers. Only accounts with the same benchmark should be
measured against each other, he says.
MAM is not alone in seeking to refocus its strategy. The other three big UK
pension fund managers, Schroders, PDFM and Gartmore, are also looking for
ways to expand, either through new domestic products or by tapping
international accounts. Privately, MAM's largest competitors concede they
also are too reliant on a single product in a single market.
Mr Stevenson is confident that MAM will prosper in these new conditions.
'Our strategy is to maintain ourselves as a growth company in a growth
industry,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940418

