FT942-15731

FT  14 APR 94 / World Trade News: Labour standards move resisted


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   MARRAKESH


Ministers from developing countries railed yesterday against moves by
industrialised nations to include labour standards in trade negotiations,
saying they would provide a cover for protectionism.
Mr Pranab Mukherjee, India's commerce minister, told the ministerial meeting
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade that although India was
strongly committed to internationally recognised labour standards 'we see no
merit whatsoever in the attempt to force link-ages where they do not exist'.
Mrs Rafidah Aziz, trade minister of Malaysia, said the linkage of trade with
labour standards 'would in effect provide a convenient cover for trade
protectionism'.
Under a compromise between the US and developing countries hammered out in
Geneva last week, labour standards will not be specifically mentioned in the
formal documents of the Uruguay Round, due to be signed in Marrakesh
tomorrow.
However, it and other issues may be raised in the preparatory committee for
the World Trade Organisation, which will replace Gatt.
Sir Leon Brittan, European Union trade commissioner, said the issue was 'a
legitimate global concern and cannot be taboo among participants in the
world economy'.
The US and the EU say they do not want to curb competition from low-wage
countries but to tackle slavery, child exploitation and bans on trade
unions.
Apart from labour standards, industrialised countries this week proposed the
WTO discuss competition policy, investment rules and finance/exchange rate
policies.
Developing countries have put forward free movement of workers and
restrictive business practices - the latter aimed mainly at alleged abuses
by multinational companies of dominant market positions.
Third world nations also called for compensation for poor countries which
stand to lose from the Uruguay Round's provisions. Some have urged a
permanent monitoring mechanism within the WTO to assess the Round's impact
on individual nations.
Among other proposals, developing countries want assistance to exploit new
market opportunities, including help to diversify exports and outlets, as
well as financial aid, debt relief and extra trade preferences.
Many developing countries complain that industrialised nations have not done
enough to open their markets to their goods, with the poorest feeling that
they have had a raw deal from the Uruguay Round.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940414

