FT941-4069

FT  12 MAR 94 / Motoring: Is the revolution here? - Stuart Marshall detects
changes in car design which may presage major upheavals / Geneva motor show


   By STUART MARSHALL


For years, most cars were three-box (bonnet, body and boot) saloons. Then
came the two-box hatchback (bonnet and body with integral load space). And
now it looks as if it will be the turn of the one-box car. The first signs
of what could be a major upheaval in car design are evident at Geneva salon
international de l'automobile this week. Marginally different - you could
call them badge and grille engineered  - versions of a tall, chisel-nosed
vehicle jointly developed by the Fiat and Peugeot groups are on the Citroen,
Fiat, Lancia and Peugeot stands.
They prove that Renault got it absolutely right when it launched the Espace.
Ten years later it is still Europe's best selling multi-purpose people
carrier and, at any rate in styling, the new Fiat-Peugeot product looks
rather like a carbon copy.
Peugeot 806 and Citroen Evasion versions of the new vehicles, powered by
2.0-litre petrol engines, one of them turbo-charged, will go on sale on
mainland Europe in mid-summer. But Britain will have to wait another year
for right-hand drive production, by which time there will also be a
turbo-diesel.
The new MPV (multi-purpose vehicle) is front-wheel driven, has twin sliding
doors and takes five people plus a mass of luggage, or up to eight, all on
face-forward seats, if they are travelling light.
At the moment, MPVs are a minority choice in Europe with around 150,000 sold
annually, half of them Renault Espaces. The industry believes that by the
end of the decade it could be half-a-million, though this could be an
under-estimate if the current fashion for using on-off road 4 x 4s as car
substitutes should run out of steam. The MPV would then be a logical
replacement. Its driving position is as high and the interior space as
generous as an on-off roader's but it rides and handles like a normal car
and uses less fuel.
One of the most intriguing Geneva exhibits is the Lexus Landau, a research
prototype shown by ItalDesign that looks half way between a hatchback and an
MPV. It is based on a Toyota Lexus GS300 platform but has a V8 engine
instead of a V6 and four-wheel drive.
Although its body is 2ft (60cm) shorter than a Lexus GS300's, it is 2in
(5cm) taller and offers a lot more space for people and luggage. It is too
early for any talk of possible production. But the current Lexus GS300
luxury executive saloon owes a great deal to a Jaguar-engined ItalDesign
prototype called the Westminster displayed at Geneva four years ago. Jaguar
showed no interest in it. Toyota did and history could repeat itself. Today,
there is a trend away from sheer bulk. Reasonably enough, buyers want cars
that are large inside but do not take up too much road space - just like the
Lexus Landau.
There are new cars galore at Geneva. The recently introduced Volkswagen Golf
and Citroen ZX estate cars have been joined by a class rival, the Rover 400
Tourer, which has made its world debut at the salon.
Rover does not call its dual-purpose car an estate though that is what it
is. The elegant Rover 400 Touring has a high class and traditional-looking
interior. Buyers will have a choice of 1.6-litre or 2.0-litre petrol engines
or a 1.8 litre turbo-diesel when the car goes on sale in June, priced from
Pounds 14,495.
Renault's Laguna (this column, 19 Feb) and General Motors' new Vauxhall
(Opel) Omega which replaces the Vauxhall Carlton will be hotting up the
competition in the medium and medium/large company car market this year.
Omegas, which are rear-wheel driven, come with saloon or estate car bodies.
Petrol engines range from a 2-litre four-cylinder to a 3-litre in-line six
but the pick is the British-made 2.5-litre V6. The diesel has a turbocharged
straight six bought-in from BMW. Like the petrol cars, it will be available
with automatic transmission. Prices are expected to start at Pounds 16,000
when they go on sale next month.
Nissan chose Geneva as launch pad for its striking new 200SX
high-performance sporting coupe that competes with the new Toyota Celica
(described in this column last week). Yet another good looking two-door was
unveiled by Honda - the Accord coupe, conceived and built in the US. It is
due in Britain in May.
Two new German cars attracting a lot of attention are the BMW Compact, a
3-door variation on the 3-Series theme, and Audi's stunning all-light alloy
A8 luxury saloon.
Although the 1.6-litre or 1.8-litre engined Compact is aimed downmarket of
what one thinks of as typical BMW buyers, it concedes nothing in terms of
safety and convenience. Anti-lock brakes, driver airbag and power steering
are all part of the package.
Having been shown thinly disguised as a prototype last autumn at Frankfurt,
the Audi 8 was hardly a surprise. But it shows how a high performing luxury
saloon's weight and environmental impact can be reduced when other new
models generally get heavier.
More of the Audi A8 and other Geneva exhibits next week.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940312

