FT943-13302

FT  20 JUL 94 / Belgian steelmaker looks at east German plant


   By MICHAEL LINDEMANN, EMMA TUCKER and JUDY DEMPSEY


   BONN, BRUSSELS, BERLIN


Cockerill Sambre, Belgium's biggest steelmaker, is in talks about a possible
takeover of Eko Stahl, the ailing east German steel works.
Cockerill said there had been only one meeting with the Treuhand, the
government agency trying to privatise Eko Stahl. The talks are the first
evidence of interest in the east German plant since a bid by Riva, the
private Italian group, collapsed in mid-May. 'There has been one contact and
we are sending a technical delegation over there on Monday,' Cockerill said.
German steel analysts expressed surprise because Cockerill had previously
said it would join an international consortium, including Thyssen, the
biggest German steelmaker, and Usinor-Sacilor, the largest French producer,
to prepare a feasibility study on Eko Stahl's prospects.
Mr Gunter Rexrodt, economics minister, said after the failure of the Riva
bid that he would push to have an integrated steelworks built at the mill
which lacks hot-rolling capacity. However, German steelmakers have rejected
such a proposal given the existing excess of hot-rolling capacity. They
argue instead that the cold-rolling mill should be extended.
To add to difficulties surrounding privatisation of Eko Stahl, the European
Commission has begun inquiries to establish the legality of state aid, much
of which was conditional on the Riva takeover.
Eko Stahl receives about DM10m (Dollars 6.1m) per month from the Treuhand
and the Commission said recently that the agency had provided further loans
of DM15.6m and had guaranteed DM149m in bank debt.
Eko Stahl is the last bit of heavy industry in Eisenhuttenstadt, on the
Polish border, and indirectly provides work for many of the 50,000
inhabitants. The plant used to be east Germany's biggest steel mill, but has
cut annual production from more than 2m tons to 900,000 and reduced its
workforce from 12,000 to fewer than 3,000 since 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940720

