FT942-14597

FT  20 APR 94 / Berlusconi gives evidence in bribes inquiry


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate turned politician, yesterday gave
evidence for three hours to Turin magistrates investigating alleged bribes
paid by his Fininvest group and French investors to secure a large shopping
development in the city.
His appearance was a reminder that the man most likely to become Italy's
next prime minister still has questions to answer before the law.
His questioning coincided with the severest criticism to date of people
interrogated in the two-year-old corruption scandals. Mr Antonio Di Pietro,
the most prominent of Milan's investigative magistrates, yesterday claimed
none of them had volunteered information and had only co-operated when
confronted with irrefutable evidence.
Mr Di Pietro's statement underlines what has long been suspected - the full
scale of corruption and personal enrichment in the elaborate system of
bribes established by businessmen and politicians has yet to be revealed.
Summing up as public prosecutor in the first corruption case to be tried, he
told the court in Milan: 'In this case there have been no pentiti. Not one
(of the 117 people questioned) has come and confessed.' The term pentiti
usually refers to former members of the Mafia who co-operate with justice.
Mr Di Pietro added that in all the the other cases information had only been
acquired when people had been confronted with evidence they could not deny.
The implication was that the five former party secretaries (including the
Socialist Bettino Craxi and Christian Democrat Arnaldo Forlani) called to
give evidence plus countless businessmen and intermediaries had been
economical with the truth. One witness, Mr Carlo Sama, former chief
executive of Ferruzzi-Montedison and married into the Ferruzzi family, was
called back on four occasions to have his memory refreshed in court.
'In every case, what was said to have been paid out, does not correspond
with what was said to have been received. . . . In other words if 100 is
paid out, only 50 is reportedly received.' Here again Mr Di Pietro went
further than any other magistrate in suggesting that the court had only
heard half the story.
In explaining the system of corruption to the court, Mr Di Pietro said it
was vital to appreciate that it had become a sophisticated 'engineered'
process. The businessmen paying the bribes, like the politicians, dealt
through intermediaries, enabling them to say they 'knew nothing of the
system or had no dealings with it.'
Meanwhile in Turin, Mr Berlusconi was being questioned about the granting of
permits for the Le Gru shopping development which he opened late last year.
Le Gru was developed on a 60/40 basis by the French group Trema with
Euromercato, part of Fininvest's Standa stores group. In early March Mr
Roger Flamant and Mr Maurice Bansay, respectively chairman and managing
director of Trema, were arrested and reportedly admitted paying L2bn (Pounds
833,000) in bribes to secure the development.
Yesterday Mr Berlusconi when asked about this after seeing the magistrates,
said: 'You must understand the Trema group was involved in its first Italian
venture at Le Gru and thus had to come to terms with an unknown world.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940420

