FT942-12577

FT  29 APR 94 / Dutch parties cross swords over welfare: Voters preoccupied
with preserving and paying for social security provisions


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


   AMSTERDAM


With its high standard of living and an unusually generous and extensive
welfare state, the Netherlands is preoccupied with one issue as it prepares
for national elections next Tuesday - social security and how to continue
paying for it.
Parties vying for the attention of voters are more or less agreed on the
need for European integration, on the importance of cutting the budget
deficit and on the desirability of creating more jobs.
Where they differ most is on social security, a perennial preoccupation for
a prosperous country which is home to some of the world's richest pension
funds.
It is a sign of the times that one of the fastest growing parties, besides
the far right, is the Algemeen Ouderen Verbond, or General League of the
Elderly.
Founded just four months ago, it is poised to win up to four seats, marking
the first time that the Netherlands' retired people - and people who hope to
retire one day - have sent their own representatives to parliament.
Its lead candidate is Mrs Jet Nijpels, a 46-year-old former city councillor.
The party is winning support from people aged 40 to 80 and its list of
candidates includes economists, business executives and medical
practitioners, with an average age of 62.
'Our appeal is not just to people who are already retired but also to
40-year-olds who want to be sure that in 20 years' time they'll be able to
draw a substantial old age pension,' says Mr Will Verkerk, a 55-year-old
civil servant who is one of the party's candidates.
The party's appeal has been aided by the uproar among the elderly that
followed the unveiling of plans by the Christian Democrats (CDA), the party
of outgoing Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers which until now has been the largest
in parliament.
The CDA's call in January to freeze the state old-age pension in order to
find money to stimulate job creation has badly hurt the party's standing.
However, calculations made by the Central Planning Bureau, an independent
economic forecasting body within the Dutch government, show that the
policies of the three other main parties will also lead to a decline in
purchasing power for pensioners.
Mr Frits Wester, campaign spokesman for the CDA's new leader, Mr Elco
Brinkman, acknowledges that social security is a main issue for the party,
as part of a wider focus on security at large.
'The emphasis is on security in its widest sense, in combating crime and
ensuring that education is well funded and jobs are created,' he says.
Nevertheless, the CDA's support has halved since 1989, creating the most
wide-open Dutch election in decades.
The most radical plan for social security put forward by any of the parties
is the 'mini-system' proposed by the Liberals, who served as junior partners
in two of Mr Lubbers' cabinets in the 1980s but who lost this role to Labour
in 1989.
The Liberals want to cut unemployment, health and social security benefits
to 60 per cent of the minimum wage, in order to encourage people to find
jobs.
People seeking fuller protection against the risk of unemployment or ill
health would have to take out supplementary private insurance.
Although coalition negotiations will not start until after May 3, the
Liberals' plan is already dominating the pre-election jostling among parties
sizing up possible coalition partners.
Mr Dig Istha, the campaign spokesman for Labour, says such drastic cuts in
the social welfare system are unacceptable because they would hurt the
weakest members of society.
Labour is particularly sensitive to reform of the social security system
because it is still recovering from a sharp drop in support after it agreed
to wide-ranging changes to disability insurance in the early 1990s.
'Those changes were made, not to do weaken the system, but to ensure that it
could survive. Many voters saw this as an attack on social security, and it
has been difficult to explain to them,' Mr Istha says.
The fourth main party, D66, a left-of-centre grouping which may hold the
balance of power after May 3, is also critical of the Liberals' plan for
sharp cuts in benefits but has ruled nothing out.
With the four main parties about equal in the opinion polls, it is clear
that negotiations on the future coalition will be difficult, because at
least three parties will be needed to create a majority, a break from the
1980s when CDA-dominated two-party coalitions held sway.
'None of the parties has ruled out working with any of the others, and there
are a quite a few possible combinations,' Mr Istha notes.
Nevertheless, the defining element to the talks is likely to be the parties'
views on the social welfare system and its future.
The Liberals will come under pressure to soften their stance, and the other
parties will be encouraged to meet them part of the way.
A three-party coalition, and the concessions needed to hold it together,
would seem to argue against a radical change in government policy.
Referring to the prospect of a multi-party coalition, Mr Herman Wijffels,
chairman of Rabobank, told a gathering of foreign bankers in Amsterdam last
week that the Netherlands was likely to 'muddle through' over the next few
years rather than take any decisive action.
The next government will have to tackle more than simply the future of the
social security system. It will also have to find ways of boosting jobs at a
time of rapidly rising unemployment.
Mr Wim Duisenberg, the president of the central bank, used his annual press
conference yesterday to warn against any easing of the fight against the
budget deficit to stimulate employment.
'At the end of the day, sound public finance and sustainable job creation
are inextricably linked,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940429

