FT944-2410

FT  16 DEC 94 / Management: Ford's global matrix gamble


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


In just over a fortnight's time, on New Year's Day, one of the boldest
organisational experiments of the decade will kick into action. After a
remarkably - some would say dangerously - short preparation period of only
10 months, the Ford Motor Company will merge its North American and European
operations into a single 'global' structure.
In place of its long-standing twin organisations on each side of the
Atlantic, which suffered from overlap, waste, poor communication and
inadequate exchange of know-how, it is creating five transatlantic 'vehicle
centres', each with responsibility for particular sizes and types of
vehicle. Four of them will be located in the US, but the one with the
greatest growth potential, for small- and medium-sized cars, will be based
jointly in Britain and Germany.
The centres will have responsibility not only for designing, developing and
launching their respective lines of vehicles for North America and Europe,
but also for the profitability and cash flow of each product throughout its
life. Their development responsibilities will also cover Asia, although
Ford's Asia Pacific and Latin American operations will remain officially
separate from the new structure for now.
The group's transformation, christened 'Ford 2000', has rightly attracted
widespread attention on a series of counts:
For its speed: most multinationals in other industries have taken a decade
to shift their organisations gradually from national or regional structures
to near-global ones.
For the degree of 'process re-engineering' involved: a key part of Ford's
transformation is the introduction of a single set of worldwide processes
and systems in product development, production, supply and sales.
For the sharp 'delayering' which is occurring in several parts of the
organisation, halving Ford's average number of levels from 14 to seven.
And for the degree of behavioural and cultural change involved in what is,
in effect, an overdue bid by Ford's new chairman, Alex Trotman, to drag the
company into the late 20th century by removing its outdated military
mentality.
More than most other multinationals outside the Germanic world, Ford has
suffered for too long from a 'command and control' culture which has
fostered the power of departmental barons at the expense of innovation,
speedy decision-making and cross-functional teamwork.
But one key facet of the transformation has received surprisingly little
comment, given its inherently controversial and risky nature: that the new
structure consists of a matrix in which most managers - an estimated 10,000
of them - will find their lives complicated in the new year by having more
than one boss.
Most will report to a manager from one of the new vehicle centres. But they
will also report to an executive from one of the 'functional' departments
(manufacturing, marketing/sales, purchasing etc.)
In many ways, the introduction of this matrix is Ford's most fundamental
change. It is certainly the one being trumpeted most noisily within the
company as vital to global teamwork and organisational effectiveness.
Ford's internal videos and other forms of employee communications have waxed
lyrical over the past few months about the virtues of matrix management.
They claim it provides 'a flexible environment where all avenues are open,
there are no one-way streets and no dead ends'.
In similarly colourful vein, Trotman has declared repeatedly that, compared
with Ford's established, pyramid-like organisation, matrix management will
be 'more like jazz than a structured orchestra'. It will, he promises, allow
considerable informality, and improvisation as situations change.
Trotman's metaphor is striking. But it ignores the fact that, while some
jazz combos do achieve the 'perfect harmony' which Ford says it wants to
create, others produce only cacophony and chaos.
This was certainly the painful outcome of most of the matrix management
practised widely in the 1960s and 1970s, especially by American
multinationals.
With a few notable exceptions, their matrices were plagued by internal
conflict, inefficiency, expense and delay, as divisional, geographic and
functional managers debated and fought with each other. In many cases
disputes were only resolved laboriously by powerful co-ordinators acting as
matrix 'police'.
Ford hopes to rehabilitate matrix management by several means, both 'hard'
and 'soft'. They include: making doubly sure that objectives are agreed
precisely between the vehicle centres and the functional side of the
organisation; specifying clearly the respective roles and responsibilities
of individuals towards each side of the matrix; changing appraisal and
reward systems accordingly; only appointing senior executives who have shown
they can work collaboratively; training everyone involved in the art of
developing a co-operative matrix 'mindset' which largely replaces the need
for policing; and introducing much more intensive and open communication
than the organisation is used to.
Enthusiasm for the new way of working is palpable within the company, not
merely at the top. There is particular excitement about the visibility of
the new vehicle centres, and the global future which they promise.
Yet to an outsider, the organisation has too much of the shape and feel of
what business school academics call a 'balanced matrix', in which the power
of its two sides are too even for them to operate smoothly together. If this
proves to be the case, Trotman will have to do some tricky retuning. That
could prove almost as controversial as the current upheaval.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

941216

