FT941-16948

FT  07 JAN 94 / Help promised for multimedia development


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications said yesterday it planned
to promote the build-up of Japan's advanced telecommunications networks and
support their use for a range of multimedia services, including
broadcasting, which it believes could create markets worth Y123,000bn
(Pounds 736bn) by the year 2010.
Mr Takenori Kanzaki, posts and telecommunications minister, said yesterday
the government intended to help nurture that market as a key sector for the
future Japanese economy and that the multimedia market in Japan was expected
to create 2.4m jobs by that year.
The ministry's indication of support for multimedia, which combines
transmission of video, graphics and voice, reflects a growing recognition
that Japan will be left behind in advanced information and communication
services unless the government promotes infrastructure improvements and
relaxes the regulatory environment.
NTT, Japan's dominant telecommunications group, and electronics companies
have frequently complained that the country's strict rules separating
telecoms and broadcasting have hampered the move towards multimedia
services, such as video on demand, teleshopping and interactive television
which blur the boundaries between the two industries.
Under existing rules, NTT is prohibited from engaging in businesses that
fall outside its main sphere of providing telecommunications services so
that it cannot offer broadcasting services, for example, on its
telecommunications network.
Although such restrictions do not apply to Japanese cable television
companies, some of which offer telecommunications services, the scale on
which they operate is too small and their profitability too low for them to
build national operations. Telecommunications companies which compete with
NTT are also still relatively small in scale.
Japanese companies have been frustrated with the lack of direction on
multimedia from the Japanese authorities as they watched a growing number of
telecommunications and cable companies join hands in the US to lay the
foundation for the growth of promising multimedia markets there.
Mr Kanzaki's comments, which come ahead of a report in March by the
Telecommunications Council, raised hopes that the telecommunications
authorities intend to bring down the barriers separating telecommunications
from broadcasting in order to promote new businesses in those industries.
The news lifted shares in NTT by Y12,000 to Y778,000 as well as other
information and communications issues on the Tokyo Stock Exchange yesterday.
Together with recent indications that the Japanese authorities intend to
liberalise the country's cable television market, the possible deregulation
of telecoms and broadcasting also opens the door further to US
telecommunications and cable companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940107

