FT942-14928

FT  18 APR 94 / Equity Markets: Hope of early base rates cut revived -
London


   By TERRY BYLAND


Hopes for an early cut in UK base rates are back in force following the
March retail price index figures and the stock market faces this morning
with more enthusiasm than for several weeks past. The recent correction
appeared to blow itself out when the FT-SE 100 Index found support around
3,100. Since then, equities have tried to respond to good company news, in
particular to a stream of dividend rises, but have been balked by erratic
bond markets, which have been reacting feverishly to developments in the
Bundesbank/US Federal Reserve dramas.
Setting aside the Bundesbank's success last week in wrong-footing markets
and the anxiety over the accidental downing of US helicopters over Iraq, the
international bond market scene has not changed significantly. The shift in
sentiment has come at home, where the March inflation numbers are seen as
providing credibility for the base rate cut which markets assume the UK
chancellor of the exchequer would like to make.
Strauss Turnbull believes markets could be looking at annualised inflation
of no more than 2 per cent by next month, opening the way for a cut of  1/4
per cent in interest rates, probably around the time of the local elections
in May. Most analysts would be in agreement, although some would warn rates
will be rising again by the second half of the year.
Dividend growth figures have received a further boost now the effects of the
1993 Budget reduction in advance corporation tax credit has dropped out of
year-on-year data. Dividend growth is well on target for expectations of a 6
per cent increase for 1994, according to surveys of fund managers, or as
much as 10 per cent, according to some analysts. These trends are expected
to remain as strong in 1995.
The best performances have been seen in cyclical stocks as confidence in
economic recovery has revived. Building and construction stocks are leading
the market and have traditionally responded sharply to interest rate cuts at
home and, in the case of several leading stocks, to rate cuts in Germany.
The oil sector is now moving powerfully as some, but not all, analysts begin
to predict recovery in crude prices. With BP and Shell heavily-weighted
components of market indices, the impact on market ratings of the rally in
the oil sector will be significant.
However, any benefits to market indices of oil sector outperformance could
be counter-balanced by uncertainty in the pharmaceutical sector. After a
poor 1993, the first quarter has proved equally disappointing, with Glaxo
underperforming the FT-A All-Share Index by nearly 11 per cent, Zeneca by
over 7 per cent, Wellcome by nearly 6 per cent and SmithKline by about 2 per
cent.
The damage to drug stocks originated from poor results from the US majors
but has left the UK names highly vulnerable to specific developments.
Market recovery is likely to be highly selective.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940418

