FT944-2941

FT  15 DEC 94 / UK Company News: London Electricity sees rising pay-outs


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


London Electricity yesterday promised its shareholders steadily rising
dividends as it announced a 22 per cent increase in profits.
The company made Pounds 85.3m before tax and exceptional items in the six
months to September 30, against Pounds 69.9m. Exceptionals took in a Pounds
33m provision for restructuring over the next three years and Pounds 9.5m to
cover the premium incurred on the repurchase of government debt. Underlying
earnings per share improved 25 per cent to 30.1p (24p).
Sir Bob Reid, chairman, said the company was 'in good shape' with strong
improvements in trading volumes and continuing efficiency gains. The interim
dividend is raised 28 per cent to 9.5p; allowing for the buy-back of shares
earlier this year, this amounts to an underlying increase of 20 per cent.
Of the improvement in profits, Pounds 5.2m came from higher distribution
income and Pounds 5m from reductions in distribution operating costs. The
supply business transformed last year's loss of Pounds 600,000 into an
operating profit of Pounds 1m. Mr Roger Urwin, chief executive, said a
sizeable contribution had come from the networks at London's three airports
which the company bought for Pounds 90m.
Overall operating costs were down 6.8 per cent. The company shed nearly 400
jobs - about 8.6 of the total - and expects to lose another 300 in the
second half.
The total number of units distributed rose 2.6 per cent, with the biggest
rise - 3.6 per cent - coming from the commercial sector.
Mr Urwin said that dividend cover could be reduced and this, when combined
with potential earnings growth, gave scope for 'attractive real dividend
growth'.
Next April will see the start of the new price regulations which will
produce a cut of 5 per cent in real terms for customers, and cost the
company Pounds 39m in revenues over a year. Mr Urwin said that the company
disagreed with the way Offer, the regulator, had calculated the new price
formula. 'But it is a challenge and we have to meet it.'
Sir Bob said he remained confident about prospects. 'The key economic
indicators continue to look encouraging for London and we fully expect to be
one of the principal beneficiaries.'
The company would be looking for new opportunities to expand the business,
such as the airports deal. But it was also casting its eye abroad for
electricity distribution projects.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

941215

