FT941-4230

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (10): Signs that investment will
improve - Bargain hunters can find good quality office space at some of the
lowest prices in Europe / Austria


   By PATRICK BLUM


The Vienna property market is not out of the doldrums yet, but there are
signs that rental prices may have reached bottom and that investment is
destined to pick up because the scarcity of new developments could lead to
under-supply of office space within a couple of years.
For the time being however, bargain hunters can find good quality office
space at some of the lowest prices in Europe ranging from Sch280 a sq m for
top development in prime sites, to Sch120-Sch160 a sq m elsewhere.
Rents declined sharply after almost doubling between 1987 and 1992 during a
speculative boom encouraged by the prospect - now abandoned - of a joint
world expo with Budapest in 1995. Last year alone, prime rents fell by about
11 per cent. As a result, office space in Vienna is now cheaper than in
Prague or Budapest, which goes to explain why so many companies are looking
to Vienna again as a location for their central and eastern European
headquarters.
'There are many constraints on the market, but things are improving, and
we're seeing an increasing number of international companies setting up
here,' says Mr Alan Vincent from real estate consultants Richard Ellis.
Companies that have chosen Vienna as a regional base include McDonald's,
IBM, Hewlett Packard, Alcatel, American Express, Gillette,
Colgate-Palmolive, Pepsico and Nomura.
Vienna's offers a good supply of western standard office space at reasonable
rents, it has efficient telecommunications, a good transport infrastructure,
a clean and attractive environment, and a high quality of life, says Mr
Vincent.
As Budapest, Prague and Warsaw develop, there may be less incentive to go to
Vienna as more companies may chose to base themselves directly in those
cities. But 'many western companies have already been disillusioned by the
slow pace of improvement of their transport, infrastructure and
telecommunications, as well as the generally poor environment,' a Richard
Ellis report argues.
Vienna, it says, is likely to remain a regional centre for Austria, Hungary,
and the Czech and Slovak republics for the medium term.
Which should be good news for investors and developers who found Vienna a
difficult market to enter. 'Owner occupation in Vienna stands at around 80
per cent with the market dominated by banks and insurance companies, which
in turn own property development and construction companies,' says a report
by John Lang Wootton.
'People here tend to hold on to their property, and that makes for a very
illiquid market,' says Mr Vincent.
The residential market also continues to suffer from rent and tenancy
controls that give almost unlimited security of tenure to occupiers. Agents
say recently-approved legislation has made matters worse by further
strengthening protection for tenants. 'Landlords have no incentive to
maintain their property in Vienna, and this could lead to some serious
degradation as a result of neglect in a few years' time,' says one agent.
Meanwhile several projects have recently been completed or will be completed
shortly, with a few large developments in the pipeline. Supply has exceeded
demand since 1991, leading to a vacancy rate of about 5 per cent today,
although agents say this is not high by international comparison. With
demand for office space averaging about 130,000 sq m a year, supply peaked
at 290,00 sq m in 1993 and is expected to fall to 150,000 sq m this year,
and 80,000 sq m in 1995.
In and near the city centre there are several important developments ranging
in size from a 7,000 sq m office building recently completed by Groupe
Pierre 1er of France, to a planned 80,000 sq m of offices, apartments and
shops at Wien Mitte in a project originally led by Sweden's SPP. LET, but
taken over by Bank Austria and domestic partners after SPP. LET sold out.
Further out from the centre, developments range from the huge Donau-City
project with a planned 470,000 sq m of offices, apartments, shops, and a big
hotel, in the north-east of the city, to the 37,000 sq m Concorde Business
Park, Vienna's only purpose-built business park, on the road to the airport.
Four office developments, two of which have already been completed and let,
totalling 160,000 sq m are planned along Lasallestrasse, on the main
north-east axis out of Vienna; and Business Park Vienna, a 60,000 sq m
development with offices and a hotel in the south of the city.
The Donau-City project dwarfs all others by its size and its ambition to
become Vienna's second city centre. The first phase of construction
representing about 40 per cent of the total development including all basic
infrastructure and some 70,000 sq m of residential, office and commercial
space is expected to be completed in 1997. The rest of the development will
be completed at a more leisurely pace 'depending on market demand' an
official said.
Outside Vienna, the market is small, with some activity in Graz and Linz,
although local restrictions - especially in Salzburg and in the Tyrol - make
it very difficult for foreign investors.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940311

