FT943-12698

FT  23 JUL 94 / Wish they were there: MPs may be exhausted, but so is the
British public


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


It has been a week for fresh faces and new political images. We saw the
broad smiles of the incoming members of the cabinet as they stepped into the
sunlight from the door of 10 Downing Street. Then the delight of Mr Tony
Blair as he was anointed the youngest-ever leader of the Labour party. Even
Mr Paddy Ashdown got into the act by shuffling the portfolios of the Liberal
Democrats' rather smaller political team.
There was talk at Westminster of new battle lines being drawn, of government
and opposition parties marking out the ground on which they will fight the
next general election. That may well be true. History may judge this week as
the beginning of a new era in British politics.
After all, who would have bet with any confidence three months ago that Mr
John Major would look secure? And look secure at the very moment that Labour
was choosing as its leader a 41-year-old public schoolboy committed to
recasting socialism into social democracy?
There was the odd dramatic moment also. Mr John Patten's dismissal as
education secretary had been widely predicted. But no one was quite sure
whether Mr Major would in the end have the courage to wield the knife. Mr
Patten was devastated.
Mr Blair's coronation likewise had been discounted. But the image of the
young leader telling his party he now had a mandate to ditch its precious
dogmas is one that will stick in the mind. So too will that of Mr Neil
Kinnock, the man who rescued Labour from extinction a decade ago, looking on
with the beaming satisfaction of a proud father.
But such moments mingled with palpable exhaustion. The politicians have
fought themselves to a standstill. The electorate has looked on with
undisguised disgust. Used car dealers, even journalists, attract more trust
nowadays than political leaders.
Westminster is still disconnected from the real world. The pubs this weekend
will not be buzzing with talk of Mr Jeremy Hanley's elevation to the Tory
party chairmanship or of Mr Blair's promise of a crusade for change.
The voters are a shrewder bunch than the self-assured insiders who proclaim
with absolute confidence that Mr Major is now safe; or that Mr Blair's
middle-class accent guarantees Labour victory in two dozen of southern
England's marginal constituencies.
Real people are still angry with Mr Major's government, very angry. But they
will need convincing that a man who was barely out of university when Labour
last governed Britain can do a better job.
Government and opposition face two more grinding years before a general
election, which need not take place until the spring of 1997. As ministers
and their opposition shadows prepared to clear their desks before heading
for the beaches, you could almost feel them willing a summer of political
peace.
They hope politics will remain on hold until they regroup in Bournemouth,
Blackpool and Brighton for their autumn conferences. There will be time
enough then to begin persuading a wider world that things have changed.
Mr Major's government is battered, demoralised but most importantly still
standing. The sensible people at the top of the government make no great
claims for this week's extensive but uninspiring ministerial shake-out.
Journalists struggling to find a theme or a strategy were told not to waste
their time. Reshuffles (with one or two spectacular exceptions) are not like
that. Mr Major's priority was competent government.
The shake-up was designed to advance that cause by rewarding talent,
punishing mistakes and putting round pegs into round holes. It was also
intended to ensure that the Tory MPs left Westminster with the notion that
Mr Major had at last restored his grip.
The Tory right might claim that it had done better out of the changes than
the centre-left. Certainly the Thatcherites were happy with the appointment
of Mr Michael Portillo to employment and Mr Jonathan Aitken as chief
secretary.
But, as usual, Mr Major built in a raft of checks and balances. Mr Hanley,
the unknown choice to run the Conservatives' general election campaign, is a
pro-European protege of Mr Chris Patten, a former chairman and now governor
of Hong Kong. Mr Kenneth Clarke, the centrist chancellor, still holds the
economic policy levers.
The economy is Mr Major's best hope. The latest statistics confirmed it is
growing quite fast. Inflation for the time being looks subdued. The recent
pace of falls in unemployment is unlikely to be sustained, but those in work
should begin to feel a bit more secure.
But the economy won't be enough. The government cannot risk another reckless
boom of the sort that puts real money in the voters' pockets. Some time soon
Mr Clarke is going to have to raise interest rates.
The chancellor is less certain than almost everyone else in the Tory party
that the public finances will improve sufficiently to allow him to bribe the
voters with large cuts in income tax in 1995 or 1996.
Mr Major needs a prospectus, a theme, something that will persuade the
nation he has an interest beyond clinging to office. He has been searching
for one almost from the moment he entered Downing Street. But the Citizen's
Charter will not do. Nor will Back to Basics. At this autumn's party
conference, he needs to ignore the gimmicks and aim for both clarity and
depth.
As for Mr Blair, so far he has not put a foot wrong. His promise this week
was both to excite the electorate and to reassure them: excite them with the
notion that Labour is the party of change; reassure them with the promise
that it has abandoned its past. Almost unnoticed he borrowed a phrase from
left-of-centre Toryism to encapsulate the message. We now have One Nation
Socialism.
He is an attractive figure. The comparisons with Kennedy and Clinton are not
as silly as they sound. He is much tougher than he looks: the sort of
politician who leaves you feeling slightly uneasy as the depth of his
ambition sinks in. And for the first time in living memory Labour has a
leader who is shaping the framework of political debate.
Mr Blair is right to judge that Labour wins elections when it has a capacity
to inspire the electorate. But despite the convincing nature of his victory
(another powerful image was of the party's trade union paymasters relegated
to the back of the hall as the result was announced), he must give substance
to his philosophy. Voters can be enthused by ideas and by values. But they
need policies to put them into context.
That leaves Mr Ashdown. It has been a dismal few weeks for the Liberal
Democrats. The party's disappointing performance in the European elections
last month has led the Westminster intelligentsia to write it off. Why
should the middle managers of Basingstoke vote for Mr Ashdown, when Mr Blair
is every bit as moderate?
It's an unfair assessment. The third party frequently has prospered
alongside a Labour resurgence. But Mr Ashdown needs to carve out a more
distinctive niche - and to abandon the fiction that his party could just as
well do a post-election deal with the Conservatives as with Labour.
Such decisions though can wait. For now, Mr Major, Mr Blair and Mr Ashdown
should pause to enjoy their summer break. They can be certain the voters
will not miss them.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940723

