FT944-10921

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (27): Cutting edge of capitalism - Paul
Taylor hears how Bombay and Maharashtra plan for the future


   By PAUL TAYLOR


The large billboards around Bombay invite India's stock market punters to
purchase shares in the some of the 100 companies which come to market each
month while street stalls act as broker's agents, distributing share
application forms to passers-by.
'We have 25m investors in India,' says Mr Bhagirat Merchant, president of
the Bombay Stock Exchange. 'That makes India second only to the US in terms
of number of private investors.'
Bombay, India's premier financial centre, economic powerhouse and the
capital of the state of Maharashtra, is at the cutting edge of capitalism in
the sub-continent. Now, after decades of stifling state-planning, business
is booming.
The city's plush hotels are full of foreign businessmen. But such
conspicuous consumption serves to further highlight the gap between the
growing number of affluent white-collar workers and the poverty of the less
fortunate.
On the seafront outside the deluxe Taj Mahal hotel, Bombay's street beggars,
many of them children dressed in rags or women holding babies, plead with
the tourists; 'Money for food, money for food, sir.'
Since independence Bombay's population has risen from 2m to around 13m. Each
day an estimated 500 families, most from outside the state, arrive in the
city in search of a better life.
Most end up sleeping on the pavement or in Bombay's sprawling shanty-town
slums which are among the worst in Asia. Even then many try to eke out a
living, sorting through piles of rubbish or mounds of plastic bottles.
Everywhere there is activity.
Bombay has a reputation for being a cosmopolitan business centre, more
interested in making money than in politics. But inter-religious riots have
highlighted the murkier links between politics and crime.
Two months ago Mr Ramdas Nayak, local president of the right-wing Hindu
Bharatiya Janata party and a strong critic of political corruption, was
killed by gunmen using automatic rifles.
Since then Mr Sharad Pawar, the chief minister of Maharashtra, has faced
mounting criticism about the rise of violent crime in the city and growing
evidence of ties between politicians and underworld gangsters.
Bombay plays a pivotal role in the the economies of both the state and the
nation. It is India's busiest port handling nearly 25 per cent of total
foreign trade; it has the nation's largest stock exchange which handles
around 70 per cent of all capital market transactions and is headquarters
for most large commercial banks and the Reserve Bank of India.
It is also a large manufacturing centre for everything from textiles to
pharmaceuticals and it is India's 'Hollywood', turning out about half the
500 to 600 full length feature films made in the country each year.
Maharashtra is one of the largest states in India with a population of 79m
and accounts for more than a quarter of the country's industrial output.
More than half India's top 100 companies are based in Maharashtra.
Multinationals such as Lever, Roche, Sandoz, Bayer, Asea Brown Boveri,
Burroughs, Wellcome, Colgate, Procter & Gamble, Coca Cola and Kellog have
plants in Maharashtra, making it India's most industrialised state.
Outside Bombay several other large industrial centres have emerged including
Pune, a city of 2.5m people perched high up on the Deccan plateau.
To investigate how Maharashtra could maintain its industrial and economic
leadership in the face of increasing competition the state Investment
Corporation of Maharashtra (Sicom) commissioned a study by McKinsey, the
management consultancy.
McKinsey's report, published in April last year, identified Maharashtra's
key strengths as revolving around 'a skilled, low-cost labour pool,
availability of select minerals (coal, oil and gas and bauxite) and
agricultural products, adequate power supplies, Bombay's premier position
(in the domestic and global context) and established resource clusters in
the textiles, auto, engineering, food and petrochemicals industries'.
However, the report also identified a number of 'major barriers to continued
growth and leadership' including quality of infrastructure.
Since then the state has adopted a new industrial policy which Mr Pawar says
is aimed at freeing the industrialisation process from bottlenecks and
encouraging non-polluting high tech industries.
The chief minister, a powerful advocate for Marharashtra, runs the state as
if he were the chief executive of a large company and has a single vision of
how it should develop.
'I want to make Bombay another Hong Kong,' he says. He wants a review of
urban land policy and 'the modernisation' of India's rent control acts. In
addition he is advocating the development of a series of satellite towns 30
to 40 miles outside Bombay.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

941108

