FT942-14653

FT  19 APR 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries plunge after surprise move by
Fed


   By FRANK MCGURTY and SARA WEBB


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US bond prices plunged yesterday after the chairman of the Federal Reserve
surprised the market by announcing a move to lift short-term interest rates
for a third time in two months.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was 1 11/32 lower
at 86 5/32 , with the yield rising 12 basis points to 7.407 per cent. On the
short end, the two-year note was down  5/16 to 99 1/16 , to yield 5.638 per
cent.
Early in the session, prices were drifting lower in quiet trading. The
market was jolted out of its slumber by a 10am statement issued by Mr Alan
Greenspan. The Fed chief said the central bank would 'increase slightly'
pressure on reserve positions in the banking system, a move which is
expected to boost the Federal Funds inter-bank lending rate, from 3.50 to
3.75 per cent.
Most traders had not expected the Fed to act until the next meeting of its
policy-making arm on May 17. Last week, many were speculating the move would
coincide with Friday's release of data on March capacity utilisation. When
the figures proved tame, and the morning passed uneventfully, the market let
down its guard.
Yesterday, prices on the long end of the maturity range quickly dropped
nearly a point, stabilised and then dropped a further during the afternoon.
Traders said the losses reflected disappointment that the Fed had not acted
more aggressively in moving toward its stated goals of 'neutral' credit
conditions. Many economists believe the Fed will continue to lift rates
until Fed Funds are at 4 per cent or higher.
European government bond markets plummeted as news emerged of the rise in US
short-term interest rates. Bond futures contracts lost between a point and
two points on the day, breaking through key support levels which then
triggered further selling by investors. While most of the activity took
place in the futures markets, the steep fall pulled cash bond prices down
too.
'It was a bit of a meltdown,' said Mr Steve Major, bond analyst at Credit
Lyonnais.
Europe opened on a fairly bearish note yesterday morning as investors
digested the implications of the Bundesbank's small easing last week.
'Investors are reconciling themselves to the fact that the Bundesbank is
going to continue with its slow pace of easing, cutting three or five basis
points from the repo at a time,' said one bund trader.
While the Bundesbank's interest rate cut last Thursday prompted several
other European central banks to follow suit, there was disappointment that
the Bank of France left its intervention rate unchanged at 5.90 per cent
yesterday.
The French notional bond futures contract on the Matif opened at 122.94 and
fell to a low of 121.94 after breaking through the key support level of
122.00. The contract settled at 122.02.
'The European markets were driven by weakness in the US, and in the near
term we can expect to see technically driven trading. All the markets are
breaking important support levels, and this is triggering stop-loss
selling,' said Mr Ifty Islam, bond strategist at Merrill Lynch.
The German government bond market fell sharply too: the Liffe bund futures
contract opened at 96.47 and quickly reached the high of the day at 96.57
before drifting lower. But news of the Fed tightening sent the futures
contract down to a low of 95.36, after which it recovered to trade at 95.47
by late afternoon.
High-yield European markets suffered even bigger losses with Spain and Italy
falling nearly two points on the day.
The Liffe long gilt futures contract fell nearly two points, again prompted
by the unsettling news from the US and despite relatively favourable
economic fundamentals. Friday's good inflation figures, and the prospect of
'gilt-positive' news this week on the economic front did little to stem the
selling, dealers said.
However, before the US news was released, and while market conditions
remained relatively calm, the Bank of England sold out its tranche of Pounds
150m of 2 1/2 per cent index-linked stock due 2011. announced on Friday.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940419

