FT942-16080

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: Finland steps up privatisation
pace - Sell-off programme enters new phase


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


Finland's privatisation programme has entered a new phase with the
announcement that two big industrial groups, Rautaruukki and Valmet, intend
to launch large share offerings to international investors in the next few
weeks. A sell-off programme characterised by caution and hesitancy is
expected to gain momentum, as other state-owned groups follow their lead.
'The pace of privatisation this year will be faster than it has been,'
asserts Mr Matti Vuoria, secretary general at the Finnish ministry of trade
and industry.
Rautaruukki, Scandinavia's second largest steel producer, is aiming to raise
FM800m (Dollars 145m) and reduce state ownership to 70 per cent from 81 per
cent through an offer of 16m new shares.
Valmet, one of the world's three biggest producers of paper machinery, hopes
to raise more than FM500m by offering between 5m and 7m shares.
But these are only two of the 11 names on the government's privatisation
list, companies which together account for 20 per cent of Finnish exports
and 15 per cent of the industrial labour force.
Other candidates include Neste, the oil and petrochemicals group; Kemira,
the chemicals group; Outokumpu, the mining company; and Enso-Gutzeit, the
pulp and paper group.
In all 11 companies, the government has parliamentary authorisation to
reduce current state ownership levels sharply.
Privatisation has come to the fore partly because of the general European
trend. But the process also recognises that the state cannot afford to
finance its siblings, who instead will be encouraged to tap the capital
markets for their needs.
Finnish privatisation has significant differences to sell-off programmes in
other European countries.
First, the process is more a widening of ownership than full-scale
privatisation, as the state currently intends to keep more than 50 per cent
of the shares in all but three of the companies on its list.
Second, the state is not garnering the proceeds, but instead allowing the
companies to bolster balance sheets weakened by recession and heavy
investment. It is a process of gradual dilution, with companies typically
targeting share issues at domestic and international institutions to broaden
their ownership base. To date, the retail element has been very small.
It is also a very cautious programme: no timetable has been specified, let
alone a revenues target. Kemira, which first asked to be privatised 10 years
ago, is still 100 per cent state-owned.
One obvious reason for the slow progress is the three long recession years
between 1991 and 1993, which dragged many companies into the red and sent
share values plunging.
Another is the small size of the domestic market. 'I don't think we can
afford any failures, taking into account the size of the Finnish stock
exchange,' says Mr Vuoria.
There are still painful memories of one such failure: a Valmet issue in the
late 1980s when the shares crashed to FM20 from an issue price of FM120. The
limited size of the domestic market explains why international investors
will play a crucial role in the success of the privatisation process.
Finally, there has undoubtedly been a certain political hesitancy,
particularly on the part of the opposition Social Democrats. Certain
elements within the Centre Party, which dominates the centre-right coalition
government, have also shown limited enthusiasm for the process. Both parties
worry about the implications for regional policy and jobs if companies slip
out of state control.
This does not mean that there are significant ideological barriers to
privatisation. Finns stress that their state-owned companies were never
nationalised; instead their roots originate in the post-war period when
Finland had to create industrial capacity to pay war reparations to the
Soviet Union. In the meantime, they have had considerable freedom to operate
like private companies.
For many companies, the main worry is timing. Having improved their results
strongly last year, and after heavy internal restructuring, they fear that
market conditions may move against them.
Helsinki was western Europe's top performing bourse last year, rising 91 per
cent, but this year conditions have been more unsettled amid the turbulence
which has swept international bond and equity markets.
However, most analysts do not believe that the recent price correction will
unsettle the privatisation programme. 'I am very positive about prospects,'
says Mr Esa Cleve, director of Prospectus, an investment banking group.
He believes that foreigners will continue to be attracted to the Finnish
market due to the improving domestic economy and the much stronger financial
performance of the country's big exporters. Mr Cleve also notes that
domestic interest in equities is high with interest rates at their lowest
levels for decades.
Even if privatisation does move faster this year, the programme is unlikely
to be concluded before the end of the decade. At the end of the process, the
state says it will only retain a direct holding in companies on grounds of
specific national interest.
The government has already indicated that it will start selling stakes in
companies itself - but not before it is satisfied that companies' balance
sheets are generally much stronger than they are today.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940412

