FT941-13133

FT  27 JAN 94 / Lilley to cut jobless benefits for the young


   By JAMES BLITZ


The government is to cut the amount of benefit given to unemployed people
aged between 18 and 24, Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary,
announced yesterday.
In evidence to the Commons social security committee, Mr Lilley said that
the introduction of a jobseekers allowance next year would involve general
reductions in the level of benefit given to this age group.
Legislation for the new allowance will be presented to the next session of
parliament for implementation in 1995, and will help to cut about Pounds
300m from the social security budget in the first two years of its
implementation.
Under the current benefit system most people over the age of 18 who become
unemployed receive weekly benefit of Pounds 44.65 in the first 12 months out
of work. After that they switch to Income Support, receiving Pounds 34.80 if
aged between 18 and 24.
Under the new system they will receive a jobseekers allowance for the first
six months, the level of which has not been set. After that they will switch
to income support. Mr Lilley told MPs: 'There will be a lower benefit level
for those under 25, which reflects the lower earnings expectation of people
in that group.'
Mr Lilley said the under 25s had lower earnings expectations and made lower
National Insurance contributions than people over that age. Social security
officials also claim that part of the rationale is that many young people
below the age of 24 tend to stay at home.
Mr Frank Field, Labour chairman of the social security committee, said that
young people would get much less than they would have received under the
current system. 'We are slowly finding out which groups will be affected by
Mr Lilley's new policies,' he said
Mr Lilley reiterated the importance of his overall goal of reining in the
Pounds 80bn social security budget so it grows in line with the nation's
ability to pay for it. 'If you want to contain its long-term growth, you
must introduce long-term structural reforms to ensure it goes to those with
greatest need,' he said.
Mr Lilley denied suggestions that he was engaged in an argument with the
Department of Employment over who would administer the scheme.
Meanwhile, the government last night admitted that more than a million UK
citizens are classified as unemployed but are not claiming
unemployment-related benefits.
But, it added, there were nearly as many claimants who were not unemployed,
according to the international standard measure.
The answer came in a parliamentary written answer from Miss Ann Widdecombe,
employment minister.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940127

