FT942-15400

FT  15 APR 94 / Management: Paean of praise in model guise - Christopher
Lorenz reviews a new study of European management


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


European managers are subtle, socially responsible and humane, believe that
maximum profit is not the primary aim of business, and consider it better to
be shrewd and cunning than simply rational.
They are more adept than their American or Japanese counterparts at handling
'diversity' - they benefit from cultural differences within their
organisations and serve different market preferences around the world.
European chief executives are also more accomplished leaders than their
American and Japanese peers, earning loyalty rather than imposing their
will.
This remarkable paean of praise for Europe's business community comes in a
study published this week on behalf of the European Round Table of
Industrialists, a lobby group of chairmen and chief executives from 40 large
European multinationals including Volvo, Philips, Lafarge Coppee, BSN,
Hoechst, Solvay, Siemens and Unilever.
The study - published as a book* co-authored by an American journalist and
two respected continental European academics - is essentially an opinion
survey of the ERT's members, plus a few Americans and Japanese. But it is
presented as an emerging 'European management model' - something that other
European business people and academics have been trying for years to develop
as an antidote to the dominant US model of ultra-rational, homogenous
management styles and techniques.
As an obvious confidence-rebuilding exercise for demoralised European
managers, the book has an upbeat tone. But its content is by no means
entirely positive and nuggets of realistic criticism shine through:
European companies pay a price for their social attitudes, in terms of lower
flexibility and reduced economic effectiveness;
They suffer from a fear of risk-taking and failure;
European culture does not encourage people to work in teams;
The relative security of semi-regulated markets, plus Europeans' 'fierce
pride in their engineering prowess', has deterred companies from putting
customers first, and from matching Japanese quality levels;
Europeans are 'handicapped by their sophisticated world outlook that sees
every country and culture as different and deserving of tailor-made
treatment'.
European companies must become much more adept at changing, and at living
with uncertainty.
The study is at its most valuable when the academics set the executives'
comments in the context of their own wider research.
For instance, they stress the difference between a monocultural 'global
strategy', as pursued by many US and most Japanese companies, and a 'world
outlook' which sees the globe as composed of interconnected but distinctive
details.
Another prominent theme is the need to reconcile contradictory forces:
global, regional and national strategies; social responsibility and profits;
long-term planning and short-term flexibility; diversity and integration;
leadership and management; individuality and team work; a balanced life and
commitment to the company.
The trouble with that list - which the study claims is the foundation of its
emerging 'European management model' - is that it could have been drawn from
the very source that the ERT so decries: a collection of US business school
professors.
Yet that does not necessarily invalidate the study's conclusion that,
provided they make the effort, Europeans should prove better than Americans
or Japanese at managing these conflicting forces. Whether that will create a
'renaissance of European management', as the ERT hopes, is quite another
matter.
*Euro Management, by Helen Bloom, Roland Calori and Philippe de Woot. Kogan
Page. Pounds 9.99.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940415

