FT942-16187

FT  12 APR 94 / UK Elections - Major's Campaign: Final test for prime
minister's authority - European Elections, June 9 / The next eight weeks
will see voters deliver a comprehensive mid-term judgement on John Major's
embattled Conservative government. As campaigns get under way in local and
European polls and in five parliamentary by-elections. FT writers survey the
electoral battlegrounds


   By DAVID OWEN


They will mark the end of the government's ordeal by ballot box. And they
will probably have the greatest bearing on whether the prime minister keeps
his job. More than next month's local elections and the smattering of coming
by-elections, it is the European elections on June 9 that are making Mr John
Major and the Conservative party apprehensive.
If the results are bad enough - and some are predicting substantial Liberal
Democrat and Labour inroads into the Tories' remaining 32 seats of the 87 -
the pressure on Mr Major to go by the autumn, if not sooner, could be
irresistible.
Some observers put the prime minister's survival threshold as high as 20
seats. Most believe he would be hard-pressed to stay if the tally fell below
15 - only a third of the total won by the party in 1984.
With turnout traditionally low, much will depend on the leading parties'
ability to coax their supporters into the polling booths.
Such are the government's current difficulties that the opposition parties
will almost certainly try to cast the election as a national referendum on
its overall performance.
It is equally likely that the Conservatives will respond by encouraging
voters to focus on genuinely Europe-related issues.
The trouble with this strategy is that it could provoke another damaging
outbreak of the internecine warfare over Europe that has plagued the party
under Mr Major's premiership and which flared up again in response to the
recent row over European Union voting rights.
An insight into how campaign managers will attempt to apply a veneer of
unity came at the end of last month in a letter to Conservative MPs and MEPs
from Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary.
This spoke of a campaign stressing both the importance of the European
parliament and the party's commitment to national sovereignty within a
decentralised, free-trading Europe.
It will be a delicate balance to strike - especially if the share of the
vote which the party achieves in the local elections augurs badly for its
European election performance and dents morale.
In 1989 the party secured 34.7 per cent of the vote - far above recent
opinion-poll ratings - compared with 40 per cent for Labour which won 45
seats. The combined share of the Liberal Democrats and the SDP was less than
7 per cent. The Greens, enjoying their brief spell in the electoral
limelight, polled 15 per cent of the vote.
Opinion poll evidence suggests the Liberal Democrats may emerge as the
biggest victors, winning anything up to a dozen seats in a swathe of England
running from Cornwall to Hampshire - site of the Eastleigh by-election. That
would be a devastating blow to Conservative morale in the south.
Tory strategists will be noting nervously that the Greens took as much as a
quarter of the vote last time in Sussex West, and 23 per cent in the
Cotswolds, Hereford & Worcester and Somerset. Precious little of that
surprisingly heavy environmental protest vote is likely to come the
Conservatives' way four years later. The Lib Dems may also pick up a seat in
Scotland.
Labour could make about six gains, although the target seats are more
difficult to identify because of the effect of boundary changes. The party
has high hopes of picking up seats in north-west England and possibly the
east Midlands. The battle in London and the south-east will also be of
crucial importance.
In Northern Ireland - the only part of the UK where first-past-the-post does
not apply - the Rev Ian Paisley, leader of the hardline Democratic Unionist
party, has already served notice of his intention to turn the poll into a
referendum on the Downing Street declaration.
Most interest will focus on what difference this makes to his share of the
vote, which reached 34 per cent in 1989, versus 22 per cent for both the
mainly Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party and the Ulster Unionists,
13 per cent for Sinn Fein and 5 per cent for the non-sectarian Alliance
party.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940412

