FT942-16303

FT  11 APR 94 / World Bond Markets: Bond-dumping rears its head -
International


   By SARA WEBB


In the notoriously cut-throat world of Eurobonds, the recent difficult
market conditions have brought to light one of the nastier syndicate
practices - bond-dumping.
Last week, Goldman Sachs brought a Dollars 1.5bn floating-rate note for the
Republic of Finland. Rival syndicate houses gave the deal the thumbs down,
saying it was too aggressively priced, especially as there was already
plenty of left-over floating-rate paper sloshing around the market.
When the deal broke syndicate on Thursday, Goldman said it had managed to
sell its portion of the deal to investors in the Far East and Europe, but
admitted it had had to buy back some Dollars 400m of the bonds that had been
dumped by other members of the syndicate.
Its rivals in the Eurobond business pointed out that Goldman could find it
was sitting on a large pile of unsold bonds.
The case above, like many of the deals launched in the first quarter, has
helped to focus Eurobond specialists' minds on two points - the trend
towards increasingly aggressive pricing, and the faults which have emerged
in the current system of selling and distributing bonds.
Many syndicate officials complain that international bond issues tend to be
brought at far too aggressive a price. This is often a reflection of the
highly competitive bidding process that takes place between banks to win the
mandate for the deal.
And as borrowers are usually driven by their bottom line when they award the
mandate, they have a tendency to choose the house which comes up with the
most aggressive pricing.
The consequences of this are especially obvious when the market is facing
difficult conditions, as they are now.
Investors are clearly nervous and in many cases appear to be adopting a
'wait-and-see' attitude, rather than regarding particular new issues as a
'must-buy'. As a result, deals are taking longer to place, and big chunks of
the new issues launched in the first quarter of 1994 are still stuck firmly
with the lead managers.
The second point being discussed more widely among syndicate managers
concerns the way bonds are underwritten and sold. Many feel some syndicate
members are not prepared to work for their fees, preferring to dump the
bonds they have been allocated once the deal has broken syndicate, spoiling
the deal and undermining investor confidence still further.
Enter CS First Boston, which is proposing that the system under which bonds
are underwritten and sold should be amended. It is holding informal
discussions with other houses and with IPMA (the International Primary
Market Association).
The fixed price reoffer method of syndicating Eurobonds was introduced in
1989. Under this system, the lead firm sets the price at which the bonds can
be traded (known as the fixed price reoffer).
Once it is satisfied most of the bonds have been placed with end investors,
the bond issue is allowed to find a free market price. Borrowers expect the
lead manager to support the bond price at the fixed price reoffer level:
however, other participants in the deal do not feel obliged to do so.
'The co-managers in the transaction are confident of getting their
allocation of bonds, and they know they will get their fees anyway, at which
point everyone dumps bonds on the brokers and pockets the fees. There's no
inclination among the syndicate to support the issue so the bond issue gets
off to a bad start,' points out one syndicate member at a UK house.
'We think the market has a problem: the fixed price reoffer system is
excellent, but the trouble is that it has become so rigid it is open to
abuse,' says Mr Marcus Everard, head of debt capital markets at CS First
Boston.
'The market has lost the distinction between underwriting and selling. In
the worst-case scenario (in the current market set-up where the lead manager
supports the transaction at the fixed price reoffer), where the co-manager
and co-leads often are allotted securities equal to their underwriting
commitment, they have little incentive to distribute them.'
CS First Boston has suggested that one way around this problem would be to
separate the underwriting and selling processes. The lead manager would
invite other banks to underwrite the deal for a fee but would not guarantee
to allot bonds to those houses. Instead, the underwriting banks would have
to request the amount of paper they felt able to sell to investors.
Some Eurobond specialists think the new system would also be open to abuse,
with lead managers hogging the bulk of the popular deals, and only allowing
the other syndicate members to participate fully in the less desirable
issues.
Mr Everard concedes this is a fair criticism, but stresses there would have
to be 'an element of reciprocity between the major participants' or it
simply would not work - even though the Eurobond business is not known for
its altruism. In other words, banks which failed to co-operate and only came
in for a free ride would be 'punished' next time around and squeezed out.
An alternative might be based on the method of book-building seen in the
international equities field.
'It would be lovely to have that sort of exercise in the bond market and to
some extent it already happens with World Bank issues where the deal is
pre-marketed with an indicated pricing range,' says one Eurobond specialist.
There are problems with this method though: the time taken to bring a deal
can be very short as it may be determined by fleeting swap opportunities, or
the perception of investor demand, so it might not be possible to spend days
or hours conducting a book-building exercise.
Bond specialists point out the debate is still in its early stages. However,
many feel the trend will have to be towards better distribution skills.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940411

