FT944-11103

FT  08 NOV 94 / CBI chief tells executives to set pay example: Excessive
rises undermine management credibility, conference told - Labour names
European goals


   By RODERICK ORAM


Business leaders have a 'clear responsibility, moral and political, to set
an example on pay discipline', Sir Bryan Nicholson, president of the
Confederation of British Industry, said yesterday.
Excessive executive pay rises undermined the credibility of managements in
the fight against inflation, Sir Bryan told the CBI's annual conference.
He called on remuneration committees to recognise the undesirability of
managers and directors awarding themselves 'increases and performance
bonuses which are not only well above inflation, but also out of proportion
with the rewards received by the workforce for the company's performance'.
Sir Bryan, chairman of Bupa, the private health-care group, said most CBI
members he met 'are not satisfied' with high executive pay awards, 'and yet
the problem exists'.
His was one of the few comments on the subject during a conference dominated
by broader issues such as European integration and manufacturing
competitiveness. But each time it has come up in Birmingham, it has led to
awkward discussions.
Mr Tony Hales, chairman of the CBI's National Manufacturing Council and
chief executive of Allied Domecq, the wine and spirits group, was asked in a
press conference on Sunday the size of his employees' pay rise last year. He
said the group's UK pay awards 'tended to be 2 to 3 per cent. Mine hasn't
been published (yet) and I'm not talking about it here.'
Mr Howard Davies, CBI director-general, said the confederation's executive
had not discussed whether executive pay should be a conference topic. The
CBI believes that executive pay should be set by a mechanism involving
people outside the management, such as a remuneration committee. with
external directors. But Mr Davies said that what process a company used to
link pay to performance was not a matter for the CBI. 'People should be able
to defend themselves,' he said.
The debate over pay had been moving rapidly, he said. A year ago many people
had felt three-year rolling contracts for directors were acceptable. But now
Mr Alistair Ross Goobey, head of the Postel pension fund, who has been
campaigning against them, was 'winning the argument'.
A report on west Midlands remuneration by KPMG Corporate Finance helped to
highlight the issue at the conference.
It says directors' pay in the region's utilities rose 22.8 per cent to
Pounds 95,600 in the fiscal year 1993-1994, by 15 per cent in large
companies to Pounds 124,800; by 5.7 per cent in medium-sized companies to
Pounds 63,200; and by 5.6 per cent to Pounds 52,800 in small companies.
Over the same period, the average wage per employee in the region rose 4.7
per cent to Pounds 14,500.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941108

