FT944-2832

FT  15 DEC 94 / Rebels defy government again


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


The government was rocked last night by another rebellion by the group of
backbench Conservative MPs suspended from the parliamentary party after
voting with Labour in a crucial vote on the European Union.
All nine rebel Tories defied the government in a vote on EU fishing policy,
after a debate marked by clashes between Mr Michael Jack, fisheries
minister, and a coalition of Euro-sceptics and backbenchers from fishing
constituencies.
The government beat off a Labour attack on its fisheries policy by 298 votes
to 270, a majority of 28, avoiding defeat on the eve of the Dudley West
by-election, which Labour is expected to win.
However, the vote demonstrated the determination of the Euro-rebels to act
as a group, defying Mr John Major's attempts to discipline them by insisting
that they can only regain the party whip by supporting the government.
One of the rebels, Mr Michael Carttiss, MP for Great Yarmouth, voted with
Labour. The eight who abstained were Mrs Teresa Gorman (Billericay), Mr Tony
Marlow (Northampton N), Sir Teddy Taylor (Southend E), Mr Nick Budgen
(Wolverhampton SW), Mr Christopher Gill (Ludlow), Mr Richard Shepherd
(Aldridge Brownhills), Mr John Wilkinson (Ruislip Northwood), and Sir
Richard Body (Holland With Boston).
The vote resembled last week's government defeat on the imposition of value
added tax on heating fuel, when eight of the nine rebelled. The group
signalled further defiance yesterday by publishing a bill seeking a
referendum on Europe.
The size of the government majority was a minor embarrassment for the Labour
leadership, which had given permission to several MPs to travel to Dudley to
campaign for tomorrow's by-election.
The failure to capitalise on Tory divisions recalled a similar fishing
debate last year, when the government won by a few votes after a poor Labour
turnout. However, Labour whips had indicated that the party was taking a
relaxed approach to the debate because it did not affect legislation.
The crucial vote took place on a Labour amendment criticising a government
motion setting out the government's determination to fight for a good deal
for UK fishermen in EU negotiations next week on Iberian access to fish
stocks.
Tory MPs from fishing constituencies, particularly in the south-west, had
indicated they might join the rebellion, but backed down following appeals
for support from Mr Jack.
However, MPs from both main parties claimed that a secret deal had been
reached at last week's EU summit in Essen that would give the Iberian fleets
virtually free access.
Mr Jack told them: 'I know of no deals that were done in Essen.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941215

