FT942-15328

FT  15 APR 94 / International Company News: Decline steepens at Cockerill
Sambre


   By GILLIAN TETT


   BRUSSELS


The crisis in the European steel industry was highlighted again yesterday
when Cockerill Sambre, Belgium's largest steel maker, announced a loss of
BFr6.5bn (Dollars 184m) for 1993. This compares with a loss of BFr1.4bn the
previous year and a profit of BFr3.6bn in 1991.
The company, which had previously predicted a loss of between BFr4-BFr6bn,
blamed falling prices and sales for its poor results.
Sales in the group, whose core activity is the production of flat rolled
products normally used in the motor and construction industry, fell to
BFr147.4bn, down from BFr164.7bn the previous year. Meanwhile, financial
debt rose to BFr8bn, up from BFr4.6bn in 1992.
Cockerill Sambre insisted that conditions should improve next year - a hope
being echoed by most European steel makers who argue that the improvement in
the car manufacturing industry could start to boost steel prices as early as
the summer.
'The first half of 1994 saw a pick-up in steel industry activity and an
improvement in prices. This ought to lead to a notable recovery of earnings
by June,' the company said.
However, Mr Jean Gandois, chairman, warned that there would be no dividend
for 1993, insisting that he wanted to 'reserve all possibilities to
distribute a dividend on 1994 earnings'.
Coming hard on the heels of the steel industry's dispute with the European
Commission over its demands for further capacity cuts, the result seems to
raise more questions about government policy towards steel plants like
Cockerill Sambre, which is partly owned by the Belgian Walloon government.
Earlier this week the commission formally agreed to recommend that it would
delay its threat to withdraw aid until November to allow the industry more
time to develop restructuring plans.
But the delay is contingent on the European steel companies adhering to a
pledge that they will not ask for more aid. Commission officials privately
admit that the temporary agreement has done little to address the broader
problems of the steel sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940415

