FT942-15832

FT  13 APR 94 / International Company News: Norwegian cruise group disposes
of ferry business


   By KAREN FOSSLI


   OSLO


Vard, the Norwegian cruise and ferry group, is to dispose of its ferry
business for NKr1.1bn (Dollars 149m) in a move which will help reduce the
debt of the holding company, estimated at Dollars 185m.
The group also expects to win shareholders' backing at an extraordinary
general meeting today to replace the board with members nominated by the
existing board.
Mr Einar Kloster, chairman of the management committee of Philips
Electronics' lighting division and a member of Philips' group management
committee, is expected to be confirmed as new chairman, replacing Mr Terje
Mikalsen who will retain a board seat.
The group has been seeking ways to reduce its debt following an expensive
debt restructuring package for its Kloster Cruise unit secured last May. A
group of institutional investors took up Dollars 300m of senior, secured
notes with a 13 per cent coupon.
Vard yesterday reached agreement in principle with Skagerak, a Norwegian
company formed by a syndicate of primarily Norwegian institutional investors
to acquire the Larvik Line and Scandi Line.
The syndicate has agreed to supply Skagerak with NKr475m in equity and will
seek to raise an additional NKr725m to consummate the deal.
About 20 per cent of the shares in Skagerak will be made available in a
public offering in June, giving existing Vard shareholders preference rights
of purchase. Skagerak will also seek a listing on the Oslo bourse.
The deal will bring to Skagerak three ferries, terminals and the rights to
operate the routes between Larvik in Norway and Frederikshavn in Denmark,
and between Sandefjord in Norway and Stroemstad in Sweden, as well as other
assets and rights related to the operations.
It is contingent on Skagerak securing financing, a due diligence process
lasting until May 2, and the agreement with management in the ferry
operation of acceptable terms and conditions of appointment.
Vard had earlier failed to agree terms to sell the ferry unit to a group of
investors led by Mr Trygve Hegnar, a member of the board who is also behind
the call for today's EGM.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940413

