FT941-4183

FT  12 MAR 94 / Maxwell administrators agree to pensions talks


   By NORMA COHEN and JOHN MASON


Price Waterhouse, the firm acting as administrators to Maxwell Communication
Corporation, has agreed to hold negotiations with lawyers acting for the
Maxwell pensioners.
The pensioners are seeking the return of up to Pounds 235m allegedly
misappropriated from their company pension schemes.
The move follows a closed High Court judgment on February 25 when Mr Justice
Vinelott strengthened an earlier decision not to authorise a distribution of
MCC assets to creditors until pensioners' claims had been protected.
Any settlement arising from the talks would significantly affect the
proposed distribution of assets - currently exceeding Pounds 680m - raised
by the sale of MCC businesses by the administrators.
The four high street clearing banks would be among those unsecured creditors
of MCC that would receive considerably reduced dividend payments from the
administrators if the talks succeed.
The negotiations will be aimed at short-circuiting the complex legal
proceedings now before the Appeal Court in which the liquidators of
Bishopsgate Investment Management, the former managers of the Maxwell
company pension schemes, are seeking a proprietary claim to the first Pounds
235m of the Pounds 680m raised by the administrators.
In December Mr Justice Vinelott said: 'It would, I think, shock the
conscience of any informed member of the public if it were to transpire that
monies which could have been claimed as belonging to pension funds had been
distributed to unsecured creditors, however tenuous the claim by BIM and the
pension trustees might have appeared to be at the time of the distribution.'
If successful, the BIM court action would substantially reduce the money
available to meet the claims of other unsecured creditors, currently
totalling over Pounds 2bn.
It was Mr Justice Vinelott's rejection of BIM's arguments which prompted it
to take the issue to the Court of Appeal earlier this week. Three appeal
court judges have reserved their judgment.
However, with a final appeal to the House of Lords possible, authorisation
of the distribution of the MCC assets is likely to be delayed until May at
the earliest. It is this delay which is believed to have brought the MCC
administrators to the negotiating table with lawyers acting for the
pensioners.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940312

