FT942-14311

FT  21 APR 94 / Singapore's PM warns US over China: Washington urged to
pursue a policy of constructive engagement with Beijing


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


Mr Goh Chok Tong, Singapore's prime minister, warned yesterday that a break
in Sino-US relations over China's human rights policies would have severe
long-term consequences for the world.
In an interview with the Financial Times in London, Mr Goh emphasised that
he did not foresee a fracture in relations because he did not expect
President Clinton to revoke China's most-favoured nation status, which comes
up for annual renewal in June.
'The US at the end of the day will be rather pragmatic,' he said. 'China is
a huge export market for the US. US business people are putting pressure on
the administration that you can only make a point on human rights thus far
and beyond that the Chinese are not going to move.'
But if there were a break between Beijing and Washington, Singapore would
continue to invest in China. 'China will need even more investments from
Singapore because there will be fewer from the States. The market will be
open to those who trade with China.' The principal concern would be over the
geo-political consequences. China would interpret the US action as an
attempt to limit its growth and would remember it for a long time, Mr Goh
said.
'China will continue to grow - that is our assessment. The resources are
generated internally, not like the former Soviet Union which depends on
(other countries) for resources,' he said.
'When China becomes powerful in 20 or 30 years time, there is no reason why
China should behave kindly towards the west. That's our worry: China may
want to flex its muscles and then it will be a very troublesome world,' Mr
Goh said.
To prevent this, Mr Goh advocated a policy of constructive engagement 'so
that when China grows, it grows as part of the international community.
There are certain ways of behaving, certain norms of behaviour
internationally. If China wants to be an influential member in the world it
can have influence only if its norms of behaviour are similar to the
others'.'
Mr Goh said that Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation, the 17-member
trans-Pacific grouping, was the best forum to promote common understanding.
Mr Goh declined to comment on Singapore's caning sentence on Mr Michael Fay,
an 18-year-old American convicted of vandalism, in advance of consideration
of Mr Fay's appeal.
The prime minister was in London to spearhead a marketing effort for
Singapore's 'external wing' policy, under which it is building industrial
parks in other Asian countries and wants foreign companies to set up plants
in them while also basing part of the operation - corporate headquarters,
high-technology manufacture, training or research and development - in
Singapore.
He admitted the argument was less persuasive to UK companies with
long-established Asian links that it was, for example, in Germany.
The industrial parks which Singapore is building in China, India and
Indonesia were regarded as 'an extension of Singapore - so that you can take
advantage of the lower labour costs in those countries'.
Among other points, Mr Goh said:
Following last year's partial privatisation of Singapore Telecom, the
government planned to offer shares in the gas and electricity systems - now
run by the Public Utilities Board - and in the port.
It was considering enlarging the government's property development arm by
merging smaller companies into it, to prepare it for privatisation.
Singapore was seeking to develop 'three or four' multinational corporations
and to encourage 'a big presence' for them abroad which, he said, would be
both systematically developed and entrepreneurial.
Protest votes against the ruling People's Action party sprang from growing
materialistic aspirations.
Asked whether he expected opposition parties to become a force to be
reckoned with, he replied: 'Not in my political life-time.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940421

