FT944-14410

FT  22 OCT 94 / Outdoors: Heavenly flowers to make October bright - Robin
Lane Fox suggests a new approach to autumn


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


The past two months have been so exceptionally kind to gardens that they
must make us all think again about our style.
So many of us concentrate on the year's familiar points: the daffodils in
spring, the magnolias, the June rush and the cascade of roses before any
surviving bedding plants take over the show. But a golden October reminds us
that gardening is more than a three-month wonder.
There is something odd about one's style in late autumn and early winter.
Somehow, the individual flowers seem to go together naturally; their colours
are more clear and pure.
Perhaps a lack of choice concentrates the mind. There are fewer plants that
produce blooms in October, but I find that they have a distinction that
often disappears when the entire world of flowers is available in July.
Lack of choice first forced me to make an experiment which I now recommend
to anyone. I bless the day that I ignored the experts and went over to
growing schizostylis in a dry garden, which they are supposed to hate. One
of their best suppliers even laughed at the idea when I proposed it at a
recent flower show.
Schizostylis have pale, rushy leaves and long stems of flowers with rounded
petals in pink and white, curving to a length of nearly 2ft. For three years
now, they have multiplied and extended their season from August to November
in my dry garden without any trouble.
In the wild, these heavenly flowers are known as Kaffir lillies. In Britain,
they are much less popular than the shocking pink nerines (or Guernsey
lillies), but I can pay them no higher tribute than to say they are just as
good.
They seem to relish life in gaps between paving slabs where they can find a
cool root. And while they seldom appear in London, they would be marvellous
experiments for sunny, paved front gardens where you could take out the
occasional slab, improve a square of soil and pack in a Kaffir carpet
varying between pink and scarlet.
In my garden, they keep good company with a plant which would be the darling
of every expert if it was not so easy and available so widely. The brilliant
blue ceratostigma Willmottianum is the outstanding small shrub to a height
of just over 2ft in September and October.
The flowers of this infallible Chinese shrub are a brilliant cobalt blue
and, if you plant a few bushes under a sunny wall of your house, you can
then put the pink and red schizostylis in open squares among the paving
stones which link the house to the lawn.
The same possibilities are present 10 times over among Michaelmas daisies:
clear colours, a long season between different varieties, and easy
companionship with other strong shades of yellow or white. I like the late
blues such as Blue Down, the small-flowered Little Carlow and the tall
Calliope amid the strong yellows and shocking pinks of autumn-flowering
bulbs.
Among the bother of ordering and planting next year, many people forget they
could be enjoying shocking-pink nerines and the brilliant yellow Sternbergia
as bulbs in October.
Order them next spring and give them a dry, sunny place. A few bulbs soon go
a long way because they are better if divided after several years:
otherwise, the small, yellow Sternbergia will run to leaves rather than
buds.
If these clear colours leave you short of white, head for the hardy Japanese
anemones which are neglected only by unwise planters who think these plants
are, somehow, too common. For big groups, I think ordinary Japanese White
Alba remains the answer - the simplest and still the best. Once again, all
the experts would long for it if only it was more difficult to grow.
The same sort of people seldom want to mention a chrysanthemum, for much the
same reasons. Here, too, the botanists are behaving as if these fuss-pots
are right and are trying to re-name chrysanthemums as dendranthemums in a
spectacular fit of botanical 'correctness'.
I believe, however, that this family contains some excellent garden plants.
The single-flowered hardy forms are often lovely if you place them carefully
in borders and do not abandon them to a special corner where you will use
them for nothing but picking. The best give an extra month's life to fading
borders.
Everybody has a favourite but I must push my two latest discoveries, which
have flourished in this singular year. Weyrichii is a low-growing,
white-flowered form which seems to spread easily in a dry soil and lights up
the front of the border with a last, white splash.
Among the late blue daisies, I also have a small-flowered number known as
Doctor Tomm Parr, which seems to be as tough as nails and colours itself in
rusty red flowers. These forms, and their hardy relations, have a clarity
which is much rarer among flowers in high summer.
If you do not hide them away in beds for cutting only, you can develop a
style with a new range of colours which staves off the sad moment when the
garden finally heads for bed.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

941022

