FT942-15646

FT  14 APR 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Corporate zits
beware - Diane Summers looks at how to become a 'marketing excellent'
company


   By DIANE SUMMERS


Is marketing facing a mid-life crisis? This uncomfortable question was
considered by members of The Chartered Institute of Marketing, the UK
professional body, at its annual conference this week.
If the question sounds familiar, it is because the conference was addressing
a similarly-titled, highly-critical report* from consultants McKinsey, which
argued that the marketing function must take the lead in reinventing itself.
The McKinsey critique, published last year, was damning from the first
paragraph: 'Whatever the reality behind marketing's vaunted contribution to
corporate success, the large budgets it has enjoyed for decades are finally
beginning to attract attention - even criticism. So much so, in fact, that
doubts are surfacing about the very basis of contemporary marketing: the
value of ever more costly brand advertising, which often dwells on seemingly
irrelevant points of difference; of promotions, which are often just a fancy
name for price cutting; and of large marketing departments, which, far from
being an asset, are often a millstone around an organisation's neck.'
Marketing's bad press has continued in recent months. One respondent to a
survey** in December from accountants and consultants Coopers & Lybrand
said: 'In my 10 years as managing director, the marketing department has
kept on growing but I'm not quite sure why.'
The survey of the marketing and managing directors in 100 of the largest
companies found marketing departments lacked accountability and were not
involved in activities central to companies' success. Fewer than half of the
marketing departments surveyed were responsible for the development of
pricing strategies, while only a quarter had responsibility for customer
service; only 42 per cent were involved in just-in-time programmes and 31
per cent in total quality initiatives.
Alarmed by these critiques, The Chartered Institute of Marketing
commissioned Cranfield School of Management's Centre for Advanced Research
in Marketing to examine the mid-life crisis question and present the
findings to the institute's conference.*** Over five months, Cranfield
reviewed the literature, questioned leading academics and consultants in the
field, and spent at least six hours with each of 15 companies judged to be
'excellent' in marketing terms. The decision was made largely to steer clear
of the fast-moving consumer goods companies which normally get all the
attention.
Malcolm McDonald, who led the Cranfield research, told delegates that four
decades of marketing appeared to have had little impact on British business:
for most companies, marketing remained synonymous with promotion and
selling, rather than integral to all-pervading, customer-geared philosophy
and practice, as it was in 'marketing excellent' companies.
Some organisations have acquired the veneer and vocabulary of marketing,
said McDonald, but their marketing departments operate at the periphery.
Such a department, he said, drawing a circle and sticking a blob on its
circumference, is like a 'corporate zit'. He is disdainful of the
organisations which fail to understand their customers, provide them with an
unsatisfactory product or service and then expect a marketing department to
'sprinkle a bit of magic marketing dust' on at the end of the process.
One trend noted in the Cranfield study was for 'excellent' companies to do
away with marketing departments altogether and marketing professionals to be
integrated into multi-disciplinary teams organised around processes or
customers.
This process is being speeded by the current fashion of 'business process
re-engineering', or 'redesign' - a concept which aims to do away with
organisations' 'functional barons', radically redesign business processes
and eliminate the 'waiting time' as departments pass partly-finished jobs to
each other. AT&T Global Information Systems, Boots Healthcare International
and Standard Life are all examples, says McDonald, of companies moving away
from the single marketing department.
Cranfield found the 'excellent' companies had other features in common which
could be summarised to form a checklist of how to become 'truly
market-orientated':
Start at the top - strong leadership and commitment to customer focus at the
top of the organisation is indispensable;
Involve everyone in the organisation in the marketing philosophy;
Be prepared for structural change;
Use the new structure to feed a 'customer facing strategy';
Review marketing tactics to see whether the 'four Ps' - product, price,
promotion and place - work from the customers' point of view;
Accept that change is a way of life;
Understand the difference between quality systems and quality products or
services;
Focus on the customer, not the competition;
Look at 'end-to-end', not piecemeal processes - the customer should
experience seamless service;
Keep the end user in sight. Do not become distracted by the middleman;
Measure the success of the marketing approach and be able to demonstrate the
link between customer focus and profit.
Far from being in a mid-life crisis, McDonald concludes that marketing is
'somewhere between childhood and adolescence'. Marketing has not failed -
for most companies, it has yet to be tried.
*Marketing's mid-life crisis, by John Brady and Ian Davis. The McKinsey
Quarterly, 1993, Number 2.
**Marketing at the Crossroads, Coopers & Lybrand, 43 Temple Row, Birmingham
B2 5JT.
***Marketing - the challenge of change. From The Chartered Institute of
Marketing, Moor Hall, Cookham, Berkshire. Pounds 99 for non-members, Pounds
85 for members, plus p&p.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940414

