FT944-2660

FT  16 DEC 94 / Academics claim audit body is undemocratic


   By JIM KELLY, Accountancy Correspondent


A group of accounting academics has launched an attack on the authority of
the audit profession's main regulator, the Auditing Practices Board,
claiming that it is undemocratic.
The 36 academics have called, in a written submission to the board, for the
creation of an independent body accountable to parliament.
Mr Prem Sikka, reader in accounting at the University of East London, said:
'To the best of my knowledge this is the largest number of academics ever to
sign a submission and publicly express a vote of no confidence in a standard
setting body.'
The group was responding to a consultation paper on the regulator's future
programme of work. Last week the board published its long-awaited paper on
audit reform - The Audit Agenda.
The academics have attacked the regulator's right to determine policy.
'The APB is a division of a limited company, CCAB Ltd. In our view it has no
democratic mandate to formulate audit policy for the UK, ' says the
submission.
'The APB is owned by six major UK accountancy bodies who continue to control
the agenda and parameters of discussion. It is not independent of the
profession.'
The academics, who have all put their names to the submission, claim that
the board is 'unduly influenced' by members of the big accountancy firms.
'There is no moral or ethical reason for allowing partners from such firms
to make UK audit policy,' says the submission.
The academics also argue that because the standard-setting process in audit
relies on volunteers it will never reflect the views of small practitioners
or interested parties such as pensioners or employees.
'Major firms and their corporate patrons are able to buy influence by
seconding individuals to the APB and its committees.'
Finally the academics say that the board has been diverted from considering
how to prevent further audit failures leading to corporate collapses.
'We urge the APB and its sponsors to join us in calling on the government to
appoint an independent body to regulate all aspects of auditing,' they say.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941216

