FT944-14438

FT  22 OCT 94 / Food and Drink: How to give that perfect dinner - Inviting
friends for a meal? Chef and author Ken Hom has some tips for up-and-coming
hosts / Entertaining at home


   By KEN HOM


Twenty years ago, when I was much younger and more naive, I entertained
extravagantly. My dinner parties would have a minimum of 12 guests and no
fewer than 12 courses. I would spend days preparing elaborate and obscure
Chinese dishes.
I had much more time then and I had great pleasure and enjoyment preparing
those meals. However, in the last eight years, with a heavy travel schedule
and the pressures of a busy life, my style of entertaining has changed
radically.
Now, I usually have no more than six guests and just three courses. My
friends enjoy these intimate dinners as much as my lavish spreads of the
past. Here then, is how I entertain today, simply but still elegantly,
keeping the following tips in mind:
Invite friends you really want to see. Spending three hours at the dinner
table with good friends is my idea of bliss. Remember, conversation and mix
is almost as important as food and wine.
Do not invite the same guests all the time, it is nice to mix and match your
friends. Never have a party with all the guests from the same profession,
nothing is worse than talking shop all evening.
Do not skimp, buy the best ingredients and have good wines. This is vital if
you have only three courses. Your chances of success are greater if your
dishes are memorable.
Do not attempt new dishes, always entertain with tried and true recipes or
dishes which you feel comfortable with. You do not need the additional
stress of knowing whether the dish will be good or not.
However, you should feel free to mix and match dishes from different
cuisines. For example, you could begin with a Chinese soup, then serve a
lovely roast chicken with basmati rice, and perhaps a Thai stir-fry
vegetable dish.
Avoid trying to impress your guests. I always think it is grander to make
delicious simple food than to present pretentious mediocre dishes. There is
no need to stick too rigidly to other people's rules about food, if you like
fish with red wine, then serve it as such.
Remember to make dishes within the realm of home cooks. Chefs apart, I do
not think your guests should expect you to be proficient in restaurant
cooking. If you are making a Chinese meal, do not make more than two
stir-fry dishes at any one meal. There are many recipes in the Chinese
repertoire that are braised dishes, steamed, etc. and many can be prepared
ahead of time.
Light meals are usually the best remembered ones. That means light or no
sauces, avoid red meats, stick to fish or chicken. Nothing is worse than a
heavy meal which can stay with you for the whole night.
Although I rarely use a microwave to cook, I have discovered that it does
wonders to fish. It is as good as steaming the fish in the wok.
Soups, especially good ones are an elegant opening. I like them because I
can make them days, even a week ahead. They freeze extremely well and
re-heat beautifully. If you like cream soups, add the cream at the last
moment.
Give your dinner a few moments of thought before you plan it. All too often,
home cooks plunge into organising a dinner party without thought to the
balance of the meal, logistics, etc. Think about how you would feel as a
guest at this dinner. If your instincts tell you that the dinner will be
good, chances are it will be.
Start the evening with champagne, bubbles are always a festive start to any
meal. It immediately puts everyone in a good mood and is an important factor
that will determine how the rest of the evening will flow.
Buy the best - I especially like Louis Roederer - and, when it is special
occasion and I feel flush, I will have a bottle of Roederer Cristal. By the
way, I have found for my Chinese dinner parties that champagne is the
perfect drink throughout the meal. The acid and sweetness seems to balance
out the oils and flavours that one finds in Chinese cookery.
Do not clutter the table with a huge bouquet. Nothing is worse than trying
to converse with flowers in your face. Place one flower at each table
setting for a nicer and more elegant effect.
Finally, never panic. If something does not turn out the way you thought it
should, do not mention it. Patch it up as best as you can, smile, have
another glass of champagne and enjoy yourself.
Here are two recipes from a typical dinner party at my house, they are easy
to make and taste wonderful:
DOUBLE STEAMED MUSHROOM SOUP Double steaming involves an unusual method of
making a rich but clear soup. You must first prepare the soup in its own
covered pot, so that it is producing its own steam.
Then you place it on a rack over boiling water in another pot, cover the pot
tightly and steam the soup for three hours. This technique is usually
reserved for the finest ingredients with the most delicate flavours and
textures. Steaming is a gentle cooking method that works best with such
foods.
In this soup, the highest quality of dried mushrooms that money can buy are
used. They should be thick so that they can absorb all the flavours from the
long steaming process. The result is a clear, concentrated and rich consomme
redolent of the essence of mushroom. All the work can be done in advance. In
fact, the soup can even be frozen a week ahead and re-heated. This soup
would make an earthy and elegant opener for any meal.
50g/2oz finest quality dried Chinese black mushrooms; 900ml/2 pints/4 cups
chicken stock; salt to taste.
Soak the mushrooms in warm water for 20 minutes. Then drain them and squeeze
out the excess liquid. Remove and discard the stems.
Bring the chicken stock to a boil in a large pot. Pour the stock and the
mushrooms into a pot or heatproof soup tureen. (This is the first steaming
process.) Cover the pot or tureen and set it on a rack inside a large
steamer. Keep this larger wok or pot tightly closed. Steam continuously for
three hours. Replenish the hot water from time to time as necessary.
Adjust the seasoning with salt to taste and serve at once or allow it to
cool thoroughly and freeze until it is needed.
QUICK STEAMED SALMON FILLETS
You can steam this dish in a wok or microwave. It cooks to perfection in the
microwave.
1 1/2 lbs/700g salmon fillets; 1 teaspoon salt;  1/4 teaspoon freshly ground
white pepper; 1 tablespoon Chinese Shaoxing rice wine or dry sherry; 1
tablespoon light soy sauce; 3 tablespoons fresh chives, finely chopped; 3
spring onions, finely chopped; 2 teaspoons ginger, finely chopped; 1
tablespoon groundnut (peanut) oil; 2 teaspoons sesame oil.
Rub the salmon fillets evenly with salt and pepper, pour on the rice wine
and cover tightly with plastic wrap.
Prepare the rest of the ingredients. Cook the salmon in the microwave oven
at 100 per cent for 3-5 minutes, depending on its thickness. The salmon is
done when it feels firm and not spongy. Remove and let sit for three
minutes.
In the wok, combine the two oils and heat. While the oil is heating,
sprinkle the salmon with the soy sauce, chives, spring onions and ginger.
When the oils begin to smoke, pour this over the top, it should sizzle and
be served at once.
Ken Hom's Chinese Kitchen is published by Pavilion Books (Pounds 17.99 in
hardback, 200 pages). His restaurant, Imperial City, is located in The Royal
Exchange, Cornhill.

The Financial Times


London Page X

941022

