FT944-14563

FT  22 OCT 94 / Jaguar workers send a restive signal: Why observers fear the
car industry may be courting wage-driven inflation


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


Jaguar car workers' sudden rejection yesterday of a two-year pay deal may be
partly due to the shop floor's alleged discontent over the introduction of
compulsory overtime work to meet rising orders.
But many observers also believe it reflects the first signs of a restive
mood across parts of the British workplace as the economic recovery gathers
pace and workers start to improve their bargaining strength.
Earlier last week Mr Howard Davies, the director-general of the
Confederation of British Industry, warned member companies about the dangers
of increasing unit labour costs and urged them to keep a firm grip on their
non-wage employment budgets
The car industry in Britain - beyond Jaguar - is turning into a cause for
concern for those worried by the dangers of wage-driven inflation.
Both the Rover group and the trade unions remain confident that the
company's 28,000 employees will accept a two-year pay offer negotiated for
them last week.
This involves 3.7 per cent basic rate increases from November 1, with a
further 4 per cent, or the equivalent of the inflation rate if higher, from
November 1 1995. Rover workers with a full attendance record are to receive
payments of Pounds 150 in their pay packets this month through the company's
profit-share scheme.
The size of the deal has surprised some observers but it reflects the new
optimism in the group about its market prospects.
Two other car companies - Nissan and Peugeot Talbot - are due to seek
two-year agreements with their unions shortly and they are under pressure to
reach deals in line with that of Rover.
The rest of the vehicle sector is not involved in wage negotiations this
year. But Ford is due to increase pay by at least 3.5 per cent next month in
the second stage of a two-year wage agreement while Vauxhall paid out a 3
per cent improvement in September in a similar two-year deal.
Both Honda and Toyota have one-year agreements and neither expire until
April. This year their employees received pay rises of 3.7 per cent and 4.3
per cent respectively.
But the widespread use of two-year wage agreements in the car industry is
building leap-frogging tendencies between the companies. 'A 4 per cent rise
is already a benchmark for next autumn's negotiations,' said Mr Alistair
Hatchett, editor of Incomes Data Report, yesterday.
The steady upward pressures on pay are by no means confined to the car
industry. A number of settlements over recent weeks suggest rises are moving
above 3 per cent as companies adjust their offers under the threat of
industrial conflict. These include:
A 3.5 per cent plus Pounds 325 lump sum deal from October 1 for manual
workers at British Aerospace's plant at Woodford in Cheshire after a 24-hour
stoppage by operators.
Anglesey Aluminium has increased pay by 4.7 per cent at its Holyhead plant
after an earlier offer was turned down by the workforce.
Honeywell Controls Systems in Motherwell has reached a two-year deal with 4
per cent from this month plus 1.5 per cent next March and the next deal to
be from March 1 1996.
Employees at Westland Helicopters have received 3.25 per cent pay increases
after a number of groups staged one and two-day strikes. Britannia Airways
improved its pay offer for 1,400 cabin staff after a strike ballot vote with
a guarantee no rises would be less than 3 per cent.
Mr Davies sees this as a 'creeping' rise in the wages trend above the
inflation rate and level of productivity improvements.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941022

