FT944-6038

FT  01 DEC 94 / Spanish airline looks to Brussels to keep it aloft: Without
aid, Iberia faces bankruptcy within three months


   By TOM BURNS


If Iberia hurries, it will just have time to hand to Mr Marcelino Oreja its
request for a fresh injection of large amounts of public money. The European
Commission's outgoing transport commissioner, like most Spaniards, is a
frequent user of the beleaguered national airline.
Any delay will mean that Iberia's bid for a Pta130bn (Pounds 640m) aid
package will land in the in-tray of Mr Neil Kinnock, the former UK Labour
party leader, who replaces Mr Oreja in January.
A sympathetic hearing in Brussels is vital for Iberia. Unless the Commission
authorises its urgent recapitalisation, the airline could be bankrupt in
three months' time. But the issue is likely to prove even more controversial
than Brussels' recent approval of a much larger subsidy - Pounds 2.4bn
(Dollars 3.9bn) - to Air France, a move which is being challenged by other
airlines in the European Court.
The first problem Iberia will face is that its request runs counter to the
'one time, last time' policy on state aid that governs the Commission's
efforts to liberalise the airline industry by 1997. Brussels authorised a
Pta120bn capital injection into the Spanish airline just two years ago.
Iberia will accordingly plead that it faces 'exceptional circumstances,
unforeseen and external to the company' as the Commission's subsidy
guidelines state. One such circumstance would be the three devaluations the
peseta suffered between September 1992 and last June.
The second problem is that the effectiveness of a viability plan for the
airline which will accompany the request is certain to be questioned by the
Commission's more hawkish members. Mr Karel Van Miet, commissioner
responsible for competition policy, is one such, and he has clashed recently
with Mr Oreja over airline subsidies.
Details of the viability plan have still to be finalised but the signs are
that it will fall far short of the management's original hopes. A wildcat
strike on Monday, which paralysed air traffic in Spain and cost Iberia more
than Pta1bn in lost revenue , forced a drastic revision of cost-cutting
plans.
Bowing to union pressure, the airline agreed to lower wages by 8 per cent
rather than 15, promised to make up back pay which it had said it could not
honour, and agreed to stagger 3,500 redundancies, through incentives and
early retirements, over three years instead of two.
Before Monday's strike, the carrier's management had said that failure to
agree on a 15 per cent wage cut would mean the immediate firing of 5,000
employees, 20 per cent of its labour force, and the break up of the company
in order to raise capital through disposals.
The climbdown is unlikely to impress those who believe that baling out
Iberia, which has debts of Pta424bn, half of which are short term, is the
equivalent of good money chasing bad.
Added to that, under the terms of the post-strike settlement, the leaders of
the airline's two main unions, which organised Monday's strikes, will now
join Iberia's four-man management committee.
The increased union power is an unsettling development for Iberia's dismal
balance sheet, which is to a large extent the consequence of over-manning
and low productivity.
Although salaries have been technically frozen over the past two years, the
wages bill grew by nearly 7 per cent last year and could increase by 4 per
cent this year. The company has 156 employees per aircraft; in comparison
with competitor Air Europa's 46. Air Europa is one of two private sector
domestic carriers which now compete with the state airline on domestic
routes and have prompted a sharp reduction in fares.
Iberia's cost problems have been highlighted by ambitious expansion in Latin
America that started in 1989, a year when the company last reported profits.
That year profits tumbled to Pta6.2bn from a record Pta24.2bn.
Within three years, which coincided with the devasting impact of the Gulf
War on the airline business, Iberia bought into Aerolineas Argentinas,
Austral, the domestic Argentine carrier, Venezuela's Viasa, and Chile's
Ladeco. The Spanish company's debt shot up from Pta147.6bn in 1989 to
Pta371.5bn in 1991, a year when it posted losses of Pta35.8bn and when it
began to request the Pta120bn injection of state aid that was finally
authorised by Brussels in 1992.
Last March, as part of a complex rescue plan for Aerolineas agreed with the
Argentine government, Iberia raised its stake in the airline from 30 per
cent to 83.4 per cent in a Dollars 400m debt-for-equity swap. Iberia also
chipped in a further Dollars 100m that had been put aside for emergencies
when it first bought into Aerolineas.
It was ironic that just as the Spanish company was pouring money into the
Argentine airline earlier this year, lack of traffic was forcing it to close
a hub in Miami which it had begun operating in 1991. The hub was part of
Iberia's grand strategy to become the European link with Central and South
America.
The closure of Miami has been planned by Mr Juan Saez who became managing
director of Iberia in a boardroom shake-up that brought in as chairman Mr
Javier Salas, who is president of INI, the public-sector holding that owns
the airline.
The outgoing chairman, Mr Miguel Aguilo, was blamed for last year's losses
of Pta69.7bn, which were double those of 1992. Mr Aguilo, who became
chairman in 1990, had inherited the Aerolineas Argentinas project from his
predecessor, Mr Narcis Andreu, who left in 1990 at the beginning of a
dizzying series of top management changes at Iberia.
Mr Saez, together with Mr Salas, will now be responsible for drawing up the
viability plan that will be taken to Brussels by Mr Juan Manuel Eguiagaray,
the industry minister, perhaps as early as next week.
Yesterday, Mr Eguiagaray said he was 'absolutely convinced' that the
Commission would approve an aid package. He is probably reassured by the
precedent set by Air France and by the presence in Brussels, at least for
the next two months, of Mr Oreja.
Editorial Comment, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941201

