FT942-15389

FT  15 APR 94 / Arts: A theatre in free flight - Alastair Macaulay talks to
Lev Dodin, the artistic director of the Maly Theatre of St Petersburg


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


For decades, the west knew next to nothing about the performing arts troupes
of Russia. Even the big Kirov and Bolshoi ballet companies toured far less
than their western admirers would have liked. Now the situation is reversed.
It is the west that sees the Russian companies most.
Ballet and opera, though more expensive, are more obviously international
arts. But the spoken theatre? One company in particular has pandered to the
growing western appetite for Russian theatre. The Maly Theatre of St
Petersburg, which has made several visits to the west in recent years, has
now begun to spend most of its time outside Russia. Last weekend it finished
a season at the Odeon, Paris; this week it begins a tour of Britain. The
scale of the endeavour is probably without precedent in the history of the
spoken theatre. The Maly company has 85 members; it brings five different
productions to Britain (including the two-part Brothers and Sisters and
three-part The Devils); it will visit London, Manchester, Glasgow,
Newcastle, and Nottingham.
The company's artistic director is Lev Dodin. In interview, he at first
delivers a certain amount of Eurospeak. 'These new contacts are very
important for us . . . We gain a new quality of communication in the west.
Performing here has become natural; it makes us aware we are all part of one
community.' He drops the 'one community' line, however, when I make the
error of referring to St Petersburg as a more conservative city than Moscow.
'St Petersburg had always the more profound culture. Things were hatched
there before appearing on the surface. The surface is where Moscow picked
things up.'
This is true Petersburg-speak, and wonderful. 'St Petersburg is built
according to laws of beauty, and these laws shape our thought. The Soviet
regime stifled ideas, and more so in St Petersburg. It was easier to keep
down inventive thought there, whereas the bureaucracy in Moscow allowed
various different channels there. But St Petersburg was always alive to the
work of Meyerhold, Akhmatova, Brodsky, Shostakovich.'
Today, he says, there are as many experiments in St Petersburg as in Moscow.
'You can do what you like now - if you have money. But it's hard, as yet, to
judge the results.' I ask if there had been an extra stimulation in trying
to create new work under the Soviet regime. 'Well, it gave certain spurs,
certain energy, yes. But it was the energy of craziness. It's very hard to
create in a situation where any minute your mouth can be stopped. The
absence of freedom has taken away a lot of force from Russian theatre. Now
it is a new world - one of financial values.'
Will theatre be able to preserve its role? 'This is a very serious question
for us. You know from your own country that theatre easily becomes an
entertainment industry. That is not real art.' I think of Solzhenitsyn and
his discomfort in the west. What is it like being a company in exile, I ask?
'No, no, not exile, but free flight] We have been abroad since January, and
we return in June. We will work there, and perform in September. We perform
in the west so much because this is the best way we can support the staff in
our theatre. There are people at the Maly now whom we can only support by
working here. We have to send a lot of money home; and this is getting
harder.'
The company has made its western reputation with theatrical adaptations
rather than by performing plays that were written as plays. The Paris season
ends, however, with Chekhov's The Cherry Orchard, with which the British
tour opens. This was my introduction to the company's work, and it is, by
most accounts, by no means the best. The company's admirers love the
theatrical energy and intensity of its stagings; but The Cherry Orchard is a
play with a great deal of languor, which Dodin observes. Nonetheless, this
staging is less naturalistic than most British productions.
The play has one single set, which changes in the light. It is, by turns, a
hall of mirrors, a wall of windows opening onto cherry trees, a dark
interior. Splendid; but why so much surrounding darkness in the daytime
scenes? Dodin feels that this is not a naturalistic play; while talking of
the comic element in Chekhov, he says 'It is not a naturalistic drama, not a
sad tragedy. It is a spiritual tragedy which is sometimes very comic. The
comedy is that of human life. A human's life is very short and limited. A
human is unwilling to accept this, which makes his life only faster. This is
close to Shakespeare. The comic aspect is dramatic.'
This staging, daringly, is given without an interval; and the second act is
in Chekhov's original version. I have always loved the asymmetries of
British Chekhov stagings, the ways that two or more activities are
frequently going on at different tempi, and the way that the people in the
stage world never stop to orate to the audience. Dodin, however, frequently
has events happen bang on the centre-line of the stage, underplays any
multiplicity of stage incident, and has certain speeches delivered straight
out to the audience.
But his company is a true ensemble, and they bring to it a Russian ease in
large emotion, easily able to switch between laughter and tears, or indeed
to catch both at the same time. Dodin again: 'A common spirit is very
important in Chekhov. When individual stars appear in Chekhov, they make it
less like Chekhov, more like any other play. You must hear the music of the
Chekhov symphony. Or, rather, the small evening serenade.'
The Maly Theatre tour starts with The Cherry Orchard, until April 17 at the
Lyric, Hammersmith. The Forum Theatre, Manchester, presents Brothers and
Sisters and Stars in the Morning Sky, April 20-24; as does the Nottingham
Playhouse, May 24-28. Glasgow presents all five productions, at the Citizens
and Tramway Theatres, April 29-May 15. The Newcastle Playhouse presents
Brothers and Sisters and The House, May 18-21.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940415

