FT941-17169

FT  06 JAN 94 / Beirut rebuilding shares 'oversubscribed': Lebanon's biggest
stock offering aims to raise Dollars 650m from Arab investors


   By MARK NICHOLSON


   CAIRO


Lebanon's biggest share launch - to establish Solidere, the company which
will rebuild war-torn central Beirut - will be oversubscribed, the company
and bankers handling the offering said yesterday.
The offer, designed to raise Dollars 650m towards the costs of rebuilding
Beirut, has been open to Lebanese and other Arab investors since November
and closes on January 10.
Mr Nasr al-Shamaa, secretary general of Solidere's founding board, said: 'We
will have a successful subscription, it will be oversubscribed.'
The offer represents 35 per cent of the founding capital of Solidere, which
is expected to begin putting out to tender the main contracts for the first
phase of central Beirut's reconstruction within weeks. The remaining capital
comprises shares granted to landowners in the Lebanese capital in exchange
for title to their property, which Solidere will develop.
Neither Solidere nor bankers handling the share offer will say how far the
offer is oversubscribed, though company officials have hinted that
subscriptions may reach Dollars 1bn. Bankers said they expected a late rush
for the Dollars 100 shares this week.
A successful offering would represent the largest injection of private, and
expatriate capital into the Lebanese government's ambitious reconstruction
schemes and would offer a substantial vote of confidence in the government
of Mr Rafik Hariri, the country's businessman-turned-prime minister.
However, the offer is not unanimously popular, and Sheikh Mohammed Hussein
Fadlallah, spiritual leader of the pro-Iranian Hizbollah, last week decreed
a ban on the purchase of Solidere shares. He said property owners in central
Beirut had been compelled to give up their flats, shops and houses, an act
which he said Islam considered a sin.
Final allocations of the shares will not be known for up to 10 days after
the offer closes. Priority will be given to Lebanese property owners in
Beirut, Lebanese nationals living in the country, government agencies,
Lebanese expatriates and, finally, Arabs elsewhere. Paribas, in London, and
Saudi American Bank, in Riyadh, have both reported healthy demand for
placements with Gulf Arabs and Lebanese expatriates.
Non-Lebanese institutions are not allowed to buy shares and no individual
holding can exceed 10 per cent. Al-Anwar, the Lebanese newspaper, reported
on Tuesday that Mr Hariri had subscribed for the maximum permissible stake.
A secondary market in Solidere shares is expected to open by February,
forming a basis upon which the government hopes to rebuild Beirut's bourse.
Stock market officials believe a skeletal stock market could be operating
within eight months. The original market was closed in 1983, during
Lebanon's 17-year civil war.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940106

