FT941-3312

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (19): An
expensive option for the foreseeable future - Systems integration / The
perceived demand for systems integration has attracted a growing number of
supplier and services companies


Like many computer terms, systems integration is hard to define. At one
level, any computer-based information system must be integrated or it will
not work. But the term has come to refer to a particular class of computer
system - that is, one which is assembled from a set of components in a way
which hides the technology from the customer.
The importance of systems integration as a discipline has grown steadily
since companies began the move towards open systems. A system does not, of
course, need to be 'open' to require integration - but this is where the
largest demand is.
Proprietary systems are also 'integrated' - but most of the integration is
performed by the manufacturer and the system is sold as a complete solution.
Open systems bring the advantages of user choice and flexibility - but there
is a price to pay. They are constructed from hardware and software
'components' which are usually sourced from several different manufacturers.
They will almost certainly involve the use of a technological design
framework which separates systems functions into users and services. This
approach is usually referred to nowadays as client-server computing.
Advanced skills are a pre-requisite to bring these components together to
create coherent and useful applications. Systems integrators must have a
wide knowledge of 'componentry' and how it may be brought together
successfully.
They must also have strong software development skills because integrated
systems invariably require some 'custom-built' components to meet the
application need.
The perceived demand for systems integration has attracted a growing number
of supplier and services companies in the past two or three years.
Established hardware manufacturers in particular have seen systems
integration as a growth area as margins on hardware have fallen. IBM, DEC,
Groupe Bull, ICL and Unisys have emphasised their systems integration
talents in recent years and their service revenues have grown accordingly.
They are not the only contenders. Large consultancy companies such as EDS,
Andersen Consulting and KPMG have also made a large dent in the market as
indeed have traditional custom software developers such as Logica, SEMA and
CGS.
Successful systems integration depends on a broad foundation of standards
for both hardware connections and software compatibility.
Some standards are drawn from formal efforts by international standards
bodies such as the International Standards Organisation (ISO) and the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
But many of the standards which make integrated systems possible have
evolved from proprietary industry standards such as IBM's SQL database
standard, which is used to link desktop data tools to database servers.
Given the importance of open systems standards, it is no surprise that the
lead in systems integration has come from the public sector.
The procurement policies of government departments have pushed the cause of
open systems and put many of them in the front line.
'The UK government's decision to force open systems by legislation has been
good for the systems integration market,' says Mr Philip Crawford, UK
managing director of Groupe Bull.
He goes on to say that there are other reasons why the demand for systems
integration has grown faster in the government sector than in the commercial
sector:
'For the last two years companies have been holding off making large
investment decisions because of the recession - and obviously the recession
hits commercial world much more than it hits the government sector.'
Mr Crawford adds that this has depressed the market - but that there are
signs that this is starting to change:
'The market has probably grown at around 15 per cent - when two years ago we
expected it to be more like 40 per cent. But it is now being driven by the
user. The demand for systems integration is coming from the user because
they are crying out for usable power.'
This demand is manifested in the demand to integrate desktop PCs into
existing systems. The PC is obviously the best way to deliver usable power
to the desktop.
Mr Crawford warns, however, that there are dangers:
'The PC is two different tools. If you think of it like a car - it is
excellent for driving around town but it is also pretty good on the
motorway. Good systems integration makes sure that the corporate strategy -
the motorway - does not overwhelm the desktop,' he explains.
Groupe Bull's systems integration strategy, like many others, is based on
developing the right combination of technical skills and relating these to
business problems.
It also sees the wisdom of securing alliances with other important players
in the market and recently signed an agreement with software developer
Microsoft to integrate PC software with its own larger systems.
'This is more than a marketing agreement. We have had to work hard to prove
to Microsoft that we have the integration skills and the support services to
do the job,' says Mr Crawford.
The deal will give Groupe Bull advanced access to important Microsoft
developments such as the Windows NT operating system, which looks set to be
a leading component in future client-server systems.
This level of software is increasingly important to the success of systems
integration as indeed is the move to object-oriented computing, which will
help to enforce standards for software components.
Despite this, systems integration will never be easy - especially as the
number of choices open to users increases.
'Users have developed an attitude which means that they expect information
technology to support them - whereas a few years ago they had to put up with
what they were given. But because of openness, there are far more decisions
to make now and it is certainly is not getting any the less complex,'
observes Mr Crawford.
Systems integrators are, therefore, in the unenviable position of having to
keep up with every new technology development at the same time as meeting
the growing demands of increasingly educated users.
For this reason, systems integration is likely to remain an expensive option
for the foreseeable future.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940316

