FT941-13150

FT  27 JAN 94 / Changing of the old guard may shift power structure


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


For many senior members listening to President Bill Clinton's State of the
Union speech in Congress on Tuesday night, it was the last time they will
have front row seats for such an address.
Members are retiring or seeking other office in record numbers, driven out
by age, cynicism or fatigue. Many others face a hard fight to win
re-election.
Complaints that the Congress has become more partisan and less rewarding are
widespread among those who have chosen to leave.
'Partisan politics and negative campaigning have so poisoned the system that
reasoned, good faith debate on policy is now the exception when once it was
the norm,' said Congressman Austin Murphy of Pennsylvania. Congressman Al
McCandless of California said he simply wanted a leisurely breakfast and
more time with his grandchildren.
The 1992 election had already brought in a crowd of new faces: 110 members
of the House of Representatives and 14 senators.
But so far this session 19 House members with 348 years of legislative
experience between them - 14 of them Democrats - have announced their
retirement after the November 8 election. Six senators are also retiring.
Another seven House members are giving up their seats to run for governor in
their home states, while nine more are trying to move up to the Senate.
Democratic leaders expect to lose some seats in November, a normal
phenomenon for the president's party in the first two-yearly congressional
election after a presidential victory.
But the projected swing of about 25 seats - a figure both parties agree on -
would not be enough to change control of the House, where the Democrats now
hold 257 of the 435 seats.
In the Senate, too, the Republicans are expected to gain another two or
three seats in 34 elections that will be fought this year, but this would
again not break the Democratic majority, now 56 out of 100 senators.
The departures include some of the most influential members of the House:
from Mr Bob Michel of Illinois, the Republican leader, to Mr William Ford of
Michigan, chairman of the education and labour committee.
They also number some of Congress's most colourful and principled members,
such as Mr Jake Pickle, a protege of former President Lyndon Johnson.
The exodus could affect the power structure of Congress, where committee
chairmanships are critically dependent on seniority. Three of the six
judiciary subcommittee chairmanships will come open, and another nine
subcommittee chairs will be left empty - besides Mr Ford's chairmanship of
the full education and labour committee.
Even more sweeping changes could be under way, as several senior members
could be persuaded to withdraw, or be defeated outright, by powerful
challenges in their party primaries.
The most important figure under attack is Mr Dan Rostenkowski, who holds
sway over tax matters as chairman of the ways and means committee. Still the
target of a Justice Department investigation, Mr Rostenkowski's popularity
in his Illinois district has rarely been lower.
Mr Jamie Whitten of Mississippi, whose 52 years in the House are already the
longest in history, has been urged by many of his colleagues, who have
already eased him out of the important appropriations committee
chairmanship, to go gracefully.
If he does not, he faces the most difficult race of his career against Mr
Tim Ford, Speaker of the Mississippi state legislature.
On the other side of the political divide, Mr Phil Crane of Illinois, rated
by Roll Call, the Capitol Hill village newspaper, as the most extreme right
winger in the House, faces a tough primary.
They all might take the advice of Congressman Douglas Applegate of Ohio, who
is calling it quits after 17 years in Congress. 'It is time for younger
people to take the reins of government and lead us into the next century. I
would further suggest that other older members of Congress consider this, as
well,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940127

