FT942-14475

FT  20 APR 94 / US trade deficit soars as pace of partners' growth lags


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


The US trade deficit soared in February, reflecting faster economic growth
in the US than in most of its trading partners, the Commerce Department
reported yesterday.
The overall deficit on trade in goods and services rose to Dollars 9.7bn
(Pounds 6.6bn), against a revised Dollars 6.6bn in January. Most Wall Street
analysts had predicted a decline to Dollars 6bn or less.
The poor figures are likely to increase domestic political pressure on the
Clinton administration to take an aggressive stance in talks with Japan on
opening its domestic market.
The deficit on merchandise trade, on the customs basis, rose to Dollars
12.4bn, against Dollars 10.1bn in January, the highest monthly total since
the economic boom of the late 1980s. The deficit on trade in goods on the
new 'balance of payments' basis rose to Dollars 13.9bn. The surplus on trade
in services fell from Dollars 4.7bn to Dollars 4.2bn.
Mr Ron Brown, commerce secretary, said the deterioration was 'substantial'
and affected all categories of US trade. The figures would have a 'dampening
effect on first quarter GDP' and illustrated the risk to the US recovery
posed by slow growth in Europe and Japan.
Mr David Wyss, chief economist at DRI/McGraw-Hill, the forecasting group,
said the higher deficit would reduce growth in the first quarter by about a
percentage point. However, gross domestic product was still likely to grow
at an annual rate of about 4 per cent, reflecting the buoyancy of other
components of demand. Other analysts revised down estimates of growth in the
first quarter to about 3 per cent at an annual rate. The poor February trade
figures reflected the combined impact of a 2.7 per cent rise in imports from
January and 2.6 per cent decline in exports.
Part of the deterioration reflected special factors. Exports of capital
goods were depressed by a sharp fall in aircraft exports. Oil imports rose
because of exceptionally cold weather.
The overall US trade deficit was Dollars 76.7bn last year, nearly double the
Dollars 39.7bn shortfall in 1992. Mr Wyss predicted the deficit would rise
to about Dollars 125bn this year, or about 2 per cent of GDP.
Government bonds, Page 35; Currencies, Page 37; World stocks, Page 43;
London stocks, Page 46

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940420

