FT942-12696

FT  28 APR 94 / Brussels urges freedom in mobile phone market: Bid to make
European system global standard


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


The European Commission yesterday called for the full liberalisation of EU
mobile telecommunications, in a move aimed at overcoming fragmentation
within the Union market and consolidating Europe's place in the world
market.
The Brussels appeal is the first step towards the EU goal of total
telecommunications liberalisation by 1998. It is contained in a 228-page
green paper adopted by the Commission yesterday after two years of research.
The paper is unusually prescriptive for a consultative document, and takes
clear aim at the barriers holding back the potential of what the Commission
and market research forecast will be the fastest growing area in
telecommunications.
The paper states the pan-European GSM (Global System for Mobile
communications) is establishing itself as a main reference technology for
digital mobile systems, and could become the global standard.
Europe's mobile telephony infrastructure suppliers have an international
comparative advantage, it says. But nationally orientated and
technology-based licensing has resulted in parallel national systems, with
no consistent approach to provision of compatible, cross-border services.
This 'failure to adjust to market requirements could jeopardise Europe's
current strong position,' the green paper warns.
Mobile communications experts point out, however, that both the US and Japan
are likely to use different technology from the GSM standard which the
Commission is endorsing.
By 1995 the US will have 20m cellular telephones but the move from existing
analogue systems to digital ones is being complicated by a Federal
Communications Commission requirement that new digital technologies like GSM
must be compatible with existing analogue services.
The Brussels green paper advocates five main changes:
Abolition of all remaining exclusive or special licensing rights in the
sector.
Removal of all restrictions on the provision of mobile services across the
EU.
Full freedom for mobile operators to develop their own infrastructure
networks, whether by providing their own or sharing another company's
infrastructure.
Full freedom to offer combined services via both fixed and mobile networks,
which implies the right of independent operators to bid for licences on the
fixed networks.
Mutual recognition of standards and equipment type approval, coordination of
licensing and award procedures, to boost trans-European mobile networks.
The Commission predicts there will be 40m mobile communications users in the
EU by 2000, and eventually more than 200m.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940428

