FT943-798

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Mauritius (6): Broad centre will stay in charge -
A look at whether the ruling party can defend its position once again


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


Any prime minister who has presided over an sustained economic boom should
be riding high, confident of the outcome of the next election.
But Sir Aneerood Jugnauth, prime minister of Mauritius since 1982, is widely
seen on the island as battling for his political life. His ruling alliance
has been weakened by defections and disputes, the most notable of which took
place in February this year, when Sir Aneerood sacked Madun Dulloo, his
long-time confidant and agriculture minister.
'Sir Aneerood deserves a place in the Guinness Book of Records,' chuckles
Paul Berenger, his former party colleague and erstwhile alliance partner,
since turned political adversary. 'He is the only prime minister whose
popularity has fallen as the economy has grown.'
Mr Berenger may warrant an entry of his own, given his political record
which has included associations with no fewer than three other party
leaders.
It should be said that Sir Aneerood, as wily and resilient a politician as
the island has known, has had his back to the wall before - in 1991, plagued
then as now by scandals involving patronage, drugs and corruption.
The alliance that rescued him included Mr Berenger, who 'performed the
political equivalent of entering a revolving door ahead of Sir Aneerood and
coming out behind him', notes one Mauritian politician caustically.
Can Sir Aneerood do it again?
For all the considerable achievements - average annual GDP growth of 5-6 per
cent, the doubling of per capita incomes over the past decade, near-full
employment - the ruling alliance of Sir Aneerood's MSM and Dr Prem
Nababsingh's faction of the MMM is in serious trouble, challenged by Dr
Navin Ramgoolam's Labour Party and Mr Berenger's wing of the MMM.
Not the least of the prime minister's problems is resentment at a
personality cult that is inappropriate to a democracy.
Sir Aneerood's portrait has supplanted that of the island's head of state,
President Cassam Uteem, and is prominently displayed in most of the
country's public buildings and government offices.
His image appears on the island's gold coins, and on the 500 rupee note,
while that of his wife adorns the 20 rupee note.
No-one, however, underestimates the resilience of Sir Aneerood, who would
not otherwise have survived 12 years in office.
As one political observer, who concedes much of the criticism that is
frequently expressed, warns: 'It is too soon to write him off.'
The origins of the governing coalition go back to the 1970s when Mr
Jugnauth, as he then was, and Mr Berenger formed the MMM, with a trade union
base and a radical platform.
In the June 1982 election an MMM-led alliance with the Parti Socialiste
Mauricien captured all 60 island seats (Rodrigues has two, and up to eight
best losers are appointed) and swept to victory over the Labour party, led
by the late Sir Seewoosagar Ramgoolam, prime minister since independence in
1968.
It proceeded to lay the foundations of the island's economic success. Mr
Jugnauth and Mr Berenger, then finance minister, launched a reform programme
which has been at the heart of government policy to this day.
The relationship between the two went sour. Mr Berenger resigned in March
1983, taking with him the claim to the MMM, while Mr Jugnauth launched a new
party, the MSM.
A month later it amalgamated with the PSM, which was renamed the Mouvement
Socialiste Mauricien.
In the general election of August that year, Sir Aneerood's considerable
political talents helped create a broader alliance, defeating the MMM
opposition coalition, subsequently led by Dr Prem Nababsingh, who had been
chosen with an eye to the Hindu factor in Mauritian politics.
Hindu Indo-Mauritians constitute about 52 per cent of the island's 1.1m
population, while Muslim Indo-Mauritians make up about 17 per cent.
In 1991 Sir Aneerood was burdened by much the same issues as threaten him
today - low standing, scandal and drugs in particular.
However he emerged like a Mauritian Houdini at the head of an alliance
between the MSM and the MMM which captured 57 of the 62 elective seats at
the September election. Mr Berenger became the foreign minister in the new
government.
Once again, Sir Aneerood and Mr Berenger fell out.
Mr Berenger was sacked last August. In April, Mr Berenger's faction of the
MMM and Dr Navin Ramgoolam's Labour Party, formed an electoral pact.
Dr Ramgoolam would be the prime minister, with Mr Berenger his deputy. Of
the 62 seats that are directly elected, 35 would be allocated to candidates
from the LP and the remainder to the MMM-B, while the cabinet would give the
LP 12 portfolios and nine to Mr Berenger
On the face of it, this seems a winning combination, but Sir Aneerood's hand
has not lost its cunning.
According to Mauritian insiders, the prime minister has proposed an
electoral pact with Dr Ramgoolam, in which Sir Aneerood would remain in
office for the next two or three years, and would then stand down in favour
of Dr Ramgoolam.
Although the MSM-MMM-N commands a working majority in the assembly, many
observers believe that its days are numbered. In a country where political
allegiances shift and new coalitions form, the further defection of a
handful of deputies, once they see Sir Aneerood as a loser, would be enough
to force a general election.
However, it is clear that the dominant theme of the election campaign will
be a call for clean government. Mr Berenger also raises the need for tougher
measures to protect the environment and more emphasis on skills training,
but he stresses that he would not change the basic strategy.
In sum, the frequently changing coalitions and alliances provide a safety
valve, enabling politicians to let off political steam, but the broad centre
will win the next election, whoever leads the victorious party.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
MAIN POLITICAL PARTIES
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
MSM Mouvement Socialiste Mauricien led by Sir Aneerood Jugnauth
MTD Mouvement des Travaillistes Democrates
OPR Organisation du Peuple Rodrigues
MMM-N Mouvement Militant Mauricien faction led by Dr Prem Nababsingh
MMM-B Mouvement Militant Mauricien, faction led by Paul Berenger
LP Labour Party led by Dr Navin Ramgoolam
PMSD Parti Mauricien Social Democrate
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page III

940927

