FT941-12977

FT  27 JAN 94 / International Company News: Rivals target Mexican monopoly -
Telmex is to face competition for the first time


   By DAMIAN FRASER


Telefonos de Mexico, Mexico's monopoly telephone carrier, is about to face
competition for the first time. Notoriously inefficient and hugely
profitable, the company is proving an irresistible target for rivals.
On Tuesday, MCI, the US long-distance carrier, and Grupo Financiero
Banamex-Accival (Banacci), Mexico's largest financial group, announced they
were forming a new company with the aim of offering long-distance services
in 1996. The company will be capitalised at Dollars 1bn, and build a
state-of-the-art fibre-optic cable linking three cities.
MCI was confident the joint venture would be awarded a long-distance licence
by the government. The new operators could provide services from August
1996, when Telmex's monopoly on long-distance service runs out.
The MCI-Banacci announcement comes as Iusacell, the cellular phone company
in which Bell Atlantic recently took a 42 per cent stake for Dollars 1.04bn,
is preparing to provide a basic wireless local telephone service. Iusacell
hopes to have 1.5m subscribers by 1996, compared with Telmex's 7.3m.
'Depending on regulation, the future for Telmex could be very difficult,'
says Mr Bill Deatherage, an analyst with S. G. Warburg. 'Obviously, new
entrants will focus on the more lucrative markets.'
Telmex's main weakness is that its costs are high, and it is required to
install new telephone lines at a loss, making it vulnerable to competitors
that have no such obligations. Telmex charges a telephone installation fee
of about Dollars 580 for homes and Dollars 1,000 for business, against an
average cost of installation of Dollars 2,500.
It recoups the installation costs from inflated charges for long-distance
and international calls. According to France Telecom, Telmex's partner, the
company makes profits on subscribers who make more than Dollars 300 worth of
telephone calls a year, the average operating cost per telephone line.
MCI is likely to focus on long-distance business traffic, the most
profitable segment of the long-distance market. In all, long-distance and
international revenues are expected to have accounted for Dollars 4.2bn of
Telmex revenues last year, or more than half the total.
Mr Austin Beutner, general partner of The Blackstone Group, which advises
Iusacell, says installation costs on the Iusacell local service are
'dramatically lower' than Telmex's. Assuming the same installation fees as
Telmex, Iusacell can cover installation costs with far fewer than the
planned 1.5m subscribers, he says.
Mr Beutner adds that operating costs for the digital wireless service will
be much less than the Telmex average of Dollars 300 per subscriber. Usage
(excluding long distance) will be higher for Iusacell than Telmex's since
'in building any network you are going to penetrate high demographics and
high-use areas first.'
If so, Telmex's profit margins of nearly 40 per cent could start to fall.
Local revenues are expected to have been Dollars 3.15bn last year, and were
Iusacell to meet its target for subscribers, it would capture at least a
fifth of that.
Telmex is betting on a friendly regulatory environment in both long-distance
and local markets. Mr John Atterbury, local head of Southwestern Bell - one
of Telmex's foreign partners - believes Iusacell should bear some of the
cost of Telmex's obligation to install lines at a loss by paying, for
example, high interconnection fees.
Telmex is also seeking to limit competition in the long distance segment.
The company recently proposed a plan for long-distance interconnection
which, if accepted, would 'leave very little on the table for new
long-distance carriers,' Mr Deatherage says.
Under the plan, Telmex will establish just 10 interconnection points between
local and long-distance networks, ensuring that a good part of many
long-distance calls will be carried by Telmex's local network.
Telmex will require all links between a user and long-distance network to be
provided by Telmex 'to maintain equality among competitors'. Telmex will
also force subscribers to choose a carrier each time they call, rather than
pre-select a long-distance carrier as in the US.
The government has still to approve the Telmex plan and will be under
pressure to encourage competition. MCI and Banacci are confident Mexico
would move to the sort of competitive market found in the US. Iusacell
already has the regulatory go-ahead to provide a basic service, it says.
If there is open competition, Telmex would seem to be ill-prepared,
providing a service well below that demanded by subscribers. Last year, the
government's consumer protection agency received 114,000 complaints against
Telmex, 44 per cent of all complaints received.
While Telmex is investing heavily to improve efficiency, new technology
alone may not solve the problem of high costs. Telmex's foreign partners say
the telephone union is a significant obstacle to greater productivity.
Telmex, complains Mr Christian Chauvin of France Telecom, 'is like two
companies, the management company and the union company. Negotiations can
take months'.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940127

