FT942-12442

FT  29 APR 94 / Israel and PLO agree pact date: Landmark deal on Palestinian
self-rule to be signed next week


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   CAIRO


Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation yesterday appeared to end
months of bitter wrangling by agreeing to meet next Wednesday in Cairo to
sign a landmark Palestinian self-rule agreement.
The agreement on self-rule in the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank enclave
of Jericho was originally supposed to have been signed last December 13. The
breakthrough came in a meeting in Cairo between President Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt, Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO chairman, Mr Shimon Peres, the Israeli
foreign minister, and Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state.
The agreement signals the beginning of the end of more than a quarter of a
century of Israeli occupation of Palestinian land and could prove to be the
first step towards an independent Palestinian state. It could also speed up
progress towards a comprehensive Middle East peace agreement between Israel
and neighbouring Jordan, Syria and Lebanon.
'For us it is the end of a long voyage and the beginning of a new chapter in
the relations between the Palestinian people and ourselves, adding another
footstep to peace in the Middle East,' Mr Peres said yesterday.
Mr Christopher, who is on a Middle East tour, said he was impressed by 'the
sense of urgency that both sides now have on reaching a conclusion on this
implementation agreement'. He will cancel engagements in Europe and extend
his regional tour to attend the signing ceremony between Mr Arafat and Mr
Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister.
Mr Mubarak said Mr Rabin would attend a pre-signing summit with Mr Arafat in
Cairo on Tuesday evening. The two leaders face two outstanding issues: the
final size of the Jericho enclave; and whether Israel will allow the PLO to
station Palestinian policemen on the Allenby bridge border crossing between
Jordan and the West Bank.
Several other issues remain to be resolved, including the extent of
jurisdiction of Palestinian courts, the security zoning arrangements for the
Gaza Strip, and the composition of an 18-member interim Palestinian National
Authority led by Mr Arafat which will govern Gaza-Jericho before elections.
It is also unclear whether the Palestinians will have symbols of sovereignty
such as the right to issue their own stamps, travel documents and currency,
and have their own international dialling code. However, both sides have
said they are prepared to overlook these issues to allow next Wednesday's
signing ceremony to go ahead.
Mr Christopher said the conclusion of the agreement 'creates an important
sense of momentum' for talks between Israel and Syria. Israeli officials
hope Mr Christopher will shuttle between Damascus and Jerusalem with new
Israeli proposals which focus on security issues and a three-stage Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Golan Heights over a number of years.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940429

