FT944-14589

FT  22 OCT 94 / Jaguar car workers reject 7.5% pay package


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


Jaguar car workers have overwhelmingly rejected a two-year pay deal worth
7.5 per cent in a move that has shocked the company and the trade unions
that negotiated the agreement.
The decision aroused fears yesterday that discontent might spread to other
parts of the UK car industry as economic recovery increases the demand for
cars and strengthens employees' bargaining power.
Next week, unions covering 28,000 employees at the Rover group will announce
the results of a workplace ballot on a 7.7 per cent, two-year pay offer.
Nissan and Peugeot Talbot negotiate in November. Ford will raise pay by 3.5
per cent on November 24.
Both sides at Jaguar are expected to meet in the next few days to try to
revise the offer. If they fail to secure an improvement, the unions are
likely to call a strike ballot.
The Jaguar workers threw out the offer by six to four. The Transport and
General Workers union said it believed they accepted the pay element of the
negotiated offer, which increases their basic rate by 3.5 per cent from
November 1 this year. Next November, the company would pay a further 4 per
cent or an increase equivalent to the retail price index, whichever is
greater.
But the unions and the company believe workers dislike the requirement to
work 'compulsory' overtime on top of their basic 37-hour week. Under the
proposed deal, employees would have been expected to work overtime 'should
it become necessary to meet operational needs and/or maximise efficiency'.
Both sides are keen to avoid industrial conflict. Jaguar said it believed
there was still room for manoeuvre. A senior TGWU official added that the
union was confident that a settlement could be reached that would satisfy
the workforce.
The offer also guaranteed no compulsory redundancies provided the workforce
continued to back efficiencies, and gave greater security of earnings where
workers have to be laid off.
Restive mood, Page 4
Lex, Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941022

