FT942-12555

FT  29 APR 94 / Li Peng tip-toes along the old silk route: China seeks wider
ties with Central Asia without ruffling Moscow's feathers


   By STEVE LEVINE


China's premier, Mr Li Peng, trod carefully during his tour of ex-Soviet
Central Asia. He did not want to kick up any dust from the decades of
suspicion and rivalry between Russia and China. 'The idea is to reduce the
hostility, the perceived threat from China,' a diplomat in Alma Ata, the
capital of Kazakhstan, said yesterday. 'He can't do it in one visit, but he
is trying to start the process,' he added.
During his 12-day tour, the first by a top Chinese leader to the land once
called Turkestan, Mr Li has entered territory over which Moscow still claims
suzerainty. Until the 1920s the region was a nest of Chinese and Russian
spies seeking to undermine each other, but now there is little to suggest
that Moscow could be dislodged any more than Beijing could be unearthed from
Sinjiang.
Moscow, which has remained silent over the arrival and travels of Mr Li,
could be forgiven if it harboured some apprehensions about the Chinese
premier's visit, which ended yesterday. This is mainly because few
Sino-Russian observers believe Beijing has genuinely dropped its historic
claims to the region, where the Han dynasty ruled till the second century.
If anything, Mr Li's constant references to reviving Marco Polo's Silk Road
have only underscored China's interest, and growing influence, on its
western border.
'Li would be happy to increase Chinese influence here,' said a western
analyst in Uzbekistan's capital, Tashkent, Mr Li's first stop on the tour.
'Chinese leaders know that historically the countries on their borders have
the greatest opportunity to destabilise the mainland,' he added.
While appearing to want to demonstrate the opposite, Mr Li and his Central
Asian counterparts have displayed a mutual interest in China's recovered
regional influence.
Arriving in Uzbekistan last week, Mr Li was publicly feted and in
Turkmenistan he was asked - and agreed - to examine a plan to pipe the
republic's abundant natural gas to Chinese Turkestan's rich Tarim Basin, to
connect with a future 1,500-mile pipeline to China's east coast. In
Kyrgyzstan, Mr Li was presented with a horse and in Kazakhstan he was
treated like a delicate potentate, shielded from protesting Uigur
nationalists and from foreign journalists.
Everywhere, to Mr Li's gratification, he was assured that there would be no
support for the local Uigur nationalists, who claim responsibility for
repeated bombings in Sinjiang.
Russian commercial, military and political influence dwarfs all other comers
to Central Asia. But the ramifications of Mr Li's visit are sizeable. By
improving its links with China Central Asia is not placing all its hope and
trust in Moscow and the Russian economy.
Mr Li sees the same potential as the western investors who have flocked to
the region to exploit its huge oil and natural gas reserves. While Moscow
has made it clear that it expects to share the profit from exploitation of
the region's resources, for China the Central Asian nations could help
relieve a projected chronic energy shortage.
Now a net energy exporter, China is expected to become an oil importer by
the end of this year.
Thus, though the suggestion to build a natural gas pipeline from
Turkmenistan might seem preposterous, since routes through Turkey and Russia
are far nearer the sea, a second glance shows that it might not be so
far-fetched. After all, Turkmenistan must build an alternative to the
Russian pipeline that transports its natural gas - virtually its only
hard-currency source - if it ever is to gain some independence from Moscow.
Since Beijing plans anyway to build a pipeline from Tarim, China and Japan
are willing at least to consider an additional leg from Turkmenistan.
China, next to Russia, has become the biggest foreign trader in energy-rich
Kazakhstan. Last year Uzbekistan sold seven IL-76 aircraft to China - the
aircraft were made in the republic's huge Soviet-era plant - and Mr Li
expressed interest in buying more.
Mr Li and his entourage of 100 aides, journalists and businessmen have
trumpeted the tour as a way to showcase increased trade on the old Silk
route. And he has made it clear that he expects support in suppressing the
manageable Uigur rebellion.
But he also had a third, probably more important aim. A diplomat in the
Turkmenistan capital, Ashkabad, described his tour as an epitaph to the
former Soviet Union and Moscow's sphere of influence in the region.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940429

