FT942-12475

FT  29 APR 94 / Management: 'Um . . er . . um you're fired' - Dismissing an
employee is never an easy task. Richard Donkin on how to handle the job


   By RICHARD DONKIN


As Harrods discovered this week, firing the managing director can have
embarrassing public consequences. But dismissing anyone, be it a boss like
Harrods' Peter Bolliger or whole sections of the workforce when a company
goes into receivership, is almost always a delicate task.
The language of dismissal appears to have as many euphemisms as that of sex
and death. Those unfortunate enough to find themselves on the street may
often wonder if they have been let go, terminated, discharged, fired,
sacked, axed, given the boot, pushed or chopped.
The euphemisms for executives are more gentle. They retire, leave by mutual
consent, part company to spend more time with their family, pursue an
alternative career or accept a fresh challenge.
One of the most subtly disguised dismissals appeared in the film
Philadelphia, when the actor Tom Hanks, playing an Aids victim, was told by
his bosses: 'We can't make the best use of your talents.'
At least the words 'You're fired' have a certain ring to them, evoking 1960s
American television sitcoms. But does anyone really say that any more? It
appears that Mohammed Al-Fayed, Harrods' owner, did or at least say
something very similar in last week's acrimonious parting, though this is
disputed by Bolliger himself. The Harrods press release - in response to
Bolliger's side of the story in a Sunday newspaper - was a masterpiece of
corporate vitriol and left no impression that the parting was in any way
amicable.
Someone who did enjoy firing people was the late Robert Maxwell. The story
goes that he sacked a workman for smoking in the corridor, counting out a
month's salary from a wad of notes in his pocket. Only later was it
discovered that the man had been repairing a photocopier and worked for
someone else.
Anna Reece, Maxwell's former corporate communications manager, recalls that
she was sacked simply for waiting at the wrong door of the Savoy Hotel when
he arrived to interview a leading Russian politician.
'I had told his secretary and his driver we would be waiting at the main
entrance but he told the driver to take him to the riverside entrance
instead. In the time it took him to walk the length of the hotel he had
called me on his mobile phone to tell me I was fired,' she says.
The incident, Maxwell told her, had called into question her ability to
communicate and her attention to detail. 'He fired a lot of people,' says
Reece, now head of communications at the Institute of Personnel Management.
The experience of dismissal - Maxwell style or otherwise - can be disastrous
for the morale of individuals.
Alan Fowler, a personnel specialist with 20 years' experience of informing
employees that it is time to leave and author of a book on redundancy, says
the best way of dealing with dismissal is to be direct, honest and
reasonable.
Some employers exacerbate the problem by rushing to withdraw access passes
for security reasons. This is often, he argues, an unnecessarily draconian
action, leading to a perception by departing employees that they cannot be
trusted. For the same reason, he says, there is rarely an excuse for
immediate repossession of the company car.
'The most difficult situation for a company is the one where the person is
not performing sufficiently well but is not so bad that it is obvious. In
those cases it is a matter of judgment,' he says.
'Problems arise when managers take the decision that someone should go but
try to find other reasons for saying so, rather than being honest about it.
The best approach when someone is not doing their job well is to tell them
what's required, where they are falling short and give them time to put
things right.'
Unfortunately, he says, the dismissal itself is often not dealt with openly.
'Managers feel embarrassed by the situation and might exaggerate a person's
shortcomings in order to make themselves feel better about the decision.
Others may give no explanation why they are doing it.'
The risk here is opening the way to possible legal action from the
disgruntled employee since unreasonable behaviour is one of the grounds for
accusing the employer of constructive dismissal.
Using an outplacement agency to counsel staff and help them find new careers
is often helpful, he adds, though some companies see this solely as a
convenient form of conscience-salving.
Roger Shipton, a partner at KPMG Career Consultancy Services, believes
counselling can dramatically affect how individuals approach a new career.
'We have had client companies who have told us that they have noticed a
great increase in the morale of those about to leave, often contrasting
markedly with low morale among those staying.'
The point is underlined by Ewart Wooldridge, director of resources at the
South Bank Centre, London, who had to arrange his own departure along with
that of everybody else when he was director of personnel at TVS.
The company lost its independent television franchise near the end of 1991.
'Redundancy impacts within the whole organisation, with those staying as
well as those leaving. You are much more likely to come out with a positive
workforce if you do it properly and that means counselling, helping people
plan and consulting them.'
Get the dismissal right and you may find yourself as embarrassed as Fowler.
He says: 'On some occasions when I have explained at length what had to
happen, people have walked out thanking me for taking the time and trouble
to do so. That's hard to take when you're sacking someone.'

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940429

