FT944-10962

FT  08 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint):
Exaggerated threat seen in eastern promise - The agricultural potential of
the former communist bloc may be overestimated


   By DAVID RICHARDSON


Most UK farmers have absorbed the European Union's common agricultural
policy reforms far more easily than they dared hope when the measures were
agreed in 1992. More than two years through the three-year programme they
find themselves making bigger margins, not the smaller profits they had been
led to expect.
There are a few exceptions, particularly among the producers of pigs, fruit
and vegetables - significantly, perhaps, all virtually unsupported by the
EU. For most of the rest, the first two years of reform have been good ones.
However, as those measures are concluded in the middle of next year, the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade settlement, assuming it is
universally ratified, is scheduled to come into effect. Key aspects
affecting EU agriculture are the reduction of internal support for the
industry by 20 per cent; a cut in export subsidies of 36 per cent and in
export volumes of 21 per cent - all to be phased in over six years.
EU officials have consistently claimed that these measures could be achieved
within those already taken in reforming the CAP; that the production control
afforded by acreage set-aside, combined with a forecast increase in internal
consumption of lower priced EU-produced raw materials for feeding to
livestock, would remove the need for further restrictive policies.
Britain's National Farmers' Union has never accepted this and has predicted
that crop yields would continue to increase across the EU, thereby negating
much of the effect of idling land. Moreover, the NFU, along with many farm
industry pundits, believes that further reform of the CAP, within the next
few years, is inevitable.
At grass roots level, however, this prospect is causing hardly a ripple.
Farmers have money in their pockets and a degree of complacency has set in.
'If we can come through CAP reform as easily as we have,' the thinking goes,
'we can handle anything else that happens.'
This attitude fails to recognise that much of the present prosperity can be
attributed to the devaluation of sterling two years ago which, because
guaranteed prices are set in European currency units, had the effect of most
sterling farm prices by about 20 per cent - an advantage not enjoyed across
the rest of the EU. The other reasons for UK farmers being better off than
expected at present have been kind weather, good yields and shortfalls in
the harvests of other countries.
One subject that does raise fears for the future, however, is the
enlargement of the EU. Not that which has already occurred, for the farmers
of Finland, Norway and Austria - as well as Sweden (if that country decides
to join) - are known to have been supported at significantly higher levels
than those in the existing EU and their produce will not, therefore,
undercut that in member states. It is the old communist bloc that causes
greatest concern and the fear that low-priced farm products from those
countries could be allowed unrestricted access to newly-unsupported western
European markets.
To most farmers the possible threat from eastern Europe remains something of
a mystery. That it is vast is well appreciated; that it may have enormous
agricultural potential is the fear. And recent reports of ways in which that
potential is already being unlocked by international entrepreneurs increases
the level of apprehension.
A German friend of mine, Christof graf Grote, who has interests in farms in
Norfolk, western Germany and the old East Germany, told a farming conference
last week how he and a partner had also taken a 12-year lease on a block of
land in Ukraine. The rent was half that for comparable land in the UK, he
said, 'and the potential is absolutely staggering'.
He told, too, how he was enjoying similar success in eastern Germany.
Indeed, he had already decided that the way to maximise his income from the
German land was to ship the grain he grew there direct from the farm to
mills in the UK.
All of which sounds intensely threatening to British farmers who lack the
business and linguistic skills necessary to operate internationally. But do
isolated instances like that, which rely almost entirely on western
management and capital, indicate that eastern European agriculture is an
imminent threat to that in western Europe? Having myself visited several of
the countries concerned in recent years, my assessment is that they do not
pose such a threat, at least for several years to come.
Moreover, a recent report by the NFU appears to support my view and,
incidentally, in spite of his personal successes, that of Christof graf
Grote. For although some areas in some of the countries in eastern Europe do
have unrealised potential, the majority have severe climatic disadvantages
compared to the UK and most of western Europe, suffering from long cold
winters and hot dry summers.
Even more significant are the cultural, capital and political problems,
which will take many years to resolve. Corruption is widespread, inertia is
endemic. It takes a brave man like Christof graf Grote to tackle them.
Meanwhile, the new democratic governments of many of the former communist
states are busy recreating small farm structures more appropriate for the
last century than for the next.
As always, there are exceptions that prove the rule. Labour-intensive crops
like cherries and soft fruit for processing are already coming into the EU
from some eastern European countries, undermining the prices and profits of
UK producers. Such trade will doubtless continue to be the subject of
lobbying by specialist producers.
For mainstream commodities like cereals, however, I cannot believe that
eastern Europe will pose a serious threat for 10 or perhaps 20 years.
Meanwhile, western European farmers will legitimately try to ensure that
when the former communist countries join the EU they do so on terms that are
fair to those of us already here and do not skew the agricultural production
base from west to east.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

941108

