FT943-796

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (9): Much rhetoric,
no consensus - Working conditions


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


Europe has a long way to go before it achieves free movement of workers
across national borders, let alone a flexible and deregulated labour market
stretching from Ireland to the Urals.
Inside the expanding European Union, enormous disparities persist in
employment cost levels, worker skills and employee flexibility, both between
and within member states.
There has been a good deal of rhetoric about the emergence of a single
European social market model, especially since the passage of the 'social
protocol' into the EU's Maastricht treaty in December 1991.
A flood of EU social affairs directives, covering working time, equal pay
and job opportunities, collective redundancies, health and safety at work,
business transfers and transnational works councils, might suggest that
Brussels wants to establish at least a minimalist framework of basic social
rights to complement the new single market.
But as Mark Hall, at Warwick University's industrial relations research
unit, argues: 'There is a general lack of consensus among key parties about
the extent to which community-wide labour standards are necessary in a
single market, or in the context of economic and monetary union.'
Certainly, European employers and a number of member state governments will
resist any over-centralising tendency that seeks to undermine their
competitiveness and add to their cost burdens through highly detailed and
uniform social regulations.
EU social affairs commissioner Padraig Flynn was well aware of the important
national diversity of labour markets in Europe during his tour of member
state capitals earlier this year. He reported: 'The urgent need for
collective reflection and co-ordinated action across the whole range of
policies affecting the broad employment environment has not yet been
realised. A fragmentary approach is still noticeable. Old and complex
national regulations still remain in force in many member states.'
But across Europe, there is widespread anxiety among the policymakers about
the impact of global competition on the continent's labour market
regulations and welfare states. High unemployment - with 17m jobless, or 11
per cent of the labour force in the EU alone - has has focused attention on
whether the current balance between labour-market flexibility and solidarity
can continue.
In its jobs study published earlier this year, the OECD argued that the EU
was suffering from 'poorly functioning labour markets', mainly because its
unemployment had ratched up over successive business cycles, resulting in
rising long-term unemployment. 'Inflows into unemployment have been
relatively low, but outflows have been even lower,' it argued.
The EU's own recently published annual employment survey criticised what it
sees as 'insufficient flexibility of labour markets' in western Europe,
which has 'slowed down the structural change in economic activity necessary
to maintain competitiveness.'
As a result, there has been an increasing social divergence inside labour
markets, between those with skills who are able to enjoy job prospects and
those without. The economic integration of the EU has been paralleled with
'limited progress in convergence of living standards and job opportunities
between people living in different regions of the union.'
The most up to date comparative labour statistics - published in the EU
employment survey - underline that observation. It shows:
A wide variation of four-to-one in wage rates, from an average of Ecu2,750
(Dollars 3,355) in Germany and Ecu2,500 in Belgium to under Ecu1,000 in
Greece and less than Ecu600 in Portugal.
Non-wage labour costs differ widely across western Europe. In 1991, for a
male manufacturing worker paid an average wage, they amounted to nearly 30
per cent in France, Italy and Belgium; under 20 per cent in Ireland and
Luxembourg; under 15 per cent in the UK; and under 5 per cent in Denmark.
The 22 per cent average non-wage labour cost rate for the whole of the EU
was slightly higher than in the US.
Social contributions and income tax paid in the EU by a male manual
manufacturing worker amounted to 45 per cent of his labour costs in 1991. He
received 55 per cent less than what it cost his company to employ him. But
the so-called 'wedge' was over 50 per cent in Germany, Holland and Belgium,
and not far below that in France and Denmark, compared with only 35 per cent
in the UK.
In nine EU countries, government-imposed non-wage labour costs are heavier
proportionately on workers at the lower end of the earnings scale than on
those at the higher end. The exceptions to this are the UK, Belgium and
Portugal.
One in six of those in work inside the EU had not been in their present job
a year earlier. The figure was highest in Spain, Denmark and the UK, and
lowest in France and Italy. Labour turnover was highest in Spain, where one
in five of those employed in a particular sector between 1986 and 1992 had
not worked there the previous year - compared with only one in 15 in
Germany.
Only 1 per cent of the EU's gross domestic product is concentrated on active
labour-market measures to get the jobless back into employment. It was under
0.5 per cent in the UK, but 1.8 per cent in Denmark.
There are vast differences in the EU's employment structure. In Germany, for
example, 50 per cent more of the workforce is employed in engineering and
motor vehicles than elsewhere. People with jobs in the social services make
up nearly 8 per cent of total employment in Denmark and Holland, but only 1
per cent in Spain and Greece.
The emergence of more flexible eastern European labour markets, after nearly
half a century of state control, has heightened the differences as
private-sector employers unilaterally set pay levels, pay structures and
employment conditions.
'This largely represents the unwinding of several decades of distortions and
misallocation of human capital and talents,'Professor Michael Burda, from
Berlin's Humboldt University, told an International Labour Organisation
conference in London. It seems likely to make a profound, if uneven, impact
on the rest of the European labour market.
But the diversity of employment conditions and social regulation across
Europe may have little significant impact on competitive costs. As the EU's
Employment in Europe report pointed out: 'It is exchange-rate movements,
rather than differentials in productivity or wage rises, which have been the
major determinant of the cost competitiveness of European producers,
relative to those in the rest of the world, as well as between producers in
different European countries.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940927

