FT942-15699

FT  14 APR 94 / Publication of Bank papers given welcome


   By DAVID OWEN


The decision to publish the minutes of the monthly meetings between the
chancellor and the governor was broadly welcomed at Westminster by
politicians from both ends of the political spectrum.
Downing Street said that the measure was meant to introduce greater
transparency. It was also intended to promote a better understanding of the
way in which monetary policy is made.
For Labour, Mr Alistair Darling, City spokesman, said the decision would be
welcomed provided that the minutes were 'full and extensive.'
He said that it would be interesting to see whether future minutes disclosed
differences of opinion between the chancellor and the governor - 'or even
robust discussion'.
He said that the government's track record did not give much ground for hope
that this would be the case.
'I only hope William Waldegrave (minister for open government) is not in
charge of the exercise,' he said.
Mr Giles Radice, a senior Labour member of the Treasury and civil service
select committee, said it was a 'useful improvement'.
Mr Nigel Forman, a Conservative member of the same committee, said it was
'an excellent step forward' and 'part of the move towards gradually greater
transparency'.
Mrs Teresa Gorman, the outspoken Tory Euro-sceptic who is a frequent critic
of the Treasury, welcomed the measure on the grounds that it would 'help
clear away a few cobwebs'.
Mr Alan Beith, Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesman, said publication should
'discourage bad interest rate decisions'.
'The revelation that the chancellor went against the governor's advice with
the ill-timed February interest rate cut of 0.25 per cent fully justifies
the decision that these minutes will now be published on a regular basis,'
he said.
Mr Beith pointed out that the government had refused an earlier
recommendation from the Treasury committee that the minutes should be
published.
'Now they have agreed, partly as a cover for their failure to accept the
committee's recommendations for central bank autonomy. Central bank autonomy
will come in the end,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940414

