FT942-15382

FT  15 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Tecs - not so easy, not so bad (1)


   From Mr GREGORY HYLAND


Sir, Lisa Wood has highlighted several key issues in her article on Training
and Enterprise Councils ('Carnage of chiefs in Tecs battle', April 13 UK
edition, April 15 international). I see none of the existing Tec chief
executives was asked to comment, and neither were the 35 who have left. Not
really surprising, since there is no shortage of people who feel free to
point out how Tecs could be run better, without at the same time having the
troublesome need to try it out for themselves.
The issues are far more complex than your article suggests, and the problems
of Oldham Tec cannot be generalised across the Tec system. Not all those who
have departed were pushed out. In my own case I resigned because I felt too
much time was spent on negotiating arcane details with civil servants, and
not enough on getting the job done. In case that sounds too noble, I also
earn significantly more in my new role. Others left for different reasons.
Does the head-count include those chief executives who died in post, or
those who had to bow out with nervous frustration?
Make no mistake, the job to be done by Tecs is formidable. They are
attempting to reverse more than a century of national economic decline, and
to combat deeply entrenched positions. The weight of fire implicit in this
task falls on the shoulders of the Tec chief executive, and it is one of the
most demanding jobs around. But it is wrong to suggest that success or
failure rests on the chief executive alone. Tecs need to move into a more
sophisticated and effective mode, and the best Tec boards are starting with
their own development.
Those who are doing the job of Tec chief executive now are to be greatly
admired and deserve the strongest public support, but much more than an
individual will be needed for success.
Gregory Hyland,
managing director,
The Condor Group,
PO Box 24,
Princes Risborough,
Buckinghamshire HP27 0LD

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940415

