FT942-14476

FT  20 APR 94 / Building sector recovery proves 'painfully slow'


   By JENNY LUESBY


The construction industry will never return to the peak levels of output and
employment seen in 1989, warned Sir Brian Hill, president of the Building
Employers Confederation yesterday.
Speaking as the confederation published its latest quarterly survey on work
prospects in the industry, Sir Brian said that in spite of further evidence
of a recovery, the pick-up was proving painfully slow.
'With the amount of spare capacity in the industry, higher productivity
through new technology, and the current low level of growth, it is hard to
see how the industry could reabsorb all the 500,000 workers lost since
1989,' he said. 'We are just not going to need as many people.'
'Historically, recoveries have brought greater construction investment than
we are now seeing,' said Sir Brian, who yesterday in his capacity as
chairman of the Construction Industry Employers Council met Mr John Major,
the prime minister, to discuss the state of the construction industry.
The Department of the Environment yesterday reported a 31 per cent increase
in construction orders in the three months to February 1994, compared with
the same period the previous year. The latest figures were boosted
considerably by about Pounds 500m of construction orders for the Jubilee
line Tube extension, many placed in December.
But there was evidence of an underlying growth trend. Private housing orders
rose 33 per cent in the three months to February compared with a year
earlier, although public housing and housing association orders fell 15 per
cent, taking the overall rise in housing orders to 19 per cent.
However, the building confederation said it did not foresee a return to the
industry's peak levels of output. Only 17 per cent of the companies surveyed
by the confederation were operating at close to capacity in the first three
months of 1994, and the organisation expected only gradual growth of around
2 per cent in 1994, and the same again in 1995.
About two-thirds of 600 companies questioned by the confederation last month
said their output was the same in the first quarter of 1994 as in the final
quarter of 1993, while a further 19 per cent reported a contraction in
output over the same period.
The survey revealed some recovery in confidence, with 42 per cent of
companies expecting more work in the second quarter. But only 15 per cent of
companies predicted an increase in jobs.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940420

