FT944-2543

FT  16 DEC 94 / Letters to the Editor: Shareholders must exercise pay power


   From Mr EDWARD LEIGH MP


Sir, The problems surrounding shareholder control of executive salaries were
accurately and extensively reflected in your leader ('Can pay, will pay',
December 6).
I am glad to hear that the government intends to act, as this was an issue
which I addressed in a policy pamphlet which I published on November 28. I
said there that the way forward was to empower shareholders. Two days later
the prime minister told the House of Commons that he was prepared to
consider a similar solution.
In my pamphlet, Responsible Individualism, I wrote that the public is
justifiably suspicious when executives raise each other's salaries in a
round of mutual pocket-lining. Especially since many of them perform roles
more akin to ministers presiding over large bureaucracies than to genuine
entrepreneurs who innovate and create wealth and jobs.
It is indisputable that capitalism and the market are the most effective
systems to generate wealth and improve the material well-being of the
nation. But man cannot live by those alone; a sense of right and justice
must also be part of the equation. Politicians should give a lead.
The issue cannot be dismissed by the simple argument that British companies
must be free to offer world-class salaries. There has been a real public
outrage and that is something companies and government ignore at their
peril. There is an important moral dimension and it is this which has been
missing on recent economic policy. A sense of duty and service on the part
of executives and a sensitivity to the feelings of those on low wages would
not go amiss.
I do not advocate the Labour remedies of intervention and state regulation.
We should empower shareholders - who, after all, own the companies and
employ the managers - to enable checks to be placed on what the public
suspects are unnecessarily large pay packages.
This can be achieved, first, by fiscal measures to encourage direct share
ownership - something lacking at present; and, second, by legislation to
ensure that City institutions take due note of the views of the beneficial
owners of the shares they nominally hold.
I recognise there are difficulties in devising a mechanism by which the
latter could be achieved, but it should be possible to introduce a legal
system, however rough and ready, which would make fund managers respond to
the opinions of the millions of investors whom they represent.
We should trust the people in this respect. The public is bright enough to
know when they need adequately to reward an entrepreneur who boosts their
dividends, asset values and pensions, but jaundiced enough to recognise
blind greed.
Edward Leigh,
House of Commons,
London SW1A 0AA

The Financial Times


London Page 18

941216

