FT941-12884

FT  28 JAN 94 / Bank of France sets money goal


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


The newly-independent Bank of France made a cautious start yesterday by
setting a general goal for money-supply expansion of 'around 5 per cent' for
the medium term, rather than any more precise target for this year.
The French central bank said the aim underlying this goal for M3, a broad
definition of money that includes short-term mutual funds, was to raise
growth in the French economy to between 2.5 per cent and 3 per cent a year
by the late 1990s, while keeping inflation at 'no more than' its current
annual pace of 2 per cent. The banks' new monetary stance - which Mr
Jean-Claude Trichet, the governor, said had been decided 'collegially' with
his eight fellow members of the new independent monetary policy committee -
is unlikely in itself to put a break on the Balladur government's hopes for
an early economic recovery.
Indeed, some economists commented yesterday that the bank was perhaps being
optimistic because investment cutbacks in recent years may now have reduced
France's low-inflation growth potential to below 2.5 per cent a year.
But the bank also said yesterday that, as well as providing scope for
economic recovery, it placed equal weight 'on stabilising the external value
of the currency' in line with its central rate in the European Monetary
System, which was left unchanged by last August's crisis.
Mr Trichet said that since then the bank 'has followed a policy of prudent
and gradual reduction of short-term interest rates . . . aimed at preserving
the external and internal value of the franc and letting the economy benefit
from the best medium-and long-term financing conditions'. It would continue
the same policy, he implied.
Asked to what extent the newly-independent central bank was taking France's
record unemployment rate of over 12 per cent into account, Mr Trichet said
the fact that France could now borrow over 5-10 years at rates which, Japan
apart, were 'among the lowest in the Group of Seven countries', should
ensure 'fairly substantial medium-term growth'.
Mr Trichet was at pains to stress that there was nothing new about the
central bank's decision not to set a precise spread for M3 money growth in
1994, as it had done a year earlier in setting a 4-6.5 per cent target range
for 1993. Other central banks had sometimes been similarly vague, he said.
But what is new is the bank's evident mistrust of M3 as a reliable sole
indicator of the country's money supply, as a result of last year's
experience when M3 actually shrank by 1.6 per cent between end-1992 and
end-1993. This contraction was far greater than that in the real economy,
and was caused, according to the bank, by massive shifts of money out of
mutual funds (which are included in France's definition of M3) into
non-monetary assets like 'Balladur bonds' and shares of privatised
companies.
The bank warned that the savings shifts could reoccur or be reversed in
1994, and 'this is why no range has been specified either side of the medium
term objective'.
The Lex Column, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940128

