FT942-14602

FT  20 APR 94 / Gonzalez fends off calls to resign


   By DAVID WHITE


   MADRID


Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the Spanish prime minister, yesterday fended off calls
from the opposition to resign over the alleged financial misconduct of
senior officials and promised a crackdown on corruption.
Facing frequent barracking in one of the toughest parliamentary debates of
his 11 years in office, Mr Gonzalez sought to regain control over a
turbulent political climate.
He recognised that recent allegations of illicit enrichment by Mr Mariano
Rubio, former governor of the Bank of Spain, and Mr Luis Roldan ex-director
of the paramilitary Civil Guard, had caused 'public revulsion.'
He also accepted that he was 'directly concerned' by the Rubio case since he
had proposed Mr Rubio for the job and defended him when the first
allegations about his financial affairs emerged two years ago.
Opening a two-day state-of-the-nation debate he said the government planned
to set up a special prosecutor's office to deal with corruption, tighten the
country's penal code, increase penalties, strengthen the powers of the
Accounts Tribunal and set up a team to defend the interests of the treasury
against fraud.
He said it was 'imperative to confront these problems and restore society's
confidence'. The parliament is expected today to approve the setting up of a
special committee to investigate the case of the former governor, who on
Monday faced questioning from prosecutors over reports that he channelled
investment gains into a secret account.
Mr Jose Maria Aznar, leader of the Popular party, the main conservative
opposition, called on Mr Gonzalez to resign and nominate a successor. But he
said it would be against the country's interests to dissolve parliament and
hold fresh elections. Spain's last general election, which produced a
minority Socialist government, took place last June.
Mr Gonzalez listened solemnly as Mr Aznar accused him of 'permissiveness' on
corruption and attacked his government's record on unemployment. 'Things
have gone too far,' Mr Aznar said.
Rejecting the resignation demand, Mr Gonzalez said he intended to continue
to the end of the four-year electoral mandate. Mr Aznar's call was echoed by
Mr Julio Anguita, leader of the Communist United Left party, the
third-largest party in parliament. However, Mr Gonzalez was expected to
retain the support of Catalan nationalists, on whom the Socialists rely for
a parliamentary majority.
Earlier Mr Gonzalez told MPs the worst of Spain's economic crisis was over
and strongly defended the government's controversial new labour legislation
aimed at easing hiring and firing laws.
Worries about political instability have rocked Spanish stock markets over
the past two days. Stocks in Madrid yesterday hit their lowest levels this
year but later recovered, with the general index closing 2.8 points up at
313.6.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940420

