FT941-4031

FT  12 MAR 94 / Hawks & Handsaws: Save the male


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


I have won nothing but abuse for my suggestion last week that men today are
getting an amazingly rotten deal in comparison with women, at least in
developed countries; that it is men, not women, who need increased
protection from life's brutalities; and that traditional roles - man the
protector, woman the protected - have become unworkable.
I did not invent these ideas. They have been advanced by Dr Warren Farrell,
a US academic, whose courageous book, The Myth of Male Power, has got me
into such hot water with my executive assistant.
Miss Lee was in fine form this week, feline and pouty. A Thatcherite, she
recently binned all her Jaeger gear and is now stomping about in topline
Versace. The bit from last week's column that caused her the greatest
merriment was Dr Farrell's suggestion - reasonable, civilised  - that we
should care as much about males as we care about whales.
Miss Lee finds this sentiment inexpressibly comedic, and has reacted by
joining Greenpeace (unusual for a Thatcherite, to say the very least) and by
commissioning, from an artist she supports, a painting of killer whales
surfacing off Antarctica.
She breezed in upon me yesterday. Was just off to lunch. Teetering and
tottering. She said: 'The whales are doing fine, Michael; how about you
males?'
I said: 'Oh, supremely funny. It is a pity, Miss Lee, that women can only
chortle at male pain and suffering, because the problem is growing
globally.'
'Fiddlesticks.'
'So tell me this: why do women live longer than men? It is a question
Farrell asks; the answer is upsetting. Quoting from US experience and
statistics, he says that in 1920 women lived one year longer than men. Today
women live seven years longer. Life expectancy for white females is 79; for
black females, 74; for white males, 72; and for black males, 65. 'Power', he
says, 'is the ability to control one's life. Death tends to reduce control.
Life expectancy is the bottom line - the ratio of our life's stresses to our
life's rewards'.
'It gets worse. Blacks die earlier than whites from 12 of the 15 leading
causes of death. But men die earlier than women from all 15 causes. They
include heart disease, accidents, pneumonia and influenza, diabetes
mellitus, suicide, chronic liver disease and cirrhosis, kidney inflammation,
Aids, murder.
'In industrialised societies, says Farrell, early deaths are caused more by
diseases triggered by stress, which breaks down the immune system, than in
non-industrialised ones. It is principally stress that is killing men so
much sooner than women.
'Compared with other diseases, heart attack has now become the No 1 killer
of women. But men are still far more vulnerable to death from this cause
than women. Before the age of 65, men still die from heart attack at the
rate of almost 3:1 compared with women. Almost three-quarters of women who
die of heart attack are 75 or older. But by then the average (white) male
has been dead three years.
'Men lose out all round. In the US, 83 per cent of the homeless are male, as
are 90 per cent of deaths from Aids and 94 per cent of the prison
population; 99.99 per cent of the 58,183 names on the Vietnam veterans'
memorial in Washington, DC, are names of men.
'There is a huge amount of data in The Myth of Male Power, plus a great deal
of plucky interpretation. Farrell shatters every assumption about
masculinity you have ever heard. What he has to say is searingly non-PC  -
raw and challenging. Farrell says he does not want to dismantle feminism; he
just wants us to recognise that, in different ways, men too have been
oppressed and damaged by gender role-playing.
'Miss Lee, imagine the uproar if tonight's TV bulletins reported that women
were dying seven years earlier than men, and that women had been identified
as the principal victims of every single one of the 15 leading causes of
death.'
Miss Lee looked amused. Shook her expensive hair. Straightened the platinum
Dalmatian brooch stuck in the lapel of her Versace.
She said: 'Try and get some air, Michael. Walk across the bridge. Get
yourself a sandwich. You look pasty-faced and stressed, and that jacket
needs cleaning. I would hate something to happen to you. Try a new haircut.
You have got to get a life.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXVIII

940312

