FT944-10895

FT  09 NOV 94 / Heavy fees charged as 'secret' papers are disclosed


   By WILLIAM LEWIS


Government departments and quangos are charging large fees for information
which they must disclose under openness guidelines based on the Citizen's
Charter, a survey has found.
Some departments are charging hundreds of pounds for previously secret
information which became available under the Code of Practice on Access to
Government Information, introduced in April. The sums are usually based on
the costs of staff doing the research, and can be as high as Pounds 45 an
hour.
'What we have found is extraordinary differences between departments'
arrangements, showing how arbitrarily charges have been set,' said Mr
Maurice Frankel, director of the Campaign for Freedom of Information, which
carried out the survey. 'Some of the charges will preserve Whitehall secrecy
as effectively as any Official Secrets Act.'
The most striking example in the survey is the National Rivers Authority,
which says that it may charge children and students who request information
for their full-time studies if it takes one member of staff more than half
an hour to undertake the necessary research.
The Ministry of Defence in effect rules out providing information which is
more expensive than Pounds 200, 'since it would probably represent an
unreasonable diversion of manpower from defence activities'.
The survey found that three government departments - the Foreign Office,
agriculture ministry and Inland Revenue - charge for all requests which
involve staff in extra work. Two - the Home Office and the Department of
Health - waive charges for requests which take less than an hour, and charge
Pounds 20 an hour for others.
Charges varied widely. The departments of Transport and Social Security only
charge for information if more than four hours' work is required, with fees
based on the average salary cost of staff involved.
The cheapest departments appear to be the Lord Chancellor's Department, the
Public Records Office and parts of the Northern Ireland Office, all of which
allow five hours' work free. The Cabinet Office and the Scottish Office
waive the first Pounds 100 of any charges.
The Office of Public Service and Science yesterday defended the charges and
said anyone dissatisfied should complain to the parliamentary ombudsman.
Paid for by piggy bank, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941109

