FT942-15866

FT  13 APR 94 / Fraud office calls off Gooda Walker probe


   By ANDREW JACK


The Serious Fraud Office has called off its investigation into the Gooda
Walker syndicates, the biggest loss-makers on the Lloyd's of London
insurance market.
The action marks the end of the only current criminal investigations
connected with Lloyd's and shifts the onus on any disciplinary action to the
insurance market's own regulatory system.
The news was greeted with muted disappointment yesterday by Gooda Walker
Names, the individuals whose assets have traditionally backed the insurance
market, who stand liable for underwriting losses on the syndicates during
the 1980s totalling nearly Pounds 1bn.
Mr Michael Deeny, chairman of the Gooda Walker Action Group, said: 'I think
it's regrettable that there will be no prosecutions. We believe there was a
cover up at Gooda Walker and it should have come before the courts.'
However, he stressed that a criminal case would have brought no compensation
to the loss-making Names, and that legal action launched by the group was
proceeding. The case is due to begin in the High Court on April 26. Gooda
Names are pursuing 71 members' agents, who looked after their interests on
the market, for more than Pounds 600m.
The police investigation began last July after Mr Ken Randall, a director of
GW Run Off, the insurance agency now managing the Gooda Walker syndicates,
sent a detailed report in April to the SFO as well as Lloyd's and individual
Names on the four syndicates.
The report raised concerns over the way in which some reinsurance policies
were accounted for, how 'time and distance' policies might have distorted
the syndicates' results and suggested that transactions between the Gooda
syndicates might not have been at arm's length.
Time and distance policies are reinsurance policies allowing syndicates to
manage reserves against 'long-tail' claims, which come many years after the
start of policies.
The SFO wrote recently to Mr Randall saying it had decided not to pursue
action and said yesterday: 'We can confirm that the SFO investigation into
certain matters referred by the directors of Gooda Walker Run Off has now
ceased.
'No criminal proceedings have commenced. The director is aware that a
parallel inquiry is being conducted by the legal department of Lloyd's with
which the SFO is co-operating closely.'
The SFO is believed to have passed considerable information gathered during
its inquiry on to Lloyd's.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940413

