FT943-13178

FT  21 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Taking a leaf from the car industry's book
 -A look at Aerostructures Hamble's new approach to making aircraft parts


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


In the 1930s the slipway at Aerostructures Hamble was used to launch
seaplanes; in the 1990s it is being used to dispatch the cargo door of a
single transport plane.
The door, built for the cargo aircraft used to ferry sections of Airbus
airliners to Toulouse for final assembly, measures 8 metres by 8 metres by 8
metres and weighs 2.5 tonnes. That is far too big to take down the lane
through Hamble without removing power lines and other obstacles.
The Hampshire-based aircraft components maker completed the first of four
doors late last year, 18 months after the initial order. It was taken down
Southampton Water by barge, across the Channel and floated up the Dordogne
river.
The people in 30 villages en route to the final destination of Toulouse were
not so lucky as the Hamble villagers. They had to take down their Christmas
decorations to let the load past.
Work on the next cargo door has started on the enormous and robust jigs
built specially for the job.
Mr Howard Wyman, operations director, believes the speed of execution of the
order and its delivery on time - 'totally foreign to the aircraft industry'
 -reflects the company's fresh approach to managing an aircraft component
manufacturer.
It is working hard to introduce Japanese techniques devised by car
manufacturers, and stressed these new capabilities when it was floated on
the stock market in May.
The company's history began, however, in 1936 and reflects the many changes
undergone by the British aerospace industry. As Folland it made the Midge
and Gnat aircraft. Hawker Siddeley took it over in 1963; the aircraft
manufacturing side was nationalised as part of the British Aircraft
Corporation, which was privatised in 1979.
It became Aerostructures Hamble in 1989, when British Aerospace decided to
make it more accountable as a profit centre. Mr Andy Barr, chief executive,
joined from Rover Group and led a Pounds 46.7m management buy-out in 1990.
There are now 10 senior managers, including Mr Barr and Mr Wyman, who have
come from Rover, where Japanese management techniques were the norm.
'You have got to get it right first time, like the Japanese carmakers do,'
said Mr Wyman. He believes that if the introduction of a product is correct,
everything will run smoothly, whereas a false start will turn everything
into an uphill battle.
A tour of the factories shows the group's continuing investment in new
equipment, including riveting machinery, a large press, machine tools, and a
world class aluminium finishing plant.
'We are upgrading our equipment,' said Mr Barr in his office - a beautifully
proportioned room with a high ceiling, decorated with birds and flowers, in
a listed 1750s house guaranteed to impress potential customers. 'But that's
not very relevant to what we are doing.'
The company is also concentrating on statistical process control, known as
SPC, which sets narrow parameters within which a component must fall. Under
old methods, a part would be made and then measured to see if it fitted. But
with SPC and computer technology 'you know it's going to come out right',
explained Mr Wyman.
In order to get things right first time, the group approaches each new
project through a multidisciplinary team with a manager who becomes the main
contact with the customer. People are seconded from other parts of the 1,500
workforce, which has been divided into 12 'cells'.
The manager sticks with the team right through the project, from the initial
bid to the finished project.
While some of the team members might change, there is a consistent thread
running through a project from initial conception to final delivery. 'The
whole idea is to get a seamless process,' said Mr Wyman, in contrast with
the old methods of passing a project from one department to another.
The team's brief is to come up with a product which can be made repeatedly
to tight quality and budgetary parameters. The process includes a
presentation to the shop floor and a preliminary design review that can also
involve the customer. 'We want the considerable wisdom of the company
involved in a project,' said Mr Wyman,
For a high technology industry the method of showing progress with work in
hand is very old - coloured pins and charts on a large board. A mass of blue
pins clearly illustrates that things are going well.
Daily quality control meetings, detailed analysis of rejected goods, and a
suggestions scheme in which 55 per cent of the staff have taken part, have
all been introduced in the past few years. The group is also working towards
scrapping its aluminium store, and relying on just in time delivery to
specific parts of the factory.
Perhaps more novel is the logical reorganisation of the stock room, so that
parts needed for a particular job are kept side by side on the shelves.
'Kitting' has been introduced, through which parts are dispatched to a
customer in a carefully laid out package. Any part missing is immediately
visible - a simple innovation that has revolutionised the traceability of
orders and saved hours of argument.
The company claims nothing new in its management strategy, but it does claim
its methods are new in the aircraft components industry. Mr Wyman gives the
example of hourly reports - second nature to the car industry - which were
introduced in the detail machine shop and doubled output in two weeks.
In the past three years margins have increased from 8.9 per cent to 11.3 per
cent. The company's reliance on its former owner, BAe, which accounted for
93 per cent of its business in 1990 and 78 per cent last year, is expected
to fall further this year.
It has been successful in getting new orders and now has an impressive blue
chip customer base, including Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Vought and
Raytheon.
'We've got the strategies in place and we will get better. The techniques
are well known - but you need persistence,' said Mr Barr. 'We are getting
leaner all the time - but it gets tougher as you go on.'

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940721

