FT941-4205

FT  12 MAR 94 / Owen in warning to UN on Bosnia


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


If the present peace momentum in Bosnia-Hercegovina stalls, and if all three
sides appear determined to continue the war, then the United Nations should
considering pulling out, Lord Owen, co-chairman of the Geneva peace talks on
the former Yugoslavia, says in a lecture prepared for delivery last night to
the Pescatore Fondation in Luxembourg.
The UN should 'not contribute to prolonging it (the war) through a third
winter', he says.
Although he does not spell out whether the UN humanitarian aid effort helped
fuel the military machine of all three sides in Bosnia, Lord Owen, as he
suggested earlier this year, believes that aid, frequently hijacked by the
three armies, has indirectly prolonged the fighting.
As the war erupted, first in Croatia and later in Bosnia, Lord Owen says
that 'little thought was given to involving from the outset either the UN or
the Russian Federation'.
He believes the Russian's readiness to extend the consensus working
arrangements in the Security Council developed in the Gulf War, to
Yugoslavia had been taken 'too much for granted' and 'nearly came unstuck in
February 1994' when Nato issued the Bosnian Serbs with an ultimatum to
withdraw its heavy weapons from around Sarajevo or else risk air strikes.
He has little sympathy for Washington's 'role' in the present conflict - or
the European Union's belief that it was 'all too ready to prove itself as an
independent force in the field of foreign affairs'.
Indeed, Lord Owen believes there are lessons the EU can learn: the conflict
could not have been solved by the EU alone. 'Once it was clear the US would
not become involved, and therefore Nato as well, we were too slow to involve
the UN.' And second, had the threat of force - Nato air strikes, for
instance - been used early, particularly in Vukovar in late 1991, perhaps
the war would not have spread to Bosnia. But that would have required
support from the US.
The only hope for an early peace is Russia, the EU and the US working
together, he concludes.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940312

