FT944-2454

FT  16 DEC 94 / Housing groups to issue Eurobond


   By RICHARD LAPPER


A group of medium-sized housing associations have reduced the cost of
raising funds by forming a company into which they will pledge future rental
income.
UK Rents (No1) will issue a Pounds 36.6m Eurobond with both interest and
principal repaid from the rents. The company will be a 'special purpose
vehicle' - an arms-length company for the housing associations. Because the
bond is expected to be assigned the highest possible rating from two
credit-rating agencies, funding costs are nearly 1 per cent lower than those
typically obtained by housing associations in recent issues.
The deal, developed by Nomura International, the Japanese securities house,
is the first in the UK but resembles other 'securitised' transactions in
which companies sell pools of mortgage obligations or other 'receivables' to
raise money.
Ms Barbara Ainger, chief executive of The Housing Finance Corporation, said
the deal would enable the associations 'to make full use of the strengths of
their rental income flows'. She added: 'This will enable them to benefit
from a very attractive funding cost for long-term finance and opens up new
international markets for investment in UK social housing.' The corporation
funds and monitors the work of housing associations, which provide low-cost
rented accommodation or home-ownership schemes and control about 4 per cent
of housing stock.
Six associations - Cheviot of Newcastle upon Tyne, Beaver of London, Kelsey
of Orpington, Portico of Manchester, the Portsmouth Housing Association and
Mercian of Birmingham - are involved.
The issue, which has a maturity of 30 years, has been launched at a spread
of 75 basis points (a basis point is one hundredth of a percentage point)
over the UK government bond which matures in 2017. Other issues by housing
associations have been at a spread of between 150 and 165 basis points over
the government bond.
The AAA rating expected from Duff and Phelps Credit Rating and Moody's
Investors Services meant the issue could be placed with a number of new
investors who previously have been unable to buy unrated housing association
issues.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941216

