FT942-12848

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (12): The focus shifts to
boardroom pay - Corporate governance


   By PETER MONTAGNON


When the Cadbury Committee report on corporate governance was completed some
18 months ago the main public focus was on the issue of splitting the role
of chairman and chief executive to provide a proper system of checks and
balances in the boardroom.
With memories of the Maxwell scandal still strong, there was a preoccupation
with the need to prevent companies falling under the control of powerful
individuals who might abuse their position. Since then the number of
companies who combine the two roles has diminished. Barclays Bank, for
example, appointed Martin Taylor as its new chief executive last year. The
focus of debate has moved on to boardroom pay.
Part of the reason is the apparent sharp increase in directors' remuneration
at a time when wages are being restrained and shop floor jobs cut. Probably
more significant is the way some companies have paid large sums to directors
whose performance has fallen short.
Concern has focused on the Pounds 2.2m pay-off to Chris Greentree following
his departure as chief executive of Lasmo, the oil company. Other examples
include the large options and bonus package promised to Robert Montague,
founder of the troubled Tiphook container concern, to compensate him for a
cut in salary to Pounds 200,000 from Pounds 816,000. Though the fortunes of
British Aerospace turned round while he was chairman, John Cahill aroused
controversy as a result of the multi-million pound package he received on
his departure.
A large payment to Mr Cahill was inevitable given that he was leaving in the
middle of a five-year contract. Much of the apparent inequity of such
payments stems from the contracts which directors secured at the time of
their appointment.
'We're going to be seeing for some time the consequences of contracts that
were entered into in the 1980s. There are going to be very few of these
contracts in the 1990s,' says Mr Alistair Ross Goobey, chief executive of
Postel.
Mr Ross Goobey last year launched a campaign to put an end to three-year
rolling contracts, which are not outlawed by the Cadbury report but which
make it hard to dislodge poorly-performing directors without large
compensatory payments. Since then, he says, there has been a definite trend
for the length of contracts to be reduced and for more discipline on
payments in lieu of notice.
Another reason for the concern about boardroom pay is that many options
schemes first launched in 1984 are coming up for renewal this year. This has
opened up a broad debate about how such schemes should be constructed.
M&G Group, the UK's largest independent unit trust company, faced protests
over its new scheme which will allow executives to buy share options at
current market prices and exercise them after three years, providing the
share price rises. The move contravened recommendations from the National
Association of Pension Funds (NAPF) and the Association of British Insurers
who want to limit executives' freedom to benefit from options unless the
company has genuinely improved its performance.
Agreeing that something needs to be done, though, is one thing. Deciding on
an appropriate solution is another.
Institutions do not want to intervene too directly. 'Unless something's
egregious, the business of managing a company should be left to the
management,' says Mr Geoff Lindey of JP Morgan Investment Management and
vice-chairman of the NAPF investment committee. The structure of
remunerations schemes should, however, be within a given template, he says.
Similarly, Mr Ross Goobey believes it is not up to institutions to comment
about the absolute level of remuneration. 'But we do expect it not to be at
the expense of shareholders.'
There are several obstacles to a satisfactory solution. One is that board
remuneration committees tend to be made up of non-executive directors who
are also executives of other companies. The suspicion is that many are
unlikely to recommend anything that may come back to haunt them in their
main occupation. Some fund managers are also afraid to be too vociferous for
fear they may lose business or that they will end up showing remuneration
packages received by their own boards in a bad light.
Another problem is that institutions simply do not have the time to
scrutinise every single board contract. Directors' pay is increasingly in
the hands of consultants who are able to advise on how a particular package
compares with others in the industry. This process, however, can easily lead
to a system in which directors are paid a 'going-rate' which is itself
ratcheted continuously higher as pay packages leap-frog each other.
Institutions stress that the idea is not necessarily to limit the absolute
amount of remuneration. Where a board is delivering value to shareholders,
even the highest packages may be worth paying. The problem is to ensure that
bad performance is not rewarded in the process. A future revision of Cadbury
may have to address this point.
The right approach, many fund managers believe, is not necessarily to set
rigid rules on remunerations packages. The right approach may vary from
company to company, but Cadbury could have gone further in making disclosure
requirements which, for example, might make it harder for companies to
secure a higher pension for directors by paying them a large salary increase
in their final year.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940427

