FT943-12729

FT  23 JUL 94 / Clinton agrees healthcare stand


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


President Bill Clinton and Democratic party leaders yesterday agreed on a
new strategy for the healthcare reform bill that would, the president
insisted, still meet his basic goals, including universal medical insurance
cover.
Only the most general outlines of the Democrats' thinking were immediately
available. But Senator George Mitchell, the majority leader, said: 'Our
plans will be less bureaucratic, more voluntary and will be phased in over a
longer period'.
Mr Clinton argued that the new approach, outlined after a White House
session on Thursday night, did not constitute a retreat as there was
agreement on the overriding objectives. These he defined as universal cover,
quality and choice of medical care, emphasis on preventative and primary
treatment, and cost containment.
He did not mention the controversial issue of requiring employers to finance
the lion's share of the insurance premiums of their workforces, but said he
had long been flexible on the details.
With the stage now set for the climactic debate in Congress, 'now is the
time for those with a better idea to come forward', he added.
Essentially, the president, Mr Mitchell, Congressmen Tom Foley, Speaker of
the House, and Richard Gephardt, its majority leader, were confronted with a
legislative impasse.
None of the bills reported out by various congressional committees commands
majority support, nor does the modest alternative reform plan offered by the
Republicans.
To deal with this, Mr Mitchell said he hoped to have a new draft bill ready
to take to the floor of the Senate by the end of next week. It will seek to
reconcile the large differences in bills already reported out by the Senate
finance and health committees.
The House has scheduled a vote in the week beginning August 8, just before
the summer recess. Although its version of the bill is likely to reflect
what has already been agreed by its ways and means committee, the House's
actions are also certain to be influenced by events in the Senate.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940723

