FT941-13037

FT  27 JAN 94 / Germany plans more open market for gas and electricity


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


The German government is drawing up legislation to open the country's highly
regulated market for electricity and gas.
A draft law allowing access to the energy supply grids will be presented to
the cabinet before Easter, Mr Gunter Rexrodt, economics minister, said
yesterday.
The move would allow domestic and foreign competitors to take on the main
energy utilities including RWE, Veba's Preussen-Elektra and Bayernwerk, as
well as Ruhrgas, the country's leading gas importer and distributor.
It is likely to be fiercely resisted by the big utilities, the local
authorities which are their leading shareholders, and trade unions and
opposition Social Democrats because of worries about job security and
quality of services.
Mr Rexrodt insisted the change had the backing of the ruling coalition in
Bonn, and he was determined to make it law before the next election. It is
part of the government's programme to create jobs and stimulate growth.
'I know this is stirring up a hornet's nest,' he said. 'But we have the
consumers supporting us, for whom electricity and gas in Germany have been
too expensive for far too long.'
The new law will bar agreements between the utilities which set demarcation
lines between their operations, with each supplying all energy demand in
their own areas. Instead, it will give transmission rights to other gas and
electricity suppliers.
Mr Johann Eekhoff, state secretary for economics, said the aim was to open
competition in the German market before the European Union allowed
cross-border energy supplies from 1998. Germany would allow cross-border
supplies once neighbouring countries did the same.
The German market was opened to foreign competitors for the first time last
year, when an Anglo-US consortium, including Britain's PowerGen, bought the
Mibrag brown coal field in east Germany.
German inflation falls, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940127

