FT942-12195

FT  30 APR 94 / Markets: Ask a weatherman how the wind blows - Wall Street


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


After a long, cruel winter, New York was more than ready for the baking hot
sunshine that arrived suddenly last Sunday. There was almost a carnival
atmosphere as the city basked in the parks, gardens and sidewalk cafes.
People were filled with such optimism that when they returned to their
offices on Monday morning, they ploughed their money into shares, sending
the Dow Jones Industrial Average up more than 57 points - one of its biggest
single-day increases this year.
Absurd? Of course. But how else to explain Wall Street's behaviour when it
flew in the face of everything that had gone before?
All last week, the message had seemed clear. The market was obsessed by the
fear of inflation - or more precisely, the fear that the Federal Reserve
would push up interest rates to prevent it. The week had begun with another
tightening of the monetary screw by the Fed, and investors believed the
higher cost of borrowing would increase businesses' debt costs and
eventually feed through into slower economic growth.
Company after company reported big increases in profits for the quarter to
March, only to be slapped in the face with heavy selling of its shares.
Corporate profitability apparently counted for nothing. Investors were more
concerned about the gloom-laden prognosis for further interest rate
increases.
Nothing of significance had changed over the weekend: so anyone who had been
around the week before would have been baffled by the explanation offered by
analysts for Monday's rise. It was down to strong corporate results, they
said, in particular from DuPont, the chemicals group, and Boeing, the
aircraft manufacturer.
Never mind that DuPont and Boeing are almost the epitome of cyclical stocks,
supposedly the least favoured in the current climate; nor that the main
reason for DuPont's earnings growth was cost-cutting, not rising demand; nor
that Boeing actually made a whopping loss, albeit not quite as whopping as
feared. Suddenly, company results were moving the market again.
The flow of good corporate news continued on Tuesday. Walt Disney increased
after-tax profits by 16 per cent; the Capital Cities/ABC entertainment group
virtually doubled net income; and tobacco stocks were given a boost when
Britain's BAT Industries made an agreed Dollars 1bn cash offer for American
Tobacco, a subsidiary of American Brands.
So the market soared again, right? Well, no, actually. Instead, it fell more
than 6 points during the day to close back below the 3700 level. 'Er . . .
ah] . . . profit-taking]' the analysts said, unconvincingly.
Clearly, what Wall Street needed was a sense of direction. Perhaps Wednesday
would have provided it. Unfortunately, we will never know, because US
financial markets closed for the funeral of former president Richard Nixon.
The grumbling could be heard from one end of the street to the other. Never
mind that Nixon was the only US president ever to have resigned in disgrace.
More important, he was only the third president since the Dow Jones
Industrial Average was invented in 1897 to have left office with the index
lower than when he came in. Moreover, when William Howard Taft and Herbert
Hoover (the other two) died, the stock market only closed for half a day.
Grumbling aside, Wednesday evening had been marked by a particularly violent
thunderstorm over New York, so the weather pointed towards a turbulent day's
trading on Thursday. And sure enough, that is just what Wall Street
delivered. Bond prices plummeted when figures for the first quarter's gross
domestic product came out, because although they showed a
lower-than-expected growth rate of 2.6 per cent, the inflation indicators in
the figures pointed towards acceleration.
Stocks followed bonds down, depressed once again by the bigger economic
picture. Interestingly their 31-point fall was not as great as the
plummeting bond market might have indicated. In early trading yesterday,
stock prices rose while bond prices fell. Could this week's events have
marked a de-coupling between stock and bond prices - the start of a period
in which the share index might be driven more by fundamentals than mood?
As to the answer, it is anybody's guess. If it is any help, the weather
forecast for New York next week is changeable.
Meanwhile, the quote of the week award goes to Christopher Madell of Chicago
Capital Markets, who told the New York Times: 'Part of the problem I have
with this market is that people always gather round at the end of the day
and say 'Now why did I do what I just did?''
So do we, Mr Madell; so do we.
Monday     3705.78  +  57.10
Tuesday    3699.54  -   6.24
Wednesday   Closed
Thursday   3668.31  -  31.23
Friday     3681.69  +  13.38

The Financial Times


London Page II

940430

