FT941-16979

FT  07 JAN 94 / BT to cut call charges by 12%: Regulator forces reduction -
Customers to pay only for time used


   By ANDREW ADONIS


British Telecommunications is to cut the average price of telephone calls by
more than 12 per cent this year, before inflation, after intervention by
Oftel, the telecommunications regulator.
Business and residential customers will save more than Pounds 800m from the
cuts in a full year.
The agreement was announced yesterday as BT unveiled tariff changes,
including an increase in line rental charges and abolition over the next two
years of the unit system of charging for calls.
At present, BT customers are charged for a full unit, which lasts for up to
three minutes and 40 seconds for off-peak local calls, even if they use only
a fraction of the time.
The planned move to charging by time elapsed - to the second - and a new
discount scheme for residential customers are BT's response to growing
competition from Mercury and cable television companies building networks in
urban areas.
Last month BT introduced a new, lower weekend tariff for long-distance
calls.
The price effect of the changes announced yesterday is neutral. But by the
end of July BT will have to make cuts worth Pounds 350m a year under its
existing price-cap agreement with Oftel.
Oftel is forcing BT to pass on the full value of next year's reductions from
November 1994, although the timing of the cuts will be left to BT. The
additional reductions will be equal to 7.5 per cent before inflation.
The action follows concern by Mr Don Cruickshank, Oftel director-general, at
BT's failure to make significant price cuts in recent months.
The increase in line rental charges, to take effect next month, will be
Pounds 1.01 for business customers and 73p for residential customers. The
increases take the quarterly rental to Pounds 32.66 for businesses and
Pounds 23.69 for residents, with Pounds 1 off for residents paying their
bills by direct debit.
BT will accompany the increases with a more generous low-user scheme for
residents making calls worth less than Pounds 10 a quarter. Some 3m
households will benefit, at an extra cost to BT of about Pounds 55m. BT
hopes that the scheme will boost phone ownership among the estimated 1m
households without a phone.
In a further move to stave off competition from Mercury, BT announced the
launch of a 'close ties' scheme, under which residential customers will get
a 5 per cent discount on five numbers of their choice, including one
overseas number, in return for a one-off payment of Pounds 4.99.
Mercury announced a similar scheme at the end of last year, to start in
March. Mercury's version, 'Yourcall', does not charge a registration fee
but, unlike BT's, is not available for local calls.
'Close ties' also reflects the influence of MCI, the US long-distance
carrier with which BT forged a Dollars 5.3bn (Pounds 3.6bn) alliance last
June. MCI pioneered a 'friends and family' tariff in the US.
Consumer groups criticised the rental increases, which are part of a
long-standing policy of raising rental charges to reduce the loss BT makes
on maintaining line connections.
But they and Mercury welcomed BT's decision to move to time-based tariffs.
Mr Terry Rhodes, Mercury's director of competition policy, said: 'Now for
the first time customers will be able to compare like with like; Mercury has
led the world by always charging by the second.'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940107

