FT941-17164

FT  06 JAN 94 / Israel hit by interest rate policy row


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


Israel's central bank and finance ministry were at loggerheads yesterday
over interest rate policy - a row that has become a public war of words.
The argument between Israel's two main economic policy-making bodies focuses
on interest rates and inflation and their impact on economic growth after
the Bank of Israel asserted its independence and raised interest rates
without consulting the ministry.
Mr Aharon Foegel, finance ministry director-general, accused the bank of
jeopardising economic growth and subverting the government's political
goals. The bank labelled the ministry's objections a 'policy of chatter
whose sole contribution is to shake economic stability'.
A central bank official said the bank had decided to raise interest rates to
commercial banks last week by 0.8 per cent from 9.7 to 10.5 per cent, to
curb rising inflation. Commercial banks followed suit, increasing the prime
lending rate from 11 to 11.8 per cent. According to preliminary estimates,
inflation last year was 11.5 per cent against the government's target of 10
per cent. The central bank felt this year's target of 8 per cent would be
unobtainable unless interest rates were increased.
'The greatest contribution the Bank of Israel can make now is by instilling
an environment of stability and sticking to the inflation target; we are in
a comfortable position to stick to our guns, because output has been growing
dramatically and there is no better environment to take another bite at
inflation,' Mr Jacob Frenkel, governor of the Bank of Israel, said
yesterday.
Mr Foegel said the central bank's move threatened the government growth
target of 6 per cent this year; higher interest rates would fuel
inflationary pressures and harm the economy's leading industrial growth
sectors. Last year's inflation rate was largely fuelled by house prices
which rose 20 per cent. The only way to curb inflation was to attack house
prices by measures to increase the supply of private land, low-cost housing
finance and tax incentives.
'We should create a monetary policy which suits the economic goals set by
the government ..the central bank must be co-ordinated with the government's
political goals and with those in charge of them,' Mr Foegel declared.
Mr Frenkel yesterday rejected Mr Foegel's criticisms. He said the bank had
exclusive control over monetary policy and it was an asset to 'maintain the
strongest independence of the central bank.'
Mr Gideon Schurr, central bank spokesman, said the central bank did not
fundamentally disagree with Mr Foegel's analysis of the reasons for high
inflation but until the government moved to lower housing prices, the Bank
of Israel would maintain its current interest rate policy. 'The finance
ministry is not acting quickly enough by giving or selling more land to the
market. Once we are back on target for an inflation rate of 8 per cent, of
course we will reduce interest rates again.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940106

