FT941-5713

FT  04 MAR 94 / Government Bonds: Technical recovery in futures calms
markets


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


European government bond markets calmed yesterday, with sentiment buoyed by
a technical recovery in the futures pits.
'The markets got oversold and the technical indicators are screaming buy
me]' said Mr Julian Callow, international economist at Kleinwort Benson,
adding: 'This has a distinct flavour of a dead-cat-bounce.'
However, while cash dealings were thin, traders reported some buying,
especially by domestic investors. 'I saw a few timid buyers today - the
first time in a long time,' said one trader.
Following Wednesday's late bounce, prices continued to firm in the morning,
underpinned by hopes that the Bundesbank's central bank council might
announce a monetary easing. When the Bundesbank left interest rates
unchanged, prices dipped briefly but soon recovered, helped by news that the
German engineering employers' association had proposed new top-level talks
with union leaders to try to resolve the pay dispute. A short-squeeze in the
futures pits pushed many contracts sharply higher in late trading.
The high-yielding bond markets were yesterday's best performers, having been
the worst casualties of the recent sell-off.
'The very strong bounce reflects the fact that they had sold off too fast
and too far,' said Mr Jouni Kokko, international economist at SG Warburg.
The Bank of Spain's surprise  1/2 -point cut in the key money rate to 8 per
cent gave Spanish bonds a massive boost, causing the March bond future to
rally by more than three points at one point. It closed at 101.38. up 2.30
points on the day.
The Bank of Spain's decision to reject all bids for its auction of three,
five and 10-year debt also helped sentiment by removing the spectre of fresh
supply at a time of scarce retail demand.
Italian bonds also recovered smartly, boosted by the Spanish rally and by
news that Italy's National Auditors Court had approved government plans to
speed the repayment of withholding tax to foreign investors in the Italian
bond market.
The court decision was the final stage before a decree speeding the
repayment could be put into effect. The decree sets out a new system for
refunding the 12.5 per cent tax to residents of countries that have signed
double taxation treaties with Italy.
The BTP future on Liffe rose by 2.04 point to 111.40.
German bonds opened on a firm tone, slipped back on the Bundesbank's
announcement of unchanged rates but rose again on news of top-level pay
talks in the engineering sector. Unsubstantiated rumours surrounding
emergency central bank action to calm the markets fuelled another late spurt
as traders covered their short positions in the futures pits.
The March bund future hit a high of 96.30 during the late squeeze, but
slipped back in after-hours APT trading to around 95.98, up 0.54 point on
the day.
Due to continued high volatility, the German futures and options exchange
DTB raised margins on its bund and Bobl futures.
Effective today, the margin for the Bund future is DM4,000 (160 ticks), up
from DM3,000 (120 ticks). The margin for the Bobl future was raised to
DM2,000 (80 ticks) from DM1,750 (70 ticks).
French bonds also ended higher, helped by the smooth auction of 10 and
30-year bonds.
'The auction went much better than expected,' said one trader, who reported
massive single bids for the paper from French investment funds.
The March notional bond future rose 0.48 point to 124.86.
UK gilts posted modest losses amid nervousness ahead of today's US non-farm
payrolls data.
'The UK is the second-furthest along in the global economic cycle, and we're
especially vulnerable to bad US news,' said a trader.
The March long gilt future slipped by  9/16 point to 111 3/8 .
After a quiet opening, longer-dated US Treasury prices fell sharply
yesterday amid fears of an impending trade war between the US and Japan.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  27/32 at 92
17/32 , yielding 6.837 per cent. The two-year note was also weaker, down
5/32 at 99 5/8 , to yield 4.808 per cent.
After the wild gyrations of Wednesday, when the bond rebounded from an early
one-point loss to end with a modest gain, trading was relatively quiet at
the opening. Prices were mostly stable, although the long bond eased later
in the morning session as market participants lightened their positions
ahead of the monthly employment data.
The jobs data could prove decisive in determining the immediate outlook for
Treasuries, because analysts believe that if the figures show continued
strength in the labour market, the Fed will probably decide to raise
interest rates again in a second pre-emptive move against inflation. This
could further undermine bond market sentiment, although traders say that in
the wake of the recent falls, a second rate hike has already been priced in.
By mid-afternoon the long end of the market was decisively lower as traders
reacted to the news that President Clinton had reinstated the 'Super 301'
provision to trade laws that allows the government to impose trade sanctions
on any country which employs unfair trade restrictions on US goods and
services. The bond market fears a trade war because it could lead to a sharp
rise in the price of imported Japanese goods, thus fuelling inflation.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940304

