FT941-16964

FT  07 JAN 94 / Kohl's ministers close ranks over Nato


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BERLIN


In the run-up to the Nato summit on Monday, Germany's foreign and defence
ministries, have put aside their differences about the alliance's
relationship with eastern Europe.
However, the government consensus is being overshadowed by a debate in the
media and between deputies in Chancellor Helmut Kohl's governing Christian
Democrats who want the summit to offer eastern European countries either a
concrete timetable for eventual membership, or security guarantees for the
region.
The differences between the foreign and defence ministries are two-fold. Mr
Volker Ruhe, the defence minister, has argued that eastern Europe should be
brought quickly under Nato's security umbrella, leading eventually to
membership. Mr Klaus Kinkel, the foreign minister, prompted by his Russian
desk, advises more caution, fearing that any commitment to include eastern
Europe would be at the expense of isolating Russia and would play into the
hands of the ultra-nationalists there.
At the same time, the foreign ministry wants closer links between Nato and
eastern Europe - and Russia - to run in parallel with the European Union's
links with the region. The defence ministry plays down the importance of
this linkage.
'Some capitals do want to have this kind of parallel process,' a German
diplomat said. 'But if you were really cynical, that would mean that eastern
Europe would never join Nato because the EU is reluctant to offer full
membership to the region. Look at the way it still has trade barriers for
the region,' he added.
Yet according to CDU deputies, it is precisely the rise of nationalism in
the former Soviet Union, in particular Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky's far-right
wing Liberal Democratic party, and the crisis in the former Yugoslavia,
which necessitates a Nato extension of its security umbrella to eastern
Europe.
The conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine daily newspaper said in an editorial
yesterday thatthe whole debate about Nato's relationship with eastern Europe
was really about the need for Nato to re-define its role in a way which
would provide security in regions which could threaten the west.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940107

