FT942-12461

FT  29 APR 94 / Personal View: A vicious circle of social kindness


   By ANTHONY DE JASAY


Unemployment in the industrialised west is now clearly endemic and not
cyclical as in the past. No reversal appears in prospect. At best the next
few years will bring a minor rise in employment, at worst a further fall.
In the search for an explanation and cure, many old - but unsatisfactory -
chestnuts are trotted out: a deep technological transformation is taking
place (it always is); world trade has become too free and not fair enough
(but freer trade, surely, brings greater riches?); or labour markets are too
rigid and training inadequate (but did not the same apply 20 years ago?)
There may, however, be a different explanation for high unemployment in
modern, redistributive democracies.
This is best illustrated with a simplified example. Imagine an economy where
income comes from only two sources - profits and wages. Rents are
negligible, and there is full employment. If the government wished to
redistribute income in favour of wage earners, it would tax employers'
profits and add the money raised to wages.
The natural response would be for employers to cut the wages they offer  -
and for employees to demand less. Consequently, the impact in terms of
redistribution would be negligible and harmless: there would be no
unemployment created and after-tax, after-subsidy incomes would remain
unchanged.
But imagine that instead of transferring money, the government offered
employees a basket of 'social protection' - insurance against illness,
unemployment, or destitution in old age. If we make the (large) assumption
that collecting the tax and distributing it in the form of social protection
are costless, the effect on the demand and supply of labour would depend on
the difference between the cost of the package and the value attached to it
by recipients.
At first sight, it would appear that employees would attach great value to
social protection: reaction to proposals for curtailing benefits is usually
virulent. But that is because most wage-earners are under the illusion that
the greater part of the 'insurance premium' is being paid by someone other
than themselves.
If wage earners understood that, ultimately, the cost had to be borne out of
their own wages, would they prefer to have the 'social protection' on offer
 -or would they rather buy some private insurance, save some, and spend the
rest?
There is a strong paternalistic argument for saying that wage-earners should
not be given such a choice - improvidence would make many take the money and
'blow it'. But the important point is that 'social protection' costs more
than it is worth to at least some of those that it protects.
The result is that, at the margin, employment is taxed more than the subsidy
is worth to workers. The two no longer cancel out and there is a net extra
burden on the economy. Enterprises have to 'restructure' and unemployment is
born of 'social protection'.
Worse, a vicious circle comes into operation. The initial unemployment
created by the tax-subsidy inequality increases the amount of 'social
protection' that has to be handed out.
That extra cost results in a further increase in the tax on employment,
widening the gap between the non-wage costs of labour and the value of the
benefits in kind. Demand for labour is further depressed relative to its
supply, more unemployment is created and the cycle is repeated.
Under an optimistic scenario, non-cyclical unemployment would stabilise, at
some point, at a level that society would have to support indefinitely. But
under a pessi-mistic scenario the rise in unemployment would prove
inexorable.
There is empirical evidence to lend weight to such a theory. Comparisons
across countries show a high correlation between cyclically-corrected
unemployment and 'social protection' expressed as a share of national
income. Unemployment in Europe, where the welfare system is more costly per
head, is twice as high as in the US and many times higher than in east Asia.
Within post-Maastricht Europe, unemployment is worse in the centre than on
its periphery, and the more 'social' the country, the more it is plagued.
Democracies, we are told, cannot relax social protection. Are they, then,
condemned to smother the young and the long-term unemployed with their
caring kindness?
The author is a former economics don at Oxford University and wrote 'Social
contract, free ride' published by Oxford University Press in 1989

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940429

