FT944-6166

FT  30 NOV 94 / BTR acts as City concern mounts: Forecast of 'satisfactory'
profit lifts share price


   By DAVID WIGHTON


BTR, the industrial conglomerate whose shares have fallen by more than a
quarter in the past three months, issued a trading statement yesterday which
failed to restore City confidence.
However it did reassure the market that trading has not turned down in the
second half and the shares added 2p to 287p.
BTR predicted a 'satisfactory' operating profit in 1994 with price increases
and buying policies mitigating the impact of raw materials cost increases.
BTR's high margins have been the focus of City worries since September, when
the shares fell 12 per cent on the announcement of disappointing interim
figures. These showed margins falling from 15.7 to 15.2 per cent.
Yesterday BTR said operating margins in the second half would show some
improvement over the first half, though analysts pointed out that this would
be no more than its normal seasonal pattern.
BTR has been putting pressure on its suppliers to cut their prices, in
response to rising raw materials costs and pressure from its own customers.
In a meeting with analysts, Mr Norman Ireland, the chairman, stressed the
company's commitment to improving margins but said it might adopt a more
low-key approach to the issue. He said: 'BTR will achieve (improved margins)
but not by announcing its success with trumpets and drums, but with violins
and clarinets.'
However analysts remain concerned about the outlook for margins in the more
competitive 1990s. 'They are more likely to go down than up,' commented one
analyst.
Analysts also complained that the company gave no further insight into
management succession following the announcement last week that Mr Bob
Faircloth would be retiring as chief operating officer.
In its statement the company predicted increased earnings in the full year
though it pointed out that earnings per share will be diluted by the
exercise of warrants which will increase the average number of shares in
issue by 6 per cent. Analysts are expecting earnings per share to be little
changed.
This year BTR has decided to suspend the annual distribution of warrants
which some institutions have criticised as a rolling rights issue that
dilutes earnings.
The trading statement reported 'buoyant order positions and profit
performance' in a number of BTR's US manufacturing companies, particularly
Fasco Motors, Fexnord, Plastics Packaging and the Meter Group. But these
have been partly offset by the problems of its Denver baggage handling
contract, difficult market conditions at Weavexx and further rationalisation
costs at Allsteel.
In the UK, BTR has seen 'slow growth' throughout the year but most of its
industrial manufacturing, automotive and constructions are up on last year.
In spite of the upturn in continental European car production, BTR reports
difficult markets in automotive, valves and batteries but predicts
'profitable growth' in 1995.
BTR said it decided some weeks ago to issue an annual trading update at this
stage in line with other large companies.
Lex, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 49

941130

