FT942-12566

FT  29 APR 94 / Banks bill could spark row with EU


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The US and the European Union could be heading for a clash over the
reluctance of Congress to lift restrictions on the opening of new branches
by foreign banks.
Both chambers of Congress have passed bills that would loosen restrictions
on interstate branching by US banks, which currently must set up a new
subsidiary in each state they want to do business in. Foreign banks which
have a separately incorporated subsidiary in the US  - such as Barclays Bank
of the UK - would, in both versions of the bill, have the same freedom to
open new branches. However, the Senate version, which must be reconciled
with the House version before the measure can become law, would still
prevent foreign banks which operate in the US through a branch - for
example, Lloyds of the UK - opening new branches.
Mr John Mogg, director general of the European Commission's financial
services division, has written to Senator Donald Riegle, chairman of the
Senate banking committee, to complain that 'our banks would continue to face
restrictions on their activities throughout the US in ways that US banks
would not', and that the Senate version of the bill would therefore not
provide full national treatment.
Mr Frank Newman, undersecretary of the US Treasury, has also written to Mr
Riegle to oppose the provision, arguing that the US 'has repeatedly objected
to similar requirements imposed by foreign countries on US banks that
operate abroad'.
Leading senators remain adamant, however, insisting that foreign banks
operating as direct branches otherwise enjoy a competitive advantage over US
banks because they can escape US laws on consumer protection, community
reinvestment and fair lending.
'Nothing in the Senate bill prohibits a foreign bank from establishing a
subsidiary as a US chartered bank, which then has available all of the same
rights and privileges of interstate banking and branching this legislation
provides to US banks,' said Senator Wendell Ford of Kentucky. 'But to obtain
these privileges, they must pay the same price as US banks - compliance with
all relevant laws which apply to chartered institutions.'
Bankers' associations from 17 states have backed the Senate provisions.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940429

