FT944-6045

FT  01 DEC 94 / Germany agrees to toe line on Bosnia: Chancellor puts unity
before his 'moral' position against blanket arms embargo


   By DAVID BUCHAN and MICHAEL LINDEMANN


   BONN


Chancellor Helmut Kohl assured France yesterday that he would continue to
restrain his 'moral' sympathy for the Bosnian Moslems in the interest of
maintaining a show of European unity for the arms embargo and support for
new peace efforts.
At a news conference concluding the Franco-German summit, Mr Kohl said it
was vital to intensify the search for a political solution led by the
international contact group, which includes Germany and France. Both
countries reiterated their appeal to the United Nations and Nato to ensure
respect of security zones around Bihac and elsewhere.
But Mr Kohl, who earlier this week voted with his Christian Democrat (CDU)
party to approve a resolution urging a conditional lifting of the embargo,
warned that time was running out for international diplomacy. 'It is one
minute to twelve,' he said, adding that 'what has happened in Bihac is
really the last warning'.
He appeared to indicate that, if diplomacy did not produce results soon, he
would revert to what he described as his 'moral' position against the
blanket arms embargo in a war 'in which one side (the Bosnian Moslems) is
not armed and the other (the Serbs) is'. At last year's European Union
summit in Copenhagen he said he had undertaken to follow loyally the EU's
support for the arms ban. But President Francois Mitterrand's spokesman said
France understood 'where the chancellor's heart really is on this matter'.
Mr Kohl and Mr Klaus Kinkel, his foreign minister, explained to worried
French leaders that the CDU resolution did not change the German
government's position in favour of the embargo. The French side will also
have been grateful for Mr Kohl's advice to his own countrymen not to lecture
France about a conflict in which the lives of French military peacekeepers,
but not German, were at stake. 'Despite all the moral indignation, we must
be sparing in our reproaches,' he said.
During the overnight meeting the two sides also agreed to finalise details
about their proposed co-operation on spy satellites. France is already
involved in the Helios II project, a joint venture with Italy to launch an
optical satellite, but is eager to have Germany on board. The two countries
said that by March they would decide whether to go ahead with the Osiris
radar satellite. The Germans want a closer look at the amount of money
involved in both projects before making a decision.
Leaders of the two countries also decided for the moment to minimise their
differences on the future course of the EU. Mr Edouard Balladur, French
prime minister, said he had come out against a 'federal' Europe because he
did not want the EU debate in France to become mired in a sterile quarrel
about federalism.
Mr Kohl agreed that such ideological debates should be avoided. He had been
brought up like many in the Adenauer era to believe in the 'united states of
Europe', but had come to see that Europeans did not want to merge their
states into another America.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941201

