FT944-2864

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (12): A step in the right direction -
Case study, financial enterprise in Morocco


   By FRANCIS GHILES


In September 1993, Upline Securities, then a little-known firm of financial
intermediaries in Casablanca, found that a private Moroccan shareholder, the
Al Amane Insurance Company, wished to sell the 4 per cent stake it held in
the capital of ONA, the kingdom's largest private company, whose chief
executive is King Hassan's son-in-law, Mr Fouad Filali.
That stake was worth Dollars 15m and entitled its owner to a seat on the ONA
board. Upline Securities subsequently sold the stake to Baring Securities in
London which, in turn, sold it to a group of institutional investors. That
'coup' landed a small band of enterprising Moroccans on to the front page of
the Morocco's economic and financial weekly, L'Economiste.
Upline International was founded in January 1993 by Jalal Houti and Hassan
Aitali - both aged 30. Jalal Houti had returned two years previously from
nine years in the US, where he graduated at the business school in Austin,
Texas; meanwhile, Hassan Aitali had graduated at the business school of the
Universite Libre de Belgique.
Jalal Houti joined the the Banque Marocaine pour le Commerce et l'Industrie
where he worked in correspondent banking. He was the only person who spoke
English in that department of BMCI and soon realised the interest that banks
such as JP Morgan, First Chicago and Chase Mahattan had in trading Moroccan
debt in the secondary market. Hassan Aitali joined the Moroccan subsidiary
of AT & T, Networking Computing Resources.
In November 1992, Jalal Houti left BMCI and became a consultant - to a US
bank - on the Moroccan economy. Then, in January 1993, both friends started
a weekly report which, by mid-year, had a dozen institutional investor
subscribers in London and New York. Today it boasts 50 subscribers.
Both men realised that foreign investors were showing greater interest in
Morocco because, by late 1992, the much-heralded privatisation programme was
finally under way. Foreign banks and funds were hampered, however, by the
lack of up-to-date information on the country. Hence, their decision to
start a series of sector and company studies - reports which are common in
London and Paris, but were the first of their kind in Morocco.
Last month, Upline Securities, which now has a staff of eight traders and
financial analysts, all between the ages of 23 and 32, won their seat on the
Casablanca stock exchange - a seat worth having since the Casablanca stock
exchange is no longer an old fashioned, rather clubbable place where nothing
much goes on.
Up to 1991, most of the activity on the stock exchange was in government
bonds. Now, however, the faster pace of privatisation, new share issues and
the increasing flow of foreign investment have transformed the place and
equities now account for 95 per cent of all trading.
Upline Securities is capitalised today at Dh1m, 47.5 per cent of which was
bought by the French broker Finacor in December 1993. Turnover last year
amounted to Dollars 30m, a figure which is expected to rise to Dollars 50m
in 1994. By world standards, such amounts are small, but the drive and
enthusiasm shown by this young Morrocan team is a pointer to the big changes
being wrought in a highly conservative banking and stockbroking community,
many of whose senior members, who belong to the Groupement Professionel des
Banques du Maroc, seem more than a little reticent about the reforms
currently being promoted by King Hassan.
Meanwhile, Upline Securities' aims to combine stockbroking and market
research in corporate finance. A seat on the Casablanca stock exchange is
thus a step in the right direction.

The Financial Times


London Page 45

941215

