FT942-14752

FT  19 APR 94 / Personal View: City must defend its capital position


   By PADDY LINAKER


Last autumn, Britain's chancellor of the exchequer announced that Stephen
Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, would conduct a review of the
'impact of tax and other government policies on savings and the flow of
funds through the economy'. For a while, nothing emerged. Last month,
however, at a Confederation of British Industry conference, Mr Dorrell told
his audience that he had come to enlist their aid in a dialogue over the
issues raised by the review. He betrayed a belief, a dangerous one in my
view, that the emphasis in the UK on dividend yield has reduced cash
available to companies and harmed their ability to carry through capital
investment programmes.
At M&G, we strongly dispute this belief. We also believe it is imperative
that the City makes its views known. Life and pensions policies, unit trusts
and the corporate sector could all be affected. As the CBI said following
the speech, the review is of potentially greater significance than was
originally thought. At the CBI seminar, Mr Dorrell said its purpose is to
test the UK's 'arrangements for handling savings and investment against our
desire to promote efficient allowance of capital within the economy'.
Perhaps it is some of the weaknesses he identified that are most intriguing:
manufacturing is now a small part of the UK economy.
dividend pay-out ratios appear to be relatively high in Britain,
particularly when compared with continental European economies.
M&G's view is that these points fail properly to understand the role of the
institutions. In particular, institutions do not manage companies - boards
of directors do that. It is for those boards to identify good investment
opportunities and for institutions to assess them and to place their money
accordingly. So-called good investment opportunities are those which provide
the prospect of an adequate return on capital employed.
It is, of course, the stock market generally that passes judgment on the
wisdom of a board's long-term investment programme. It is no accident that
the manufacturing sector, in terms of gross domestic product, has shrunk in
the postwar period, as it has in other western countries. Foreign
competition is often fierce and returns on capital commensurately lower
unless the company concentrates on high added value, often
technology-driven, areas. The non-manufacturing sectors, in contrast, have
often suffered less competition and have prospered accordingly.
Mr Dorrell particularly emphasises the UK's high dividend payout ratio. The
UK equity market is very large in relation to the size of the economy and
the UK corporate sector is probably the least dependent of any major nation
on bank finance. It is therefore hardly surprising that the payout ratio is
the highest: by contrast, bankers abroad insist on stronger internal cash
surpluses to repay debt as a matter of prudence, and so they should. I
believe many overseas companies are actually envious of the freedom that the
UK's largely equity financed corporate sector enjoys.
In the very long term, it is the flow of dividends that determines capital
values and hence returns to shareholders: perhaps, in the fullness of time,
Mr Dorrell and his Treasury team will come to appreciate better the
excellent returns produced by British industry. He may also become more
fully aware of the vital discipline on company boards that dividend paying
represents. To cut a dividend usually leads to a fall in share price and
will diminish the company's ability to raise equity finance and lead to its
increasing dependence on bank finance.
I am therefore convinced of the correctness of high pay-outs and of capital
raising where necessary, a process which acts as a filter mechanism. The
City enjoys a flexible capital-raising system, and the process does not
constitute 'unnecessary and expensive churning', as Mr Dorrell suggests. It
not only reduces companies' reliance on bank debt, it also makes them less
vulnerable to the wide swings in interest rates that have been a
characteristic of UK economic management since the second world war.
It is clear the City needs urgently to understand the broad scope of Mr
Dorrell's review and the potential impact it could have on capital
investment and on savings - and it needs to respond. It needs to address two
particular questions: will the proposed changes benefit industry and the
saver? And will they increase or decrease the flow of savings from the
private to the corporate sector which is so necessary for the continued
expansion of the UK economy?
The author is managing director of M&G Group

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940419

