FT944-2260

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (4): Putting on a brave
face - Profile, Renault Vehicules Industriels


   By JOHN RIDDING


Jilted at the altar at the end of last year, Renault VI, the trucks and
buses arm of the French state-owned motor group, is putting a brave face on
life after its failed merger with Volvo. 'We lost a big opportunity, but we
remain very confident,' says a spokesman for the company.
Optimism is made easier by the rebound in the European truck market which is
pulling out of the severe recession of 1992 and 1993. But revival in the
market, which still remains well below its peaks of the late 1980s, may
mask, rather than resolve, the longer-term strategic challenges facing the
French group.
In the short term, the target is a return to profitability. After suffering
losses of FFr1.4bn in 1993, the company aims to report an operating profit
for 1994 and to move back into the black at the net level next year. The
revival is based on three factors, stronger sales in Europe, particularly in
France, continued strength in the US market where Renault VI is present
through its Mack subsidiary, and further cost-cutting and productivity
measures.
In France, the company expects sales of about 34,000 vehicles this year,
compared with 28,000 in 1993 and an average of about 40,000 over the past 20
years. For Europe as a whole, sales of trucks above five tonnes are expected
to reach 210,000 this year, compared with 203,000 in 1993. The upturn is
confirmed in the company's order books which saw a rise of more than 30 per
cent for Europe in the first nine months of the year.
Maintaining market share has, however, proved a struggle. In France for
example, Renault VI's share slipped slightly to about 42 per cent for the
January-September period, partly because of the price advantage gained by
its Swedish rivals as a result of devaluation last year.
In the US, Mack has steadily strengthened its performance. Acquired in 1990,
the company returned to profitability in February and is benefiting from a
vibrant market. Total sales in the US of Class 8 trucks, which are more than
15 tonnes and comprise Mack's principal products, should reach a record
level of 220,000 this year.
The turnaround at Mack is not just the result of a buoyant market. It also
reflects the benefits of restructuring measures which have seen the
workforce fall from 26,000 in 1987 to below 6,000 today. Similarly, the
number of employees in the company's European operations has been reduced
from about 35,000 to 20,000.
The cost-cutting and efficiency gains are aimed at enabling the company to
remain in profit through the next industry downturn. It is a tall order,
which requires further progress towards economies of scale in manufacturing
and the reduction of development cost.
Renault VI sees the solution in terms of an expansion of specific alliances,
rather than a grand merger a la Volvo. 'A big marriage would be very
difficult,' says a spokesman for the company, citing the lack of appropriate
partners. Iveco, for example, the trucks division of Fiat, is seen as too
similar. Both companies have a strong presence in southern European markets
and a virtually identical model range.
Some steps towards more modest partnerships have already been taken. In
July, Renault concluded an agreement with Iveco, under which the two
companies will co-operate in the manufacture and development of cabins. For
Renault VI the deal concerns its 3.5-tonne and 6-tonne Messenger vehicles.
With Volvo, a joint project to develop rear axles has survived the divorce.
Renault VI also sees scope for production economies within the group. In
particular, there are plans to develop co-operation with Mack in the
development of motors and, possibly, suspension and brake systems.
Are such measures enough? For Renault VI, the response is positive. 'We have
no handicap linked to our size,' says Shemaya Levy, who took over as
chairman at the beginning of the year.
Officials at the company point to the progress made in improving
profitability and the benefits of having a strong US presence. 'The US
market has now moved largely out of phase with the European market,' says a
company official. 'So there is a compensating, anti-cyclical effect which
smoothes earnings.'
As for the prospect that Renault VI could be spun off from the parent
company or that Mack could be sold, the answer is clearly negative. 'Mr
Schweitzer has emphasised that Renault VI is a core element of the group's
business,' the company says. 'Mack is an important element of our strategy.'
Some industry observers, however, remain guarded about the company's
post-Volvo prospects. 'It is still an open question whether Renault is big
enough to survive long term without some substantial partners,' says a motor
industry analyst at one Paris merchant bank. 'Volvo was the ideal solution,
in terms of product range and geographical spread and Renault will find it
that much harder to find the financial resources to revamp its model range
on its own.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

941216

