FT944-5986

FT  01 DEC 94 / Procter set for rap on soap advert


   By DIANE SUMMERS, Marketing Correspondent


The Advertising Standards Authority is to censure Procter & Gamble over
advertising claims in its 'soap wars' with Unilever, according to a leaked
draft of an ASA adjudication.
While the draft's focus is the 'knocking copy' produced by Procter attacking
Unilever's Persil Power soap powder, the document contains damaging
criticism of Persil Power itself. The draft describes the product as 'more
harmful than any other detergent on the market'.
The authority said yesterday that the draft was 'still very much under
discussion and subject to further change'.
It said it was not uncommon for the authority's council to reverse draft
views before adjudications were published. The council is not expected to
discuss the issue until next month.
Newspaper advertisements placed by Procter in July said 'only Ariel
(Procter's soap powder) washes so clean yet so safe'. The advertisements
contained warnings that the manganese 'accelerator' ingredient, which is at
the centre of the controversy about Persil Power, could leave residues on
clothes and continue to cause fading, even if users switched to another soap
powder.
Unilever, which has always said that there is no such 'carry-over' effect
from the accelerator and that Persil Power is not damaging under normal
usage, complained to the ASA about the advertisements.
The ASA draft criticises Procter's advertisements for 'concentrating on
vulnerable fabrics and dyes and not mentioning that the accelerator products
were intended for low temperature washes' and for giving 'an exaggerated
overall impression of the damage caused by the complainants' products'. It
dismissed as not proven Procter's claims of manganese 'carry-over'.
However, the draft, which is published in today's edition of the trade
magazine Marketing Week, says that Procter is entitled to present its
product as a safer alternative to Persil. It adds: 'The authority sought
expert advice and concluded that all detergents damaged clothes to a certain
extent. It further concluded that Persil Power was more harmful than any
other detergent on the market.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941201

