FT944-10970

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (11): Deregulation
the driving force - Real estate


   By SIMON LONDON


The turmoil in bond markets this year has spilled over into most
international property markets. While improved levels of economic activity
promise good investment returns from property, rising bond yields have taken
the shine off the early stages of recovery.
However, cross-border investment in property is often driven more by
financial deregulation than any cool assessment of market conditions. The
flows of Japanese, Swedish and German money into London over the past decade
were prompted by regulatory changes which gave the institutions a free hand.
The impact of deregulation is especially powerful when institutions are
already riding a wave of liquidity. Thus the deregulation of German
open-ended mutual funds coincided with a period of high net investment by
retail investors. Fund managers had the cash and the regulatory authority to
buy City of London office blocks. Even though London property prices are now
flat or falling - thanks to the drag of bond yields - the flow of overseas
money continues.
According to Jones Lang Wootton, institutional investors bought Pounds 1.8bn
of central London property during the first nine months of the year. UK
investors accounted for only 55 per cent of this turnover. Of the overseas
buyers, German open-ended funds were the most active.
A similar pattern is seen in continental European markets. There is strong
investment demand for German property, for example, much of it from
overseas. Since development activity was muted in most cities other than
Berlin and borrowing costs were falling through the year - at least in terms
of short-term interest rates - the German property market has shown strong
capital growth.
However, the pattern of supply and demand in individual cities can change
quickly. In Berlin, up to 1.5m sq m of office space will be built this year
and next. Since take-up by tenants was only 200,000 sq m in 1993, there is a
real threat of oversupply.
In France, domestic institutions have been concentrating their efforts on
the retail sector, partly driven by the need to diversify away from offices.
Overseas investors, mostly from Holland and the UK, have also concentrated
on shopping centres.
Schroders International Property fund, based in Amsterdam, recently acquired
its third French shopping centre, at Amiens in Picardy. Hammerson, the UK
company which recently sold its Australian assets, is also on the look-out
for shopping centres in France.
In the US, Atlanta and Washington DC have emerged as the most desirable
cities for overseas investors, according to the Association of Foreign
Investors in US Real Estate (Afire). Atlanta, which was the second most
popular destination for overseas investment in 1993, was ranked as the most
viable city for foreign real estate investment, followed by Washington, New
York, Phoenix, and Charlotte.
Afire also refutes claims that Japanese investors have been trying to
offload assets acquired in the 1980s.
'There have been rumours that the Japanese are trying to sell but no
evidence of it,' said James Fetgatter, chief executive of Afire, which
represents about half the foreign investment in US real estate. 'Japanese
investment has remained at the same level for the past four years.'
Most of the new foreign investment in US property is coming from Europe. An
Afire survey found 46 per cent of respondents planning to increase US
holdings, up 14 per cent from 1993.
Property advisers agree that even the most overbuilt cities such as Denver
and Boston are showing signs of recovery.
The lingering worry for the UK property market is that overseas investors
often seem more enthusiastic about the opportunities than their domestic
counterparts. UK pension funds' average weighting in property is now around
7 per cent, having fallen steadily from a peak of more than 20 per cent in
the mid-1970s.
According to second quarter figures from the Central Statistical Office (the
latest available) this trend continued. Life insurance companies were
enthusiastic buyers, investing a record Pounds 2bn in commercial property
during the three months Yet pension funds were net sellers, shedding a net
Pounds 246m-worth of property.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the weight of life insurance company money
waiting to come into commercial property started to diminish in late spring.
The property investment market was unusually quiet through September and
October, traditionally one of the most active periods for institutional
dealing.
Fund managers' caution is understandable. The property market went off the
boil over the summer against the background of rising bond yields. Rental
growth, which would help property detach from bonds, has been slower to show
through than many investors hoped.
The net effect has been falling capital values. The Investment Property
Databank Index for September showed a drop in capital values after 14 months
of upswing.
Just how long investors have to wait before rents start to rise is a moot
point. Some agents suggest rents on prime City offices have already started
to climb. Richard Ellis pointed to 8 per cent rental growth in the third
quarter of the year, with prime City rents rising from Pounds 30 per square
ft to around Pounds 32.50.
Unless there is a huge reversal of fortune in the final weeks of the year,
UK commercial property should still outperform both equities and gilts in
1994. A total return of around 14 per cent this year should be enough to
beat other financial assets.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

941108

