FT941-4151

FT  12 MAR 94 / UK Company News: S&P may downgrade Barclays' credit rating


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


Barclays' return to profitability has failed to impress Standard & Poor's,
the leading US rating agency, which yesterday announced that it was
considering lowering the bank's credit rating.
The move came a day after Barclays announced pre-tax profits of Pounds 664m
for last year, following a 1992 loss of Pounds 242m.
However, Standard & Poor's said it was dissatisfied with the low level of
retained earnings. While a substantial improvement on the previous year's
retained loss of Pounds 586m, Barclays' retained earnings of Pounds 67m were
'quite insignificant for their size,' said Mr Barry Hancock, a director of
S&P.
'We have maintained our rating of AA through the last couple of
disappointing years, on the basis that the bank's strong underlying
performance will enable it to bounce back as earnings pick up, and use
strong retained earnings to strengthen its balance sheet,' Mr Hancock said.
'But we are now concerned that this recovery in performance is still some
way off.'
Barclays lost its triple-A rating from S&P in February 1991, and was
downgraded to AA in June 1992. It is currently rated AA2 by Moody's and AA
by IBCA, which are equivalent ratings.
'I suppose they are worried about the problems in the US, which are the main
reason for low retained earnings, but those problems are firmly in the
past,' said Mr Martin Taylor, Barclays' newly-appointed chief executive. 'I
hope we shall be able to convince the rating agencies that a number of
aspects of the figures, including the tax charge, are very prudently
stated.'
S&P will meet with the management of Barclays in the next few weeks to
discuss the issues involved. The other rating agencies appeared unperturbed
by the Barclays results. 'I would argue that they are roughly what we
expected, or even a little better. Our general view is that we are past the
worst in the UK,' said Mr Robin Monroe-Davies, a managing director of IBCA,
which specialises in bank credit analysis. 'We do not expect to downgrade
any more UK banks.'
Barclays' shares gained 9p to close at 519p.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940312

