FT942-15796

FT  13 APR 94 / International Bonds: EBRD reopens Ecu sector with benchmark
global offering


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development issued its first global
Ecu bond yesterday, taking advantage of an advantageous funding opportunity
and investor demand for Ecu.
The bank issued Ecu500m of 6 per cent five-year bonds via joint leads Banque
Paribas and Goldman Sachs International.
After a difficult period for the Ecu market, 'we tried to reopen the market
by providing paper with a current coupon and in large size with a global
format,' said Mr Louis de Montpellier, head of funding at the EBRD. He added
that the deal provided an opportunity to launch a large benchmark issue
while achieving good floating-rate costs after the swap.
Although most dealers welcomed the name, timing and maturity of the deal,
they felt its pricing was too tight. At issue, the bonds yielded 6 basis
points below the French government's Ecu BTAN. 'BTAN flat would have
generated more interest - it's been a slow seller,' said a trader.
But the lead managers, who between them took close to Ecu400m of the issue,
reported healthy demand. 'We're seeing investors cautiously returning to the
market,' said one official, adding that large Ecu bond redemptions and
interest-payments have boosted demand for fresh supply.
The Eurodollar market, which has lain dormant for weeks, came back to life
with a Dollars 400m three-year bond issue for American Telephone and
Telegraph.
Uncertainty over the direction of US interest rates has kept issuers and
investors sidelined for weeks, but those worries have calmed in recent days
and some investors are seen to be more willing to test the waters.
'Last week, we saw a fair amount of money going into the short end and we
decided to look for a good-quality name with a short maturity to reopen the
market,' said a syndicate official at lead manager CS First Boston.
According to another trader, AT&T is a popular retail name. 'Although it's
double-A rated, it trades like triple-A paper,' he said. The 6 1/4 per cent
coupon was a further attraction for retail investors.
At their 99.79 fixed re-offer price the bonds yielded 25 basis points above
the US Treasury note. Aided by a firmer Treasuries market, they closed at
99.83 bid while the spread remained steady.
Bayerische Vereinsbank Overseas Finance was the first non-supranational to
tap the Greek drachma market, issuing Dr10bn of 15 1/2 per cent three-year
Eurobonds. Lead manager Bayerische Vereinsbank reported good demand from
institutional and retail investors attracted by the high coupon.
Landesbank Rheinland-Pfalz made its first foray into the Eurolira market,
issuing L200bn of 8 1/4 per cent four-year bonds. Although the sector has
seen steady issuance recently, lead manager IMI Bank reported demand from
investors betting on falling Italian interest rates and currency
appreciation. The bonds ended at 99.85 bid, just inside fees.
Depfa, the German mortgage bank, issued DM1bn of five-year floating-rate
notes paying three-month Libor flat. Others poised to tap the D-Mark market,
including L-Bank, the World Bank and Belgium, remained in the wings,
presumably awaiting tomorrow's Bundesbank meeting.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940413

