FT942-15324

FT  15 APR 94 / International Company News: Rising costs put Boise Cascade
deeper in red


   By LAURIE MORSE


   CHICAGO


Boise Cascade, the Idaho-based paper manufacturer and forest products
processor, blamed severe winter weather and higher costs incurred through
operating difficulties at some plants for deeper losses in the first
quarter. An expected rise in paper prices failed to materialise.
The net loss for the quarter of Dollars 37.6m, or Dollars 1.35 a share,
compared with a deficit of Dollars 12.1m, or 56 cents, a year earlier. The
first-quarter loss was also larger than the Dollars 23.7m, or 98 cents,
deficit Boise reported in the fourth quarter of last year.
First-quarter sales rose to Dollars 1bn from Dollars 984m a year ago.
Losses in the company's largest business segment, paper and paper products,
were Dollars 69.7m in the quarter, up from Dollars 43.5m in the first
quarter of 1993, due to higher operating costs and declining prices for
Boise's most important paper grades.
About 54 per cent of the company's paper sales last year comprised coated
and uncoated white papers. In the first quarter, the average price for these
grades fell more than 5 per cent from the fourth quarter of 1993, the
company said.
Average prices for newsprint and uncoated groundwood papers also declined,
while containerboard and market pulp prices rose in the quarter.
Mr Vincent Hannity, Boise Cascade spokesman, said the company's paper
segment results would not recover significantly until worldwide paper
consumption grew.
'With overseas economies weak, their paper consumption is less. This has
caused a sharp increase in white paper exports to the US at reduced prices,'
he said.
Income from the company's office products segment improved slightly in the
quarter, but income from its building products division declined sharply to
Dollars 35.0m, from Dollars 62.4m a year ago.
Constricted logging in the US north-west raised materials costs, while
winter storms muted construction across much of the US.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940415

