FT944-14469

FT  22 OCT 94 / Howe - and why Europe ravaged the Tories: The ultimately
explosive nature of the Thatcher-Howe relationship is explained by
ex-chancellor Lord Lawson in a review of Howe's book


   By Lord LAWSON


Conflict of Loyalty, by Geoffrey Howe. (Macmillan, Pounds 25, 736 pages).
Geoffrey Howe has completed the last major ministerial memoir of the
Thatcher era, a substantial book by a substantial political figure. After
Margaret Thatcher it was Geoffrey Howe, her first chancellor and
longest-serving Foreign secretary, who played the most pivotal role in that
remarkable decade. Always readable, warmly human, and characteristically
fair-minded, it is an essential document for future historians.
A fine mind, intellectual conviction, courage, integrity, tenacity,
resilience, great courtesy allied to driving ambition, and a voracious
appetite for work - he tells us that he needed, like his prime minister,
only four hours' sleep a night - combined to make Geoffrey Howe a formidable
minister.
It was his courage and resilience in the face of the most appalling
pressures that most contributed to his success as chancellor. In that
period, he is perhaps best remembered for his brave 1981 Budget, which
increased taxation by Pounds 4bn, in terms of 1981 money, at the very pit of
a recession considerably deeper than the one through which we have recently
passed.
The 1981 Budget came to be seen, along with the Falklands conflict in the
following year, as the watershed in the political fortunes of the Thatcher
government. Not only did it coincide with the end of the economic downturn,
and the start of what was to prove an unusually prolonged upswing, but its
success confounded the government's critics and threw them into disarray.
In his book, Howe is able to debunk the subsequent myth that the Budget was
not really his (and his Treasury colleagues') at all, but one imposed on him
by Number 10.
No similar climacteric punctuated his time as Foreign secretary, where his
patient diplomatic skills were often employed to great effect. Geoffrey came
to love the Foreign Office and his work abroad as Foreign secretary. The
problem lay at home, in the tension between himself and Margaret Thatcher,
which became evident quite early on but which steadily grew in intensity.
That increasing tension, which ultimately led to his explosive resignation
from her government, is the sub-theme of this book.
According to Geoffrey, the deterioration in equality of the Thatcher-Howe
partnership occurred 'not, I think - at least initially - for personal
reasons but largely because of Margaret's profound antipathy for the
(Foreign) Office'.
There is, of course, much truth in this; but it is not, I think, the whole
truth. Margaret Thatcher certainly regarded the Foreign Office as
irredeemably wet, if not actually on the side of the foreigners. But there
was a personality problem, too - and one which went beyond, although it was
compounded by, their unfortunate personal chemistry.
Geoffrey Howe is no wimp. He was, for example, and rightly, an early and
persistent hawk on the trade union issue, which loomed so large during the
1970s and early 1980s. But it remains the case that his political
philosophy, as his own account repeatedly shows, is one based on the values
of consensus, compromise and 'balance'; on a pronounced distaste for what he
describes as theological absolutes; and in which the ultimate accolade for
any particular stance is that it is 'non-doctrinaire'.
The difference between this and Margaret Thatcher's approach to government
needs no underlining. Moreover, Geoffrey's commitment to compromise,
consensus, and 'balance' is held with a passionate intensity. He refers at
one point, for example, to 'the heady, irresponsible, rhetoric of free
collective bargaining' and has an instinctive revulsion against immoderate
rhetoric of any kind.
He was to find what he saw as the crudeness of much of Margaret Thatcher's
rhetoric increasingly distasteful.
This is linked with his fondness for Balfour's dictum that 'democracy is
government by explanation'. Certainly, an important part of the art of
government in a democracy is for the government to explain to the people
precisely what it is doing and why. At the end of the day, it knows that it
will be judged not primarily by s intentions but by the results. Geoffrey's
interpretation of the Balfour dictum, however, goes further than this,
embracing extensive consultation and discussion of every kind, both before
and after decisions are taken. Hence, for example, his devotion, more than
once declared in this book, to the late (and to my mind, unlamented)
National Economic Development Council. He goes so far as to refer to 'the
value of NEDC as a generator of economic innovation and understanding' - a
description which, as a chairman of the NEDC for more than six years, and
with the best will in the world, I find difficult to recognise.
More generally, in the real world, the search for assent before a policy is
put in place can often become a recipe for inaction - indeed, in the modern
world of compulsive leaks, even 'confidential' discussion among colleagues
has to be handled with considerable care if it is not to constitute an
impediment to action.
Thatcher was right to recognise that the art of governing successfully in a
democracy requires strong leadership; and strong leadership cannot allow
quite as high a value to the search for consensus, compromise and 'balance'
as Geoffrey does, any more than it can afford his expansive interpretation
of the need to explain. Sadly, she came to take this recognition too far,
and, as Howe accurately chronicles, towards the end, her style of government
became increasingly, and damagingly, uncollegiate, secretive, authoritarian
and strident. But I have to say that my own practical preference is for the
style of the early Thatcher years, rather than that of the more civilised
Geoffrey Howe - which is perhaps why he accurately describes our close
relationship as that of 'firm friends, if never soulmates'.
Nevertheless, there was enough common ground between Thatcher and Howe, in
terms both of shared beliefs (at one point he describes himself as a
'proto-Thatcherite', which in one sense he was) and shared experiences, to
have made their differences of philosophy and character a strength rather
than a problem, just as the rather greater differences between the
personalities and outlooks of Thatcher and Willie Whitelaw, former
Conservative party chairman, made his counsel all the more valuable to her
and to the government.
That this was not so can be attributed to a number of factors. There was the
bad chemistry, as incontrovertible as it was inexplicable, which led
Thatcher to treat Howe, in personal terms, in a way that became increasingly
intolerable. There was also the fact that, while he kept his very different
instinctive approach to issues fairly well disguised when under siege by
common enemies at the exchequer, once translated to the Foreign Office his
profound commitment to compromise, consensus, and 'balance', chiming as it
did so well with the departmental ethos, became increasingly apparent.
It may be, too, that she believed that he was scheming to supplant her - as
she knew Willie would not and could not do. Most prime ministers, if they
are long enough in office, eventually come to believe they are being
conspired against. As is clear from this book, if Margaret Thatcher did
believe this she was mistaken. Certainly, as Geoffrey Howe makes clear, he
wanted to succeed her as prime minister, but he never plotted to supplant
her.
But the most important contributory factor to the increasingly sour and
ultimately explosive nature of the Thatcher/Howe relationship was almost
certainly their differing views on Europe - the issue over which Geoffrey
was to resign, and the issue which continues to ravage the Conservative
Party in government today.
It is true that he had very nearly resigned more than a year earlier, when
he was dismissed as Foreign secretary in July 1989, in the reshuffle that
followed Geoffrey's and my joint demarche on the eve of the Madrid EC
summit. The draft resignation letter he then wrote, published in this book,
gave as his reason for resigning partly the prime minister's 'lack of
confidence in our continuing partnership' (particularly over Europe) and
partly (shades of the earlier Heseltine resignation) 'my own developing
anxiety at the way in which decisions are taken in the government.'
Thereafter, he continued to brood about resignation, particularly after my
resignation in October that year. But still, he would stillnot, I believe,
have taken that fateful step, which was to prove the final nail in
Thatcher's political coffin, had she not persisted in behaving with reckless
disregard for his position and opinions.
When Howe did eventually resign, there was initially some dispute as to what
the issue between him and Thatcher really was. This uncertainty can be
attributed largely to the lack of frankness in the treatment of the European
issue in their exchange of letters.
When Geoffrey wrote in his formal letter of resignation that 'I am not a
Euro-idealist or federalist', he may or may not have portrayed his true
position. When she replied that: 'We want to play a leading part in Europe
and to be part of the further political, economic and monetary development
of the European Community. We have always been the party of Europe, and will
continue to be so,' she was certainly not portraying hers. In retrospect, it
might have been better if their differences on the issue of Europe had been
properly thrashed out within the government.
The question, essentially, is whether, as the great bulk of the Conservative
Party and indeed the people of this country would hope, there is a viable
and attainable constitution of Europe that falls short of full federal union
 -and, if so, how best to achieve it. That has always been the question. I
remember having a heated argument with Hugh Gaitskell, not long before his
death in 1963, in which he defended his vehement opposition, as leader of
the Labour Party, to Britain's membership of what was then known as the
Common Market, on the grounds that there was no conceivable half-way house.
There is no doubt that any British government has an excruciatingly
difficult hand to play. But the present prime minister could have made his
task significantly less difficult if he had taken two complementary
initiatives.
The first is to undertake that, if in the future (and it clearly could not
in practice come during the lifetime of the present Parliament), the
government were to conclude that the pound sterling should be abandoned in
favour of a single European currency, the question would be so momentous
that it would first be put to the nation in a referendum.
The second initiative would be to support the growing interest, especially
in Germany, for the adoption of a formal written constitution for what is
now the European Union. This should state clearly which powers are reserved
for the union, with everything else remaining with the still sovereign
member states. Since part of the essence of a constitution is that it must
be very difficult indeed to change, this should help end the fear that we
are on an unstoppable federal centralising) express.
Perhaps it is still just not too late for those two commonsense moves to be
taken.
If I have one regret about this important book, it applies equally to
Thatcher's own memoirs. It is sad that most political careers end in
disappointment, or worse, however great the preceding achievement may have
been; and memoirs written (as they must be) at the end tend to be
excessively coloured by that disappointment - as indeed the very title of
this book bears witness.
Yet the truth is that the Thatcher era, in which Howe played a crucial role,
was a remarkable decade: an age of reform, an age of optimism, and an age of
achievement. If there has been a fundamental change for the better in the
centre of gravity of politics in Britain, and the election of Tony Blair as
Leader of the Labour party suggests that there may have been, it is the
decisive break that was made in 1979, and pursued with unflagging resolution
and remarkable success throughout the 1980s, that has brought it about.
Nigel Lawson's own memoirs, The View from No 11 - Memoirs of a Tory Radical,
are published by Corgi Books at Pounds 9.99.

The Financial Times


London Page I

941022

