FT941-3536

FT  16 MAR 94 / Flexible harmony marks G7 jobs talks


   By GEORGE GRAHAM, DAVID GOODHART and STEPHANIE FLANDERS


   DETROIT


Labour and finance ministers from the Group of Seven leading industrial
nations yesterday wound up two days of discussions in Detroit about
unemployment and job creation in a warm glow of apparent harmony.
'It seemed to me that there was a new conventional wisdom emerging about the
whole question of unemployment,' said Mr Padraig Flynn, the European
commissioner for social affairs.
Ministers emerged from their meetings to say they were in broad agreement on
the need for macroeconomic policies that promote sustainable growth with low
inflation, but also that they shared a problem of structural unemployment
that would not be solved by growth alone.
'Everyone agrees it's both structural and cyclical,' said Mr Paul Martin,
Canada's finance minister.
At the same time, everyone agreed on the role of small business as an engine
of job creation, the need to improve education and vocational training and
the importance of offering the long-term unemployed a way to re-enter the
workforce.
With considerably less unanimity, the participants also spoke approvingly of
labour market flexibility.
Even when they used the same words, however, different ministers brought
different underlying meanings to them, reflecting both national and
functional divergences.
Besides occasional national splits - 'the Anglos against the rest', as one
Italian official put it - some delegations showed internal differences both
between the different political parties in their coalition governments and
between the different outlooks of labour and finance ministers.
'I've got a sense of cultural gulfs in other delegations,' said Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the UK chancellor of the exchequer.
On macroeconomic policy, the usual topic of G7 meetings, the Detroit
conference showed some of the customary disagreements.
The US argues that a considerable portion of the G7's current high
unemployment rates, particularly in Europe, must be attributed to the
recession, and therefore requires efforts to boost demand-led growth - by
interest rate cuts in Europe and by fiscal stimulus in Japan.
Japanese and European officials coolly noted the US argument, which Mr
Edmond Alphandery, France's economy minister, said had become 'quite
standard'. He noted that although continental Europe had higher unemployment
because it was at an earlier point in the recovery cycle, it was emerging
faster and with less pain than the UK and US had done.
Ms Laura Tyson, the chief White House economic adviser, insisted at the
opening that she would not accept the argument that structural policies
could replace cyclical policies as a recipe for dealing with unemployment.
US officials had expected some-thing of a row with the UK on this issue, but
other participants said that the argument quickly fizzled out when no-one
disagreed.
'We have never said that structural adjustments could replace a good
macroeconomic framework,' said Mr Henning Christophersen, vice president of
the European Commission.
On the issue of labour market flexibility, the division became clearer.
'Some seem to define flexibility as the freedom to fire workers and lower
wages,' complained Mr Robert Reich, the US labour secretary, calling for
more worker empowerment and training to help mobility.
Mr Clarke, the implicit target of Mr Reich's jibe, denied any substantial
rift between the UK and the US.
'The Americans in their presentations put less emphasis on labour market
flexibility than we do but the reason is that they already have a
deregulated labour market,' Mr Clarke said.
While ministers agreed on the need to reduce the cost of labour to
employers, they differed on the extent to which this reduction should come
from the wage packets of their workers.
Canada and France urged an attack on payroll taxes, which Mr Martin
described as 'a cancer on job creation', as well as a weeding out of social
security programmes that can harm job creation.
'We feel we can eliminate part of the social support system which is a
disincentive to work and keep the basics,' Mr Martin said.
All sides drew a sigh of relief, however, at the complete absence of support
for ideas such as protectionism or a shorter working week.
'The idea of a generalised reduction of the working week was raised by
no-one. No-one proposed closing their frontiers to fight unemployment.
No-one said we should tackle unemployment by slowing the rate of
technological progress. The most tangible thing to come out of it was the
refusal to simplify the problem,' said Mr Alphandery.
In their efforts to resist populist demands such as protectionism, G7
countries hope that the Detroit gathering will provide them with useful
political cover at home.
'We'll be able to say, see - the Germans and the French and the Canadians
and the Italians and the Japanese - well, we all have the same problems,'
concluded President Bill Clinton.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940316

