FT942-16257

FT  12 APR 94 / Oil groups to develop big fields in Russian Arctic


   By ROBERT CORZINE and KAREN FOSSLI


   LONDON, OSLO


Four western companies yes-terday announced an ambitious plan to develop oil
reserves in the Russian Arctic which they 'conservatively' estimate at 2bn
barrels. They said the project, one of the largest in Russia, might last for
50 years and cost tens of billions of dollars.
Texaco, Exxon and Amoco of the US and Norway's Norsk Hydro said they planned
to assess and possibly develop as many as 11 proven oilfields in 2,847 sq
miles of the remote Timan Pechora basin, which lies within the Arctic
Circle, 1,100 miles north-east of Moscow.
Unlike many western projects in Russia and other oil regions of the former
Soviet Union, the Timan Pechora plans envisage the construction of a
dedicated export terminal. That would prevent the bottlenecks that have
beset other projects.
Texaco, which has been studying the area since 1990, said its 'conservative'
estimates put recoverable reserves in the area covered by the consortium's
contract at 2bn barrels. Russian estimates place reserves at 5bn barrels,
but much of the area remains unexplored. The top end of the range would mean
that Timan Pechara's reserves exceed the UK's proven oil reserves of 4.1bn
barrels at the end of 1992.
Mr Peter Bijur, Texaco's senior vice-president, said the project was 'one of
the most challenging and attractive hydrocarbon development prospects in the
world today.'
He would not be drawn on the eventual output of the area, but predicted that
initial output of 120,000 barrels a day could be achieved by 2000. That is
equivalent to production of the larger North Sea fields.
Some consultants believe exports from that and a Conoco project being
considered in the Timan Pechora basin could reach 400,000-600,000 b/d in the
first decade of the next century.
The Timan Pechora company, in which Texaco and Exxon each hold 30 per cent
and Amoco and Norsk Hydro 20 per cent each, will spend Dollars 100m on a
three-year assessment phase. Mr Bijur said the consortium's partners were
chosen in part because of their Arctic experience.
The consortium hopes to gain final approval of a production-sharing
agreement from the Russian government by this autumn. Mr Bijur said the
consortium was also seeking the approval of the Russian parliament because
of the political controversy over western oil deals.
A useful buffer, Page 21
Commodities, Page 34

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940412

