FT941-3320

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (10):
Computer industry in transition - The seismic trauma that has rocked the
computer industry in the early 1990s is not just the result of a recession -
it is the result of a fundamental shift in technology / Philip Manchester
looks at network developments and the business benefits of client-server
systems


   By PHILIP MANCHESTER


The computer industry fared well in previous recessions because companies
turned to automation to save costs and cut staff. But in the early 1990s it
was different. Former giants of the industry - such as IBM and DEC -
tottered alarmingly and have yet to prove they will survive the upheaval.
The main cause is the transition from centralized, mainframe-based computing
to distributed client-server-based computing.
In many ways the transition reflects a wider change which is taking place in
industry generally; local autonomy from the distribution of computer power
and management responsibility.
Technologically, this change manifests itself in client-server systems - an
approach to distributed computing which separates users (clients) and the
services they use (servers).
Client-server computing has its origins in database management systems
(DBMS) and the trend to separate the software used to access data from the
software used to manage it.
During the 1980s, developers created a new model for DBMS which allowed
these two components to be distributed across computers on a network. The
front-end tools - data query languages and local applications - became known
as 'clients' and the back-end DBMS 'engines' became known as servers.
Database vendors such as Oracle, Ingres, Sybase and Gupta use this approach
in their products with the result that they can all communicate with each
other.
A front-end tool from Gupta, for example, can use a back-end DBMS engine
from Oracle without the user ever being aware of the location of the data.
Client-server computing extends this idea across the whole system and breaks
down functions according to their role either as a client or a server.
addition to DBMS servers, a modern network will have servers to handle
printing, communications, mass storage back up and so on.
This approach can bring many benefits. It allows users greater freedom in
their choice of hardware and software - with consequent cost-savings. It
makes systems more flexible and provides for better integration of different
types of systems.
'We have to tie the benefits to the business and I think client-server does
this in four ways,' says Mr Lawrence Hunt, director of distributed
processing at the UK software company ACT.
'Firstly, client-server is much more flexible than traditional mainframe
systems. If you want to get data for management information systems, this is
difficult with closed mainframes.
'Secondly, it lets you integrate application more easily. You can integrate
a PC-based spreadsheet into a mainframe database much more easily with a
client-server approach.
'Thirdly, client-server systems give much more independence from vendors.
All business want to future-proof their investment in applications software,
which probably represents 80 per cent of the cost of a system. Client-server
enables you to do this effectively.
'Finally, client-server systems can cut costs. We were recently installed a
client-server system at a large investment bank. The costs came to about
Pounds 1.5m. It would have cost Pounds 3m if we'd had to use a traditional
approach with mainframes,' says Mr Hunt.
Other financial institutions have also opted for the client-server approach
in a big way. The Nationwide Building Society, for example, has standardised
on Microsoft's Windows NT operating system as the lynchpin for a
client-server system which will support 10,000 personal computer users over
the next three years. It is also looking into the possibility of plugging
its Automatic Teller Machine network into the new system with Windows NT as
the controlling software.
National Westminster Bank has also adopted Windows NT as the basis for its
client-server developments.
Most organisations are adopting a cautious approach to the transition from
traditional centralized computer to client-server systems, however.
Paymaster, formerly the Paymaster General's Office, is typical - 'we are
introducing client-server slowly - function by function. We have started
with electronic mail and access to shared spreadsheet and are moving on to
introducing more function on desktop PCS,' says Mr Derick Harbottle,
director of information technology at Paymaster.
After many years of relying on an ICL mainframe computer to do everything,
Paymaster has embarked on an ambitious plan to integrate up to 800 users
into a three-layer client-server system using hardware from Olivetti and
software from Novell and Oracle.
The ICL mainframe will eventually become no more than a database server.
'We have a heritage of 'legacy' systems on mainframes and we had to see if
it was practical to move away from the mainframe. After a rigorous
right-sizing study to see if it was feasible, we opted for a staged approach
with a pilot project to start,' says Mr Harbottle. Paymaster's move to
client-server is the result of the same commercial pressure faced by
business. Following changes in the UK government's approach to public
services and the introduction of market testing, Paymaster has had to become
aware of the service it offers it customers.
'We have made the change for sound business reasons. We are forward-looking
company and need do more than sit back and let things just happen,' says Mr
Harbottle.
He goes on to emphasise that client-server should not be seen as a
technology solution - but a business solution which brings greater
flexibility to building information systems. He is also wary of expecting
too much in the way of cost savings - 'some people are talking about the
technical issues or the cost-saving issues. We prefer to concentrate on the
business benefits which will come from client-server,' he explains.
Any move to a new technology is bound to cause new problems and the
transition to client-server systems is no exception. Paymaster's cautious
approach - with carefully phased introduction of the new system alongside
the old, is an object lesson in how to move to client-server with the
minimum amount of pain.
'We try to avoid being at the bleeding edge of technology. Rather than
inventing our own, we would rather steel other people's wheels,' observes Mr
Harbottle.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940316

