FT941-4056

FT  12 MAR 94 / Arts: Hated Nightfall - Paul Driver enjoys Howard Barker's
'theatre of catastrophe' / Manchester, City of Drama


   By PAUL DRIVER


The Dancehouse Theatre is Manchester's latest performance space, providing
this City of Drama with a much-needed middle-sized theatre.
To launch the Oxford Road venue, the Wrestling School company is giving the
premiere of Howard Barker's tough two-acter Hated Nightfall, under his own
direction. All Barker's plays are tough. His is a self-styled 'theatre of
catastrophe', in which the worst conceivable things tend to happen just
because they are conceivable; and blindings on stage in the King Lear manner
are routine.
Hated Nightfall has one - it comes nicely at the end to cap the four fatal
knifings we have witnessed, had our stomachs turned by, and also laughed at;
for though what we see is tragic it is also farce. The play's climate is the
permanent imminence of murder. If a character is not being butchered, he or
she is certainly being lethally threatened; but Barker has found the perfect
donnee for this kind of drama in the mysterious assassination of the
Romanoffs.
When the remains of the Tsar's family were exhumed, two unidentified bodies
were also found, and while Barker soberly conjectures that they were tutor
and maidservant to the Imperial household, his further conjectures about the
mind-set of the former are excitingly wild. Dancer is an all too willing
henchman of the Revolution charged with despatching his former employers and
charges, but possessed by a terrible spirit of historical irony. He does not
need the quasi-Greek conscience-chorus to remind him that he is only a
'transient phenomenon'. As brilliantly played by Ian McDiarmid, this
'Doorman of the Century' is leering, smug, vicious, unstaunchably
loquacious, and tormentedly looking for love.
Stepping ably with him in the dance of death are Nicholas Jones, a desperate
Emperor given to an impotent feyness of gesture; Anna Patrick, a superbly
haughty Empress; Jane Wood as a servant who cannot innocently bustle as she
would like to, since dead bodies strew her path; and Rebecca Charles, Nicola
Walker and sailor-suited Paul Gonshaw as the royal children. The last is a
silent role, but his ritual pouring of black fluid from a watering-can on
the occasion of each murder is peculiarly eloquent. It is a piece of
business worked up from a photograph of the young heir to the throne
wielding such a can.
Five great-coated Bolshevik ruffians including a lady, Claire Rushbrook's
Albeit, who delivers the coup de grace, complete the cast. Johan Engels's
set affords a pertinent contrast of traditional Russian birches and the
stark red telephone pole of the Future. Barker's direction is elegant and
sensible, unlikely though those terms might seem. It is surprising how much
of the complex nuance and poetic force of his text comes across. Yet there
is a sententiousness to his writing that irritates and a lack of resonance -
even at the big moments - reminding one that Barker is not a Bond or a
Beckett. Barker's reliance on the theme of open-eyed savagery can seem as
much an artificial convention as Jane Austen's 'two inches wide of ivory',
and a good deal more limiting.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

940312

