FT941-17145

FT  06 JAN 94 / Employers welcome vocational proposals: CBI pinpoints
weaknesses


   By LISA WOOD


Sir Ron Dearing's vision of schoolchildren being able to embark on
vocational studies at the age of 14, with paths to a number of post-16
options including the government's proposed 'modern apprenticeship',
received a warm welcome in principle from employers yesterday.
The proposal could bring the UK more in line with many Continental schools
where the opportunity to study vocational subjects, within a broad
education, is widely available for pupils younger than 16.
Sir Ron said yesterday: 'It will be a particular challenge to establish how
a vocational pathway which maintains a broad educational component might be
established . . . over the next few years as part of a 14-to-19 continuum.'
At present there are no vocational courses specifically catering for
14-year-olds. Sir Ron is asking the School Curriculum and Assessment
Authority to work alongside the National Council for Vocational
Qualifications in developing vocational options.
The working of the two bodies together may meet some of the recent criticism
of the council's National Vocational Qualifications, which are generally
acquired in the workplace, and its General National Vocational
Qualifications, which are mainly an alternative to A-levels for students in
full-time education.
Professor Alan Smithers and his team from Manchester University's Centre for
Education and Employment criticised such qualifications in a recent report.
Yesterday Prof Smithers welcomed the Dearing report in principle, saying it
made raising the skill levels of vocational qualifications more urgent.
The Confederation of British Industry also welcomed the proposals and said:
'Vocational courses have the potential to raise standards, but they are not
an easy option.'
The CBI identified two weaknesses that had to be addressed if vocational
options were to succeed: teachers would have to be trained to deliver them
and students would have to be given access to top quality careers guidance
to enable them to make informed choices.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940106

