FT942-15791

FT  13 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Great potential seen for plant
power in power plants


   By ALISON MAITLAND


Governments and international agencies are urged to give more vigorous
financial support to production of electricity from plants in a report
published last night by the UK's Royal Institute of International Affairs.
The study says that plant material, or biomass, 'may be on the threshold of
a new breakthrough, as a fuel for advanced forms of electricity generation'.
According to the US Department of Energy, biomass power will be the most
important renewable energy option for the next 25 years. Projects
cultivating crops for electricity and developing power plants are under way
in Brazil, Scandinavia and parts of the European Union, as well as the US.
The greatest potential will come from 'integrated' development of the fuel,
using dedicated energy crops serving advanced-technology power stations,
says the study.
Financial and organisational support is emerging, 'but the potential of
integrated advanced biomass power appears to warrant much more substantial
promotional effort at the governmental and international level in the near
future in both industrial and developing countries'.
Fast-growing poplar, willow and conifer trees and miscanthus, or elephant
grass, are considered promising for electricity production in northern
Europe, while robinia, cynara and eucalyptus trees and sweet sorghum appear
to have more potential in warmer southern Europe. Sugar cane, along with
pine and eucalyptus, is suitable in the tropics and sub-tropics, although it
needs heavy irrigation which sweet sorghum does not.
Unlike coal, the energy from biomass makes no net contribution to the
greenhouse effect and as such offers an attractive alternative, says the
report, written by Mr Walt Patterson, a senior research fellow at the
Chatham House institute.
In the long run, biomass power will have the greatest impact in tropical and
sub-tropical countries where it grows fastest and where electricity demand
is increasing most rapidly. The World Energy Council has projected a
doubling in world electricity use to 23,000 terawatt-hours in 2020 from
11,600TWh in 1990.
But the study suggests that a more immediate boost to biomass power could
come from growing crops for electricity in industrial countries on land set
aside to cut overproduction.
'This use of cultivated land no longer required for food production would
ease the pressure on the agricultural sectors of major producer countries,
and make international agreement on food trade more readily achievable,' it
argues.
Estimates on the costs of biomass electricity compared with
conventionally-produced power are encouraging, the report says.
Demonstrating that it can be economically and environmentally sustainable in
the industrial world will foster its acceptance worldwide.
Power from Plants, available from Energy and Environmental Programme, Royal
Institute of International Affairs, 10 St James's Square, London SW1Y 4LE.
Tel: 071 957 5711. Pounds 9.95

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940413

