FT944-2875

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (1): Regional unity remains elusive -
Political suspicions have often been the chief impediment to economic and
financial integration in the Arab world


   By MARK NICHOLSON


Arab banking is not what it was five years ago. By and large, the region's
banks - and notably those in the Gulf - are more efficiently managed, more
soundly capitalised, better regulated, and generally more profitable. They
offer a wider range of services to increasingly sophisticated clients and
can draw on a fuller quiver of varied financial instruments, many of them
new to the Middle East. Capital markets in the region are starting to emerge
and showing tentative signs of coalescing.
Equally, however, Arab banking has not become the distinctive international
force many of the region's bankers believed it might - even as little as
five years ago. Regional integration of the industry, for instance, has
failed to live up to some of the more visionary dreams of the late 1980s,
particularly in the Gulf states - 'nothing materialised,' says a Riyadh
banker. 'There's no regional solidarity among the banks, there are no
institutions.'
More than a decade of discussion of cross-border co-operation among the six
Gulf Co-operation Council states (Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman, Bahrain, the
United Arab Emirates and Qatar) remains mostly talk - 'nobody's taking a
pan-Arab view,' says one Gulf banker. 'Saudi banks have plenty to do in
Saudi, for instance: they're not in the least interested in the outside
world. They're not even interested in Qatar next door.'
Internal rationalisation of the individual and intensively banked Gulf
markets, notably in Kuwait and the UAE, has also been slow to materialise,
with family-owned institutions stubbornly reluctant to heed central bank
urgings to merge.
Internationally-aspiring Arab banks, moreover, which once viewed themselves
as the prospective pillars of a new Arab banking order, have largely failed
to fulfil such ambitions. Banks such as Arab Banking Corporation, Gulf
International Bank and National Bank of Kuwait have survived the rigours of
the Gulf war and retained significant cross-border operations. But none of
the banks born during the petrodollar recycling boom of the early 1980s has
fully achieved its international ambitions. Most have retreated from
optimistic ventures in North America, Europe and the Far East for want of
profitable business.
'All the Gulf banks had problems,' comments Mr John Cunliffe, chief analyst
with Capital Intelligence, the Cyprus-based bank analysis and rating agency.
'They all had large deposit bases but, until recently, had no great
opportunities in their local markets, so they had to go overseas. But by and
large they were too small to get the best business.'
One result, concluded one senior banker at the recent North African and
Middle Eastern economic summit in Casablanca is that 'it's no longer
appropriate to speak of 'Arab banking' as such - what we have is banking,
done in Arab countries.'
Looked at market-by-market, it is perhaps most fruitful to divide Arab
banking into three centres of gravity; the Gulf, North Africa - specifically
Tunisia and Morocco - and those countries like Jordan, Egypt, Lebanon and
Syria whose chief economic determinant in the near term will be the
prospective fruits of peace with Israel.
The Gulf remains the Arab world's banking powerhouse, led by Saudi Arabia.
The 12 Saudi commercial banks account for 30 per cent of the gross tier one
capital of the Arab top 100, according to recent figures in The Banker
magazine, and the other five GCC states 40 per cent. But to give some idea
of the scale of Arab banking, a participant at a recent GCC banking
conference pointed out that there are 12 Japanese banks with greater assets
than all 160 Gulf banks combined.
Despite the overcrowding in some Gulf markets, most banks have begun to
offer an increasing range of retail services in countries where such things
as bank cards, telephone banking and consumer loans are relatively recent
developments. Given the large wealth and youth of most Gulf states'
populations, such services are offering banks some room for growth.
Corporate banking is also benefitting from the relative success in countries
such as Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Bahrain of long-standing government
support for non-oil based light industrial development.
Capital markets in Saudi, Bahrain and Oman are growing. And the persistent
needs of Gulf governments are adding to the still embryonic financial
markets. The recent Saudi offering of Dollars 280m of floating rate notes,
with a second offering expected soon, is one recent example.
In Morocco and Tunisia, meanwhile, the success of International Monetary
Fund-guided structural adjustments is leading to the steady modernisation
and internationalisation of the banking system. A number of western banks
has stakes in their Moroccan counterparts while two of the kingdom's largest
banks, Banque Populaire and Banque Marocaine du Commerce Exterieur have
subsidiaries in Paris, Madrid and Belgium.
Investment funds jointly owned by Moroccan banks and companies such as ONA,
the kingdon's largest priovate company, and foreign interests are
increasingly active in purchasing shares in newly privatised companies.
Foreign investment in Morocco this year will be close to Dollars 1bn, nearly
twice last year's figure.
Thoughts of pan-Arabism have largely died for bankers in both countries.
Tunisia's experiment with a number of largely Gulf and Saudi government
backed banks proved a failure. These left a trail of poor investments and
bad debts which will take years to write off. They did nothing to generate a
competitive national banking industry.
Instead, the minds of private investors in Algiers, Tunis and Casablanca are
turned increasingly towards Europe, with a number of North African-European
banking alliances being formed. GP Bank, which is the merchant banking
subsidiary of Societe Marseillaise de Credit and a group of north African
investors who this autumn acquired 40 per cent of the capital, has spawned
two banks and one brokerage house in north africa.
Union Bank was recently set up in Algiers - the first of its kind in
Algieria. International Merchant Bank is the first north African merchant
bank and was set up in Tunis last October, with a capital of Dollars
3m-Dollars 5m. Its shareholders include north African individuals,
Creditanstalt Finanziera and the IFC. In Casablanca, Maroc Service
Intermediation (MSI) in which GP Bank and nine other Moroccan investors each
have a 10 per cent stake is one of the newest brokerage houses.
Similar trends are true of Egypt and Jordan, where economic reforms have in
the past few years led to reviews of banking regulations and practices. In
both countries, cautious privatisation and liberalisation policies are
stimulating fast capital market growth and rising foreign interest. And
though banks in Egypt, in particular, lag their Gulf counterparts in range,
efficiency and sophistication - only one Egyptian bank offers an automatic
telling (ATMs) - they are fast learning the virtues of capital market
services. Local banks have launched five new investment funds, the country's
first, this year alone.
But perhaps the most significant development in this part of the Arab world
will be the outcome of the peace process between Israel and its neighbours.
As the recent Casablanca economic summit signalled, there is a clear
determination among some regional states, most energetically pursued by
Israel, Jordan and Morocco, to create from peace the kind of economic
integration the region has so manifestly lacked. They will be building from
a low base. Recent studies suggest that intra-Arab trade, to give an
illustration, has actually declined over the past five years to around 7 per
cent of total trade flows from 10 per cent - one compelling reason why the
region's banking system has remained 'fractured and localised,' as one
Riyadh banker puts it.
For many at Casablanca, a first step was seen as the creation of a new
regional development bank. Its rationale was put by Mr Basel Jardaneh,
managing director of the Jordan Investment and Finance Bank: 'Since the
institutions of the region are not fulfilling their intermediation role to
attract international capital, and the fact that the banking system is
divided into small markets which has created rigidities and inhibited their
ability to intermediate effectively and at reasonable cost, the
establishment of a new regional bank should stimulate the integration of the
regional financial market,' he told one Casablanca seminar.
There were, however, as many doubters as advocates in Casablanca. Many
bankers wondered if the region needed a new institution, where there already
exist several Arab development banks. There was also as little agreement as
to exactly what the bank's precise role should be as there was a lack of
zeal among some western and Arab countries - notably Saudi Arabia - to fund
the institution.
The prospect of a peace-led economic integration has also raised the
question of where, and indeed whether, there might emerge a new banking and
financial hub for the region.
This question is central to the ambitions, specifically, of Lebanon. Mr
Rafik Hariri, Lebanon's prime minister, has put at the core of his
multi-billion-dollar plans to rebuild the country after its 17-year civil
war, the notion that Beirut will recover its lost 1970s role as the region's
chief financial intermediary.
There is little doubt that Mr Hariri has made significant strides in
recapturing regional and international financial confidence in Lebanon.
The recently heavily subscribed dollar bond issue and successful flotation
of Solidere, the company formed to rebuild battered Beirut, are two clear
examples. Hundreds of millions of dollars of private Gulf funds have flowed
back into the country. Institutions such as ING Bank, Robert Fleming and
Paribas have all established or expanded their presence in Beirut.
But there are as many bankers and businessmen who wonder whether the concept
of a banking centre makes any sense in these days of 24-hour global banking.
The waning importance of Bahrain, which during the mid-1980s turned itself
into the capital of the petrodollar recycling boom and replaced Beirut as
the Arab banking hub with the world, is often cited as a counter-example to
those who believe regional banking needs centres at all.
'Bahrain has become much, much more regional than it was a few years ago,'
says Mr Cunliffe.
'Things have changed considerably since Beirut's heydays,' says another
banking analyst. 'Nowadays, Saudis and other Arabs have discovered they can
do all the banking they want in Paris, New York, London. These places offer
more than Beirut did or Bahrain does.'
If any centre is to emerge, it may prove to be Israel, which in its drive to
integrate itself into the region politically, is carrying with it presently
the strongest force for regional economic integration. But, in a region
where political suspicion has often been a chief impediment to economic and
financial integration, Israel's energy may create as much competitive
jealousy as unity.
Mr Hariri, for example, believes strongly that Lebanon's ambitions pit the
country directly in competition with the Jewish state.
For the time being, however, there is no other centripetal force acting on
the Arab financial world. The Gulf states may make greater headway in
creating a cross-border banking and capital market. Oman and Bahrain, for
instance, are exploring cross-border share listings.
But the greater trend is likely to be increasing openess to the
international financial currents flowing into liberalising economies such as
Jordan, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia and Lebanon.
Whether such currents will leave remaining anything indissolubly 'Arab'
about the region's banking system, looks at this point unlikely.
Trends in Islamic banking: Page II
Kuwait and Bahrain: Page III
UAE, Jordan, Palestine: Page IV
Arab-Israeli issues: Page IV
Quiet revolution in Morocco: Page IV

The Financial Times


London Page 41

941215

