FT942-15753

FT  14 APR 94 / Serbs promise end to Gorazde onslaught


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


   SARAJEVO


The first glimmer of a breakthrough between the United Nations and the
Bosnian Serbs appeared yesterday when Mr Vitaly Churkin, Russia's special
envoy, claimed to have won a commitment from the Serbs to halt their
offensive in the Moslem enclave of Gorazde.
But in Sarajevo, there was more intense sniper fire than has been heard for
several weeks, and at least two rockets were fired, one landing not far from
the headquarters of the UN commander in Bosnia, General Sir Michael Rose.
This was described by a UN officer as 'a clear violation' of the 20km
exclusion zone for heavy weapons imposed by Nato in February.
Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian President, said in Belgrade that
negotiations in Bosnia could only resume if sanctions against his country
were lifted.
The Serbian media meanwhile intensified its propaganda war against the UN
and humanitarian organisations, creating a tense climate for western
residents.
Despite his tough public stance, Mr Milosevic met Mr Yasushi Akashi, special
representative of the UN secretary-general, and General Bertrand de
Lapresle, head of UN forces in former Yugoslavia.
Fighting between Bosnian government and Bosnian Serb forces yesterday abated
in Gorazde following two Nato air strikes on Serb targets in the enclave.
Bosnian Serb forces stopped shelling the town - only firing sporadic bursts
from anti-aircraft guns on the outskirts, said Major Rob Annick, spokesman
for UN forces in Sarajevo.
Efforts to reach a ceasefire in Gorazde, restore the flow of humanitarian
aid through Serb-held territory, and get the peace process back on track,
were stepped up yesterday when Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, EU and
UN mediators, flew to the Bosnian capital.
The visit was unexpected as the Geneva conference chaired by Lord Owen and
Mr Stoltenberg has been largely sidelined in recent months by US and Russian
diplomacy.
The reason, however, is obvious enough. Since the UN requested air strikes
last Sunday and Monday against Bosnian Serb forces in Gorazde, the Serb
leaders have denounced the UN as no longer objective and cut off relations
with Unprofor (the UN protection force).
Although Mr Stoltenberg represents the UN, he is not directly connected with
Unprofor, and even before last weekend Serb leaders were urging a return to
the Geneva process, which they remember as more favourable to their war aims
than the more recent moves involving Nato and the US.
Significantly, Lord Owen and Mr Stoltenberg yesterday became the first
westerners allowed to enter Serb-held territory in Bosnia since the Nato air
strikes, when they travelled to Pale, to meet Mr Radovan Karadzic, head of
the self-proclaimed 'Serb republic'.
Previously, the Serbs had designated Mr Churkin as the only acceptable
mediator.
Lord Owen said after meeting Gen Rose, that he hoped to widen the issue from
the fate of Gorazde and get the peace process back on track.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940414

