FT944-6135

FT  30 NOV 94 / International Company News: Hungary to privatise energy
sector


   By VIRGINIA MARSH


   BUDAPEST


Hungary's new socialist-led government has announced sweeping privatisation
plans for its energy sector. They will transform the sector from full state
ownership to one of the most privately-controlled and liberalised in Europe
over the next three years.
The government is to sell off 100 per cent - minus one golden share - of its
five regional gas suppliers. It will also sell the non-nuclear electricity
generation and power supply companies held by MVM, the state electricity
monopoly.
MVM, which had a book value of Ft671.8bn (Dollars 6.67bn) at the end of
1993, will retain full control of the Paks nuclear plant and the national
grid, but will sell off 50 per cent, minus one vote, of its national
distribution centre.
In addition, it aims to sell off 30 per cent of MOL, the oil and gas
monopoly, to strategic investors and to reduce state ownership to 25 per
cent plus one vote.
The government's decision marks a significant change from the previous
conservative administration, which aimed to keep a majority stake in most
companies in the sector. The government hopes the sales will help it raise
between Dollars 1.5bn and Dollars 2bn over the next year.
The gas companies, which together have registered capital of Ft44.5bn, are
expected to come up for sale first. The government, which is being advised
on the sale by UK merchant bank NM Rothschild, aims to sell 50 per cent,
plus one vote, to strategic investors via an international tender due to be
held early next year.
The remainder would later be sold to institutional and local investors and
floated on local and international stock exchanges.
A similar strategy is expected for MVM. The first tenders for stakes in six
regional power supply companies are likely in the first half of next year,
according to Schroders, the UK merchant bank advising on the sale.
While the decision to sell off majority stakes is expected to boost the
price of companies, the government has yet to agree on politically-sensitive
price increases in the sector.
Domestic electricity and gas prices are well below world levels and would
need to rise significantly to make the companies competitive and provide
funds for modernisation.

The Financial Times


London Page 53

941130

