FT942-12852

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Hong Kong (16): The young ignore taboo - Life
assurance


   By RICHARD LAPPER


The recent growth of Hong Kong's life insurance companies has been quiet and
unobtrusive, but this year the industry has faced the glare of publicity,
after allegations of a smear campaign and conspiracy.
National Mutual Asia, the industry's second largest company, in which
Australia's National Mutual owns a majority stake, has been at the centre of
the controversy, following the defection of its chief executive, Mr Andrew
Yang, several senior managers and some 500 of its salesmen.
The company accused the executives of 'conspiracy by combining together with
others with the intention to injure National Mutual' and has issued legal
proceedings.
Substantial damages are being claimed and National Mutual accepts that its
sales efforts have been disrupted.
Mr Yang spearheaded the company's growth in the 1980s, when it built up a
business to challenge the dominance of American International Assurance.
Labour shortages in the colony could make it difficult to replace the lost
sales force, especially at a time when competition is intensifying. Both
Chinese and overseas insurance companies view Hong Kong as a springboard for
entry into the Chinese market ahead of 1997.
In particular Top Glory, a Chinese company in which China National Cereals,
Oils and Foodstuffs Import and Export, has a significant interest, took over
the business of NZI Life from the UK's General Accident in December last
year and is expected locally to build up a challenge to the existing market
leaders.
Along with AIA and National Mutual, these include ManuLife, a Canadian
company which has made expansion in south-east Asia a priority.
Each of the three dominant companies - which together control about
three-quarters of the life assurance market - have had to overcome initially
strong cultural resistance to the basic idea of life assurance.
'Traditionally, the Chinese didn't buy life assurance. There is a
deep-rooted superstitious fear of insuring against death and the extended
family has provided security for dependents,' explains Mr John Snelgrove,
general manager (employee benefits and corporate affairs) of National
Mutual.
'Traditionally, for a lot of people it was a taboo,' adds Mr Edward Lau,
agency vice president of ManuLife. However, geographical and social changes,
partially linked to Hong Kong's rapid economic growth, have led to a
cultural shift. National Mutual - and its rivals - have found the younger
generation of Hong Kong Chinese much more sympathetic to the idea of life
assurance.
It is 'gaining widespread acceptance, particularly from the younger
generation,' says Ms Janice Wallace, analyst with Goldman Sachs in Hong
Kong. Some 30 per cent of the Hong Kong population of 5.6m is in the 21-35
age group and 58 per cent under the age of 35 according to the 1991 census.
The sales forces, often in their 20s and 30s, have found it easy to sell a
relatively simple 'whole of life' policy denominated in US dollars, which
offers an element of life assurance protection, a guaranteed surrender value
and an annual cash dividend.
In a savings market where interest rates on bank deposits are negative in
real terms, the policy has offered an alternative to higher risk investments
in the property and stock markets.
'We are not judged on our investment yield, as we would be in the US or
Europe,' says Mr Snelgrove. 'People are looking for long-term guarantees.'
Additionally, fears about the political and economic future of Hong Kong
have increased the attractions of a savings vehicle which offers guaranteed
protection in hard currency, especially for the territory's socially and
geographically mobile middle classes.
The property boom has also generated some demand for life assurance.
'Chinese people like to acquire property. As soon as you do that you need
some protection against liability,' says Mr Lau.
Certainly, the evidence shows a sharp increase in life insurance sales since
1983. Premium income has risen from HKDollars 1.2bn in 1983 to HKDollars
13bn in 1992, with sales of individual policies rising from HKDollars 6.4bn
to HKDollars 8.2bn in 1992 alone, an increase of 28.2 per cent.
A total of 1,97m policies are now in force. The percentage of the population
insured has risen tenfold to about 20 per cent over the same period.
National Mutual's last annual report indicates that sales continued at a
similar pace in 1993, with premium income from individual policies rising by
24 per cent to HKDollars 2.5bn.
Industry executives believe the prospects for further growth are good. Mr
Snelgrove suggests that as younger people continue to buy whole of life and
endowment products, the generation who bought life policies in the 1980s
will buy a different range of products as they grow older, allowing the
industry to broaden its range to include annuities, for example.
Ms Wallace, of Goldman Sachs, says Hong Kong is still a relatively untapped
market. In 1991 life insurance premiums amounted to only 1 per cent of GDP
compared to 6.2 per cent in Japan and 9.3 per cent in South Korea.
'The large pool of uninsured population, much of which is experiencing rapid
gains in wealth and standards of living, is expected to provide sustainable
growth,' says Ms Wallace, in an assessment of National Mutual's prospects
which could equally apply to other big players.
Extra potential for the industry could be generated if the Hong Kong's
government adopts a compulsory pension savings scheme. Officials are
currently mulling various schemes to provide for an ageing population.
Above all, the territory's life companies have the additional attraction of
the world's largest - and as yet totally undeveloped market - just over the
border in China.
AIA is already off the mark in this respect, having acquired a licence to
trade from Shanghai in 1992. National Mutual has a representative office in
China. Mr Snelgrove says the company is particularly keen to win access to
the market of 63m people in Guangdong province.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940427

