FT941-3590

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (12): Looser rules to encourage
new players - Andrew Adonis weighs the case, now being debated in the US,
for more competition in local telephony and an overhaul of the (woefully
inadequate) regulatory structure / US communications


   By ANDREW ADONIS


Toward Competition in Local Telephony
by William J Baumol and J Gregory
Sidak MIT Press, Dollars 27.50
169 pages
William Baumol and Gregory Sidak are in that happy league of advocates of
radical reform: they are on the winning side. At any rate, they are so for
more than half of their reform agenda, which is as much as one can hope for
in this life.
For the non-economist, their book is a tough read in parts, and much of the
regulatory and industry detail is less than vital to non-US readers. But
their essential argument consists of two propositions: that there is room
for more competition in local telephony; and that the current US regulatory
structure is woefully inadequate as a mechanism for promoting efficient
competition.
The first proposition is gaining increasing international acceptance. In the
US, competitive access providers have been growing fast, competing against
the local Bell companies to provide businesses with access to the
long-distance carriers. The regulatory structure looks set to loosen
further, with cable companies allowed to offer telephony services and vice
versa.
The speed of the change is remarkable, given America's history of
legislative sclerosis. Bills currently before Congress, and likely to pass
in some form, would repeal cable-telephone cross-ownership rules, although
they would still prohibit telephone companies from buying cable systems in
their own service areas. A separate bill would permit the local Bell
companies to compete with AT&T and the other long-distance carriers.
To an extent, the US is following the UK's lead. Three years ago, the
government decided to break the pre-existing BT/Mercury duopoly and allow
new operators to build local cable telephone and television networks, while
banning BT from offering entertainment services over its own network for a
decade. Cable companies - mostly US-owned - are currently investing nearly
Pounds 5bn in building networks in conurbations which, by the end of the
century, will cover about half the country.
The Baby Bells are keen to take the lessons back home. However, it would be
rash to presume that the US telecoms map is going to be rewritten overnight,
even if the draft legislation is enacted.
The recent decision of Bell Atlantic to call off its Dollars 21.4bn merger
with Tele-Communications, the largest US cable television service company,
citing the 'unsettled regulatory climate', is a sign of the continuing
difficulties.
A particularly thorny issue is that of 'universal access' - or, as Al Gore
puts it, the imperative that there should not be 'information haves and have
nots'. As yet, there is no such concern in Britain, where the cable
companies are regarded as providing an additional, non-essential service to
their customers.
What does universal access mean? Special 'universal access' payments by
competitors offering new broadband services? Vouchers for the poor and/or
rural dwellers? If the latter, paid to whom and by whom? These are key
questions, which will need to be answered if the inter-active super-highways
are intended to provide 'universal service'.
Baumol and Sidak concentrate on a revised regulatory system to promote
competition. Essentially, for the (former) monopoly carriers, they want to
move away from rigid, service-by-service rate-of-return regulation to a
price cap applying to the average price of services in a basket - much as
does Oftel, the UK telecommunications regulator.
For new entrants competing against an existing operator whose network they
have to use to deliver their service, the authors want to see access prices
which include the 'opportunity cost' involved in the existing operator
losing market share to the new entrant.
They call this approach 'efficient component pricing'. It has the advantage,
they argue, of only admitting competition that is truly efficient, providing
real service improvements and/or price benefits to consumers. Furthermore,
they suggest, it reduces concerns about new entrants simply 'cream skimming'
the more lucrative parts of an operator's business.
The question, of course, is how to set the 'efficient component prices'. But
then, setting access charges under current regimes is a tough business -
witness the acrimonious disputes between telecoms competitors currently
taking place across the world. The principle is attractive. It deserves a
serious reception from the regulatory community, which more than anyone will
determine the shape of telecoms markets country by country over the next
decade.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940315

