FT942-12268

FT  30 APR 94 / Lancer Boss staff unite to back German bid


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Senior management and employees at Lancer Boss, the Bedfordshire-based
lift-truck producer which went into receivership this month, are backing a
takeover by Jungheinrich of Germany.
It emerged yesterday, however, that the Hamburg-based company is facing a
serious challenge for Lancer Boss from Terex, the US industrial and
construction machinery group, which entered the lift-truck business in 1992.
Mr Allan Griffiths, a partner at Grant Thornton and one of the
administrative receivers at Lancer Boss, said there was a shortlist of three
potential purchasers for the businesses.
According to a senior manager at Lancer Boss, two 'very serious' bids have
been made by Jungheinrich and Terex. The third approach is understood to
come from an entrepreneur based in South Africa.
A management buy-out is said to have been discussed but according to the
senior manager there is no buy-out proposal at present. Potential management
'buy-ins' have also been proposed.
Amid continuing speculation about the identity of potential purchasers of
Lancer Boss, one report suggested that Hanson, the Anglo-US conglomerate,
may also be interested. On Thursday the ITV television programme Anglia News
said it had received a fax, purportedly from the receivers to departmental
heads at Lancer Boss, to which a handwritten addition names Hanson and
Jungheinrich.
Hanson said yesterday that it never commented on rumours or market
speculation. The senior manager at Lancer Boss said staff from Grove, the
Hanson crane company, had visited Lancer Boss's Leighton Buzzard site but
that Hanson's involvement was a 'non-starter' and probably too late.
He said staff were solidly behind the Jungheinrich bid, which would produce
a 'much better fit' than a takeover by Terex. Managers of the UK company
were even prepared to offer a 'seven-figure sum' to top up the German
company's offer.
Jungheinrich has already bought Steinbock Boss, the former German subsidiary
of Lancer Boss, from a German receiver, and the trading relationship between
Steinbock and Lancer is crucial to the Bedfordshire company.
Mr Simon Valente, convener for the GMBU general union at Lancer Boss, said
Jungheinrich had told him that it wanted to 'invest money, secure jobs and
recruit people'.
Mr Griffiths, meanwhile, said he was 'reasonably confident' that he would be
in a position to complete a sale of Lancer Boss by the end of next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940430

