FT943-892

FT  27 SEP 94 / BT alliance with three Nordic partners


   By ANDREW ADONIS


British Telecommunications yesterday boosted its international ambitions on
the announcement of a partnership agreement with three of Scandinavia's four
national telecommunications operators.
Norwegian Telecom, Telecom Finland and Tele Danmark, the Danish national
operator, will work with BT to market one-stop international telecoms
services across Scandinavia.
The move marks a further stage in the division of the world's leading
telecoms operators between three rival alliances, each bidding to become the
leading supplier of international telecoms services to multinational
companies.
The deal pitches BT into fierce competition with Unisource, a grouping of
European telecoms operators which recently forged an alliance with AT&T, the
largest US operator.
AT&T is BT's main challenger in the international arena.
Telia, the Swedish state operator, is one of Unisource's four European
members. BT and its Nordic partners yesterday highlighted Sweden's business
market as their principal target. They aim to exploit Sweden's open telecoms
regime to offer a pan-Nordic telecoms service to multinationals in the
region.
Telia already faces intense competition in its home business market. A
senior executive said that France Telecom has been offering Swedish
multinationals discounts of up to 30 per cent on international traffic.
France Telecom belongs to a third alliance, which includes Deutsche Telekom,
the German state operator.
Telia said, however, that BT's Nordic alliance was 'not unexpected' given a
previous tie-up between BT and Norwegian Telecom. It called on Denmark and
Norway to end restrictions on competition in their home telecoms markets.
The backbone of BT's international strategy is its Dollars 5.3bn (Pounds
3.3bn) alliance with MCI, the second-largest US long-distance operator. The
two companies have established a joint venture, 'Concert', to service
multinationals.
BT's Scandinavian deal is far more limited and none of the three Nordic
partners will take an equity stake in Concert. But all are committed to
working with BT to provide pan-Nordic services.
Mr Hans Wurtzen, Tele Danmarks' chief executive, said: 'The agreement marks
a new era for Nordic telecommunications, addressing customer needs on a
regional and global basis.'
Analysts are divided on the scope for the new alliances to develop
significant revenues, given the limited number of multinationals and the
savings they will demand from one-stop suppliers. However, the alliances are
set to exert downward pressure on Europe's high international phone prices.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940927

