FT942-15427

FT  15 APR 94 / Industry shows caution over private roads


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


The government yesterday called for the views of the construction industry
on its plans for the private sector to build and operate a new generation of
toll roads.
The Department of Transport announced 21 schemes worth between Pounds 10m
and Pounds 350m which could be included in its 'design, build, finance and
operate' initiative.
They include improvements to the A1(M), a link road joining the M1 with the
A1, several bypasses and widening schemes on the M1, M6 and M25 motorways.
The government is keen to enhance its Pounds 18bn roads programme with
private finance and to involve private companies in building and operating
roads more efficiently.
The programme would involve 'shadow tolling', with the government paying
road operators for the number of vehicles using their roads. It is seen as a
first step towards the introduction in the late 1990s, of a full-scale
system of electronic tolling with direct payments by motorway users.
The initial response from construction companies and roads groups was
cautious.
Trafalgar House, which operates the M25 toll-bridge at Dartford, said it was
interested in the idea but needed to see more details.
Trafalgar House has been involved in preparing the Birmingham northern
relief road for the past three years but has to wait another 18 months while
a public inquiry is held.
The RAC, the motoring organisation, warned that only two of the 21 schemes
proposed had completed all stages of the planning process. 'Until all of the
schemes have been signed and sealed the financiers are unlikely to want to
put up any money,' it said.
The Department of Transport said it wanted contractors to assume a
substantial amount of the risk. There would be incentives and penalties to
encourage companies to reduce the times road were closed for repairs,
provide a high-quality road surface and design safe roads.
The initiative is unlikely to be used to build new motorways but it could
apply to motorway widening, the upgrading of existing trunk roads and
building new by-passes, the government said.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940415

