FT942-15620

FT  14 APR 94 / Leading Article: Follow the Fed


The role of the Bank of England in the conduct of UK monetary policy has
long been subsidiary to that of the Treasury. While individual governors
have exerted influence over successive chancellors, the extent of that
influence has tended to remain a well-kept secret. The decision announced
yesterday to reveal the minutes of the monthly meeting between Mr Kenneth
Clarke and Mr Eddie George is thus an important and welcome step towards
more open government which bears some comparison with the disclosure
requirements observed by the US Federal Reserve's open market committee.
Transparency will lend strength to Mr George's arm in acting as a
countervailing influence against the politicians.
The nature of the implicit sanction was made clear by the markets' unhappy
initial reaction to the publication of the minutes of the first three
meetings of the current year. It had been widely suspected that February's
quarter-point cut in interest rates reflected disagreement between Mr Clarke
and Mr George over the extent to which policy should be loosened - a
suspicion that was increased by the assertion in the Bank's own inflation
report that there was now a greater risk of rising than falling inflation.
Those suspicions have now been confirmed: the quarter-point cut was indeed a
compromise along predictable lines. The minutes also reveal that both men
are prepared to cut rates if this month's tax increases put a brake on
economic activity. Gilts and sterling promptly weakened in response to this
unexpected generosity with the actualite.
That hardly suggests enhanced policy credibility. Yet in the longer run the
markets' verdict may look over-hasty. The governor has won some ground in
his battle to achieve independence for the Bank. At the same time the
chancellor appears to have accepted the argument that openness, while it may
lead to occasional discomfort, will be conducive to more stable markets.
This belief was reinforced by the conviction that the speculation in
February over a Treasury-Bank clash was needlessly overblown.
What is clear from yesterday's unexpected revelations is that the minutes
will contain genuine substance. To that extent they represent a much more
significant advance in the framing of monetary policy than the earlier (and
no less welcome) innovations of the inflation report and the grant of
discretion over the timing of rate cuts to the Bank. Yet transparency is not
synonymous with full accountability. The lines of policymaking are likely to
remain somewhat tangled since the whip hand remains in Whitehall.
In the final analysis levels of inflation in democratic societies reflect
the preferences and priorities of the people. That, as much as a tough
central bank, is the explanation for low German inflation and the poor
British inflationary experience. The biggest mistakes in UK monetary policy
have anyway tended to happen when persuasive chancellors carried Bank
governors with them. The latest step towards greater central bank autonomy
is welcome. But it is no low-inflation guarantee.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940414

