FT941-13068

FT  27 JAN 94 / Technology: Consultant's Critique - Software at work


   By KEVIN GRUMBALL


Although a book is a manufactured item with many sub-components, not one of
them is re-usable. Most manufacturing control software is written for more
traditional operations and a major consideration for HarperCollins was to
select a package that fitted its needs. Even having selected the package
with the most flexibility, David Thomson, HarperCollins' systems manager,
says it has pushed Mac-Pac to its limits.
The most interesting aspect of the new system has been the attention given
to people. Owen
Mitchell, business development director, spent considerable effort in
getting his staff to see the computer system as a means to more efficient
operation rather than as an end in itself.
Classical change- management theory talks of a three stage process:
'unfreezing' attitudes; the change itself; and 're-freezing' new behaviour
patterns. Mitchell ensured that the unfreezing period minimised the feelings
of unease that precede change. The change itself was carefully managed
and quickly carried out. The re-freezing has been so complete that Agnes
O'Brien, inventory planner, claimed that most people now could not even
remember how to key in to the old system.
One cost is the use of internal resources. Mitchell estimates that the
Pounds 2m spent on the system has been matched by Pounds 1m of staff time.
The returns seem to imply that it has been worthwhile. Inventory has dropped
from Pounds 4.1m to Pounds 3.4m and lead times have halved. On-time delivery
for paperbacks has increased
from 50 per cent to 97 per cent. A quotation now takes about two days when
it used to take two weeks.
Andersen Consulting seems to have been a helpful partner in the process. It
has insisted that HarperCollins write its own procedures. This has a twofold
effect: first, it makes HarperCollins 'own' the result; and second, it
reduces dependency on external consultancy.
The author is a consultant at Software Design and Construction, of Milton
Keynes

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940127

