FT942-15890

FT  13 APR 94 / Arts: Libraries go up for grabs


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Would you like to run a library? If the idea appeals, Brent, the north
London council, would be delighted to hear from you. Over the next few weeks
it is advertising for bookish entrepreneurs to take over two of its
libraries, Preston and Kingsbury.
It is one of the first concrete consequences of the government's
determination to put the running of libraries out to competitive tender.
Brent has embraced the idea with enthusiasm and will give the winner of the
contract around Pounds 200,000 a year to cover the wages of the dozen or so
library staff, who come with the package, and for acquiring stock.
The idea is that the new owner, who will have five years to exploit the
libraries, will energise the operation, drawing in new customers and
increasing their approval. He, or she, will have to offer a free book
service, but there is money to be made from renting out CDs and videos, or
exploiting the premises to set up a book shop, cafe, or art gallery.
Frank Quigg, director of Arts and Libraries in Brent, is a great enthusiast
for letting in market forces, and the 12 libraries in the borough have
already been turned into independent fiefdoms, with managers, the new name
for librarians, in control of the budgets. According to Quigg this has
increased customer numbers by 25 per cent and reduced annual running costs
from Pounds 8.5m to Pounds 6m, mainly through shedding 70 administrative
posts at the Town Hall.
It has also improved the service. The main Willesden Green Library, for
example, opened on Sundays in the run up to the summer exams, and other
libraries offer story-telling sessions aimed at one parent families. But
until now the libraries have remained under ultimate Brent control. Over the
next year or so all the libraries will be put out to tender, usually in
groupings of two.
The problem is that no commercial operators have run a local library service
before. Quigg is making a play for book shops, for management consultancy
groups, for retired librarians, for leisure companies, for anyone.
He admits that there is little profit to be made from Preston and Kingsbury
Libraries at the moment, but Kingsbury is scheduled to relocate into a new
leisure complex, complete with swimming pool, restaurant and retail outlets,
which should boost its current 79,000 clients considerably. And, most
interesting of all to prospective investors, the government is committed to
making compulsory competitive tendering a way of life. These two north Brent
branch libraries could be the pilot study for a great new market leader, UK
Libraries Ltd, operating throughout the land.
Quigg also admits that the most obvious winner of the first public
competition will be the existing staff of the two libraries, who are putting
together proposals. They have chosen to operate as an autonomous company
while staying as council employees. But if Waterstones, or First Leisure, or
Price Waterhouse shows an interest Brent might be tempted. After all, it is
the bid which is both feasible and economical that will win the contract.
There will be worries that any new management at the libraries will play
down its mandatory role, issuing books for free, in favour of money making
propositions. The council's determination to regulate its tenant may not be
as great as its desire for the experiment to succeed.
A much bigger concern is that compulsory competitive tendering in the
library service is a wheeze of the current government, which has selected
sympathetic councils to try it out, but it is much opposed by the Labour
Party. On May 5 Brent goes to the polls, but Quigg believes that if Labour
does take control it will let the pilot scheme go ahead. Re-establishing
strong central control over the libraries would be costly and unpopular.
So at the moment anyone can play with the idea of running a library; just
send suggestions to Brent.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940413

