FT942-12245

FT  30 APR 94 / UK Company News: A risk taker ready to stake his reputation


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER and BERNARD GRAY


Insiders say the seal was probably set on Enterprise's bid for Lasmo in one
of Mr Graham Hearne's late-night drink and strategy sessions. Those who know
the chain-smoking chairman and chief executive of Enterprise Oil say the
real work with his key colleagues gets done only when the office staff have
gone home and the whisky comes out.
Yet Mr Hearne's ambition to take on Lasmo appears to be a carefully
considered step. For more than a year he has weighed the right strategic
choice for Enterprise. Low oil prices have presented him with the dilemma:
Should he take the opportunity to buy cheap assets now while prices are
down? Or will the crude market remain so depressed that the upstream oil
business will never offer a sufficient return on the high risks involved?
The bid for Lasmo resolves the debate. In Enterprise's view upstream oil is
still the place to be.
Having made that decision, Mr Hearne will now be faced with the prospects of
what is likely to become a deeply personal battle. Close associates say this
is one aspect of the Lasmo challenge to which he is not looking forward.
'He will want to fight the battle on industrial issues,' said one colleague.
Friends describe the diminutive Mr Hearne as fiercely loyal, dynamic,
mercurial and even say he has a streak of arrogance. The critics accuse him
of megalomania and a tendency to only hear what he wants to hear.
All are agreed, however, that Mr Hearne is well connected. One story has it
that Enterprise had all but given up on getting a response to its bid for
Saxon Oil in 1985, when the tide was turned by just a few phone calls from
him.
Those connections are obviously the result of a varied career which has
crossed the paths of some of Britain's most prominent businessmen. The son
of a Birmingham munitions worker, Mr Hearne left school at 16 to work as an
articled clerk with a firm of lawyers. After a brief stint as a lawyer in
New York, he was recruited by the Wilson Government to the Industrial
Reorganisation Corporation, set up to rationalise British industry. There he
joined the likes of Sir Christopher Hogg of Courtaulds, and Sir Alaistair
Morton of Eurotunnel.
The invitation to join Enterprise in 1984 was based on his experience there,
at Courtaulds as finance director, and the merchant bank Rothchilds, where
he was a director. More importantly he had the oil expertise through his
time as chief executive at Tricentrol.
Mr Hearne has been credited with safeguarding Enterprise from hostile
shareholders - such as RTZ and Lasmo - as well building up a Pounds 2bn
company. Yet there are those who would say the group's perceived success is
due to the team he built up, including the now departed finance director, Mr
John Walmsley. 'If he was on the board he would say this bid is absolute
madness,' says one analyst.
Yet Mr Hearne has taken precautions. By using an 'A' share structure,
Enterprise has limited the risks to its main business if Lasmo goes horribly
wrong. Investors may be unwilling to shoulder the risks that he is keen to
avoid. If so, his response is likely to be phlegmatic. Lasmo is worth
something to him at a price and an acceptable risk. If he cannot buy it at
that level he will walk away, but it might be at some cost to his
reputation.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940430

