FT944-2330

FT  16 DEC 94 / UK Company News: A change of focus for ASW - Package marks
further rationalisation of European steel industry


   By ANDREW BAXTER


ASW Holdings yesterday announced a clean break with its past by swapping its
Scunthorpe rod mill business for British Steel's 35.2 per cent stake in ASW,
the Cardiff-based steel and construction products group.
The transaction is part of a complex package of deals which mark a further
rationalisation of ownership in the European steel industry and give ASW its
first steel plants in continental Europe.
They include a 7-for-20 rights issue at ASW, to raise about Pounds 29m after
expenses, priced at 160p and payable in two instalments. It has been fully
underwritten by SG Warburg.
Other details of the package are:
The disposal by ASW of the Scunthorpe mill to British Steel in effective
exchange for the repurchase of 13.4m ordinary shares (20 per cent of ASW's
ordinary shares) and 30.8m Pounds 1 cumulative convertible preference
shares.
The stake held by British Steel dates back to the flotation of ASW in 1988.
British Steel said the consideration for the rod mill of Pounds 50m broadly
equates to the book value of its shareholding in ASW.
ASW will acquire for about Pounds 51m an 80 per cent stake in Societe Des
Aciers D'Armature Pour Le Beton (SAM), the steel mesh and reinforcement coil
(recoil) unit of Usinor Sacilor.
ASW will pay Pounds 32m cash and issue 10m new shares to Usinor, giving the
French group a stake of about 12 per cent in ASW. The Cardiff-based company
will, in certain circumstances, buy the rest of SAM for up to Pounds 19m
cash.
ASW will invest Pounds 17m in its Cardiff rod mill, to produce all its
present reinforcement bar (rebar) - now produced at Tremorfa bar mill - and
recoil in one operation. A related Pounds 2.1m restructuring charge is
expected for next year.
Sir Alan Cox, ASW's chief executive, said that, in looking for a better
ownership structure in the industry, it was inevitable to question whether
wire rod was a strategic business for ASW. It retains a small wire rod
operation in Cardiff.
British Steel already supplies steel billet to the Scunthorpe mill, which is
on the same site as its main Scunthorpe works and employs about 320 people.
It will be run as one business with British Steel's Templeborough rolling
mill in Rotherham.
Sir Alan said the SAM acquisition would turn ASW into 'a genuine company in
the European sense'. SAM had group sales of FFr2.32bn (Pounds 270m) last
year, and is forecasting sharply higher profits this year. It has already
been extensively restructured, but Sir Alan said there was considerable
scope for improving its operational cash flow.
ASW shares rose 20p to 215p yesterday. Because the shares held by British
Steel will be cancelled, The number of ASW shares outstanding will be
reduced from 83m to 82.6m even after the rights issue.
The directors said the transactions would enhance earnings per share in 1995
and forecast an unchanged 3p final for 1994, making 6p for the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941216

