FT941-13062

FT  27 JAN 94 / Arts: A pared-down Handful of Dust - Theatre


   By ANDREW ST GEORGE


It started in Brazil. Evelyn Waugh (1903-1966), travelling to South America
in 1932 after a disastrous marriage, met a religious mystic bent on reading
Dickens. The resulting short story and the novel A Handful of Dust (1934)
have been a warning to South American explorers and Dickensians ever since.
Now the Cambridge Theatre Company has staged Waugh's book at the Palace
Theatre, Watford: it makes super theatre.
A Handful of Dust, straight from TS Eliot, tells of the creaky marriage
between Tony and Brenda Last, who in the 1930s are much less middle class
than they now sound. Brenda falls in love with a younger man, John Beaver,
at the same moment that the Last's eldest son dies in a hunting accident.
Grief and alimony drive Tony to search for Indian gold in South America; but
his expedition, lead by Dr Messenger, comes to a sticky end and Tony finds
himself a prisoner reading Dickens to the illiterate local potentate.
The director Mike Alfreds opts for the anti-Brideshead approach. The ten
actors do without scenery and props for this pared-down touring production.
The scenes are short, like movie cuts, and each one finishes with a freeze
frame. The lighting is bright white and the backdrop and costumes pearl
grey.
Alfreds' adaptation is excellent. He parcels out the narrative so that
Waugh's voice in the book shares itself among the actors, who introduce
themselves or the scene and then speak the lines. The ensemble scenes -
restaurants, parties and hunts - work well, and the actors retire to chairs
facing the stage. Alfreds' other company, Shared Experience, used the same
technique to tackle Anna Karenina, so it works on longer books as well.
Waugh's best lines survive, and make dramatic sense; as her affair gathers
pace, Brenda comments to the audience: 'Their interest in each other had so
far outdistanced their knowledge that there was a great deal to say.' The
cameos also live on: the shocking American Blonde, the doddering clergyman
Mr Tendril and in the background the humble and uncomplaining victims of
primogeniture.
The principals keep the action bowling along, although the long first half
and short second is a problem inherited straight from the novel. Lady Brenda
(Annabelle Apsion) is less worldly than in Waugh and Lord Tony (Tim Dutton)
more sympathetic; both actors are sharp and subtle. Elsewhere there are fine
performances from Jason Watkins (the Lasts' boy and Dr Messenger), Laurence
Kennedy (family friend and general club bore) and Sophie Heydel (Brenda's
socialite sister, Marjorie).
In all, the characters are less extreme than in Waugh's book, but more
easily caricatured. Perhaps he felt turning 30 altered his attitude: 'for
the first time I am trying to deal with normal people instead of eccentrics;
comic English character parts are too easy when one gets to be thirty.' Noel
Coward begs to differ.
The Palace Theatre, Watford (0923 225671) until February 12.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940127

