FT942-12372

FT  29 APR 94 / International Company News: Samsung buys Nissan technology


   By JOHN BURTON


   SEOUL


Samsung Heavy Industries has signed a contract to import car technology from
Nissan Motor of Japan as part of its plan to become South Korea's fifth
passenger car manufacturer.
The subsidiary of South Korea's largest conglomerate said it would build
three mid-sized models based on Nissan technology beginning in 1997 and sell
them only under its own badge. Production in the first year will be 50,000
cars, with a subsequent increase.
Nissan will receive a total of Y8.66bn (Dollars 84.4m) in royalty and
technology fees from Samsung, plus between 1.6 per cent and 1.9 per cent of
the shipment price for every Samsung car.
Nissan said it saw the alliance with Samsung 'as a way of further expanding
its business foundations in Asia.' It said that it would develop a new car
based on one of its vehicles for Samsung. A two-litre saloon car was under
consideration.
It said Samsung planned to build a plant either near Pusan or on the west
coast of South Korea to make the car developed by Nissan.
Mr Minoru Nakamura, a Nissan board member, said that Samsung's investment in
the plant could total Y450bn.
The Korean government has expressed concerns that Samsung's entry into the
crowded car industry could cause severe problems for the country's other
motor companies.
Samsung plans soon to file an application for the import of vehicle
technology with the ministry of trade, industry and energy. If the ministry
turns down the request, it would in effect block Samsung's ambitions.
The Korea Automobile Manufacturers' Association criticised Samsung for
importing technology, which contradicts the government's goal for Korea to
achieve technical independence in the motor industry.
Under the contract, Nissan will transfer the technology for its latest range
of compacts, including newly-developed engines and suspension systems, and
jointly develop new versions for Samsung. It will also provide engineering
assistance for Samsung's production of the vehicles, which would use at
least 70 per cent Korean-made components.
Samsung will have unrestricted access to export markets under the agreement
with Nissan, which also granted the right for Samsung to change components
and designs as desired. Samsung will also receive advice from Nissan on
sales, marketing and after-sales service.
Other Korean car companies, including Kia and Daewoo, have previously been
forced to accept export restrictions in return for gaining technology from
Ford and General Motors, respectively.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940429

