FT943-13342

FT  20 JUL 94 / Recruitment: Initials that stand for main board advance -
Young finance directors are breaking into the top echelon of directorships


   By RICHARD DONKIN


The youngest Turks in UK boardrooms are likely to be linguists with at least
a brace of qualifications to go with their drive and ambition, according to
a study into the board compositions of big companies.
Korn/Ferry Carre/Oban International, the executive search company,
identifies what it calls a 'new breed of executive' in its research,
covering more than 1,000 directors in 154 companies. The survey sample,
drawn from The Times 1000 list of the UK's largest companies, has produced
discernible trends in the composition of boardrooms, which may include some
useful pointers for recruiters.
One of the most striking features is the emergence of MBAs as an
increasingly prevalent qualification among directors. The report found that
10 per cent of executives under the age of 50 had MBAs.
Many of the younger and more highly qualified directors, said the report,
are fluent in at least one foreign language and have practical experience of
working overseas. Only two years ago a similar body of research found that
fewer than 1 in 5 UK directors had a second language. Unfortunately the
survey did not produce an overall languages comparison this year but intends
to have another look next year.
Some 71 per cent of directors in companies with Pounds 1bn annual turnover
and above, compared with 63 per cent in last year's sample, had degrees.
A trend away from accountancy qualifications seems to be emerging among
finance directors. Among the 35 finance directors surveyed in the Pounds
1bn-plus companies, just over half had accountancy qualifications and just
less than a quarter had MBAs.
In previous years accountancy qualifications had dominated to a much greater
degree over a smaller number of MBAs. This swing in emphasis among
qualifications is even more apparent in the report's analysis of directors
by generation.
Only 5 per cent of chairmen, deputies and chief executives over the age of
50 in the sample had degrees, compared with 61 per cent of degree holders
among their younger counterparts. While the older generation had the edge on
legal qualifications, younger directors had more accountancy qualifications
and MBAs.
One figure that bucked this trend was the greater percentage of finance
directors over the age of 50 with accountancy qualifications than in the
younger age group.
Michael Brandon, the Korn/Ferry director who co-authored the report, says
this does not mean that finance directors are becoming less qualified. Quite
the opposite. Many of the best qualified of the older age group, however,
appear to be have gone on to the top job in companies, so fewer of the high
flyers are represented in this group.
The findings also show how finance directors are becoming younger and
increasingly mobile. Two-thirds of the sample 35 from the biggest companies
had been recruited from outside the organisation and nearly a quarter of the
same group were under 45.
Directors, generally, under the age of 50 were more likely to have more than
one qualification, the report found.
Other findings included an increasing preparedness among companies to buy in
foreign talent to strengthen their understanding of overseas markets.
The 1994 UK Board of Directors Study costs Pounds 99 and can be obtained by
contacting Michael Brandon tel (0) 71 312 3100.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940720

