FT943-13250

FT  20 JUL 94 / International Company News: Carmakers drive deep into India
 -Foreigners have jump-started a dormant market


   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA


Some of the world's leading carmakers are focusing on India, where the
fast-growing, newly-liberalised automotive industry is seen as offering a
great deal of scope for joint ventures with Indian partners.
However, while the manufacturers eye a slice of sales worth Rs39bn (Dollars
1.24bn) a year, some industry watchers feel the market is not nearly as
promising as it seems, especially in the large-car sector that most foreign
investors are targeting.
Last year, General Motors of the US linked up with Calcutta-based Hindustan
Motors - India's oldest carmaker, which produces the Ambassador, the most
commonly seen car on Indian roads - to produce its Opel Astra model.
France's Peugeot Citroen group signed up with Premier Automobiles - which
produces the Indian version of Fiat cars - to make the Peugeot 309.
Rover, the UK carmaker bought this year by Germany's BMW, is collaborating
with Bangalore-based Sipani Automobiles to assemble the Rover Montego.
Mahindra and Mahindra is teaming up with Chrysler to make the Cherokee
four-wheel-drive, using an earlier collaboration with Peugeot for the
vehicle's engines and gearboxes.
Telco, part of India's Tata group, has signed up to make the German
Mercedes-Benz E220, and South Korea's Daewoo Corporation last month entered
into a joint venture with the Delhi-based DCM group, which already has a
tie-up with Japan's Toyota, to make the Daewoo Racer.
Until recently, India's car market was languishing, dominated by obsolete
models of Fiats and Ambassadors which owners used for 15 years or more. The
industry has been given a much-needed boost in the last decade by the
introduction of the Maruti-Suzuki, produced by Maruti Udyog, a
government-owned company, and Suzuki of Japan.
The company, started by Mrs Indira Gandhi's son Sanjay in the late 1970s,
relied on a mix of political patronage and Japanese technology to corner 71
per cent of the 210,000 cars sold in India in the 12 months to last March.
The company's 800cc model, which was meant to be a 'cheap' family car,
became the status symbol of the growing 200m-strong middle classes. The
market registered an increase of more than 30 per cent in the last year, and
the industry expects a further 20 per cent boost in the current year.
Indian demand for new cars is expected to more than double, to 500,000 a
year, by 2000; the numbers sound encouraging, but not encouraging enough by
international standards for an industry dependent on large volumes.
'The global giants are racing into the Indian market, but they all seem to
be targeting the top end of the market,' said an official at the Automobile
Association of Upper India. 'The new cars are all priced in the Rs400,000 to
Rs600,000 range, and only a small section of the so-called middle class will
be able to afford them.'
However, Mr Vivek Bharat Ram, vice-chairman of DCM Toyota, is convinced
there is a 'nascent demand' for cars in the premium sector. 'There will
always be a demand for the small 800cc car, but we have perceived a distinct
shift in favour of a larger-sized family car that gives quality at an
affordable price.'
Mr Ram believes that the bottom will fall out of the small-car market, which
currently commands nearly 60 per cent of the new car market.
'Our survey shows there is an untapped demand for relatively larger cars,
and modern technology will be instrumental in boosting that demand,' he
says.
Industry watchers, however, tend to agree with Mr R. C. Bhargava, managing
director of Maruti, that it is the small-car sector that will continue to
grow fastest. 'The argument that the premium car market is growing faster
does not hold good, because it is from a much lower base,' says Mr Bhargava.
'If it is the middle classes we are looking at, then people who are driving
two-wheelers will move up to the 800cc small car, not the larger cars,' says
Mr AC Mehta, an executive with Telco.
For Daimler Benz, 'India is a market of the future,' according to a company
spokesman visiting the sub-continent recently. The Mercedes E220, priced at
Rs1.5m, will be the most expensive of the new cars entering the market, with
the Rover Montego following at Rs1m.
The manufacturers are confident that there are enough rich Indians who will
want to own large cars, and that it is a segment which will grow in time.
'Judging by the prices, very few Indians will be able to afford the new
cars,' says the Automobile Association official. He hopes that some of the
new ventures being planned will seriously consider a 'common man's car,' a
basic, low-cost alternative to the small Marutis.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940720

