FT943-13140

FT  21 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Monsanto seeks to allay
European fears about its milk yield-boosting hormone


   By ALISON MAITLAND


Monsanto, manufacturer of the milk-boosting dairy hormone BST, yesterday
sought to counter fears about its use, saying it had not cut milk
consumption and was reaping dividends for farmers.
BST, or bovine somatotrophin, is a manufactured version of a hormone that
occurs naturally in cows. Monsanto, which is reported to have spent about
Dollars 500m developing BST, began selling it in the US in February after
receiving approval from the Food and Drug Administration.
European Union agriculture ministers are due to consider in December whether
to lift a moratorium on its use in Europe. The European Commission, while
accepting BST is safe for humans, argues that artificially boosting milk
supplies runs counter to EU policy of cutting production.
In Britain, the government's adviser on animal welfare, the Farm Animal
Welfare Council, last week recommended that the hormone should not be
licensed until data were available on a wide range of issues relating to the
welfare of cows.
It said dairy cows treated with BST to induce a high yield were more prone
to mastitis, although it was not known whether the cause was BST or the milk
yield itself.
Ms Lisa Watson, Monsanto's health and consumer affairs manager, said a study
to be published in the US Journal of Dairy Science concludes that 'BST
doesn't affect the relationship between milk yield and the risk of
mastitis.'
During a visit to the UK to promote the hormone, she agreed there was a link
between high milk yield and mastitis but said other factors such as wet
weather and the stage of a cow's lactation had a 'five to 10 times greater
impact on whether a cow gets mastitis.'
Ms Watson also pointed to figures from the US Department of Agriculture
showing consumption of liquid milk was unchanged between February and April
compared with the same period last year.
This was despite the fact that 70 per cent of consumers were aware of BST,
up from around 28 per cent last November. However, only a tiny proportion of
milk is labelled as being produced without BST, so most consumers are
unlikely to have a choice about whether to buy BST-produced milk.
Conscious of milk quotas in Europe, Monsanto was anxious to sell the hormone
as 'a management tool' to help farmers meet their quotas despite output
problems caused by weather or illness, rather than as a way of increasing
milk supplies.
Monsanto's BST customers control about 20 per cent of milk production in the
US, the company says. Contrary to fears that BST could serve large,
efficient farmers to the detriment of smaller ones, the company says more
than half its customers are farmers with 100 or fewer cows.
Mr Jerry Steiner, marketing director, said farmers were getting a return of
Dollars 2 for every Dollars 1 they invested in BST, although some of that
would be absorbed by increased feed costs. 'We have a better than 90 per
cent satisfaction and repurchase rating from our customers,' he said.
Monsanto expects cows injected with BST to produce 10-15 per cent more milk
during their 300-day lactation, although the hormone is used only when
lactation is starting to decline.
The USDA has forecast that about 40 per cent of cows in the US would be
treated with BST by 2000. 'US farmers have a significant advantage in
reducing the cost of producing milk,' said Mr Steiner. 'Farmers in the UK
should have the opportunity for that same advantage.'

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940721

