FT944-5813

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1994 (3): Users demand
more - The choice of accounting packages is widening as various needs emerge


   By CLAIRE GOODING


People want more from their accounting systems than ever before. Finance
directors want better reporting facilities, packages that run on different
sorts of hardware and, increasingly, systems that can be implemented
globally. Indeed, several users suggested that accounting packages used only
as statutory reporting tools were of little relevance to the activities
which produce the data.
The number of packages available continues to mushroom in response to
different needs. Dennis Keeling, director of the Business and Accounting
Software Developers Association, Basda, keeps data sheets on more than 200
products, for the guidance of buyers. Mr Keeling's research, among 7,000
users, identifies a shift towards 'Open Systems', Unix-based and
client-server solutions, and an increasing preoccupation with 'global'
implementations.
Accounting research specialist Tate Bramald Consultancy's annual review of
accountancy software packages for 1994 found about 250 solutions being used
among its 1,000 interviewees. John Tate, founding partner at Tate Bramald
says there is a clear division in the various competitors for accounting,
amounting to a sort of 'league table'. His analysis puts Oracle, SAP, QSP
and the Dun and Bradstreet packages, (previously separate offerings, MSA and
M&D Millenium) into the top stream, as corporate heavyweights, mostly
running on mainframes.
Into the next category come those catering for companies likely to have
multiple sites, complex requirements and a fair degree of tailoring. Tate
typifies these as JBA, Coda, JD Edwards, Walker, Ross Systems, Lawson and
Dodge Group.
Tetra Chameleon, Systems Union SunAccounts, Multisoft Premier Plus, and
Strategix are typical of packages that have grown with their users, probably
old hands now on their second or third accounting system. Companies in the
Pounds 5m to Pounds 50m turnover bracket would probably look in this group
first. Those a little smaller, with a turnover between 500,000 and Pounds
5m, would probably look first at Pegasus Senior (or its Opera successor),
Multisoft Prestige, Sage Sovereign, and the newcomer, SBS Exchequer, which
has won praise for its reporting facilities.
The choice widens as the size of the company comes down, with small
businesses picking from packages such as Sage Sterling and Tas Books from
Megatech. Home users also have an increasingly wide choice of systems, with
sophisticated functions - Sage Moneywise, Quickens/Quickbooks from Intuit,
Microsoft Money.
Global accounting still presents a challenge. 'With accounting standards as
they are, there is no reason why you can't have one core product for
virtually every country in the world,' Mr Tate says. 'But, if you are
starting with a product that has not been designed with international
operation in mind, it's virtually impossible to make it into international
product. It is a huge problem for any software house to develop and release
a product internationally. Too many still use their clients for quality
control.'
European products competing in the UK such as Scala (from Sweden) and Exact
(originating in Holland) have to win success on home ground before spreading
elsewhere. And the secret of any local success, suggests Peter Quinn of
fast-expanding UK software supplier, JBA, lies in providing reliable user
support.
'Ventures elsewhere are doomed unless you can provide the same level of
support locally that you can on your home ground and that means training,
and assimilating people into the company culture,' Mr Quinn says.
International accounting, and particularly consolidation, is the niche in
which Dillon Technology International of Maidenhead has become well
established outside the UK with its Falcon package. Richard Dillon, who
founded the company in 1983, emphasises that the knowledge-base of the
vendors matters far more to multinational corporations than 'functionality
checks' on the package.
'Purchasers expect us to know about regulations such as SSAP20 and FASB52.
We sell knowledge, not software.'

The Financial Times


London Page III

941201

