FT942-14914

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (5): A highly efficient one-stop service
 -Key role for Singapore's Economic Development Board


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL


It's the annual press conference of the Economic Development Board and Mr
Philip Yeo is 'off': talking in rapid fire even while he is being
introduced, the chairman dispenses with his prepared statement, harries
local journalists to ask questions, and soon brings the meeting to an end
ahead of schedule.
Mr Yeo is in charge of Singapore's industrial development, and he is
rocket-powered, writes Alexander Nicoll.
The EDB is given credit by foreign companies for its highly efficient
one-stop investment service. Its officials will meet you at the airport,
guide you to a potential factory site, and guarantee a time (soon) when it
will be operational. The board has continued to convince foreign
manufacturers of Singapore's attractions even though the island's costs are
higher than those of its equally ambitious neighbours and skilled labour is
in short supply.
The job of selling Singapore is done partly by dressing the country's
aspirations in bewildering marketing-speak. The board aims to build
'world-class industry clusters.' Singapore is to be a 'global knowledge
arbitrageur.' It wants to promote 'second 'S' curve corporations.'
Here is a sample of the board's annual report: 'Collective competitiveness
is about synergy. It is about how the partnerships and strategic alliances
Singapore Inc forges under the Singapore Unlimited and Shakkei approach can
result in win-win benefits for all parties concerned.'
But underlying all this is a fierce determination to create jobs which will
attract the country's young people. Mr Yeo and his older colleagues in
government are ever-conscious of Singapore's small size, lack of resources,
and vulnerability to the intense competition to win away the foreign
investment which has driven the island's growth. For them, it is a matter of
the country's survival.
'What's important to a young boy or young girl in university is: who's
creating the job for me?' Mr Yeo says. He makes no apologies for
government's prominent planning role: 'Government is the great worrier. No
individual has the resources to do what a government can do. When government
abdicates, individuals suffer.'
There is no question about where he expects the aspirations of the young and
their educators to be focused - 'if people want to be poets, sculptors or
painters, they can do that as a hobby, but not as a job.'
Mr Yeo goes further. His preference is strongly for the maintenance of
Singapore's role in manufacturing more than development as an international
services hub - 'manufacturing is the key to our economy because it creates
many multiplier effects,' he says, although he acknowledges that 'the
services sector is also important because it creates good white-collar
jobs.'
The EDB, mindful of the potential obsolescence of key Singapore products
such as disc drives, is seeking to develop higher-technology industries.
Last year it took a stake itself in Singapore's first 'wafer fab' making
semiconductor chips in partnership with Texas Instruments, Canon and
Hewlett-Packard.
The EDB's success in promoting Singapore as a place for inward investment
can hardly be questioned. Inward investment remains strong while it has
fallen sharply in Singapore's neighbours, Malaysia and Indonesia.
But it is less clear that the EDB will be able to reverse its approach to
take on the new role demanded of it by the government. This is to lead
Singapore's 'external wing' policy of investing elsewhere in the region.
Predictably, this has been cloaked in another slogan: 'Shakkei, where a
beautiful garden is made more beautiful by integrating distant scenery into
the garden landscape.'
What this actually means is investing part of Singapore's riches abroad but
seeking to keep the investments closely tied to the real economy at home -
for example, through farming out labour-intensive parts of a production
process to a cheaper country while keeping the high-value-added,
skill-intensive parts in Singapore.
The task is challenging not least because more than 70 per cent of
Singapore's manufacturing industry is accounted for by foreign companies,
likely to have their own regional strategies which may not fall in with
those of Singapore. A company's decision to manufacture in China may be
taken quite separately from consideration of its presence in Singapore.
Mr Yeo hopes to work with the multinationals, some of which, he says, 'are
more loyal to Singapore than local companies.'
'Our job is to encourage Singapore companies to invest overseas,' he says.
'The EDB is a very hard-nosed organisation. Whatever project we promote must
have a direct economic benefit for us.'
He says this assurance is vital because 'otherwise Singapore appears to be a
regional Father Christmas.'

The Financial Times


London Page III

940418

