FT941-17154

FT  06 JAN 94 / Three cities slug it out in heats for Commonwealth Games


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


The final heats in the competition to be the English city which bids to
stage the Commonwealth Games of 2002 began yesterday when Manchester
published the bid it hopes will defeat rivals London and Sheffield.
The Commonwealth Games Council for England will choose between the three on
February 2. The winner will have until November next year to persuade the
federation of similar councils throughout the Commonwealth to award the
games to England, which last hosted them in 1934 in London. In the meantime
the games have been staged in Scotland twice (Edinburgh in 1970 and 1986)
and Wales (Cardiff in 1958).
New Delhi, Nairobi, Cape Town and a Caribbean city are all likely contenders
for 2002, but the 50th anniversary of the Queen's accession is seen as a
powerful selling point by all three English hopefuls. They also see the
bidding process as part of their general marketing and development strategy
to help raise their profiles.
The London bid is led by the private sector but stems from London First,
part of the government's experimental city pride partnership scheme to
stimulate regeneration. The Wembley stadium and arena complex are expected
to figure, but new international-class swimming facilities would have to be
built.
Sheffield University is co-ordinating its city's bid, supported by the city
council. It relies on the 24,000-seat stadium, swimming pool and 12,000-seat
arena built by the council for the World Student Games of 1991 - a financial
embarrassment for local taxpayers, who will be paying for the facilities
until 2010.
Professor Gareth Roberts, Sheffield University vice-chancellor, said that if
the city won the English heat the university would put together a
partnership of leading figures to run the project. No council money would be
spent.
Manchester is bidding with almost the same team which failed to win the 2000
Olympics. It will have an arena - Europe's biggest - and a covered cycling
stadium ready next year, but would have to build a stadium and swimming
pool.
Sir Robert Scott, the bid leader, said plans for a new stadium would be
announced on January 28. His team, from both the public and private sectors,
feels there should be a 65,000-seat 'Wembley of the north' to serve as a
national stadium, whatever the outcome of its bid.
Sir Robert said experience suggested that a full-scale bid for the
Commonwealth Games would cost the winning city about Pounds 1m. He was
confident Manchester could raise this entirely from the private sector. He
has support from chairmen or chief executives at Coats Viyella, Amec,
Manchester Airport and the Co-operative Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940106

