FT944-5810

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1994 (3): One version of
the truth - Upgrading international delivery information / Integrating its
operations has reduced DHL's reporting times and increased its productivity


   By CLAIRE GOODING


Quick delivery is the essence of DHL's business. 'Enthusiasm and getting
things done is the key to this company,' says Jeremy Young, the financial
systems manager based in Brussels responsible for implementing DHL's new
pan-European accounting system.
'However, the exercise of implementing something on this scale, in 23
countries, is not to be rushed . . . The challenge is the re-evaluation of
old practices as well as implementing a new computer system.'
DHL ships more than 80m packages annually, serving 80,000 locations in more
than 200 countries. The company has grown rapidly, employing about 28,000
people worldwide, and prides itself on using information technology
effectively in its operations. Its reorganisation of European and African
operations in 1991 triggered a rethink of its accounting system.
The existing Insight system on an IBM System 36 had become outdated.
'General Ledger and Accounts Payable were not integrated, there was a lot of
re-keying of data, and the information available to support management
decisions was simply too limited for the speed DHL is growing,' says Mr
Young.
The accounting project is part of a Pounds 1.5bn spend on updating and
automating DHL's entire operation. The upgrade allowed it to convert to an
open systems, Unix-based policy, using Hewlett-Packard computers. For a
company whose essence is international operation, there were obvious
long-term benefits and savings in implementing one package across all
countries.
The draft specification went to DHL working parties in six countries, whose
recommendations went into the final tender specification. This went to 11
suppliers with international packaged offerings, but not all could manage
some features with an 'essential' rating, such as Gapp requirements in the
US (Generally Accepted Accounting Practice).
Oracle Financials won on the question of resources: DHL had already
identified that any package it chose would need one major bespoke
alteration. 'DHL has a remarkable business need in Accounts Receivable,'
explains Mr Young.
'We have an invoice line for each package. There might be massive volumes
for one customer, so we might have a query on only three packages in a
1,000-package order. We need that information up-front on one screen, and in
every package we saw, the user would have needed to look at several
different screens to get that information.
Aware that it did not have all the necessary skills in-house, DHL has built
a 'core team' for the international implementation, made up of DHL staff and
consultants from Oracle and Price Waterhouse. This team turns its attention
to each country: five main modules are being implemented in 23 countries.
Francis Veldeman, DHL's financial director, wanted to 'transfer the
knowledge into the organisation'. According to Mr Young, this has worked
well. The transfer and sharing of knowledge and experience has made the
international project workable.
'Good project management is essential. We use Oracle's applications
implementation methodology, but some flexibility is vital because different
attitudes are needed to each country: Croatia needs more central support
than the UK.' DHL has had to push for local support in some countries, but
where local resources are short, Oracle has sent someone out.
The benefits are already clear. 'In terms of DHL's day to day business, the
most important is Accounts Receivable, because of the interaction with
customers.
'It is not just a debtors' ledger, it helps us to control the cash flow.'
'It's an integral part of our 'customer care' approach. Credit controllers
can keep notes on queries, see the customer history, the amount of business
outstanding, and ensure that queries are dealt with quickly, and followed
up.
The Oracle Financials are integrated with DHL's in-house billing system, and
currently with the MicroControl consolidation and reporting software. There
are plans to build on an executive information system once the core
implementation is complete.
Mr Young can already measure the benefits in terms of days and labour saved.
'Where Oracle Financials are implemented, reporting times at the month end
have gone down from 13 to within a mere eight days of closure,' he says.
'And we spend more time qualifying the information and less time
number-crunching.'
There have also been productivity gains in the Purchasing and Accounts
Payable systems, from the integration of the information which is now only
keyed in at one point.
'The UK estimates productivity gains overall of 50 per cent from when they
had separate systems,' he says. 'The main advantage of integration is that
we all get one version of the truth, and there are no longer any disputes or
misunderstandings over the actual figures.'
Supplier profile Product: Oracle Financials Release 10 is an integrated
suite of 10 core modules plus end user report writers and Oracle Alert for
exception reporting. Multi-currency, multi-company and in 13 languages, the
Financials can be integrated with manufacturing and human resources
packages. Suppliers: Oracle, the world's largest independent database
vendor, was established in 1977, with Oracle UK, a wholly-owned subsidiary
following in 1984. In addition to database revenues Oracle Corporation's
Applications business is worth Dollars 200m worldwide.
Turnover: Dollars 2bn in 1994, with Dollars 284m profit; Dollars 1.5bn in
1993, with Dollars 157m profit. Employees: 1,700 in the UK. Number of users:
170 in the UK, 1,500 worldwide.
Price: Pounds 100,000 average for four core modules, 50-user system.
Hardware and operating systems: all Unix systems, DEC Vax.
Sales and support/ maintenance: direct sales.
User views: multinational implementations easy, (including training), ease
of integration, good sales and implementation support.
Contact: Dave O'Connor, Oracle UK.
Tel: 0344 860066.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941201

