FT943-924

FT  27 SEP 94 / Arts: The Tate shortlists 13 to build for the millennium


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


The race is on to design one of the most prestigious of the millennium
projects, and one that seems likely to get the go-ahead - the Tate Gallery
of Modern Art on London's Bankside. Yesterday 13 architects were
shortlisted, with the field being whittled down to five by November 21, and
the winner to be announced in February.
Two leading British architects, Norman Foster and Richard Rogers, who are
already involved with millennium projects at the British Museum and the
South Bank, decided not to submit. The candidates going forward, in an
international list, are Alsop & Stormer; Arata Isozaki (Japan); David
Chipperfield; Future Systems; Herzog & de Meuron (Switzerland); Michael
Hopkins; Nicholas Grimshaw; Office for Metropolitan Architecture
(Netherlands); Rafael Moneo (Spain); Renzo Piano Building Workshop (Italy);
Rick Mather; Rolfe Judd/ Claudio Silvestrin; and Tadao Ando (Japan).
The building will cost at least Pounds 40m (while the overall cost will be
Pounds 80m) and work should start in the summer of 1996 in readiness for an
opening in 2000. The Bankside project is unusual in that it involves an
existing building, Gilbert Scott's 1947 power station, most of the exterior
of which will be retained. Because the gallery will house mainly
international art, there seems to be no prejudice against an overseas
architect and Tadao Ando has already been tipped as a possible winner.
Now the Tate's director, Nicholas Serota, will embark on an acquisition
drive to plug the gaps in the Tate's modern collection before 2000. He will
buy works, but also hopes for gifts from Friends of the Tate and will be
approaching leading artists asking for fine examples of their work in return
for immortality.
Meanwhile work will start next year on the revamp of the old Tate, which
will increase the space available to show British art by a quarter. It is
made possible by a Pounds 12m donation from an anonymous American
benefactor.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940927

