FT942-12320

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (28): In search of
the missing millions - Unit trusts / Have savers got too much money on
deposit? The industry thinks so


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


Unit trusts competed fiercely for market share in the first quarter of the
year, as investors' money continued to pour in, mainly through tax-free
personal equity plans and against a continuing background of low interest
rates.
Frustratingly enough for the industry, the value of funds under management
in January fell tantalisingly short of Pounds 100bn, at Pounds 99.86bn, and
the subsequent drop in world markets did not allow the target to be reached
in February either.
The unit trust industry is congratulating itself on having attracted Pounds
8.6bn of net investment in 1993, its best year ever, compared with Pounds
2.9bn of net inflow into the building societies. Despite its satisfaction at
wooing private investors away from the building society, the industry is
still only too aware that the value of its funds amounts roughly to only the
assets of the top two UK building societies.
Its industry body, the Association of Unit and Investment Funds, has begun a
marketing drive aimed at the 'missing millions', which it describes as
'those who may be losing out by keeping too much money on deposit at low
rates of interest.'*
Pep competition
Unit trusts still have much to thank personal equity plans for, as 66 per
cent of unit trust sales to private investors in 1993 was through a Pep.
It is hardly surprising therefore that, in the last quarter of the financial
year, the Pep market was the focus of unit trust competition, as private
investors took their last chance to invest an annual maximum of up to Pounds
9,000 in a Pep.
The Pep price war began well before January, when M&G decided to undercut
other unit trusts groups by waiving altogether the initial charge on its
Managed Income fund. However, since M&G is the largest Pep provider and the
move was backed by heavy advertising, this was a trigger for a steady stream
of 'special offers' and new Pep or fund launches in the run-up to the end of
the tax year.
With attention focused on the initial charge and on withdrawal charges
instead - a step first taken in the UK by Fidelity in 1992 - many companies
have quietly increased their annual management charges, with the standard
fee now at 1.5 per cent. In the long run, this is more detrimental to an
investor's returns: a high initial charge can be made up over time through
performance by a skilled fund manager.
This competition led to Baring Global Fund Managers, the merchant bank's
asset managing arm, pulling out of the Pep market in the new 1994-95 tax
year by ceasing to offer its own Peps. It cited 'a highly congested Pep
marketplace' as putting at risk the provision of 'quality service'.
It may not be long before other small players decide that providing their
own Peps is not cost-effective.
The search for income
Hypo F&C, which attracted Pounds 500m in the first year of its launch in
February 1993 with its High Income fund, announced that it would be cutting
the 'income' paid from 10 per cent to 9 per cent a year from June.
This was interpreted by many as proving how unrealistic the initial 'income'
level had been. The first full year performance figures showed the fund at
the bottom of the tables, with investors suffering a capital loss.
Other companies, mindful of the needs of income-seekers, launched products
aimed at meeting that need. Like F&C, Abbey Life's Extra Income Pep uses
derivatives to boost the yield on the fund, but it has confined the payout
to two percentage points above base rates, capped at 13 per cent. Charges
are 6 per cent initially and 1.5 per cent annually, with a minimum
investment Pounds 3,000.
Others, such as James Capel and Newton, offered Peps which leave it to the
investor to decide the level of income they wish to withdraw. The Generator
Pep is based on Capel's existing UK Tracker fund, which attempts to match
the performance of the FT-SE-A All Share index. The maximum withdrawal level
is 7.5 per cent per annum, with the income paid monthly into a bank or
building society account. Charges are an initial 5.25 per cent initial, with
an annual fee of 1 per cent. Newton's Distributor fund has a higher maximum
withdrawal level of 9 per cent, with charges of 6 per cent initially and 1.5
per cent annually.
Although these are flexible products, in that you can vary the pay-out
levels, withdrawal plans earned a bad name in the 1970s when many investors
had their fingers burnt in the 1974 stock market crash.
Global privatisation
Spurred by the success of two European privatisation funds launched by
Kleinwort Benson and Mercury, which between them raised over Pounds 1bn,
Guinness Flight and Fidelity have marketed two unit trusts investing in
global privatisations.
Both were keen to ensure that their funds qualified for the full annual
general Pep allowance, and have therefore had to restrict themselves to
holding a minimum of 50 per cent in the UK and Europe.
However, Fidelity has allowed itself a broader definition of privatisation
than Guinness Flight, by including companies which it says have benefited,
or will benefit, from the process.
Charges for those investing through the Pep are identical for both funds:
the initial charge is 2 per cent, with withdrawal charges of 3 per cent in
the first year, 2 per cent in the second and 1 per cent in the third. The
annual fee is 1.5 per cent.
*For Autif's unit trust Starter Pack or Pep pack, call 081 207-1361, or
write to 65 Kingsway, London WC2B 6TD.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVII

940429

