FT944-6052

FT  01 DEC 94 / British Gas chairman defends pay rise for chief executive


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


The 75 per cent salary increase awarded to Mr Cedric Brown, the chief
executive of British Gas, still leaves him underpaid compared with many
executives holding similar jobs in British industry, according to Mr Richard
Giordano, the company's chairman.
In a letter in today's Financial Times, Mr Giordano justifies Mr Brown's
Pounds 205,000 increase to Pounds 475,000 as necessary to bring British Gas
pay scales into line with the 'median of a large sample of UK plcs'. Before
the increase, Mr Brown was the most underpaid senior executive in the
company, earning less than the finance director, he says.
The letter marks the first top-level support from fellow directors for Mr
Brown who found himself at the centre of a row after news of his salary
increase was leaked last week. Mr Giordano says: 'The board has decided that
he is the right man to lead British Gas and we fully support him.' It is
understood that Mr Brown intends to keep all the increase. Last week he was
reported to be considering handing part of it back.
Mr Giordano also rejects suggestions that Mr Brown runs 'a cosy monopoly
earning easy profits and high returns'. The company faces increased
competition in deregulated markets, and manages a worldwide business. It is
also engaged in a large-scale restructuring. 'Any knowledgeable observer
must surely realise that Cedric Brown's task in leading British Gas is
hardly easy sailing,' he says.
Mr Giordano makes clear that the salary increase was part of a wider
reshaping of remuneration for senior executives in which rolling contracts
were shortened from three years to two, and share options replaced by a
long-term incentive scheme which rewards executives according to British
Gas's share price performance against that of other blue chip UK companies.
The higher cash payments were agreed in part to allay executives' concerns
that they would lose out financially from changes. Under the old incentive
scheme Mr Brown would have received a 37 per cent bonus this year. Mr
Giordano says that shareholders have nothing to gain by underpaying Mr
Brown.
Letter, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941201

