FT944-14439

FT  22 OCT 94 / Travel: Camping it up in relaxed, small-town America -
Nicholas Woodsworth enjoys the friendliness of Cape Cod


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


I was on US Highway 6, 10 miles out on Cape Cod and heading eastwards off
the end of the continent. Looking down at my speedometer, I realised I was
driving too fast. Hair-whippingly, aerial-bendingly, licence-confiscatingly
fast. I was racing to land's end, to Provincetown. Why? In some futile way,
I was trying to outrun America.
I had been on a tour of New England, surely the most civilised place in the
US. There is some northern level-headedness here, some Yankee scepticism
that wards off the worst of the nation's looniness. This was not drug-crazed
Miami, gun-ridden Texas, or freeway-maddened Los Angeles. This was the ocean
playground of Cape Cod a few days after Labor Day. The crowds had gone home,
the end-of-summer weather was warm, breezy and luminous, and I felt as if I
were playing truant from school.
And I was, in fact, bent on avoidance of some sort. After a few days on the
road I was feeling numbed. I was fazed by America's vast appetites, by its
endless obsessions. For winning. For snack-food. For real estate. For guns.
For fame. For immoderate, indiscriminate and violent behaviour of all kinds.
I wanted to get away.
Even here, far out in the Atlantic Ocean on this curving spit of sand, there
was no getting away entirely. When I came to the place on US 6 where
Barnstable sat to my left and Hyannis Port directly opposite it on my right,
I gave the accelerator a vigorous stab and surged ahead.
I felt as if I were running a gauntlet. Both places are settings of modern
American mythology, Barnstable being the beach resort town gripped by
submarine terror in the movie Jaws, Hyannis Port being the headquarters of
the Kennedy clan.
Both Barnstable and Hyannis Port stories reach a climax with the central
character - shark in one case and American president in the other - having
their heads blown open. It seems a too common ending to American fables
these days.
It was only in the little town of Wellfleet, 50 miles out on the Cape and
well into the protected Cape Cod National Seashore area that I began to slow
down and calm down. Commercially, Cape Cod leans pretty heavily on its
Puritan-forefathers' past. But out here there was less development - fewer
up-market, colonial-style bed-and-breakfasts displaying American flags and
vengeful bald eagles, fewer 'shoppes' selling over-priced antiques, blown
glass, old-tyme fudge.
In Wellfleet, I sat in the sun on the wooden porch steps of a small general
store, sniffed the sea air, and watched sunburnt kids in shorts zoom up on
bicycles, braking in the gravel in front of the store in a small cloud of
dust. It felt welcoming, something from my own small-town childhood summers.
There was nothing from my childhood summers in Provincetown. 'P-town', as
locals know it, is not big; its year-round population of 3,500 lives for the
most part on two long streets running parallel to the sea at the very tip of
the Cape. But Provincetown is not a year-round kind of place: in the summer
season its population swells to more than 50,000. Even now with the holidays
over, one of the last fine weekends of the summer had drawn crowds to the
Cape.
Nor was there anything conventional about these crowds. Provincetown is the
only place I have visited where there are more single-sex couples wandering
along hand-in-hand than heterosexual couples.
Off I ambled down Commercial Street, through Provincetown's motley
collection of weathered grey clapboard Cape houses, smart boutiques, art
galleries, bars, restaurants, tacky tourist shops and fine old mansions. I
was not sure what to make of it all.
There were great numbers of young, muscular men almost uniformly outfitted
in close-cropped hair, moustaches, loose khaki shorts and heavy construction
boots. Occasionally an outrageously camp transvestite in wig and gold lame
dress would saunter past.
Once I saw a group of four men in work boots and skirts trudge by. And
almost as numerous as the male couples were the female couples; heavy boots
for many of the younger women, too, were de rigueur. 'Deride us at your
peril,' they seemed to warn. 'We are not as defenceless as you might think.'
But in Provincetown, gay capital of the east coast US, such statements are
more a question of fashion than body politics. What impressed me most about
the place was its relaxed, friendly manner, the lack of stress which is
urban America's invisible backdrop.
Saturated in an atmosphere of sexual tolerance, Provincetown seems to have
shucked off the enveloping fear of potential aggression - not just sexual,
but physical, racial, and social as well - that is never far from the
surface in America's public life. Gay or straight, most visitors find
Provincetown, to use that much-laboured word, liberating.
But America remains America, and sexual liberation has its own looniness and
tragedies. That evening I attended a 'Celebration of Life' at the Unitarian
universalist meeting house, a large and lovely old wooden church in the
centre of Provincetown. This was just the curtain raiser to a weekend's
worth of festivities, a defiant kick in the teeth to Aids, the disease that
has carried off a good proportion of Provincetown's gay social and business
community. Where gays have disappeared, lesbians have tended to take their
place. What, I wondered, would earlier and sterner generations of Puritan
New England church-goers have made of the proceedings?
Wild Women of All Sexes, a female percussion ensemble, welcomed celebrants
with a feverish tattoo of African drum rhythms as they filed into church
pews. A long string of coloured ribbons, on each of which we had been
invited to write the name of someone we loved, was stretched over the
pulpit. The Reverend Jennifer Justice, an exuberant young clergywoman,
delivered opening words on the themes of peace, joy, hope, love and the
affirmation of life.
Then came a medley of songs by the Fabulous Dyketones, four butch-looking,
acoustically-correct young women in black leather jackets; Marjorie Conn and
a lesbian love poem to Eleanor Roosevelt; stetson-hatted West End Wendy, who
yodeled her way through When a Cowgirl is Happy; Betsy Sykes, a Buddhist who
distributed paper dragon stamps and instructions on how to burn them while
meditating; Proud Mary, a young man who did a drag queen strip while walking
down the nave to the altar. I could go on, but you have probably got the
general idea by now.
I was not entirely sure that I had; I walked out of church with my head
reeling. What had lead historic Provincetown, the place where the
Mayflower's Pilgrim Fathers had made first landfall before moving on to
Plymouth Rock, to such a curious pass? Surely one had a right to expect a
town of unbendingly conservative moral fibre. I decided to consult a
specialist.
Leona Egan, a writer and local historian, laughed at the idea of a
conventional Provincetown when I met her in her old book and antique shop,
The Ironmonger's. She moved to Provincetown for its flamboyance 17 years
ago, she told me, but it was just as flamboyant a place 70 or 170 years ago
as it is now. Gays and lesbians are just the latest in a long line of
bohemians and non-conventionalists to adopt the tip of Cape Cod as their
own.
'It has something to do with being way out on the periphery, away from the
middle class mainstream of American life,' she told me. 'If you come out
this far, you are looking for something different.'
If Provincetown was traditionally cut off from the mainland by 60 miles of
sand dunes and poor tracks, Egan explained, its role as an international
fishing port in the mid-1800s, when it played host to ships from many
countries, made it all the more liberal, cosmopolitan and tolerant. Economic
decline as a port at the end of the 1800s did not spell its end. While other
small towns along the New England coast - Newport, Nantucket, Martha's
Vineyard, Bar Harbour - became select summer resorts for the wealthy and
influential, Provincetown's isolation and cheap rents drew artists and
intellectuals looking for escape.
The playwright Eugene O'Neill was probably the town's most famous resident,
but he was not the first; a major school of American impressionist art had
established itself here before the turn of the century. Edmund Wilson wrote
here in the 1920s, John Dos Passos in the '30s, Tennessee Williams in the
'40s. But Provincetown has never admired pretensions or highbrow snootiness;
along with the bohemians came yearly waves of summer tourists, the source of
Provincetown's livelihood.
'One must never assume that the art gallery assistant or the waitress who
serves you are simply what they appear to be,' Egan warned. 'All sorts of
talented people find endless inspiration here and do whatever they can to
stay on. This is not just a gay centre, it is one of the most beautiful
coasts in America.'
And so it is. While most of the town gathered at the boat slip to celebrate
the Swim for Life, a mass swim across Provincetown harbour, I celebrated the
beauty of Cape Cod with a bicycle ride past high sand dunes and sedge-lined
tidal flats.
Bike rides and summer days always remind me of simpler, long-gone times. So
relaxed did I become, so forgetful of America's extraordinary extremes, that
by sunset I almost forgot where I was. Only when I arrived at Herring Cove
to find a posse of armed state troopers checking out the Festival of the
Spirit of Happiness - a sort of new-age beach party with drums, costumes and
a lot of hugging - was I reminded.
Nicholas Woodsworth travelled to Boston with Virgin Airlines (tel:
0293-747747), which offers off-peak Apex return fares there for Pounds 169.
In Boston he stayed at the Hyatt Harborside Conference Center and Hotel, 101
Harborside Drive. Tel: 617 568 1234. Fax: 617 567 8856.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

941022

