FT944-11075

FT  08 NOV 94 / Arts: Encore for quartet


   By ADRIAN JACK


Encores at string quartet concerts are not routine - they really mean the
audience wants them. On Saturday evening, the Vellinger String Quartet might
have chosen something a little less respectable and sober-minded than the
Adagio of Haydn's Opus 71 number two. Still, something restful was in order
after the storms of Elgar's Quartet.
The Vellinger was only formed in 1991 and in three years it has made a very
strong impression. It has recently released its first CD, which is entirely
of Elgar's music, and earlier this year won first prize at the London
International String Quartet Competition. It was well deserved, for among
the abundance of excellent British quartets at the moment, the Vellinger is
hardly bettered.
Its Wigmore programme on Saturday was an interesting choice - Bartok's Fifth
Quartet was followed by Schubert's A minor Quartet, then Elgar after the
interval. None of these works is really a rarity, yet none is exactly
popular either. The unusual feature was the order, with the biggest
challenge for the audience first and the easiest listen - though Schubert's
work is far from lightweight - in the middle.
Hans Keller used to be patronising about quartets written by composers who
were not string players, yet many of the great string quartets since
Schubert's are by composers who were primarily pianists. Nobody has been
more enterprising in the medium than Bartok, and his Fifth Quartet avoids
many of the obvious qualities an 'outsider' might settle on string
instruments in favour of sonorities which, however daring, even explosive,
strings alone can make. It is hard to imagine this almost tuneless though
hugely expressive work given with more sharply focused passion or attention
to colour. The Vellinger's ensemble and balance were immaculate, the rhythms
as tight as a steel spring.
Schubert's Quartet in A minor is pervaded by a mysteriously veiled sadness
which was enhanced by the Vellinger's precise restraint, though it was fiery
enough when appropriate in the middle of the second movement. The players
took the opening movement quite steadily, more mindful than is necessary,
perhaps, of the 'ma non troppo' that Schubert added after 'Allegro'.
The first violinist began the plaintive first theme almost without vibrato,
then warmed later on - a lovely touch, and typical of those players'
discriminating sense of detail. And unlike quite a few quartets, the
Vellinger boasts a marvellously energetic viola-player, who brings as much
attack and flexibility to his part as a violinist.
If Elgar's Quartet seemed rather disappointing, it was probably not the
fault of the players. There is a magical passage in the slow movement, when
three instruments wind down gently over a cello pedal before the restatement
of the theme; but the theme itself might have been penned by one of Elgar's
pale tors. Still, there was tremendous drive in the performance, as well as
tender affection for the music's moments of faded melancholy.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

941108

