FT944-5863

FT  01 DEC 94 / UK Company News: US closure boosts Dawson Intl - Rising raw
material costs and warm weather limit progress


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


Dawson International, the Edinburgh-based textiles group that has closed its
fleece and jersey business in the US, reported almost doubled interim
profits of Pounds 15.8m for the 27 weeks to October 1.
The figure compares with Pounds 8m, when the discontinued US business made
operating losses of Pounds 8.6m. Operating profits from continuing
operations fell to Pounds 19.6m from Pounds 22.1m on sales ahead to Pounds
204.2m (Pounds 191.8m).
Sir Ronald Miller, chairman, spoke of rising raw material prices, citing in
particular cashmere from China, which had almost doubled in price.
Furthermore, the warm weather of the past couple of months throughout the
northern hemisphere had dampened demand.
The pace of future progress depended on the return of consumer confidence in
Japan and Europe. Nevertheless, he said the latest figures demonstrated 'the
inherent strength of the group as it is now constituted'.
Earnings per share were 6.1p, up from 3.1p, and the interim dividend is
maintained at 1.5p. Gearing fell from 90 per cent to 52 per cent following
the 1-for-4 rights issue in May, which raised Pounds 45m.
Operating profits at the fabrics and yarns division eased to Pounds 9.6m
(Pounds 9.8m) on higher sales. Clothing profits fell from Pounds 11.1m to
Pounds 8.8m, while the fabrics division increased profits from Pounds 1.7m
to Pounds 2.6m.
The group has abandoned plans to sell Dawson Home Fashions, a maker of
shower curtains and bath mats, and has switched the Pounds 12m provision for
its disposal to a restructuring charge. The operating loss from the division
rose from Pounds 500,000 to Pounds 1.4m.
COMMENT
Sir Ronald pointed out yesterday that the exit from the US fleece business
would both liberate the group from a financial drain and enable the
management to concentrate on the continuing businesses. But it looks like
the management will have to run fast just to stand still. Raw material cost
increases will be difficult to pass on as consumers are now after value for
money rather than luxury brand names, and the recent warm weather has curbed
any desire to buy sweaters and thermal underwear. The fierce competition in
the US retail market is more likely to appear in Europe and Japan than go
away. And the management is still lumbered with the shower curtain business.
City analysts yesterday scaled back profit forecasts to below Pounds 30m for
the full year. At the closing price of 126p, up 2p, the group is on a
forward multiple of about 12, which looks high enough.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

941201

