FT942-14845

FT  19 APR 94 / World Trade News: First direct UK client for Intelsat - US
eyes only contract of its kind in west after BT relinquishes monopoly


   By JENNY LUESBY


Intelsat, the world's largest commercial satellite system, has signed up its
first direct customer in the UK, in the only contract of its kind in western
Europe or the US.
Mr Charles Ross of Beednet, the Bravo Eastern Europe Digital Network, last
week agreed a deal with Intelsat to use its satellites to offer voice, data,
fax and TV services between the UK and the Czech and Slovak republics -
where in 1992 Beednet won the first satellite-user licence.
Until now, Intelsat capacity has had to be purchased through the signatories
to the international treaty governing the organisation. However, the UK last
month ended the monopoly of its Intelsat signatory, British Telecom.
This liberalisation has been made more important by the fact that, together
with Hong Kong, the UK accounts for around 11 per cent of Intelsat traffic,
second only to the US, at 22 per cent.
UK companies can now buy satellite capacity directly from Intelsat and take
part in the organisation's user and policy meetings up to board or governor
level.
Intelsat is delighted at the deregulation. 'It is absolutely in our interest
to open up access,' said Mr Irving Goldstein, Intelsat director-general and
chief executive officer. 'Companies don't have to go through a third party
when dealing with our competitors.'
But the UK move is being closely watched by the US signatory, Comsat, which
is resisting pressure to relinquish its own monopoly. Comsat already faces
an anti-trust suit filed with the US Federal Communications Commission by
Panamsat. A clear shift in business to a more open UK market would further
raise the pressure for an end to its special status.
However, the UK move is an isolated one. Although Chile was the first to
break away from signatory-only access to Intelsat, followed last year by
Argentina, both countries account for less than 2 per cent of Intelsat
traffic.
The UK's Department of Trade and Industry, which says it will be 'as
encouraging as possible' in issuing licences to direct users, is also
pushing for users to be allowed direct access to Intelsat's pan-European
cousin, Eutelsat.
'It is to the UK's credit that they have forged ahead with opening this
market,' Mr Ross said yesterday. 'Everyone wants this access and it can only
bring end-user prices down.'
Moreover, the UK banking sector will be a big beneficiary of the Beednet
service, according to Mr Ross, with financial services at a premium in a
rapidly privatising region.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940419

