FT942-14370

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (13): Inns that can offer more - The
attractions of airport hotels


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


Flight delays, severe weather and security alerts make airport hotels more
exciting places than their city centre counterparts.
Delayed flights often provide a sudden surge in demand as airlines search
for rooms to accommodate their passengers overnight. Even when flights are
leaving and arriving normally, airport hotel guests arrive and leave at
unusual times.
Guests usually arrive at city centre hotels in the afternoon and check out
in the morning. Airport hotels have to be ready for guests who arrive at any
time of the day or night and who might demand pre- departure breakfast in
the early hours of the morning.
Mr Grant Hearn, director of the London region of Forte, the UK hotels group,
says: 'Airport hotels have a dynamic quality that other hotels might not
have. There's potential for greater surges in demand.' Mr Hearn, whose
responsibilities include Forte's three hotels at London's Heathrow airport,
adds: 'It gives you a good adrenalin boost. It's quite narcotic in its way.'
The economic downturn in the US and Europe in the early 1990s might have
been bad news for the hotel industry as a whole, but it provided airport
hotels with a boost.
Mr Geof Rochester, marketing vice president at Radisson Hotels
International, says business travellers, under pressure to cut costs, found
staying at airport hotels meant they could cut down on the number of nights
they were away from the office.
Mr Rochester - whose group owns 81 airport hotels in cities as diverse as
Los Angeles, Beijing, London and Guatemala City - says US companies appear
to be continuing to use airport hotels even as the economy picks up.
The proximity of the hotels to the airport has increased their attraction as
meeting places and conference venues. A company which wants to hold a
conference of its European sales managers, for example, will often find it
easier to get them all together at Heathrow or Amsterdam's Schiphol airport
than at a rural retreat.
The conference and meeting business has the advantage, for airport hotels,
of providing a more steady source of business than that which comes from
guests who stay for just a short period before catching their flights.
While the average length of a guest's stay in an airport hotel is shorter
than in a city centre establishment, the difference is less than might be
expected. Mr John Wilson, chief oper- ating officer of Hilton International,
says the average length of stay in an airport hotel is 1.5 nights, compared
with 2.1 nights in a city centre hotel.
Mr Wilson, whose company owns 11 airport hotels worldwide, says the
challenge is to persuade airport hotel guests to stay for even longer. The
key to doing this, he says, is to provide guests with the sort of facilities
that makes it easier to do business from the hotel.
He adds: 'The airport hotel was perceived years ago as being a transient
place. Today's customer expects it to be more. You need excellent meeting
facilities, access to fax machines and transport to the airport. At most
airport hotels, you would also expect to find leisure facilities.'
Airport hotels, particularly in the world's most important business cities,
are becoming less spartan and functional than they were several years ago.
The hotel that Hilton International is currently building at Charles de
Gaulle airport in Paris will have spacious bathrooms and shower cubicles
which are separate from the bath.
Mr Rochester says leisure facilities are an increasingly important feature
of his group's large city airport hotels. Radisson's Los Angeles airport
hotel has its own golf course and its Heathrow hotel has a masseuse.
Apart from attracting conferences and meetings, air crews provide another
stable source of business for airport hotels. Airlines tend to pay lower
rates for their crews to stay in airport hotels than the amounts paid by
ordinary guests. Nevertheless, airport hotels compete fiercely to persuade
airlines to give them their air crew business.
Forte's Mr Hearn says air crew contracts have the advantage of providing a
guarantee that rooms will be filled for a certain number of nights, even if
the rates paid are lower. The normal length of an air crew contract is 12
months. Some airlines, however, are prepared to sign air crew contracts for
as long as three years.
In return, airlines expect hotels to provide their crews with special
facilities. Airline crews need to have sufficient rest to be able to fly
again. Flying in from different time zones, they need to be able to sleep at
odd hours.
At Forte's Excelsior hotel at Heathrow, there is a special crew section with
its own reception desk. Rooms used by air crews are supplied with irons and
have refrigerators instead of mini-bars. To help crew members sleep, they
have blackout curtains.
Hilton International's Mr Wilson says his company offers air crews a service
called Touchdown, which provides a separate lounge where air crews can play
games and get sandwiches and soft drinks 24 hours a day.
Many facilities provided to air crews would also be welcomed by other
guests. Mr Wilson says airport hotels will have to begin providing lighter
meals to all their guests, available at any time of the day or night to take
account of their travel schedules.
Many airport hotels already provide a wider range of restaurants than city
centre hotels because guests cannot wander along the surrounding streets
looking for somewhere to eat.
Mr Hearn says that service airport hotels will also have to provide their
guests with more opportunities to check in for their flights at the desk,
without leaving the hotel. Airlines' security worries have hampered the
establishment of a full hotel check-in service, as airline security demands
that luggage be checked in at the airport itself.
Mr Wilson says, however, that it is already possible to check in for El Al
flights at the Tel Aviv Hilton. He says passengers with hand luggage only
can also check in at Hilton's hotels at Heathrow and Schiphol.

The Financial Times


London Page X

940420

