FT944-14541

FT  22 OCT 94 / Howard backs Rank plan objectors


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent


Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, is backing environmentalists' calls
for a public inquiry into a plan by the Rank Organisation to build a Pounds
100m holiday village in Kent.
Rank says the proposed village, which would be built in 300 acres of
woodland near Folkestone, would bring 1,000 jobs to an area of high
unemployment.
It is strongly supported by the area's local councils, one of which voted
overwhelmingly earlier this month to back the project.
However, local environmental objectors have received the support of the
Countryside Commission and the Council for the Protection of Rural England.
The commission is opposed to the project because it is in an area designated
as being of outstanding natural beauty.
Rank, which also owns the Butlins holiday camps, says the village would be
screened from public view and noise from the site would be inaudible to
local residents.
The village, built on land purchased from the Forestry Commission, would be
a family resort similar to Center Parcs. It would have an 18-acre lake, a
covered water area, a golf course and 840 accommodation units.
Mr Michael Stickland, the project's director, said that although residents
would be deprived of access to the 300-acre site, Rank proposed to open up
750 acres of nearby woodland.
Kent county council's planning sub-committee said last month that the
economic benefits of the project outweighed the environmental impact. The
council is jointly controlled by Labour and the Liberal Democrats.
Shepway district council, which is Liberal Democrat-controlled, also decided
earlier this month to back the project by 41 votes to eight.
Although the district council is the planning authority for the area, the
project still has to be approved by Mr John Gummer, the environment
secretary.
However, Mr Howard, who is MP for Folkestone and Hythe, has urged the
Environment Department to hold a public inquiry into Rank's proposals. In a
statement during the summer, Mr Howard said he had stressed to the
environment department 'the widespread opposition which exists to the
proposals'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941022

