FT941-3606

FT  15 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: FT-SE 100 recaptures 3,200 after
bonds recover - Market report


   By STEVE THOMPSON


The London stock market regained all and more of the ground lost last Friday
as dealers warmed to further encouraging news on inflation and responded to
yet more hints of European interest rate cuts.
There was further comfort for London in the performance of US markets, where
the long bond attracted little pressure in either direction and where the
Dow Jones Industrial Average opened marginally firmer before slipping into
negative territory after London closed.
Mr Ian Harnett at broker Strauss Turnbull described the London market's
showing as 'a tremendous performance', adding that he saw scope 'for more
interest rate cuts'.
The FT-SE 100 Index ended a relatively subdued trading session a net 41.5
ahead at 3,233.4, just short of the day's high and easily outpacing the
FT-SE Mid 250 Index of second line stocks, which rose 28.3 to 3,885.7.
London's excellent performance was part of a Europe-wide advance by bond and
equity markets as some of the impetus of the recent Whitewater story in the
US was lost over the weekend.
UK share prices began the new two-week trading account in good form, with
dealers marking prices higher in response to Wall Street's good showing and
the widespread strong gains in gilts and bonds.
The FT-SE 100 was up 11 points at the opening, a creditable performance
given that no less than 15 constituents were quoted ex-dividend, equal to 12
index points.
Sentiment was given a substantial boost shortly after the opening from news
of much better than expected producer price numbers for February, indicating
that inflationary pressures remain under control and leading to increased
speculation of a further reduction in UK interest rates.
Dealers responded to the good producer price numbers by marking share prices
sharply higher, attempting to head off any sizeable buying, and the FT-SE
100 responded by touching the day's best level, 3,236.1, up 44.2, shortly
before the Wall Street opening.
The latter's reluctance to make further headway and its gradual decline as
European markets closed for the day triggered small bouts of profit-taking
in London, with the FT-SE 100 eventually settling for a 1.3 per cent gain on
the day.
One of the more disappointing features of the trading session, dealers said,
was the low level of business. Turnover was never more than modest all day
and eventually reached 555.2m shares, one of the lowest daily totals this
year. Non-Footsie stocks accounted for 58 per cent of the total.
Marketmakers warned that the low level of activity yesterday would drag the
value of customer business transacted towards the Pounds 1bn. Last week saw
a pick-up in customer activity, which topped Pounds 2bn on Thursday.
The value of customer trade on Friday was Pounds 1.8bn. They also said that
many of the big trading firms had been badly bruised during the erratic
trading in bonds and equities in recent weeks.
Although encouraged by the market's resilience after the recent slide,
senior dealers cautioned that the rest of the week sees a raft of important
economic data from the UK and the US.
From the latter, today's producer price numbers and tomorrow's consumer
price figures are seen as crucial indicators. Tomorrow also brings important
data on UK retail sales and unemployment trends for February.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

940315

