FT941-3496

FT  16 MAR 94 / EU scrutineers move into the driving seat: Efforts to
increase competition on the forecourts


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


The government yesterday in effect handed to Brussels responsibility for
implementing the Monopolies and Mergers Commission recommendations for
increasing competition in car sales.
In doing so it has acknowledged its failure to make carmakers fall into line
with the MMC's findings and angered consumer groups which claim that car
prices are excessively high in Britain.
It has also irritated the country's 7,000 franchised dealer groups, many of
which maintain that competition is being thwarted by manufacturer
restrictions on dealer activities. But manufacturers are pleased at being
given breathing space while the future structure of car retailing and
distribution in Europe is decided by the European Commission.
Motorists and other interested parties must now wait to see what conclusions
the commission reaches in its review of 'block exemption', the selective
distribution system which allows carmakers to sell vehicles through
exclusive networks.
The system - which requires exemption from EU competition rules - is blamed
by consumer groups for allegedly making UK car prices higher than in many
other parts of Europe. It is also the focus of the MMC's case for increased
competition.
The EU exemption, granted in 1985, runs out on June 30 next year. The motor
industry has already been warned by the EU competition directorate that
renewal will depend largely on manufacturers' adherence to EU limits on car
price differentials across Europe and other signs that consumers are not
being disadvantaged.
It is the hope of the UK government that the MMC's concerns will be
adequately addressed by the European Commission. The MMC report on car
distribution and sales, published almost two years ago, found that a complex
monopoly existed in favour of 24 car suppliers.
It identified a number of restrictions imposed by suppliers in agreements
with dealers as operating against the public interest. It also found that a
scale monopoly existed in favour of Ford, but did not find that this
operated against the public interest.
The MMC recommended the removal of a number of restrictions on franchised
dealers imposed by some, but not all, of the leading manufacturers. It cited
those which:
Limit dealers' freedom to advertise outside their territory.
Limit dealers' freedom to hold or acquire dealerships from other car makers
outside their territory.
Prevent dealers holding or acquiring competing dealerships in their
territory.
Restrict the extent to which dealers can sell car-related goods or services,
such as hire, second-hand car sales, fast-fit or multi-brand servicing
outside their territory.
Limit the number of the manufacturer's cars that any dealer or dealer group
may sell in any given period, or the proportion of the total sales of its
cars that may be made by any dealer or dealer group.
Ford and other makers have dug in their heels against the recommendations.
Consumer groups have been consistently critical of manufacturers and
dealers, claiming that mediocre service and repair performance undermines
the concept on which block exemption had been based.
They also want a market free-for-all, with manufacturers obliged to supply
cars to virtually any outlet.
Car prices have been moving closer in line across Europe, partly due to the
recession, partly through currency shifts and as a result of EU warnings
about the conditions under which block exemption might be renewed.
The government, has found the the vehicle distribution and retailing issue
more complex than at first appeared and has concluded that to seek to impose
its will now, with only 15 months to go before the block exemption expires,
would muddy the waters unnecessarily around the European Commission's own
deliberations.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940316

