FT943-13237

FT  20 JUL 94 / International Bonds: BT gives the sterling sector a
badly-needed injection


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY and ANTONIA SHARPE


British Telecommunications (BT) launched two eurobond offerings yesterday to
refinance the three bonds with a total face value of Pounds 539.7m it bought
back on Monday at the UK Treasury's auction of privatised companies' debt.
BT injected badly-needed supply into the long end of the sterling bond
market when it raised Pounds 300m through an offering of eurobonds due 2020,
which were priced to yield 37 1/2 basis points over the yield on the UK
government's 8 3/4 per cent bond due 2017.
It also raised Dollars 375m (increased from an initial Dollars 300m) through
an issue of three-year eurobonds which were priced to yield 15 basis points
above the 6 1/2 per cent US Treasury due May 1997. The proceeds of this
offering were swapped back into sterling 'at very attractive rates,' BT
said.
The pricing of both issues was thought to be generous in view of BT's high
standing among investors. Syndicate managers said this may have attracted
short-term speculative investors hoping to make a profit, so delaying
placement with long-term investors.
The spread on the dollar bond narrowed to 12 1/2 basis points at one stage
but ended the day at 14 basis points over US Treasuries. By contrast, the
spread on the sterling issue was unchanged at the end of the day.
S. G. Warburg, joint lead manager of the offerings with Lehman Brothers,
rejected suggestions that the dollar tranche was too cheap. It noted that,
compared with a new higher-yielding US Treasury bond due August 1997 due to
be issued next week, the spread was only 6 basis points.
This issue represents the final stage of a programme aimed at restructuring
BT's debt profile, BT said.
Bank Nederlandse Gemeenten (BNG), the Dutch municipal finance bank, raised
Dollars 1bn through an offering of five-year eurobonds, its first benchmark
issue since it was assigned triple-A debt ratings a month ago.
As expected, the offering was arranged by Goldman Sachs, which acted as
financial adviser to BNG on its rating. Syndicate managers said that while
the pricing of the bonds, to yield 28 basis points over five-year US
Treasuries, was fine, the amount raised was too big given that the demand
was mainly from retail investors. 'The issue should have been Dollars 750m
tops,' said one syndicate manager.
However, Goldman Sachs said it had sold its allocation of bonds by mid-day
and that when the bonds were freed to trade, the spread was unchanged. It
added that demand had been strongest in Europe.
The lukewarm reception to BNG's bonds, despite the issuer's strong name
recognition among eurobond investors, fanned concerns about the imminent
Dollars 1bn two-year global bond offering by Federal Home Loans.
Market talk that FHL hoped to achieve a yield spread of just 9 basis points
over two-year Treasuries worried many syndicate managers since FHL is still
relatively unknown in the eurobond market.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940720

