FT941-16877

FT  07 JAN 94 / Arts: Drawn from Chinese life today - Lynn MacRitchie finds
the image of China's New Man, self-assured as never before


   By LYNN MACRITCHIE


Collectors have responded favourably to the contemporary Chinese figurative
paintings now on show at the Marlborough Gallery. 'They are buying them
because they like them,' said a gallery representative, and it is easy to
see why: all the artists are competent painters or printmakers.
China was perhaps the only culture before modern times to appreciate, in the
works of its traditional ink and wash painters, the essentially abstract
qualities of brush work. After 1949, the Communist regime imported into
China's art schools the methods of their Soviet brethren, so that for the
first time China came face to face with academic realism. The legacy of
Socialist Realism, which required artists to be skilled in representing the
human figure in poses convincing in form if unlikely in content, continues
in its art schools to this day. Thus China produces excellent painters,
skilled in the use of oils in a manner often mourned as lost in the west and
able to draw the human figure and its surroundings with confidence and
skill.
The Marlborough show is a miniature version of the major exhibition first
seen at the Hanart Gallery, Hong Kong, early last year, curated by Johnson
Chang who has played a vital role in bringing China's contemporary art to
the attention of the west. Some of the work was also seen at the New Art
from China exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in Oxford this autumn.
Most of the paintings are expertly done, their subjects recognisable, their
content, based on aspects of contemporary Chinese life, intriguing.
The differences between them are also intriguing, and lead to speculation as
to how the work of painters in China will develop in future. Two strong
tendencies are evident: a gritty naturalism, best exemplified by Liu Wei and
also demonstrated by Liu Xiaodong, Xia Xiaowan, Wang Jianwei and Zeng Fanzhi
and 'Political Pop', of which Wang Guangyi is the leading exponent.
The paintings of Wang, who is nicknamed 'China's Andy Warhol' for his clever
amalgamation of images recalled from the posters of the Cultural Revolution
with the brand names of Western products, are attractive to a western
audience: they combine what westerners still expect to see in Chinese images
 -Red Guards waving banners and Little Red Books - with the comforting proof
that consumerism has, after all, proved triumphant.
For some Chinese, however, these images are more thought provoking: many
view the onslaught of materialism with anxiety and dismay. Although
presently enjoying the trappings of his Pop-based success, Wang has shown
himself capable of radical switches in style. His work of the early 1980s
was minimalist, concerned with purity of form. His style changed as the
shifts in economic policy produced such dramatic social changes that 'a
response was necessary', he said. Wang had already worked through a series
using images of Chairman Mao in the mid-1980s before beginning the current
series, known as the 'Great Criticism', in 1990.
Others working in the pop style such as Yu Youhan, Li Shan or Wang Ziwei
continue to find the Great Helmsman a useful subject. An interesting twist
on Maoist themes is offered by Feng Mengbo, who in 'Game Over: RMBDollars
10', 1993, paints the workers, peasants and soldiers depicted on Renminbi
notes as the characters in a video game. This mocking response from one born
in the 1960s to the political class distinctions which had so devastating an
effect on his parents' generation typifies the rejection by the younger
generation of any kind of political philosophy, a state of mind which brings
young Chinese close to their European and US contemporaries in a way not
previously experienced.
While the necessity to work through the lexicon of Maoist symbols will fade,
the new realist painters, absorbed in recording their personal experience,
have managed to break with the demands of the state-sponsored art machine
while using the skills learned within it to make works which convey the
essence of everyday life. Their subjects are no longer political leaders or
spurious heroes but themselves, their friends and families, shown with an
accuracy which, though it can be shocking, is also compassionate. While Liu
Wei remains the master of meticulous mundanity, his family rendered, dirty
finger nails and all, in luscious paint, 'Family Portrait,' 1993, by Zhang
Xiaogang is striking in its tender melancholy.
Turning away from the cramped interiors and melancholy atmosphere evoked so
skilfully by his colleagues, Fang Lijun has evolved a style all his own,
part realist, part surrealist. A grisaille canvas, one of a series produced
this summer, which shows a simple image, based on a photograph of the artist
submerged in a swimming pool, is the most thought provoking painting in the
show. Illuminated by sunlight through the water, the figure confronts the
viewer bald, naked and alone, hand raised in a laconic 'peace' sign.
In a country in which social stability has been most reliably maintained
through the ties of family obligations, surviving even the Maoist onslaught
of younger against older generations, the self-contained individual,
responsible to no one, is a truly frightening figure. This ghostly grey
image could be seen as a metaphor for China's latest version of the New Man,
no longer socialist, no longer political, the lone young operator of the
1990s. Self-assured as never before, he looks out at the world and, frankly,
he doesn't give a damn. Aged leaders, beware.
New Art from China: Post 1989. Marlborough Fine Art, 6, Albemarle Street,
London W1X 4BY. Tel 071 629 5161. Until February 12.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940107

