FT943-897

FT  27 SEP 94 / Aristide supporters 'take over Haitian town'


   By JAMES HARDING and GEORGE GRAHAM


   PORT-AU-PRINCE, NEW YORK


Armed supporters of exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide were reported to
have taken over a Haitian town yesterday, heightening concern that US troops
may have to intervene more strongly to maintain order.
The civilian unrest arose as President Bill Clinton announced that the US
was lifting all unilateral economic sanctions against Haiti, except those
targeting the outgoing Haitian military junta and its supporters.
A Haitian military official claimed that Aristide supporters had 'attacked'
and taken over the northern coastal town of Le Borgne. The town is near Cap
Haitien, where US troops shot dead 10 Haitians in a clash at a police
station at the weekend.
The latest apparent upsurge of violence has underlined the difficulty of
US-led efforts to bring about a bloodless change of power in Haiti.
US officials are concerned that, after acting to protect civilians from the
Haitian militias and police, US troops may have to intervene to protect the
Haitian security forces.
Fear of retribution is growing among the security forces, who have been
accused of repression and murders in defence of the military-backed regime
in the past three years.
'The US supports the peaceful expression of political opinions, but will not
tolerate acts of violence,' Mr Stanley Schrager, US embassy spokesman in
Port-au-Prince, said in an attempt to stem popular unrest.
But in further trouble, a UN food warehouse near Port-au-Prince was
ransacked. A mob emptied it of 11 tonnes of food, a UN official said.
Mr Clinton, in his speech to the United Nations General Assembly announcing
the lifting of sanctions, said the US would act as quickly as it could to
restore water and power to Haiti.
US ambassador to the UN Ms Madeleine Albright said the decision would also
clear the way for resumption of commercial flights to Haiti. Food could be
shipped to Haiti beyond staple items permitted under the sanctions such as
flour, beans and rice, she said.
Haitians will be allowed to transfer money to and from Haiti, and Haitians
in the US will now be able to send any amount of money to family and friends
in their homeland, instead of the Dollars 50 (Pounds 32) a month allowed
under the sanctions.
But to keep the squeeze on the Haitian military officer corps and its
wealthy supporters, a total of 600 people, their assets in the US will
remain frozen and a targeted ban on their financial transactions will stay
in place.
Counting on Americans, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940927

