FT943-12748

FT  23 JUL 94 / Mercury loses court battle to change BT's charging regime


   By ANDREW ADONIS


Mercury, the largest competitor to British Telecommunications, yesterday
lost its legal battle with the industry watchdog, Oftel, to force through a
more favourable regulatory regime.
In a ruling with implications for the wider system of utility regulation,
the Court of Appeal dismissed Mercury's case without even hearing the
substantive points at issue.
By a 2:1 majority, the court supported Oftel's claim that it was not
appropriate for it to enter into the dispute between the regulator and
Mercury over the regime under which BT charges competitors for the use of
its network.
However, Mercury was given leave to appeal to the House of Lords, and there
were strong indications yesterday that it would do so.
Mercury had sought a declaratory ruling from the court on the interpretation
of BT's licence in order to pre-empt a decision on the issue by Mr Don
Cruickshank, Oftel's director-general.
Mercury's aim was to change the basis on which it pays for use of BT's
network from a per-minute system to a peak-capacity system more favourable
to competitors.
It was the first time a competitor to one of the privatised utilities had
sought to use the courts to influence the regulatory process. Lord Justice
Dillon, siding with Oftel, said the issue was 'firmly entrusted' to Mr
Cruickshank and not a matter for the courts to decide.
Ms Maev Sullivan, Mercury's director of strategy, said: 'The real issue  -
the price competitors must pay to deliver their calls to BT's customers -
has yet to be tested by the courts.'
Oftel welcomed the judgment, and said it remained 'fully confident' that it
had discretion to interpret BT's licence without judicial interference. The
decision to seek legal redress reflected Mercury's frustration at its
inability to persuade Oftel to change the regulatory system in its favour.
In recent months it has launched a strenuous campaign in the courts, the
media and with MPs to bring pressure to bear on Mr Cruickshank.
However, it has yet to achieve any success. Mr Cruickshank described recent
Mercury claims as 'shrill and unnecessary'.
Oftel is reviewing aspects of the current interconnection regime, and will
publish a consultation paper in the autumn. In addition to capacity-based
charging, Mercury is seeking to secure abolition of the special payments it
has to pay BT as compensation for the losses BT makes on its local network.
Mercury describes the payments as a 'tax on competition', a charge strongly
denied by both Oftel and BT.
BT would be free to carry entertainment services in some parts of Britain by
the late 1990s under plans to be unveiled by the Commons trade and industry
committee next week. It is expected to urge big changes to the industry's
licensing, franchising and exclusivity arrangements.  Report, Page 5
Mercury's bitterness, Page 5

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940723

