FT942-15954

FT  13 APR 94 / World Trade News: Aid agency challenges Gatt chief over
'winners' claim


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   MARRAKESH


Aid agencies yesterday challenged the robust assertion by Mr Peter
Sutherland, Gatt director-general, on Monday that all countries would gain
from the Uruguay Round trade accords.
Mr Peter Madden, of London-based Christian Aid, said there was agreement by
economists that there would be losers, at least in the short term, while the
long-term benefits were uncertain. African and Caribbean countries stand to
be worst affected.
Christian Aid is calling for additional assistance to compensate those made
worse off, by way of debt relief, aid to take advantage of market
opportunities, and the granting of new trade preferences.
Ministers in Marrakesh for this week's signing of the Uruguay Round deal are
due to approve a decision calling for extra help for poor net food-importing
countries, who may face higher food bills as western export subsidies are
reduced. But Mr Madden said this did not go far enough.
A World Bank/OECD study published last year put the losses for sub-Saharan
Africa at Dollars 2.6bn (Pounds 1.78bn) annually after 10 years, while
internal World Bank estimates suggest transitional costs could persist for
15 years. Other studies also indicate that many of the world's poorest
nations stand to gain little or lose out from the round.
Christian Aid identifies the losers as falling into four categories: net
food importers; countries now benefiting from trade preferences, notably
under the Lome Convention with the European Union; commodity exporters; and
those too underdeveloped to take advantage of new trading opportunities.
Gatt economists take a more optimistic line, arguing that the estimates do
not take account of benefits from improved trade rules or the extra
investment they could stimulate by underpinning economic reform and trade
liberalisation programmes.
In a speech to African finance ministers last month, Mr Jesus Seade, Gatt
deputy director-general, said there would be no 'food price shock'. Prices
for some products were estimated to rise by about 5 per cent over six years.
as a result of the Uruguay Round accords.
This was likely to stimulate domestic production in importing countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940413

