FT943-1025

FT  27 SEP 94 / 'Variable geometry' of measuring up for wider EU: An
emerging strategy for Union enlargement


   By LIONEL BARBER


After several false starts, the European Union is developing a strategy to
incorporate the former communist countries of central and eastern Europe.
A glimpse of the new Ostpolitik appeared last week in Paris when France and
Germany called upon the European Commission to produce a white paper next
spring setting out a plan for enlargement to the east.
The Franco-German proposal borrowed heavily from an existing Commission
paper in Brussels, but the debate about 'widening' the Union is moving away
from theoretical musings to the identification of practical obstacles.
These remain formidable. Even the most advanced candidates - Hungary,
Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia - have only a third of the per
capita income of the Twelve. Under current rules, membership for these four
alone would require a 75 per cent increase in EU spending on agricultural
subsidies and aid to poorer regions, according to a recent study by
Professor Richard Baldwin of the Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Brussels has therefore concluded that it is better to defer an acrimonious
debate about farm reform and structural funds. No doubt this will make it
much more difficult to carry out the revolution in EU common agricultural
policy which many believe is the pre-requisite for the next round of
enlargement; but Commission officials favour putting the onus on the east
Europeans to adapt in order to prepare for membership, perhaps around the
turn of the century.
The latest idea is to emulate Lord Cockfield's celebrated 1985 white paper
which set out a list of measures for the (then) European Community to
complete the single market by 1992. Brussels would map out a road for
integration covering, say, the difficulties of adapting its economic,
banking, legal and transport systems to EU norms.
This process is the logical extension of trade liberalisation which began,
grudgingly, in 1991 and has since accelerated. Free trade in industrial
goods will take effect in 1995 (steel in 1996 and textiles in 1997). But
numerous non-tariff barriers continue to exist.
One approach would be to list up to 150 measures for the east Europeans to
adopt to make their legislation EU-compatible. In return, the EU would phase
out anti-dumping measures and thereby extend the single market eastwards, a
Commission official said.
Germany, which holds the rotating EU presidency, is also pressing to extend
ministerial contacts with the central and eastern Europeans in official
council session. Despite misgivings among some member states that this
amounts to 'membership by the back-door', Germany has persuaded its partners
to hold an important session on October 31 in Luxembourg.
Earlier this year, France warned Germany not to push too fast on
enlargement. French officials were irritated by German pressure tactics to
wrap up accession negotiations with the Nordic countries and Austria; but
their broader concern was that a premature, German-led drive to open the
next round of enlargement to the east would weaken the Union and France's
own position vis-a-vis Germany.
On the surface, the Franco-German tiff has resulted in tighter
co-ordination. Germany, which hands over the presidency to France on January
1, is trying hard to keep its closest ally on board through joint planning
sessions on eastern Europe.
In return, France has quietly accepted that potential EU enlargement must
embrace the EU candidates (Poland, Hungary, the Czech and Slovak republics,
Bulgaria and Romania) as well as the three Baltic states of Latvia,
Lithuania and Estonia, and Slovenia.
A French official says France has come round to the view that enlargement to
the east is inevitable; but the question is how to carry it out without
weakening the Union, or diluting it to a free trade area. Hence the recently
launched debate on how best to organise a Union of 16-25 members, and
Franco-German noises in favour of a 'hard-core' of committed
integrationists.
Polish and Hungarian officials say they welcome this debate on 'variable
geometry' because it makes east European aspirations to become members of
the EU more credible. But they are keeping a close eye, too, on their
short-term interests, specifically the package of measures which may emerge
from the EU heads of government summit in Essen in December.
Among the priorities are a firm calendar for starting accession negotiations
and observer status for the inter-governmental conference to review the
Maastricht treaty.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940927

