FT942-12444

FT  29 APR 94 / Life sales customers set for Pounds 1bn boost


   By ALISON SMITH


Fiercer competition among life insurers, arising from new requirements on
sales agents to provide more information about their pay and products, is
likely to benefit customers by Pounds 1bn a year, research published
yesterday concludes.
The report coincided with the publication by the Securities and Investments
Board, the City's chief regulator, of the final format for the documents
sales agents must provide for their clients, together with guidance to help
companies comply with the rules on disclosure.
The life industry has been expecting for some time to have to disclose more
information on products and commissions. But many companies have argued that
until the detailed requirements set out yesterday became available, they
could not carry out much of the work necessary to adapt to the new regime.
Companies have until the beginning of next year before they are required to
adopt the new rules and documentation, but regulators hope that competitive
pressures will encourage some insurers to volunteer the information later
this year.
While one or two companies have indicated that they expect to be able to
meet the new requirements well before then, many face an extensive task
which will include redesigning their products to make the 'up front'
commission costs lower and policies more attractive.
The study carried out by consultancy firm National Economic Research
Associates found that consumers were likely to benefit by about Pounds 1bn a
year from lower charges and reduced sales, notably of policies which lapse
early, together with more unquantifiable advantages such as being better
able to take decisions on an informed basis.
The costs to the industry of implementing the new regime were estimated at
Pounds 50m-Pounds 60m a year for the first 10 years.
Mr Andrew Large, SIB chairman, emphasised the significance of a single
regulatory organisation to protect the private investor, ensuring that
companies adopted the new requirements. 'Regulators have got to ensure that
the new regime is adequately complied with,' he said.
The SIB has said it intends to recognise as a regulator the Personal
Investment Authority, which will take over retail financial services
regulation in July.
Alarm bells ring for life insurers, Page 8
Observer, Page 19
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940429

