FT942-16123

FT  12 APR 94 / Looming tax rises fail to dim signs of recovery: Consumer
loans up - Building outlook good


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY and ANDREW TAYLOR


A rise in consumer borrowing and an optimistic forecast for the construction
industry indicated yesterday that the pace of UK economic recovery is being
maintained.
Net lending to consumers rose to a seasonally adjusted Pounds 277m in
February - compared with the Pounds 250m predicted by economists - from
Pounds 235m in January, the Central Statistical Office said.
It had been feared that lending, which had fallen in January from December's
high levels, would continue to decline as the April deadline for the tax
rises approached. The February increase was due mainly to a rise in net
lending by finance houses, largely responsible for hire-purchase agreements,
which rose to Pounds 283m from Pounds 255m in January.
Further good news for the economy came from the National Council of Building
Material Producers, which published the most optimistic forecast for
construction output since 1989.
The council, representing companies with a combined annual turnover of more
than Pounds 30bn, predicted that output, measured in constant 1990 prices,
would rise by 2 per cent this year, and by 2.5 per cent in each of 1995 and
1996.
The growth was forecast to be led by private-sector house building and a
better performance than expected from commercial construction.
The Treasury welcomed the credit figures. Officials said consumer borrowing
was still high and remained consistent with a continuing upward trend of
spending by consumers.
Two other reports published yesterday showed borrowing by consumers holding
up well. Both the Finance and Leasing Association, whose figures are taken
from a wider base than those provided by the CSO, and Infolink, a credit
information organisation, reported a strong increase in borrowing in
February compared with the year before.
However, the CSO's figures showed that in the three months to February, net
lending to consumers fell to Pounds 937m from Pounds 1.077bn in the previous
three months, suggesting that the underlying trend was now downwards, in
spite of February's rise.
This more pessimistic assessment of the health of the British consumer is
supported by the fall in retail sales growth to 2.5 per cent in February,
the slowest year-on-year rate since May 1993, and by a Gallup poll
suggesting that consumer confidence dropped to a four-year low in March.
The CSO said new credit advanced to consumers - leaving debt repayment out
of account - rose to a new monthly record of Pounds 5.01bn in February from
Pounds 4.74bn in January. The rise in new credit advanced was due to an
increase in the use of Visa and Mastercard credit cards and to increased new
lending by finance houses.
Repayment of building society loans fell to Pounds 6m from Pounds 14m in
January. The amount of credit outstanding on bank credit cards was unchanged
after a small repayment in January.
Construction forecast the best since 1989, Page 11
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940412

