FT943-13084

FT  21 JUL 94 / World Trade News: Modest results seen for EU's regulatory
plan


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, Business Editor


The European Union's plans to stimulate greater regulatory competition
between member countries - a keystone of its single market programme - are
likely to produce only modest results, according to a study*.
The study, by Stephen Woolcock, a research fellow at the London School of
Economics, says this is likely to limit the application of subsidiarity -the
principle, enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, that decisions be taken at
the lowest appropriate level.
The study also concludes that the approach pioneered by the EU does not
offer a basis for an effective framework for global deregulation, because it
requires governments to surrender a politically unacceptable degree of
sovereignty.
Since the mid-1980s, the EU has sought to break down nat-ional barriers by
requiring member countries to recognise one another's regulations and
standards for products and services, in the belief cross-border competition
would lead them gradually to converge. But the study finds little evidence
that has happened so far and says important obstacles remain:
Persistence of past national policies and practices, which prevent
development of a true single market;
Limited transparency and lack of information on the impact of national
regulations and the effect of changing them;
Inadequate enforcement of EU and national rules, which undermines mutual
confidence among regulators;
The ability of national regulators to keep standards above the agreed EU
minimum level.
When national rules have converged, it has been more often due to technical
discussions between experts than to cross-border competition.
'The general conclusion that appears to emerge. . . is that the scope for
competition be-tween rules is, in reality, fairly limited,' the study says.
'Those who see it as a panacea for problems of deciding be-tween national
and EC-level regulation, or as a means of avoiding having to decide on the
form of European-level regulatory policies, seem likely to be disappointed.'
* The Single European Market: centralisation or competition among national
rules? Royal Institute of International Affairs, Pounds 8.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940721

