FT944-11081

FT  08 NOV 94 / People: Green-Armytage's transition to textiles


NM Rothschild's Jock Green-Armytage (right), 49, who is to take over as
chief executive of textile makers William Baird at the start of next year,
is one of those merchant bankers who has always fancied running a proper
business but has had some difficulty making a permanent transition from City
life.
Canadian-born Green-Armytage describes his new job as 'an irresistible
challenge'. He takes over from Donald Parr, 64, who has been Baird's chief
executive since 1976 and will remain on the board as non-executive chairman.
Green-Armytage has been a director for a couple of years and first got to
know the textile industry when he was helping bring some of Rothschild's
textile clients to the stock market in the 1970s.
Although Baird has never cut its dividend, has survived the recession better
than many textile companies, and has no gearing, there has been a feeling in
the City that there was a need for some 'fresh blood' at the top.
The company suffers from low margins on its Pounds 500m turnover and a lot
of top management time has been involved in trying to dispose of the group's
non-core Darchem engineering and contracting activities.
Donald Parr says his company has gone outside for his replacement because
the textile industry was 'not a tremendous pool to fish in'.
Green-Armytage joined Rothschild's corporate finance department in 1970 and
left in 1981 to be managing director of Guthrie Corporation, an
international industrial holding company which had been bought by the
Malaysian government. He increased its profits from Pounds 1.7m to Pounds
22m and led Guthrie back to the UK stock market in 1986.
However, Guthrie was soon swallowed by BBA Group and Green-Armytage did not
have quite the same impact in his next job - helping sort out Kelt Energy,
the highly indebted energy producer.
In little more than a year he had quit and returned to Rothschild where he
has been helping reorganise the management of the asset management area.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

941108

