FT942-15463

FT  15 APR 94 / UN Rwandan role in doubt as Belgians quit


   By LESLIE CRAWFORD and GILLIAN TETT


   NAIROBI, BRUSSELS


The United Nations was yesterday searching for ways to salvage its
peacekeeping operation in Rwanda following a decision by Belgium, the former
colonial power, to pull out its 420-man UN contingent from the strife-torn
nation in central Africa.
Mr Willy Claes, Belgian foreign minister, said in Brussels that the
inadequate protection provided for the UN troops meant that it was now
'senseless' to continue the operations under the existing mandate,
established after a 1993 peace agreement in Arusha.
The UN presence, he said, had been unable to prevent the deaths of tens of
thousands of people in Belgium's former colony. Furthermore, there was such
an anti-Belgian climate in Rwanda that soldiers' lives were in danger.
Mr Claes notified Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, of
Belgium's intention to withdraw at a meeting in Bonn this week.
Yesterday, visibly angry over the events, Mr Claes added that 'the
credibility of the UN is now at stake'.
His comments reflect the disgust felt by Belgian politicians about the poor
protection provided for the UN troops in Rwanda following the massacre of 10
Belgian soldiers last Thursday - deaths that occured in a 'terrible,
terrible' manner, Mr Claes said. The 10 were executed by rampaging Rwandan
soldiers in the violent aftermath of President Juvenal Habyarimana's death
in an air crash nine days ago.
In addition to the Belgian troops serving with the UN force, Belgium has
also had up to 800 paratroopers in the country organising the evacuation of
foreign nationals. These troops left last night ahead of a deadline set for
their withdrawal by the Rwandan government.
Mr Boutros Ghali has ordered Gen Romeo Dellaire, the Canadian commander of
the 2,500-strong UN Assistance Mission to Rwanda (Unamir), to prepare plans
for withdrawal. He has told the Security Council he does not think the
operation is viable without a Belgian presence or replacement troops.
The Security Council was meeting last night to discuss what role, if any,
the UN could now play in Rwanda. The peacekeepers arrived last October, at
the request of Gen Habyarimana's government and the rebel Rwandan Patriotic
Front (RPF), which had signed an accord in August to end three years of
civil war.
But the collapse of the peace agreement, with rebels fighting the Rwandan
army for control of the capital, Kigali, has rendered the UN mission null
and void.
The rebels yesterday denied they had agreed to truce talks as they fought
for a second day for control of the capital.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940415

