FT942-14598

FT  20 APR 94 / EBRD slimming called into question


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


   ST PETERSBURG


This has been the conference of sweetness and light for the European Bank of
Reconstruction and Development as speaker after speaker has praised the
bank's new president Mr Jacques de Larosiere and staff for re-ordering
priorities and re-organising the bank's baroque internal structure.
But close questioning of senior bank staff at the EBRD's annual meeting in
St Petersburg this week reveals a less shining picture. There is concern
that the cost cutting has left the re-focused institution without the
staffing capacity to do the job properly.
Since taking over from Mr Jacques Attali last September the new president
has cut costs by 8 per cent. Most savings came from cutting bank staff by 10
per cent to 720 and merging the formerly separate merchant and development
banking departments into a unified banking department.
The new department, headed by Mr Ron Freeman, has been strengthened by
bringing in an extra 24 per cent professional banking staff who had been
employed elsewhere under the old structure.
But the bank is soon to lose Mr Mario Sarcinelli, the former head of
development banking who helped set up the new bank and make it operational
in record time. After his departure senior bank officials question whether
the organisational structure of the reformed bank will be able to keep track
and give direction to an institution which operates in 26 disparate
countries and has been saddled with a daunting, and ever-growing, variety of
complex tasks.
At present there are no plans to replace Mr Sarcinelli, who is due to take
over as president of Italy's troubled Banca Nazionale del Lavoro. But senior
officials fear that without the appointment of a replacement vice-president
to manage the five 'southern tier' country teams ranging from Hungary to
central Asia, Mr Freeman - a deal-making merchant banker, not a bureaucrat,
by nature - will be swamped.
Until now Mr Freeman has concentrated on the 'northern tier' countries
ranging from the Czech and Slovak republics through Poland and Russia and
the Baltic states but including Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, the two central
Asian states most attractive to private foreign investors and hence to the
bank's new focus on co-financing private sector deals.
The 'northern tier' is where the bulk of the EBRD's deals to date are
concentrated, because it includes the fast track reforming central European
states and one country, the Czech republic, which enjoys triple-B investment
grade status. It thus stands out as the former communist country most able
to attract foreign investment on its own account.
'In the Czech republic the market is already sifting out the priorities,
leaving the EBRD to co-finance the very large transactions which require
additional financing,' says Mr Jiri Huebner, the EBRD's Czech and Slovak
team leader.
But this is a far cry from countries such as Ukraine and the more obscure
central Asian states where foreign investors need the most additional
'comfort' from the EBRD and other international financial institutions and
where the need for big, long-term infrastructure, energy and environmental
projects is greatest.
The southern tier is where the EBRD's development banking skills are most
needed and where the bank has been more heavily committed by Mr de
Larosiere's promise to set up EBRD projects in every post-communist member
state. He also promised to bring the bank closer to the grass roots by
strengthening the banks presence in the client countries.
As the bank's disbursements and commitments grow in size and complexity the
need for a stronger senior level management team in the bank's London
headquarters is likely to become more apparent.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940420

