FT944-14383

FT  24 OCT 94 / Single currency should be delayed, says EU bank chief


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


The European Union should consider fixing the exchange rates of its
currencies irrevocably, Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy, president of the European
Monetary Institute, says.
But the head of the precursor of a European central bank believes there
should be a delay before introducing a single European currency in the third
and final stage of the EU's planned move to economic and monetary union.
Until now, the presumption has been that the Ecu would be introduced rapidly
as a single European currency once exchange rates were locked. But Mr
Lamfalussy said in an interview that a phased introduction of stage three
would ease many potential technical difficulties surrounding Emu, such as
agreement on common European banknotes.
'The threshold of stage three of Emu is the locking of the exchange rates,'
he explained. 'You cannot do that halfway. That means a European central
bank, one monetary policy, and harmonised interest rates on wholesale money
markets.'
Other things could be 'left open', he said. 'There need not be a swapping of
domestic banknotes for notes denominated in European currency units (Ecus).
I could imagine that taking place months or years after locking the European
exchange rates.'
Mr Lamfalussy conceded there would be some drawbacks in locking exchange
rates without then moving to a single currency with its own banknotes. But a
phased introduction of the final stage of Emu would have advantages.
Companies would have the benefit of locked exchange rates without having to
wait for the EU to overcome the technical difficulties of the banknote
change.
The idea had political attractions because people would have time to adjust
to a single currency rather than having Ecus thrust upon them. Also Europe's
commercial banks, which have expressed concern at delays in tackling the
practical aspects of Emu, would be reassured.
Mr Lamfalussy said the process of adaptation would be fostered if the
individual EU currencies were made legal tender in all the countries of the
union in the early stages of a phased introduction of a single currency.
He said the phased approach to stage three was not specifically his idea,
but was being discussed among officials preparing for Emu and was compatible
with the Maastricht treaty.
Mr Lamfalussy said that his institute, which has been in temporary premises
in Basle, Switzerland, would begin work in its new headquarters in
Frankfurt, Germany, next month. The EMI would then concentrate on fostering
co-operation among EU central banks and preparing the planned European
central bank so it could begin operating once political agreement has been
reached to complete Emu.
While Mr Lamfalussy said the prospects for Emu had improved over the past
year, he did not expect stage three to begin as soon as 1997, the earliest
date envisaged in the Maastricht Treaty.
Instead, he said he believed that there would be stage three and a European
central bank 'in five, six or 10 years' time'.
Europe's realistic banker: Lamfalussy interview Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941024

