FT942-12573

FT  29 APR 94 / The far-right gains a voice and votes


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


   AMSTERDAM


Projected gains by the far-right in the Netherlands' general elections next
Tuesday could tarnish the country's reputation for tolerance.
Polls show that the Centrum Democraten (CD), a far-right party which won a
large number of city council seats in municipal elections in March, is
projected to win up to eight seats in the 150-seat lower house of
parliament.
At the last general election in 1989 the CD managed to win just one seat,
but this was enough to cause serious alarm in a country which cherishes its
liberal tradition.
The Netherlands' best-known far-right politician, the CD member of
parliament and party leader Mr Hans Janmaat, is currently standing trial for
making discriminatory remarks and inciting hatred towards foreigners.
He and his party are campaigning under the political slogan 'The Netherlands
Is Full Up', and they suggest that immigrants, ethnic minorities and an
annual inflow of 50,000 asylum seekers are affecting the country's
prosperity and social security system.
The rising popularity of Mr Janmaat has forced the Netherlands' mainstream
establishment to rethink its response to the far-right.
Until the 1994 general election campaign, politicians and journalists
completely ignored Mr Janmaat in the hope that a lack of publicity would
staunch his support. Newspapers did not cover his party or interview him,
and politicians in parliament refused to engage him in debate.
This has now changed. HP/De Tijd, an Amsterdam-based news and arts magazine,
recently interviewed Mr Janmaat under the banner 'Dumbo or Demon?' Other
magazines have infiltrated the CD and smaller extremist parties and
published exposes on their members.
Lobby groups working on behalf of ethnic minorities, such as the Dutch
Centre for Immigrants (NCB), oppose the media attention given to Mr Janmaat.
But Mr Tinus Heijmans, NCB spokesman, says: 'I can well imagine that
although politicians would rather shun the CD, they sometimes feel forced to
speak out.'
A more serious and controversial view is that mainstream Dutch parties are
moving to the right in their views on immigration and asylum seekers. Mr
Heijmans believes that it is the tone, rather than the substance, of the
other parties that is worrying.
Mr Frits Bolkestein, head of the Liberals, a pro-business party that formed
part of two government coalitions in the 1980s, has taken a lead in trying
to foster a national debate about immigrants.
Mr Bolkestein denies that he is opposed to foreigners. But he says that the
Netherlands is attracting more asylum seekers because of a perception that
it is an easier option than France or Germany, both of which have tightened
their procedures.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940429

