FT944-2541

FT  16 DEC 94 / Personal View: Taming the wild beast of derivatives


   By ALFRED STEINHERR


The explosive growth in financial derivatives since the early 1980s has been
one of the most profound structural de-velopments in financial markets since
the organisation of limited-liability equity markets early last century.
Derivatives - financial instruments that derive their value from that of an
underlying asset or index - have added another dimension to business
decision-making. Derivative finance has commoditised the risk of price
changes in many common financial assets, such as equity, fixed income and
foreign exchange.
For example, the risk of losses through exchange rate movements can be
separated from the risk of price movements in foreign assets. A stream of
variable interest rate payments can be converted into fixed rate payments.
The risk of an interest rate rising or falling by more than a set amount can
be bought or sold.
A fundamental economic benefit of this development is that it makes it
easier to quantify the financial risk in any venture and thereby produces
better allocation of resources. However, this happy picture has been marred
by the growing realisation that the new industry has burst upon a
regulatory, supervisory, accounting and legal stage that is not suited to
deal with it.
In particular, the traditional supervisory and regulatory structure for
large banks - the key players in derivative finance - is ill-equipped to
deal with the problem. The existing focus on periodic examinations of
on-balance sheet transactions is inadequate to deal with an environment
where the on- and off-balance sheet positions change so fast that even
end-of-day positions are no longer sufficient measures of an institution's
risk profile.
There is also a fear that markets have become less transparent and more
interconnected, that derivative business is unduly concentrated in a small
group of dealers (some of the big investment banks and securities firms) and
that derivative markets are critically dependent on uninterrupted liquidity
in the markets for the underlying assets. These have given rise to concerns
that problems in the derivatives markets could deal serious shocks to the
financial system.
The regulatory and supervisory response has so far focused on refining
capital requirements, improving supervisory oversight and increasing
disclosure. Although this approach is a step in the right direction, it does
not deal with the basic issue, namely that derivative finance has
fundamentally changed the balance between regulators and financial
institutions in favour of the latter. Instead, emphasis needs to be put on
fostering the growth of a framework for derivative markets that shifts
responsibility for the control and management of risk back into the private
sector.
One of the most notable institutional features of derivative finance is that
it is currently provided by two types of market organisations: the organised
futures exchanges and the providers of over-the-counter derivatives such as
banks. The OTC operators account for about two-thirds of notional values in
outstanding obligations.
What makes this surprising is the similarity between a large proportion of
the contracts sold by each type of organisation. The logical step in
developing a reliable market framework would be to persuade a large part of
the OTC derivative activity to shift into self-regulatory clearing houses or
exchanges - as has happened in other financial markets.
The major advantage of OTC operations is customisation - the products are
tailored for the customer. However, most of the forward exchange and swap
contracts involve little such tailoring. It is estimated that 60-70 per cent
of outstanding OTC contracts could be handled by standardised contracts on
the exchanges.
Many of the leading OTC dealers have taken steps to improve their risk
management. However, risk to the financial system is generated by the weaker
traders and not the best-managed ones. It would be preferable to reduce the
risk through the self-regulation imposed by exchanges, which maximise
liquidity by standardisation.
The importance of derivative markets to the stability of the financial
system suggests that there is a public interest in increasing their
transparency, integrity and liquidity. The playing field should therefore be
tilted away from the OTC markets, which escape relatively lightly under the
present regulatory structure, to induce migration to organised exchanges.
This could be done by increasing capital requirements for banks that take
derivative positions, so that they are as costly as positions taken through
derivative exchanges.
Finally, the increase in transparency would reduce systemic risk. The high
credit ratings of exchanges, their lower transaction costs and higher
liquidity would provide additional impetus to sustained growth in demand of
derivative products by end-users.
The OTC market would retain its important innovatory function, and offer
contracts for which demand is not large enough for exchange trading. But
lower trading costs, economies of scale from liquidity and the low systemic
risk pushed trading in equities - originally also an OTC operation - on to
exchanges. This will also happen for derivatives, and the sooner the better.
The author is director of financial research, European Investment Bank. With
David Folkerts-Landau, he wrote 'The Wild Beast of Derivatives: To Be
Chained Up, Fenced In, Or Tamed?', which won first prize in the 1994 Amex
Bank Review Awards

The Financial Times


London Page 18

941216

