FT942-14879

FT  19 APR 94 / Kidder fires senior trader over Dollars 350m fake profits


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


Kidder Peabody, the US investment bank, has fired its chief government bond
trader - a man who was paid Dollars 9m (Pounds 6.1m) in salary and bonuses
in 1993 - for fabricating Dollars 350m in trading profits over the past
year.
It was still unclear yesterday whether Mr Joseph Jett had fabricated the
trades in an attempt to cover up losses incurred elsewhere, or whether the
scheme was designed primarily to boost his own pay packet, the size of which
is closely tied to the profits he generates as a trader.
Mr Jett, 36, had worked at Kidder for almost three years.
Six other employees were 'placed on special assignment' pending an
investigation into what Kidder said was a scheme to create phantom trades
and profits in the trading of government bond 'strips'. Strips are widely
traded financial instruments that represent the interest payments
accumulated over the life of a bond.
General Electric, Kidder's corporate parent, will today report an after-tax
charge of Dollars 210m against its first-quarter earnings to cover the
Dollars 350m in non-existent profits.
Kidder was quick to point out that none of its customers was affected by the
scheme, which will leave the firm nursing a first quarter loss of about
Dollars 140m.
The disclosures were greeted with astonishment on Wall Street, where the GE
share price was Dollars 1 1/2 lower at Dollars 95 1/4 in heavy trading.
Ms Helen Keehner, a Kidder official, said yesterday: 'We believe that this
was essentially an individual action by someone on his own who came up with
a very sophisticated scheme which our normal systems operations and audit
procedures would not have caught.'
According to sources close to the firm, the complex scheme involved Mr Jett
entering into millions of dollars of 'forward' contracts that would allow
him to convert the government strips he held back into regular bonds at a
later date. However, each time the forward contracts were due to be settled,
Mr Jett allegedly kept renewing them.
By doing so, he was apparently able to fool Kidder's computerised trading
system into thinking that he had made a profit on the unconsummated trades.
Kidder said the Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York Stock
Exchange had been informed of the affair and that it would be up to the
regulatory authorities to decide whether any criminal action should be taken
against Mr Jett.
When people prove to be a costly liability, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940419

