FT941-4004

FT  14 MAR 94 / Envoys near critical stage in hunt for Bosnian peace: US and
Russia anxious to begin drawing up maps


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


The US and Russia, now co-ordinating every move in the search for peace in
the former Yugoslavia, want to resolve one of the more intractable aspects
of a settlement for Bosnia: the maps.
After three days of negotiations in Vienna, Zagreb and Sarajevo, Mr Charles
Redman, the US special envoy, and Mr Vitaly Churkin, his Russian
counterpart, are reaching a critical stage in negotiations over Bosnia's
future.
US and UN officials said that if the Bosnian Serbs could not be brought on
board to join the complex federation of Bosnia's Moslems and Croats - the
draft constitution of which was agreed by the two former adversaries in
Vienna yesterday - then the Bosnian Serbs would have to decide whether to
cede land in return for peace.
Otherwise, they added, the Bosnian Serbs could find themselves in a 'limbo',
with their territory The search for a settlement intensified over the
weekend when:
General John Galvin, the former supreme commander of Nato, helped forge a
defence agreement between Bosnia's Croats and Moslems leading to the
establishment of one Bosnian army. US officials stressed this would not
provide the means for a new offensive against the Bosnian Serbs. 'Its aim is
to stop the fighting between Croats and Moslems. It is also the first step
towards creation of a federation in one part of Bosnia,' a US official said.
After talks in Zagreb, the Croatian capital, Mr Churkin said he would not
rule out Serb participation in the federation. Even Mr Momcilo Krajisnik,
speaker of the Bosnian Serbs' self-proclaimed parliament and an important
negotiator, said Serbs were willing to join peace talks or some some kind of
co-existence with Moslems and Croats within Bosnia.
In Sarajevo, Bosnian Serb and Moslems said they had set up a preliminary
agreement to open up to civilian traffic routes in and out of the Bosnian
capital. This could be the beginning of the lifting of the siege, and an
eventual demilitarisation of the city.
Mr Churkin, who met Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic in Sarajevo
yesterday, will today hold talks with Serb leaders in Belgrade, the Serbian
capital. US officials said the talks could pave the way for an overall peace
settlement for Bosnia and Croatia.
Mr Churkin must establish today whether President Slobodan Milosevic of
Serbia is ready to sue for peace, which would lead to the lifting of
sanctions.
Any moves towards peace would require Belgrade persuading the Bosnian Serbs,
who hold nearly 70 per cent of Bosnia, to reduce their control to about 49
per cent.
During the Bosnian Croat and Moslem talks hosted by the US in Vienna, maps
have not been discussed for the federation as any decisions would have to
involve negotiations with the Bosnian Serbs.
Sections of the Bosnian Serb leadership are loath to cede any land. It would
mean breaking the fragile territorial corridors linking Serbs living in
Krajina, south-western Croatia, to Bosnian Serb territory, and ultimately to
Serbia proper.
'It is difficult to know if the links between Milosevic and the Krajina
Serbs are weaker than those between the Bosnian Serbs and Krajina,' a UN
negotiator said.
'Milosevic has to decide if he is prepared to weaken those links (with
Krajina) in return for sanctions being lifted; equally the Bosnian Serbs
must recognise they have no legitimacy as a self-proclaimed state if they do
not negotiate,' he added.
But the overriding consideration with regard to the status - and fate - of
the Krajina Serbs is the extent to which they can be used as pawns by
Belgrade in the hunt for a settlement with Croatia and Bosnia.
'The future status Krajina holds is the linchpin for peace between Croatia
and Serbia,' a UN peace negotiator said. 'Croatia wants full control of its
territory, including Krajina. But the Krajina Serbs do not want to live in
Croatia, regardless of pressure from Belgrade. They are the Achilles' heel.'
Despite this, Bosnian Serbs - and Mr Milosevic - continue to hold a strong
negotiating position. They can argue that the federation of Bosnian Croats
and Moslems will be linked to Croatia through a confederation, in effect
creating an eventual Greater Croatia and rewarding Croat gains in western
Hercegovina. Consequently they can ask why the Bosnian Serbs in eastern
Bosnian cannot link to Serbia proper.
'The answer is that the US wants to maintain a semblance of Bosnia's
territorial integrity. But we know that under a new guise, and with haggling
over the maps, Bosnia is already being carved up between Zagreb and
Belgrade,' a UN official said.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940314

