FT941-4162

FT  12 MAR 94 / Survey of Residential Property (7): A stress-free way of
finding a home - The advantages of professional home searchers / Relocation
agents


   By GERALD COGGAN


Relocation (or buying) agents appeared in the 1980s - after gazumping but
before negative equity. Part of their job is to prevent gazumping and
negotiate prices down. That automatically deters property inflation. Their
main function is to find and buy houses and flats.
At the end of the process, the service should have made clear to a client
all the pros and cons of the homes on their shortlist.
They charge a fee. But as they negotiate with the vendor's estate agent,
they can produce larger reductions on the selling price than the individual
buyer could achieve.
Add an immeasurable saving in hassle and family stress, and buying agents
can prove worthwhile.
If you want an expensive standard item, such as a flat in Knightsbridge,
central London, but find it daunting to work through the estate agents'
lists, then a buying agent will do the hard work, study the lists and
traipse around town to find a place to suit you and your way of life.
Buying agents create a level playing field in the game of winning a new
nest. With their help it can become an emotion-free commercial deal. And
when it is a matter of saying 'no', you have a third party to do it for you.
For example, flats and family houses are a routine request for London
company Property Vision.
If you are famous or rich, or both, an extra advantage is that the vendor
and his agent will not need to know your name until a deal is settled.
A buying agent starts by learning as much as possible about you and your
family and where you aspire to live.
A visit to your existing home is essential, unless you are overseas. The
agent sees how you live and what you want to improve on in a new home.
Expatriates should provide as much information as possible.
Then comes the search. Bedrock International starts in the office, sitting
you in front of a screen for a computerised armchair tour. You call up
pictures of possible properties and see if they appeal. Another plus is that
buying agents can often find properties that have not been put up for public
sale. Property Vision calls it 'the invisible market'.
Keeping an ear to the ground, the agents hear of houses that owners are
reluctant to admit to having to sell. Why? Perhaps because of two of the
property world's Three Ds, debt and divorce (the third is death).
Rupert Bradstock, of Property Vision, suggests that some owners, worried
about market conditions, did not want to risk their houses failing to sell
and thus going stale. His company bought more than Pounds 17m worth of
country houses last year, 53 per cent of them invisibly.
Last year's coup for Wilson & Wilson was to buy Doddington Park, a stately
home in Gloucestershire. Charterhouse International, a young company in
Bath, secured a whole crescent house in Bath (1 Cavendish Crescent) with an
offer close to the asking price of Pounds 275,000, which it now manages for
its clients after supervising the restoration.
Another success was The Moot House, at Downton, in Wiltshire, built in 1650,
listed Grade I and on the market at Pounds 650,000.
Peter Lewis, Stacks' man in Dorset, had a red letter day when he bought an
old rectory from a vendor one morning and, in the evening, bought another
old rectory at auction for that morning's vendor.
How did he hear of the first house? 'Contacts, local knowledge, you know,'
he said.
The searches lead to a shortlist, on which the buying agent can give a full
and frank report on the properties.
That is useful as information in brochures becomes thinner, as Tad
Zurlinden, of the Association of Relocation Agents, points out. The agent
will also advise on schools, golf clubs, hunts, shops and all other local
matters, and will know a surveyor to call on quickly.
The buyer then visits the properties with the agent, possibly without the
vendor being present. All that remains is to make a choice and instruct the
agent to make an offer and negotiate.
It is no surprise that buying agents occasionally end up as friends of their
clients. After holding their hands (figuratively) and discovering what they
think really matters (which takes time to learn), they come to know them
well.
Fees are in two parts. A preliminary retainer pays for the agent's
out-of-pocket expenses, and shows that you are serious and will commit
yourself, acting fast if need be. If it has a limited term, an extension may
be negotiable. Wilson & Wilson's retainer is Pounds 750, Stacks' Pounds 400
and Property Vision's Pounds 1,000. Add VAT to all sums.
Once the deal has been agreed, the retainer is usually set against the main
fee which is a percentage of the buying price, and often 1.5 or 2 per cent,
sometimes 2.5 per cent. The Property Service in London charges 1 per cent
with a minimum charge of Pounds 2,000. For a truly expensive property, you
may be able to elicit a discount.
County Homesearch has a variation. It charges the greater of 1 per cent of
the buying price or 15 per cent of the saving negotiated between the asking
price and the buying price.
'It is an incentive for us to find our clients the right property at the
right price,' the company says.
Property Vision will negotiate with the vendor's agent for a property the
client has found on his own for 1.5 per cent.
Buying agents must be prepared to advise a client not to proceed if the
property is in the wrong place or is too expensive. 'Some clients need the
sergeant major's approach,' Zurlinden says. 'It means they do not waste
their money.'
If a house on the invisible market costs too much, Property Vision advises
clients to wait until the owner puts it on the open market.
In the 1980s, when plenty of property was for sale, relocation agents helped
private buyers. In the recession they found themselves working for companies
that were moving and needed to rehouse their staff - the sort of task that
Hambros Countrywide Relocation specialises in - and were successful in
pushing down prices.
Last year, private buyers started to return. But it has been a thin market.
Too few houses have been offered publicly. This has been the best test of
the agents' power to search in the invisible market. ARA (031-558-3060) is a
professional body that issues a directory listing members' areas of
expertise. Groups covering much of the country that are members include
County Homesearch (0872-223349) and Stacks (0666-860523). ARA members
include disgruntled estate agents, converted to the other side, former
teachers, former army officers and surveyors. But many companies are not
members, including Charterhouse International in Bath (0225-482727) and
chains such as Black Horse and Nationwide.
London-based companies such as Bedrock International (071-351-2625), The
Property Service (071351-6552), Property Vision (071-602-8788) and Wilson &
Wilson (071-727-1977) also see no need to join ARA, nor do the buying
departments of the major national estate agents - who will be glad to act
but may refrain from buying a house their company is selling, to avoid
conflict of interest.

The Financial Times


Survey PRO Page 6

940312

