FT942-16312

FT  11 APR 94 / The Markets: Deflation, the biggest threat to Japan's
economy - Economic Eye


   By GERARD BAKER


Japan's spring pleasures - cherry blossoms, the start of the baseball
season, changing the prime minister - seem to have an uplifting effect on
the Japanese economy. In the last three years, the end of winter has been
marked by official figures apparently showing the end of the long recession.
But in the last two years, the revival has disappeared as quickly as the
cherry blossom itself. Will 1994 repeat the pattern?
In the first three months of 1992 gross domestic product grew at an
annualised rate of 2.4 per cent. But that was as far as the recovery got. In
the remaining three quarters of the year output contracted.
Last year the first quarter produced growth at an annualised rate of more
than 3 per cent. Again the recovery proved short-lived.
All the indications are that the first three months of 1994 will again give
rise to more vernal optimism. Consumption, housing starts and business
confidence have all been rising, and the first quarter GDP figures are
expected to show the familiar resumption of growth.
Unabashed by previous premature declarations of recovery, Mr Yasushi Mieno,
the Bank of Japan's governor, claimed last week that there is something
durable about this revival.
He pronounced the economy to be 'near the bottom' of the current cycle - not
jubilant rhetoric, but from the cautious Mr Mieno, a significantly more
upbeat assessment than previous judgments.
His remarks led to a flurry of selling in the bond market as investors took
them as a hint that the official discount rate, currently just 1.75 per
cent, might also have reached the bottom of its cycle.
However, the Japanese authorities are likely to look especially hard at the
evidence before concluding that the recession is really over, and adjusting
policy accordingly.
For the most significant threat to Japan's economy is not inflation, but its
opposite.
The risks of a lasting deflation are probably now greater in Japan than they
have been in any big industrial country since the Great Depression.
Falling asset prices have been a feature of the Japanese economy for the
last few years as the 'bubble economy' burst. At first that disinflation was
seen as an unwelcome but healthy corrective to the excesses of the financial
boom.
But now the virus has spread to the rest of the economy.
The core rate of consumer price inflation (excluding seasonal food prices)
is now down to 1 per cent. But taking the last three months compared with
the previous three, consumer prices have actually fallen by 1 per cent.
Even that may understate the extent of the deflation. The CPI's basket is
revised just once every five years, and since consumer spending patterns
have changed, the likelihood is that real inflation is even lower.
Wholesale prices have been falling for more than a year. In the year to
February they dropped by 3.1 per cent.
Wages are also flat. Though the recent shunto spring wage negotiations
resulted in 3 per cent wage increases, this disguises the real picture.
Bonuses represent as much as half of a worker's salary and have been cut, or
in many cases, cancelled this year. Last year total wages rose by 0.6 per
cent and the 1994 figure could be lower.
The yen's strength is making matters worse. The latest endaka, a 15 per cent
revaluation in the last year, is only now filtering into prices. Though it
will be a once and for all hike in the price level, the higher yen will
depress demand further.
Bank lending grew at an historically low rate of just 0.5 per cent in
January, and the money stock (M2 plus cds) spent most of 1993 falling.
In short, the conditions are in place for a classic, 1930s-style deflation,
a downward spiral of falling prices and falling demand which characterised
the Great Depression.
In a deflation firms have to cut prices to remain competitive in a push
downwards, reducing wages, and so demand, still further.
Falling prices depress consumption in other ways; consumers defer spending
as prices fall, hoping to benefit from future lower prices.
But it is the financial aspects of deflation that most threaten Japan at
present. Firms are already labouring under real interest rates of around 4 5
per cent, even though nominal rates are at an all-time low.
Worst of all is the spectre of real debt inflation - the real value of
companies and individuals' debt is rising. The recession has forced
companies which borrowed heavily in the 1980s to strengthen their balance
sheets. Yet debt-laden firms now find that the real cost of servicing their
debt is rising.
Net debt to income ratios have fallen in the last few years, yet the number
of bad debts carried by the banks has risen sharply. If the real debt burden
were to rise again, the already weakened financial sector would be further
handicapped.
This may sound alarmist to a world weaned on the perils of inflation. Isn't
a bit of deflation merely a beneficial side effect of Japan's depressed
demand?
A feature of the post war economy has been relatively low inflation. Some
argue that the severity of the current recession has simply produced a huge
output gap - the difference between actual ouput and potential output - 10
per cent by some estimates. In those circumstances low inflation - even by
Japanese standards - is only to be expected.
But a deflation acts more like a spiral than a cycle. When an economy gets
pulled into such a vortex, counter-cyclical stabilisers may not be
effective.
Until now, the Bank of Japan has pursued an accommodatory monetary policy -
with the lowest nominal interest rates in the world.
But the real deflationary pressures at work in the economy mean that policy
is tightening by default.
Another spring glimmer of recovery may tempt the Bank to keep rates where
they are. If it does, this upturn may prove to be as durable as the average
Japanese prime minister.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940411

