FT942-14935

FT  18 APR 94 / World Bond Markets: Bundesbank cuts get lukewarm reception -
Capital & Credit


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


There are not many tricks the Bundesbank can learn from the Bank of England,
but one useful lesson would have been to observe the unenthusiastic response
which the UK gilts market gave to the quarter-point cut in UK base rates two
months ago.
The German government bond market reacted in the same lukewarm fashion last
Thursday when the Bundesbank cut a quarter-point from the discount rate to 5
per cent, and from the Lombard emergency funding rate to 6.5 per cent.
If the Bundesbank had hoped that the unexpected timing of the cuts and its
optimistic statements about German money supply and inflation would bolster
confidence in the German government bond market, then it failed dismally,
analysts say.
'The main problem was that the Bundesbank only cut by 25 basis points rather
than its usual 50 basis points,' says Mr Reiner Back, head of fixed-income
strategy at Deutsche Bank Research in Frankfurt. 'The market took this as a
sign that German interest rate cuts are petering out.'
The market's perception that the current interest rate cycle is close to its
bottom is reflected in the futures market, where Euro D-Mark contracts are
discounting three-month money of 5 per cent by March 1995, down from 5 1/2
per cent currently, but of 5 1/2 per cent by December next year.
'This implies that there is another 50 basis point cut to come in the
discount rate and then that's it,' says Mr Thomas Mayer, senior economist at
Goldman Sachs in Frankfurt.
Mr Kit Juckes, international economist at SG Warburg in London, believes
investors are increasingly reluctant to buy bunds because of the question
mark hanging over the durability of low German rates.
'Money-market rates look forward and therefore become detached from official
rates,' he says. For example, in March 1983 when the discount rate fell to 4
per cent, the bottom of that interest rate cycle, three-month money touched
a low of 4 3/4 per cent.
However, by September it had returned to 6 per cent, even though the
discount rate remained unchanged until the following June. 'So what is the
potential for German bond yields to improve from where they are already?' he
asks.
The lack of investor appetite for bunds is also holding back the market,
says Mr Mayer. The rise in US rates has made foreign investors less inclined
to move into bunds while domestic investors, especially individuals, feel
uncomfortable about buying bunds at current yield levels.
'The Bundesbank's small move will not unblock this situation since it was
not enough to encourage investors to buy,' says Mr Mayer.
The buyer's strike must be worrying the banks, whose holdings of bunds have
sky-rocketed since the start of the year, although last week's rate cuts
should make these holdings cheaper to finance.
According to Bundesbank statistics, banks now own DM281.9bn worth of bunds,
up from DM262.8bn at end-1993 and DM186.6bn at end-1992.
'The rise of DM20bn since the end of 1993 must surely have been involuntary
since bund prices were falling,' says Mr Mayer.
The rise in bund holdings could reflect the slowing demand for loans in
Germany, analysts say, although it is likely that the banks would be keen to
use any rise in bund prices to reduce their stockpile.
Mr Back says the positive outlook for inflation in Germany and the
Bundesbank's decision to stick with a variable rate for its repurchase
agreements should help to push bund yields lower. He forecasts that 10-year
bund yields will fall below 6 per cent by the end of the year.
Now that the Bundesbank has restored a relatively wide spread between the
discount rate and the repo rate, now at 5.70 per cent, it has room to cut
between five and 10 basis points off the repo rate this week, analysts say.
The Bundesbank's cuts last week were followed by rate cuts in Switzerland,
Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark and analysts believe that
Italy, Spain and France will soon do the same.
However, it remains to be seen to what extent European bond markets can
decouple from the US, where rates are heading higher.
Mr Ifty Islam, fixed-income analyst at Merrill Lynch in London, says the
lack of significant buying since the start of the second quarter has made it
difficult to get any momentum going. So, while it will be possible for the
German market to decouple at the short end of the yield curve, it will be
far more difficult at the long end.
Analysts say that if the Bundesbank wants to learn anything from the Bank of
England, it should copy its recent decision to publish minutes of top-level
meetings. If it did, the market would not be confused so frequently by
conflicting statements from Bundesbank council members and would have a
valuable insight into its inner workings.
But despite all its protestations of wanting to reduce volatility, perhaps
the Bundesbank enjoys playing cat and mouse with the market.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940418

