FT941-3568

FT  16 MAR 94 / Microsoft reorganises to meet market challenges


   By ALAN CANE


Microsoft of the US, the world's largest personal computer software company,
yesterday announced a worldwide reorganisation to improve decision making
and market responsiveness.
It said the new structure was necessary to achieve its goal of doubling
sales over the next four years. Last year the company had net income of
Dollars 953m (Pounds 652m) on sales of Dollars 3.75bn.
Microsoft says the reorganisation will not lead to job losses, in contrast
to the experience of other computer companies. 'It will not reduce our
overall headcount, but it will allow us to grow without increasing our head
count as much as our current organisation would require,' the company said.
A memorandum sent to employees says the company could seize 'incredible
opportunities' in the next few years, but implies that competitors,
including Lotus and Novell, are superior in sales and marketing: 'We cannot
just follow and react to what others are doing.'
Restructuring is expected to take between two and three months, with all the
key elements in place before the start of Microsoft's new financial year in
the autumn.
The company denied the reorganisation was a response to an investigation of
its business practices being carried out by the US Justice Department. Last
year, the US Federal Trade Commission failed to agree whether to proceed
against the software company after more than three years of investigation
into whether Microsoft had abused its position as market leader.
Microsoft, boosted by sales of MS-Dos and Windows personal computer
operating software, has shown quarterly earnings growth of between 25 and 55
per cent in recent years. In the first quarter of the current year, however,
growth slowed to 14 per cent. Analysts suggested the company was maturing
and rivals were eating into its market share.
The reorganisation is designed to accelerate decision-making, simplify
marketing messages to customers and business partners and improve
efficiency. Seven product groups are to be created to cover, for example,
personal operating systems and desktop applications. New customer units will
be responsible for individual users, organisations and companies which build
Microsoft software into their own products.
Microsoft believes central Europe could become its single largest market,
with the potential of Dollars 1bn in yearly sales.
Regrouping to get closer to the customers, Page 30
Multimedia in the office, Survey, Section III

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940316

