FT942-15755

FT  14 APR 94 / Commission takes Greece to court over Macedonia


   By GILLIAN TETT


   BRUSSELS


Greece yesterday denounced a European Commission decision to begin legal
proceedings over its blockade of Macedonia, setting itself on what appeared
to be an embarrassing collision course with the Commission.
The Greek government, which currently holds the presidency of the European
Union, called the legal action 'extremely unfortunate, inappropriate and
contradictory'. It gave no indication that it would lift the blockade, which
was imposed after a dispute over Macedonia's flag and constitution.
The dispute could undermine attempts to build a tighter European foreign and
trade policy and potentially calls into question the authority of the
Commission's legal institutions.
Commission officials admitted that the case will test the ability of the
European Court to force Greece to comply with any decision if Athens insists
on playing by different political rules.
Yesterday's decision, broadly supported by the other 11 EU member states,
involves two separate legal actions. One action calls for an interim
injuction to lift the blockade, and could be decided within three weeks.
The other action, which will probably take 18 months to complete, is a
request for the European Court to make a full judgment about whether the
blockade infringes article 225 of the Maastricht treaty.
This article requires that member states should not impose unilateral
commercial sanctions except in cases of national security. The Commission
has rejected Greece's argument that Macedonia represents a national security
issue.
In theory, the Maastricht treaty gives the court the powers to fine a member
state for flouting a court ruling. In practice, though, this power has never
been used, and remains unclear in scope.
As one diplomat yesterday said: 'Greece has good domestic political reasons
for wanting the whole thing to drag on for as long as it can. . . For the
Commission, though, this means the embarrassment will grow.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940414

