FT943-12972

FT  22 JUL 94 / The New Economic Order: Latin Americans rediscover their
neighbours' markets - Companies are looking next door as protectionism gives
way to competition


   By ANGUS FOSTER


Latin American countries, for decades forced by trade barriers to look
beyond their neighbours, are rediscovering one another's markets.
Protectionism is slowly being replaced by competition and governments are
withdrawing from economies. As a result, big private companies are starting
to think of the region when they make their plans.
Brahma, Latin America's biggest brewer, is expanding beyond Brazil, where it
has a 50 per cent market share. A factory opens in Argentina in January to
serve southern countries such as Argentina and Chile. Earlier this year
Brahma bought Venezuela's second-largest brewer, Cervecera Nacional, which
will give access to important northern markets such as Colombia.
Mr Marcel Herrmann Telles, Brahma's chief executive, says the company will
move into other countries in the continent once it has built up sales
through exports.
'The idea is for Brahma to become the brand name for all of Latin America,'
he says.
The shift towards regional rather than national thinking has two main
motors. First, regional trade groupings are leading to closer cross-border
ties. Second, increasing personal wealth is improving cultural links via
television and foreign holidays for the middle classes.
Mercosur, the most important trade grouping to have developed so far, has
led to rapid increases in cross-border trade and investment among its four
members, Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay. Trade between the four
countries has more than doubled since the agreement was signed in 1991 and
reached about Dollars 8bn last year as tariffs have been reduced.
Mercosur's success has had a marked impact on exporters in Brazil, Latin
America's biggest economy, who have traditionally relied on US and European
markets. Exports to Mercosur partners, which accounted for 4 per cent of
Brazil's total exports in 1990, reached 14 per cent of the total last year.
The proportion of exports to the US and European Union, meanwhile, have
fallen from 24 to 21 per cent and 31 to 26 per cent.
Brahma's expansion into Argentina has been helped by Mercosur, especially
because of reduced bureaucracy and customs procedures. But the company's
overseas push was at first prompted by some very Brazilian circumstances.
Until recently Brazil's government set price ceilings on beer, which limited
the company's profits and investment. The removal of price controls in 1990,
one of a number of measures adopted by former president Fernando Collor to
liberalise Brazil's markets, allowed Brahma to restore profitability. But it
coincided with a steep recession, which lasted until last year and led to
declining beer sales.
'We therefore had the time and the resources to look at the rest of the
world,' says Mr Telles. 'We thought our competitive advantage lay in Latin
America where the Brahma name had resonance, so we started exporting to
Argentina.'
Brahma started selling canned beer to Argentina in 1990. Two years later it
switched to exporting 1-litre returnable bottles, a system described as
'logistically almost impossible' by Mr Telles and which involves the return
to Brazil of lorry loads of empty beer bottles. Even so, Brahma claims a 7
per cent share of the Argentine market, which it hopes to increase once the
new brewery opens.
Mr Telles says Brahma's expansion makes sense because of a similarity among
the region's beer markets. With the exception of Brazil, where three brewers
are in often vicious competition, the main markets are dominated by near
monopolies. These companies often owe their pre-eminence to government
backing and a traditional lack of concern for competition. They include
Quilmes, which has more than 60 per cent of the Argentine market, and
Empresas Polar in Venezuela with a 90 per cent market share.
Brahma believes it can compete because consumers and distributors
increasingly want competition to improve the quality and range of products.
Governments are also less interested in blocking competition to defend
national companies. Argentina, which has been opening its economy since
1991, has not reacted against Brahma's gain in market share, says Mr Telles.
This is probably also because Argentina's beer market has grown rapidly, so
that domestic brewers have not lost sales.
'There is a process of opening, both commercial and cultural, going on in
Latin America. Certainly a few years ago it would not have been possible,'
says Mr Telles.
Further progress may be erratic. While there are similarities between
markets, there are also huge differences. Venezuelans like to drink beer on
the streets and in small bottles, the latter so that it does not warm up too
quickly in the heat. Argentines prefer to drink from larger bottles at home,
and increasingly buy their beer in supermarkets rather than bars.
'It's no good trying to use a standard formula for these markets, neither in
terms of taste, packaging or distribution,' Mr Telles says.
In spite of the growing trade links, a single regional grouping still looks
a long way off. Brazil's still uncompetitive economy is likely to delay the
other Mercosur countries, which are obliged to negotiate trade treaties
collectively, from linking with the US and Mexico in the North American Free
Trade Association.
Countries such as Chile may be candidates to join both groups. But other
countries, such as Colombia and Venezuela, appear ready to join neither.
Instead, a series of sometimes inter-linked free trade areas and bilateral
trade treaties, several of which exist, are likely to continue. These could
slow further tariff reductions and cross-border competition between areas,
forcing companies to think in terms of interlinked sub-regions. This article
is the sixth in a series on the recovery in Latin America. Previous articles
appeared on June 24 and 30, and July 5, 12 and 15

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940722

