FT942-12439

FT  29 APR 94 / ICI ahead on rising sales volumes and cost cuts


   By DANIEL GREEN


Rising sales volumes and restructuring benefits helped ICI post
first-quarter pre-tax profits of Pounds 93m, compared with Pounds 71m for
the first quarter of 1993.
The rise would have been at least Pounds 10m higher if exchange rates had
been constant, said Mr Alan Spall, ICI's finance director.
Sales rose from Pounds 2.08bn to Pounds 2.15bn, with half the gain coming
from higher volumes while prices remained under pressure, said Sir Denys
Henderson, chairman.
The results were in the middle of the range of City expectations and concern
over the inability to raise prices pushed the shares down 22p to 831p.
Mr Ronnie Hampel, chief executive, said that price rises were still patchy
but that further savings would be made during the year as the benefits of
reorganisations last year were realised.
Strong cash flow and a debt payment of more than Pounds 700m from Zeneca,
the pharmaceuticals group spun off last year, cut gearing during the quarter
to 11 per cent. Earnings per share rose from 5p to 6.1p.
Within the main divisions, trading profits at Paints were unchanged at
Pounds 17m with with higher profits in Asia-Pacific offset by a cold-weather
related decline in the US. In Materials, trading profits more than doubled
to Pounds 19m from Pounds 8m, mainly the result of cost reduction and the
contribution of the acrylics business acquired in July 1993. Higher volumes
were partially offset by lower selling prices, mainly in Europe.
In Explosives, where the company has a strong position in the car airbag
market, trading profit was Pounds 12m (against Pounds 3m), the increase
primarily because of gaining full control of AECI Explosives, its South
Africa subsidiary.
Industrial chemicals saw trading profits rise to Pounds 42m (Pounds 24m),
where recent capital investments had led to lower fixed costs and improved
profit margins.
Mr Hampel said further disposals were likely as ICI reorganised in the wake
of the demerger last summer from drugs groups Zeneca.
'I have the greatest long-term question mark over the polyester film
business,' he said, adding that he could 'see the ownership changing' of the
company's petrochemicals operations. On acquisitions, he said there were no
large deals planned, but there would be a stream of smaller deals.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940429

