FT944-11129

FT  08 NOV 94 / Dublin will free IRA prisoners by Christmas


   By STEWART DALBY and KEVIN BROWN


The Irish government said yesterday it would release several IRA prisoners
before Christmas as part of its response to the IRA's ceasefire.
Ms Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, the Irish justice minister, also said talks were
taking place with Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, on the surrender of
the IRA's weapons.
The move prompted immediate concern in London about the speed of events in
Dublin and was greeted with dismay by rightwing Conservative MPs and Ulster
unionists.
Ms Geoghegan-Quinn said details of the numbers to be freed and the timetable
of their release had yet to be fixed. 'But I can confirm that a number will
be released between now and Christmas,' she said.
The minister stressed that there was no question of trading prisoners for
weapons. 'But the dismantling of IRA arsenals is being actively pursued,'
she added.
Last night the British government would say only that the release of
terrorist prisoners was a matter for the Irish government. A Downing Street
spokesman said: 'The prime minister has repeatedly made it clear in the past
that IRA prisoners are serving sentences for criminal offences. They are not
political prisoners and the question of an amnesty does not arise.'
Privately, ministers are sanguine about Irish concessions to the IRA, which
they hope will help to lock the terrorists into the peace process. There is
concern in London, however, that Dublin is moving too quickly.
Ministers are also keenly aware of the need to reassure unionists that their
interests are not being ignored in the struggle to draw the republican
movement into mainstream politics.
Mr Henry Bellingham, Conservative MP for Norfolk North West, said he was
'deeply disturbed' about the announcement. 'I can understand why the Irish
government want to keep the momentum behind the peace process going, but I
think they are taking far too big a risk,' he said.
Mr Bellingham, a member of both the British Irish Parliamentary Body and the
Conservative Friends of the Union, said it was too early for such a release
of terrorist prisoners, which would merely strengthen the IRA's active
service units if the peace process broke down.
Mr Bellingham said Conservative MPs would accept that it was not possible
for Britain to prevent the release of terrorists convicted in Ireland.
'But I hope very much that Downing Street will make its grave displeasure
very clear to the Irish government in private,' he said.
Mr Ken Maginnis, the Ulster Unionist MP, said he was becoming increasingly
worried by what he described as the republic's piecemeal approach to the
ceasefire which was in contrast to Mr Major's more considered and structured
attitude.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941108

