FT942-14665

FT  19 APR 94 / International Company News: Another Australian wine group
for market


   By NIKKI TAIT


   SYDNEY


Australia's rapidly-expanding quoted wine sector is to gain another new
entrant with the flotation of Simeon Wines, the country's largest supplier
of contract wine and grape juice and incorporating the Buronga Hill winery
in New South Wales.
Simeon Wines has been formed as a holding company by Orlando Wyndham, the
South Australian wine producer which is owned by France's Pernod Ricard.
Orlando is injecting Buronga Hill into Simeon, along with three
fully-developed vineyards. The new company will also own land at Padthaway
and Cowra, which is due to be developed.
Under the flotation plan, 12.5m shares in Simeon are being sold to the
public at ADollars 2 each, along with 12.5m convertible notes, also at
ADollars 2 each. Orlando Wyndham will retain 5.8m deferred participation
ordinary shares in Simeon, equivalent to an 18.8 per cent holding once all
notes are converted. At the issue price, and on a fully-diluted basis,
Simeon will be capitalised at ADollars 61.6m (USDollars 43.3m).
Simeon said yesterday that the funds raised would help to expand the
winery's capacity and finance the vineyard development. At present, the
Buronga Hill winery has an annual crushing capacity of 50,000 tonnes.
The enormous recent export success of Australian wines - particularly in the
UK - has put the industry under pressure to expand to meet demand. As a
result, a number of companies - including BRL HArdy and Rothbury Wines -
have listed on the stock market as a means of raising capital. Last month,
BRL Hardy raised ADollars 31.7m via a rights issue, and Australian Vintage,
based in South Australia, is also in the process of joining the stock market
via a much smaller share issue.
Meanwhile, anyone wondering about the choice of name for the latest market
entrant should refer to the Bible. Orlando Wyndham is best-known for its
Jacobs Creek wines, and Simeon was the son of Jacob.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940419

