FT942-12199

FT  30 APR 94 / Norwich Union fined Pounds 300,000: Regulator says insurer's
failures had risks for likely customers


   By ALISON SMITH


Norwich Union, one of Britain's biggest insurers, yesterday became the
second company in three days to receive a Pounds 300,000 fine from Lautro,
the life insurance industry watchdog.
The fine was imposed for breakdowns in management control relating
particularly to the implementation of higher training and competence
standards.
The regulator was also concerned about recruitment procedures and 'fact
finds' - the checking of information gathered by sales agents about
customers. It said the failures 'had risks for potential customers'.
A month ago, Norwich Union said it was suspending 800 sales agents -
including its entire life and pensions direct sales force - so they could be
retrained.
The insurer said yesterday that 53 per cent of the sales representatives
taking the training programme had passed all three elements to the test and
had returned to selling from Monday of this week. Those who have failed but
pass at a later attempt will be back on the road by the end of next month.
While the fine equals the current record - a similar penalty was levied on
Premium Life on Wednesday - Lautro could well impose even higher amounts in
the coming weeks. It has warned for some time that companies that had failed
to correct inadequacies in meeting regulatory requirements by the time of a
second round of routine inspection visits could expect more severe
penalties, and these are now materialising.
Indeed, Lautro's recognition that Norwich Union responded 'swiftly and
effectively' in carrying out remedial action will have been taken into
account by the watchdog's disciplinary committee in setting the fine.
The insurer admitted the charge of misconduct, and will also have to pay
Lautro's costs of Pounds 25,000.
Mr Allen Bridgewater, group chief executive, insisted that in general
customers should not have been put at a disadvantage. 'Our business quality
control processes check that customers have received appropriate advice. For
that reason there should be few, if any, cases where unsuitable advice has
been given'. He added that NU would pay full compensation in any such case.
The misconduct was in NU's investment business carried on by its 600 direct
sales agents and some 200 appointed representatives between January 1992 and
November last year. The charge did not affect Norwich Union's business
through independent financial advisers and Leeds Permanent Building Society.
Lifelong saga, Weekend VII

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940430

