FT944-2287

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Capital Markets: Bankers Trust faces sanctions


   By LAURIE MORSE


   CHICAGO


US regulators are within days of issuing civil complaints saying Bankers
Trust violated anti-fraud provisions of securities and commodities laws in
sales of derivatives to Cincinnati-based Gibson Greetings.
The complaints will be significant beyond the Bankers Trust case because the
agencies involved reportedly have determined that the derivatives at issue -
complex forms of interest rate swaps - can be considered both futures and
securities, and are thus within the regulatory purview of the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Until now, swaps have been considered neither securities nor futures, and
the swaps industry has grown rapidly in a largely unregulated environment.
Although legislative attempts to tighten the oversight of swaps have died in
the US Congress this year, the two agencies appear to be extending their
reach independently through their enforcement action against Bankers Trust.
In particular, a determination that over-the-counter derivatives are futures
would require swaps dealers to comply with the same tough anti-fraud and
sales practice rules that govern listed futures and options. The CFTC
exempted swaps from much of the US commodities law in 1992, but reserved the
right to enforce its anti-fraud provisions if a swap was determined to be a
future.
The CFTC is also drafting suitability rules for derivatives customers, and
is in the midst of a public comment period on that issue.
A source familiar with the Bankers Trust complaints said the bank is close
to reaching a settlement with the agencies, and is expected to agree to
sanctions and pay fines.
Bankers Trust earlier this month entered into an extensive written agreement
with its primary regulator, the Federal Reserve, that requires remedial
action on the way it markets derivatives to corporations. That agreement did
not specifically mention Gibson Greetings.
Last month, Bankers Trust also settled a lawsuit brought by Gibson Greetings
that complained that the bank failed to disclose essential information about
derivatives sold to the company.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941216

