FT941-17040

FT  06 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Extending the shake-up to the US - The
restructuring taking place at Lucas Aerospace


   By PAUL BETTS


From Silicon Valley to Los Angeles, from Salt Lake City to Jamestown in the
bitterly cold plains of North Dakota, Lucas has launched a sweeping
restructuring of its disparate North American aerospace activities acquired
during the industry's heady boom days of the late 1980s.
A large aircraft maintenance facility in Santa Barbara, California, acquired
three years ago, has just been closed with the loss of nearly 400 jobs. A
Los Angeles-based aircraft engine gear business, bought in 1987, is being
transferred to a new facility near Salt Lake City, Utah, to reduce costs.
This activity employed 1,200 people at its peak in 1986: the new plant will
employ only 200.
An essentially defence orientated subsidiary, Lucas Zeta, at San Jose in the
heart of California's Silicon Valley, is diversifying fast into the civil
market. When Lucas bought it in 1989, about 90 per cent of its Dollars 20m
(Pounds 13.5m) a year turnover involved microwave and communications
activities for the defence sector. The civil sector now already accounts for
40 per cent of annual turnover.
Like the rest of its UK and continental European operations, the US has not
escaped the restructuring which the company has undergone since Mr Frank
Turner took charge of Lucas Aerospace 12 months ago.
Simply put, Mr Turner's strategy has been to transform Lucas Aerospace from
a components supplier to the aerospace industry into a systems integrator.
'In the long term we cannot hope to compete as a components supplier against
low-cost producers in the Far East. Instead, we must turn the company into
the global leader in the provision and support of high integrity control
systems for our chosen markets,' explained Mr Turner, the former head of
civil engines at Rolls-Royce, the UK aero-engine and industrial power group.
The two core markets for the company are flight and engine control systems.
The fate of all the group's other activities, including the more recent US
business, will depend on their performance.
'These niche businesses can stay in our portfolio as long as they are
profitable and cash generating and can support financially our two core
activities,' said Mr Turner. He cites as examples the profitable cargo
handling operations in Jamestown which have carved themselves a strong
market as a supplier of cargo systems to Boeing as well as the profitable
electrosystems subsidiary at Brae, outside Los Angeles.
But he also warned that any business not capable of generating adequate cash
or profits will either be merged with another company, sold or shut down.
Apart from the Santa Barbara aircraft maintenance facility, the aircraft
windows business in Luton has been sold to its management. 'Our switch gear
and ignition business is also not core and we expect we will sell that at
some stage,' he said.
At the same time, Mr Turner is also looking for acquisitions to strengthen
the company's market penetration in its two core activities in engine and
flight control systems. Lucas's engine systems, for example, have been
reinforced by the Pounds 18.9m acquisition in September of Dowty's fuel
control business in Cheltenham.
These acquisitions and divestments are all part of what Mr Turner sees as
'the continuing big shake up in the aerospace industry where there is still
far too much capacity'.
Another good example of taking out capacity at a time when the aerospace
industry continued to be depressed by lower commercial aircraft and defence
sales was an agreement which will see Lucas supplying all the engine
gearboxes for Pratt & Whitney, the large US aero-engine maker, Mr Turner
added.
Instead of making its own gearboxes, Pratt will be buying the equipment from
Lucas's new Utah facility.
Cost cutting has also featured high in Mr Turner's efforts to reshape Lucas
Aerospace, which with sales of Pounds 643m for the financial year ended July
1993 accounts for about 25 per cent of Lucas's overall group turnover. 'By
the end of 1993 we had shed about 25 per cent of our workforce in a period
of less than two years,' he said. This has cut the aerospace division's
10,000 strong workforce to about 7,500.
Every site in the UK, France and the US has been affected by the
cost-cutting drive, which has also been sharply felt by the company's
overweight management structure. Headquarters staff has been cut from 150 to
29 people, Mr Turner said.
Mr Turner's strategy has paid dividends. Lucas Aerospace saw pre-tax profits
double to Pounds 31m in the year ended July 1993, from Pounds 15.4m in 1992.
The advance came despite a 10 per cent real fall in the volume of aerospace
sales, reflecting a sharp improvement in productivity and costs. Mr Turner
has now set a target of a 50 per cent improvement in the group's operations
over the next three years.
The US operations, however, have continued to lose money. But Mr Turner
expects these US investments to start showing a positive contribution this
year, especially after the disposal of the substantial lossmaking aircraft
maintenance operation in Santa Barbara.
'The US acquisition policy has given us a presence in the US market and
access to big US customers,' said Mr Turner. 'It has provided us with a
foundation to build on but it will require reorganisation, including the
divestment of some assets as well as acquisitions,' he added.
Lucas's US aerospace acquisition spree in the 1980s was largely aimed at
reducing the company's dependence on the automotive business as well as the
aerospace division's dependence on Rolls-Royce. 'They nearly went down with
Rolls-Royce when Rolls went bankrupt in 1971,' said one City aerospace
analyst.
At that time, as much as 75 per cent of the company's aerospace business was
directly related with Rolls-Royce. The UK aero-engine manufacturer is still
Lucas Aerospace's biggest customer but it now accounts for only between 20
per cent to 25 per cent of its sales, although Lucas recently reinforced its
ties with Rolls-Royce. It took a 3.5 per cent risk-sharing stake in
Rolls-Royce's Trent programme to develop a family of heavy thrust commercial
jet engines to power the new generation of large wide body airliners.
Mr Turner also has his eye on expanding his group's presence in the
fast-growing Asia Pacific aerospace market. At present, the UK, the US and
continental Europe each account for about one third of the company's annual
turnover. Mr Turner wants to see the group's geographical distribution
expanded with the US, the UK, continental Europe and Asia each accounting
for about 25 per cent of sales.
As restructuring continues to gather pace in the aerospace components
industry, Mr Turner expects the sector to become increasingly dominated by
fewer, broader-based suppliers capable of participating as risk and revenue
sharing partners in future engine and aircraft programmes. 'We are
positioning Lucas to be one of those players,' he added.
Ultimately, however, the reshaping of Lucas is likely to involve even wider
strategic collaboration and possibly a merger with another big international
components and systems supplier with activities in both the aerospace and
automotive industries.
Any move, however, will have to await the arrival of Mr George Simpson, who
is leaving British Aerospace and Rover to take overall charge at Lucas as
chief executive in the spring.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940106

