FT943-12742

FT  23 JUL 94 / Gonzalez tries to revive party's hopes: Will it be too
little, too late for Spain's ruling Socialists?


   By TOM BURNS


Mr Felipe Gonzalez, leader of Spain's ruling Socialists, yesterday set about
reviving his party's political fortunes and to reinforce the moderate wing
as the dominant force in Spanish politics.
Mr Gonzalez, Socialist leader for almost 20 years and prime minister for
nearly 12, opened a gathering of party leaders to address the spate of
corruption scandals, the deep economic recession and the bitter divisions
within the leadership that together led to a humiliating defeat for the
party in last month's European parliament elections.
The prime minister will tell his federal committee that despite the
government's dwindling credibility, he intends to stick to his current
policies of economic stringency and to serve out his full term until 1997.
He will also continue to seek the support of the Catalan nationalists, whose
votes in parliament ensure an outright majority for Mr Gonzalez.
While there is optimism, mainly among the moderates, that Mr Gonzalez can
revive the party's standing, some believe he is doing too little too late.
Mr Joaquin Almunia, the party's parliamentary spokesman, said the meeting of
the Socialists' 212-strong federal committee would round off a slow process
of renewal that began when Mr Gonzalez narrowly won a fourth term in general
elections a year ago. This was reinforced in March, said Mr Almunia, when
the moderates emerged as a clear majority at the party's first national
congress since 1990.
Mr Carlos Solchaga, economy minister between 1985 and 1993, said: 'I think
Mr Gonzalez should change the government but it is difficult to see how he
can do that.' Mr Solchaga resigned as parliamentary spokesman in May when
the former governor of the bank of Spain, whom he had appointed, admitted
tax evasion.
The prime minister's unswerving stand on economic policy is a victory for
the party's moderates, the so-called renewal faction of moderates, of which
Mr Almunia is the party's chief proponent, and a defeat for the left of the
party grouped around its long-time deputy leader, Mr Alfonso Guerra. Mr
Guerra was deputy prime minister between 1982 and 1991.
Sticking to current policies means restrictive budgets to reduce the
deficit, instead of sustained public spending as the left would like.
Courting the Catalans, who are politically on the centre-right and embrace
the free market, means rejecting the Communist party-led United Left, who
are viewed by the 'Guerristas' as the natural allies of the Socialist party.
'The March congress made it clear that Gonzalez would adopt our ideas,' said
Mr Almunia. 'But renewal got held up by the corruption scandals, by regional
party congresses, where the Guerristas tried to fight back, and by the
European elections.'
Two meetings this month, chaired by Mr Gonzalez, of the party's 36-member
executive commission set the stage for the effective takeover of the renewal
faction of modernisers at yesterday's widened gathering of the Socialist
leadership.
Mr Almunia and his friends will formally take over key positions in the
party hierarchy and, crucially, the renewal wing will wrest control from the
Guerristas on the commitee that vets the party's electoral candidates.
In the post-mortem delivered to the executive committee on the European
elections, Mr Gonzalez concluded that more damage had been done to the party
by its erstwhile centrist supporters who had abstained or voted
conservative, than by those who had switched their vote to the United Left
ticket.
The message is to win back the centre vote as the economy recovers with a
mix of social democracy and market-oriented orthodoxy. Some doubt this is
possible, arguing that Mr Gonzalez has still to deal firmly with the left in
his party.
'When you have retreated back through the credibility threshold, and we have
unfortunately done so, it is difficult to walk through it again and restore
confidence,' said Mr Solchaga. 'There is a lot of 'Guerrismo' that has to be
brushed away.'
Another party member, within the renewal faction, put it more bluntly: 'What
is important is to get the Guerristas out before we lose the next elections,
as we assuredly will. That way they won't be around to take control of the
party when we're out of power.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940723

