FT944-2576

FT  16 DEC 94 / Councils Shake-up: Public 'juries' overturned verdict - The
move to let local people decide their own future


   By ANDREW ADONIS and JOHN AUTHERS


The Local Government Commission was the child of the poll tax. But unlike
its parent, the commission will not lead to universal upheaval in England's
local government system following yesterday's announcement.
For most of the past three years such upheaval has been on the cards. When
in March 1991 Mr Michael Heseltine, then environment secretary, announced
the abolition of the poll tax and the establishment of a commission to
review England's local authority structure, there was an air of
inevitability about a wholesale move towards single-tier authorities in
place of the two-tier structure of county and district councils prevalent in
most of non-metropolitan Britain.
On the same day it was announced that unitary authorities would almost
certainly replace the two-tier structure in Scotland and Wales - without
recourse to an interim commission.
Senior ministers were known to favour the same outcome for England. It had
already been imposed on London, with the abolition of the Greater London
Council. Broad support for a single-tier structure was also forthcoming from
the opposition Labour and Liberal Democrat parties, and from district
councils, which outnumbered their county cousins - in lobbying power as well
as numbers - by seven to one.
Until this autumn, the commission appeared to be following this pre-ordained
route. Its draft recommendations, most of them published last June, were
largely for unitary authorities as a 'preferred option', heralding the
elimination of county councils.
The explanation for why the apparently inevitable did not happen lies in an
unexpected decision taken by Sir John Banham, the commission's chairman,
early this year.
Sir John took a step quite alien to policy formulation in Britain: he
decided to undertake formal public consultation, holding a postal referendum
in counties where his proposals were most contentious. All households in 33
counties were mailed, with voters invited to give their views to the
commission on the proposed structural changes and alternatives to them.
Had such a step been taken with the poll tax, it would certainly have
failed; so too, in all likelihood, would the move to unitary authorities in
Scotland, which is now an accomplished fact.
The biggest winner in the public consultation was apathy. In only one county
was the response rate higher than 10 per cent of the adult population, a
fair indication that radical change did not enjoy popular support.
However, of the minority who took part in the referenda, in all but a
handful of counties most favoured a continuation of a two-tier structure
although in some cases - such as Devon, Essex, Northamptonshire and
Wiltshire - unitary statusfor a part of the county was supported.
In the last recommendations, the counties recommended for abolition are
those - Dorset, Berks, Beds and Bucks - where the status quo was
emphatically defeated in the referendums.
The decision to consult the people appears to have been taken by Sir John
personally. He received no encouragement from ministers or officials, few of
whom relished the unpredictability of the exercise. But, as Sir John put it
to one audience, the voters were to be the 'jury'.
The fact that the voters largely repudiated his initial recommendations to
abolish 27 county councils left Sir John unfazed. After withdrawing plans to
abolish six counties last month, he said: 'If we had pressed ahead with our
recommendations without listening to local people we would be recommending
transitional costs of the order of Pounds 135m.'
Last month he told the Association of County Councils that unitary
authorities were a 'gamble'. He added: 'People are not willing to support an
expensive gamble on the say-so of local politicians with a vested interest,
and they have not been impressed by many campaigns - at public expense -
designed to persuade them otherwise.' Once controversy over the changes - or
lack of them - has died down, the Local Government Commission's most
enduring legacy may be its novel experiment with postal referenda. The
outcome showed policymakers to be fundamentally out of touch with the people
 -but did so in a way that allowed the policy to be changed before damage
was done.
If so, it will be a final throw-back to the poll tax. Before resorting to
that measure, Mrs Thatcher and Mr Heseltine - then in his first stint as
environment secretary - toyed seriously with the idea of forcing councils to
hold local referenda if they wanted to exceed government spending targets.
They dropped the idea because of opposition from Conservative MPs and
councillors.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

941216

