FT942-16360

FT  11 APR 94 / Leading Article: Anglo-German understanding


The post-second world war partnership between the UK and Germany - once
dubbed 'the quiet alliance' - has become uneasy. Anti-German jingoism in the
British press, for example over the UK's plans to involve Germany in next
year's end-of-the-war celebrations, has been accompanied by differences on
policy issues.
The good personal relationship between Mr John Major, the UK prime minister,
and Chancellor Helmut Kohl has had little impact on broader ties. An
international opinion poll last week indicated mutual trust between Britons
and Germans well below the confidence each country's citizens feel towards
Japan and the US. It is time to take seriously these resentments and
misunderstandings, and to consider what can be done about the causes.
The problems are more pressing because the strains of German unification are
likely to persist. The misguided opposition to unification of the then Mrs
Margaret Thatcher has left a legacy of bruised German feelings. Britain, for
its part, is irritated when the Germans flex their muscles, for instance
during Bonn's 1991 drive to give Croatia diplomatic recognition. But the UK
is also disturbed by German weakness in failing to control post-unity budget
deficits or to play an adequate role in international peacekeeping.
Striking tensions
Over Europe, there are striking tensions. Any attempt to relaunch monetary
co-operation will be bedevilled by memories of both sides' mishandling of
the UK's departure from the exchange rate mechanism. Last month's British
debacle over European Union voting weights was also apparently caused in
part by London's failure to realise that its position would not be backed by
Bonn. Mr Major is still caught between fears of being ensnared in a
German-dominated federal Europe and of being excluded from a Franco-German
'core'. Yet, in reality, the UK's chances of avoiding either outcome have
grown. Germany's stance on Europe has become closer to Britain's, manifested
by Bonn's support for EU widening, as well as by the German electorate's
scepticism over economic and monetary union.
As these examples indicate, far more unites the UK and Germany than
separates them. Rather than increasing Germany's dominance, the
incorporation of economically ravaged eastern Germany has in some ways
narrowed Anglo-German differences. United Germany's per capita gross
domestic product is only about 10 per cent higher than the UK's, on a
purchasing power parity basis, although western Germany's is about 25 per
cent higher.
Similar problems
Germany's financial and business sector is also, under the strain of
recession, responding to Anglo-Saxon influences. The size and effectiveness
of German capital investment in the UK, the large numbers of German students
at UK universities, and the good relationships enjoyed by British military
personnel in Germany all point to matching Anglo-German temperaments and
attitudes. Many problems are similar, too; high unemployment, strains in the
welfare state and a vicious strain of racism among them.
To improve Anglo-German understanding requires action on a broad front.
Political parties should learn to co-operate better, for example in the
European Parliament. Business and trade union leaders should pursue mutual
understanding and common cause in international institutions. Traditional
exchanges, such as the annual Konigswinter conferences, which have brought
together politicians, academics, business people and journalists for 44
years, should be widened in scope and participation. There is a special need
to counter ignorance among ordinary British people about life in modern
Germany. The two governments, backed by business, should try to broaden
links through wider exchanges of young people at the educational, cultural
and sporting levels, and in broadcasting, perhaps along the lines of
successful Franco-German projects.
Once divided in two world wars, the two countries have been united by nearly
half a century of joint attachment to parliamentary democracy and economic
liberalism. That unity will only be deepened by a sustained act of willpower
on both sides.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940411

