FT943-13133

FT  21 JUL 94 / London Stock Exchange: Interest rate concerns return to
unsettle shares - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


An early challenge to the Footsie 3,100 mark ran into a setback in the
London market yesterday following a fresh warning on US interest rates from
Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve. The stock market had
already been unsettled by the disclosure that the UK chancellor of the
exchequer and the Governor of the Bank of England had agreed last month that
domestic interest rates would be raised if inflation threatens. However,
early losses had been recovered and the downturn was resumed only as reports
of Mr Greenspan's testimony to Congress appeared on the trading screens.
The opening minutes of official trading saw the Footsie touch 3,099.6 before
turning back as traders reacted to publication of the minutes of the meeting
in June between Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor of the exchequer, and Mr Eddie
George, Governor of the Bank of England.
But by the end of the session, the FT-SE 100 Index had fallen to a day's low
of 3,077.2, a net loss of 14.1 points. Once again, the setback was
spearheaded by falls in stock index futures. However, traders believed that
an increase in trading volume in equities did not indicate increased selling
pressure and the FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which is less affected by the futures
markets, remained firm, closing 12.6 up at 3,587.
In the first half of the session, the stock market made a fairly neutral
response to the latest data on the domestic economy. A rise of 0.2 per cent
in June retail sales for an annualised gain of 3.3 per cent and M4 bank
lending of Pounds 2.9bn, while at the high end of expectations, were
overshadowed by caution ahead of Mr Greenspan's speech.
Confidence in London that the recent steadier trend in the dollar and bond
markets might bring a favourable review from Mr Greenspan inspired a further
move towards Footsie 3,100 in the early afternoon.
The market, however, went speedily into reverse as the speech from the Fed
chairman was followed by falls in bond prices and in other European equity
markets. The downturn was emphasised by a decline of 22 points on the Dow
Average in UK trading hours.
Trading volume rose sharply, but at the end of the session, the day's Seaq
total of 679.7m shares still compared with 691.4m in the previous session.
Retail business was worth Pounds 1.57bn on Tuesday, well up to the best
daily averages of the past twelve months.
Fund management buyers from continental Europe, who have been providing the
driving force behind the recovery in the London stock market, backed away in
the second half of the session when their own domestic markets reacted
negatively to the latest developments.
Several leading securities houses said their trading books were fairly
evenly spread between buyers and sellers. The renewed uncertainty over US
rates puts increased emphasis on this morning's meeting of the Bundesbank
policy council, and revives the question of whether European markets and
economies have decoupled from the US.
The setback took toll of share prices across the financial and retail
sectors, which have been moving ahead confidently over the past week. Store
shares, in particular, proved themselves more fearful of higher interest
rates than encouraged by retail sales growth in June reported earlier in the
day.
The blue chip dollar-earning stocks moved narrowly as these sectors waited
to see how the US currency would settle down in response to the comments
from Mr Greenspan. But turnover in these market leaders was not heavy.
London market strategists said that much will depend on the reaction from
bond markets across Europe, and on the actions and comments of the
Bundesbank.

The Financial Times


London Page 44

940721

