FT942-15735

FT  14 APR 94 / World Trade News: Agriculture accord could leave poorest
worst off


   By ALISON MAITLAND


International aid agencies are worried. The Gatt agreement on agriculture is
likely to leave the poorest countries worst off while perpetuating the
subsidies that help farmers in developed countries dominate world markets,
they say.
'There's a lot of talk about level playing fields,' Mr Kevin Watkins, senior
policy adviser to Oxfam, told a conference on Gatt and agriculture in
developing countries this week.
'We're talking about a level playing field that runs downhill all the way
from the US and Europe to the developing countries.'
One of the biggest bones of contention is that European Union compensation
to arable farmers for cuts in support prices under the common agricultural
policy reforms is excluded from the Gatt agreement to reduce domestic
support to agriculture. This also applies to US farm support payments.
'If you put public funds into the hands of big farmers producing cereals,
it's reasonable to assume some of that will go into production,' said Mr
Watkins. 'About a third of cereal production is exported. So shouldn't these
compensatory payments be treated as export subsidies?'
According to some independent forecasts, the preservation of support for
European arable farmers, coupled with likely rises in output per hectare of
at least 1.5 per cent a year, will leave EU cereal production close to its
1992 level by the end of the century.
'In cereals at least, it seems clear that US and more particularly EU
production will be higher with these (support) payments than it would be
without them, and that the additional production will have a material effect
on the world market,' said Ms Jenny Pryke of the Catholic Institute for
International Relations, which organised the conference in conjunction with
Oxfam and Christian Aid.
'Development agencies are concerned about the effect on food-importing
countries of large volumes of cheap imports being available because it
discourages local farmers from producing for their markets,' she said.
This imperils their ability to become self-sufficient and to trade food
regionally. Only 5 per cent of Africa's overall trade is with other African
countries.
At the same time, however, the agencies are concerned that poor
food-importers would be badly hit if world prices did rise, as predicted by
the European Commission and the US Department of Agriculture, as a result of
the 21 per cent cut in subsidised export volumes under the Gatt.
They argue that current food dependence is bad. But the alternative scenario
of rising world prices, while welcome to some middle-income agricultural
exporters like Argentina and Thailand, would make things at least
temporarily worse for low-income food-importing countries.
The Gatt deal allows for extra help for these countries. But rather than
being limited to aid, support should boost domestic agricultural production,
said Mr Clive Robinson of Christian Aid. 'That needs to be in place before
the adverse price effects take place,' he said.
Another target of attack by the development agencies is the incoherence of
policies which destroy with one hand the help they provide to developing
nations with the other.
The Zimbabwe dairy industry, supported by the EU, is one of the few in the
region, according to Ms Carol Thompson, associate professor at the
University of Zimbabwe. But when it tried to expand by exporting to other
parts of southern Africa, 'it ran into dumped powdered milk from the EU.'
Many conference participants said developing countries must make use of
their numerical strength in the new World Trade Organisation to defend their
interests.
The alternative looked grim for the poorest countries. Mr Luis Hernandez, of
the Centre of Studies for Change in Rural Mexico, found direct similarities
with the North American Free Trade Agreement. 'Like Nafta, the Gatt will
accelerate the integration of unequal partners without the financial and
institutional arrangements to protect the poor,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940414

