FT944-2683

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (12): Potential for
growth is huge - South America / Future prospects


   By PATRICK MCCURRY


Sharp growth in Brazil's commercial vehicle market is fuelling higher
production while locally-based manufacturers are increasingly looking to the
Mercosur free-trade area (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) for
economies of scale.
But manufacturers are worried about growing imports, particularly in light
commercial vehicles, and despite impressive productivity gains in recent
years local producers still lag behind foreign competitors.
Production of light commercial vehicles is expected to reach 253,000 units
this year, up 13 per cent on 1993. Heavy vehicle production is likely to
increase by 31 per cent to 62,000 units.
And the potential for future growth in the market is huge, say vehicle
makers, pointing to Brazil's 157m population, its important farming and
industrial sector and a land area roughly the same size as the United States
excluding Alaska.
Rolf Eckrodt, president of Mercedes-Benz do Brasil, is optimistic about the
long-term potential: 'The lorry fleet is old, about 12 years on average, and
needs replacing. At the same time there is enormous scope for economic
development spurring demand. For instance, only 9 per cent of roads are
asphalted so far.'
Much of the short-term potential, however, will probably depend on whether
Brazil's economic stabilisation can be maintained. A new real currency,
introduced in July and linked to the country's international reserves, has
brought down monthly inflation from 50 per cent in June to about 3 per cent
in November.
But to consolidate the new currency's future, President Fernando Henrique
Cardoso will have to negotiate tough economic reforms with Congress soon
after taking office on January 1.
The growth in Brazil's commercial vehicle market is part of a booming
domestic vehicle market. Last year production was 1.39m units, up 29 per
cent on the year before. This year production is expected to approach 1.6m.
The increase has been sparked by agreements between the government,
companies and unions which have reduced taxes, increased productivity and
limited wage demands. The agreements were aimed at making Brazil's motor
industry more competitive after former president Fernando Collor began to
open the economy to imports in 1990.
As well as these agreements, the commercial vehicle market has been helped
this year by increasing business confidence following the new currency
launch and by the development of leasing financing for companies. The
proportion of heavy commercial vehicles bought through leasing contracts has
increased to about 40 per cent this year from 9 per cent in 1991.
'Today inflation is under control, there is a strong currency and there is
much more confidence among companies,' says Udo Kruse, president of Ford's
Brazilian subsidiary.
He says a 'snowball effect' is emerging among companies seeking to renew
their often aged transport fleets. 'In April, we sold 660 lorries to Pepsi
and soon after that Coca-Cola and Brahma, a local soft drinks manufacturer,
began to make inquiries.'
The beneficiaries of this growing demand have been the main locally-based
manufacturers - Volkswagen, Fiat, General Motors, Ford and Mercedes-Benz -
which have been improving productivity and quality to respond to growing
competition from imports.
Since 1990, productivity gains have averaged 17 per cent a year, half the
gains has been due to higher volumes and the rest to restructuring,
according to a report by consultants Booz-Allen earlier this year. Vehicle
defects have fallen by 50 per cent during the same period.
Productivity measures have led to job cuts in some companies. Mercedes-Benz
has reduced its workforce from 20,000 to 16,000 in the past two years, while
increasing production to 40,000 from 34,000 vehicles, says Mr Eckrodt.
He adds that the company is attempting to increase radically the contracting
out of work. Today, the company is highly vertically integrated and is
making 58 per cent of the value of the vehicle in house. In future, it plans
to purchase much more from outside suppliers reducing the level of in-house
work to 35 per cent.
Manufacturers know they must continue to increase efficiency if they are to
compete with imports, which have been increasing since import duties were
lowered under Collor and speeded up following the 15-18 per cent
appreciation of the real this year. The government recently cut tariffs
again, from 35 to 20 per cent, after frustrations at local manufacturers'
inability to supply domestic demand, which the government feared would
pressure inflation.
According to Volkswagen spokesman Alberto Boaschi imports of light vehicles
will jump to 60,000, 25 per cent of the market, next year compared to 32,000
vehicles, 16 per cent of the market, this year and 11,000 vehicles in 1993.
While Brazilian productivity is on a par with Mexico's, at 48 hours per
vehicle, it is well behind Europe, at 36 hours, and Japan, 16 hours, says
Ford's Mr Kruse. Even after taking into account Brazil's lower labour costs,
productivity is still 10 per cent below Europe's, according to the
Booz-Allen study.
Manufacturers complain that even after tax reductions conceded by the
government in the motor industry agreements, taxes and non-salary costs are
still much higher than international levels.
Companies say the transition from a closed protectionist market to a highly
competitive one has been too rapid. 'We need a reasonable time to become
world class on quality and productivity,' says Mr Kruse.
Part of the manufacturers' productivity strategy is based around the
Mercosur free-trade area, which companies agree will be a crucial motor for
growth. The Mercosur, composed of Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay
and with 192m people and a combined output of Dollars 642bn, starts up on
January 1, 1995. The member governments are still negotiating an agreement
for the motor industry but the process of standardisation and integration of
production between multinationals' plants on both sides of the border has
already begun.
Mercedes' plants in Sao Paulo, the company's biggest commercial vehicle
producers outside Germany, exported Dollars 260m in vehicles and parts to
Mercosur, mainly Argentina, last year, nearly half its total exports.
Imports from Mercosur totalled around Dollars 100m.
The company is planning a transporter vehicles plant for Argentina, making
commercial vehicles below six tonnes, and production of transmission systems
was moved to Argentina several years ago. The future strategy will be for
Brazil to focus on trucks and Argentina on transporter vehicles.
'The most important thing will be the weight that Mercosur carries with
other trading blocs,' says Mercedes' Mr Eckrodt, who believes integration
with other countries such as Chile, and with other blocs such as the North
American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), is inevitable: 'The long-term outcome
will be a Panamerican market including the US and the whole of Latin
America.'

The Financial Times


London Page V

941216

