FT943-12912

FT  22 JUL 94 / Leader urges restoration of pride on the way to power


   By KEVIN BROWN


Mr Tony Blair accepted the Labour leadership with a powerful speech setting
out his vision for the party and his confidence that it can return to
government at the next general election after nearly two decades out of
office.
With his voice strained by the emotion of the occasion, Mr Blair said John
Smith had shown the British people that public service was 'still an ideal
that can breathe hope into a politics grown weary and cynical'.
Urging the assembled delegates to restore pride to the party, he said the
leadership election proved the party's ability to change with the times.
'There was a time, wasn't there, when such an election would have been
watched with trepidation by our friends and glee by our enemies. Now it is
an advertisement for Labour,' he said.
Mr Blair paid tribute to Mrs Margaret Beckett, the interim leader, Mr John
Prescott, the successful candidate for the deputy leadership, and Mr Neil
Kinnock, the former leader, who had made Labour 'electable once more'.
Mr Blair attacked the government for failing to correct the 'mistakes' of 15
years in government and urged Mr John Major to call an early general
election.
He promised help for all those who could not help themselves, and promised
to create a country with no corner 'where we shield our eyes in shame and
look away because we dare not contemplate what we see'. It was 'time to talk
a new language of social justice, of what is just and unjust, fair and
unfair, right and wrong'.
In a powerful passage he contrasted unemployment, homelessness, the growth
in government by quangos, crime, drugs and poverty with soaring executive
salaries.
But he warned that Britain had to come to terms with change in technology
and work patterns that affected the whole country, not merely the poor and
unemployed.
The party could provide opportunity and security in this world of change,
but only by taking its historic principle of solidarity and community and
applying it afresh.
'It cannot be done by a return to the past, or staying with the failed
policies of the present. It will not be done either by seeing society as
state control, central power or sectional interests,' he said.
This would mean replacing the choice between the crude free market and the
command economy with a partnership between government and industry, creating
a modern welfare system for a nation at work rather than on benefit,
returning power to local government and embracing the European Union. He
said: 'The challenge of the Labour party is not just to govern, but to
inspire; not just to show how politics matters to us, but what it can do for
them.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940722

