FT943-12809

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: Telefonica hums with talk of
alliance - GTE may take a minority stake in the Spanish group's
international unit,


   By TOM BURNS and ANDREW ADONIS


Telefonica, Spain's national telecoms operator, is set to engage in talks
next week with GTE, which could lead to the US operator taking a minority
stake in Telefonica's international arm. The outcome will have a significant
bearing on the global battle between the largest international telecoms
companies.
In addition to GTE, Telefonica will be talking to Unisource, the European
joint venture grouping the Dutch, Swedish and Swiss national operators that
it formally joined earlier this month, and also to AT&T, the US
long-distance group that in June forged an international venture with
Unisource. AT&T and Unisource could both be invited to take small stakes in
Telefonica Internacional SA (Tisa), the international subsidiary. .
For AT&T and Unisource, the prize is way into Latin America. In the last
five years Telefonica has built Tisa into the dominant operator in the
fast-growing Latin American market. A strategic partnership between Tisa and
GTE could lend critical support to the AT&T-Unisource alliance as it takes
on international rivals - notably the Dollars 5.3bn alliance between British
Telecommunications and MCI of the US - in the battle to become 'one-stop'
telecoms providers to multinationals.
With a market capitalisation of between Dollars 6bn-Dollars 7bn and an 89
per cent rise in its first quarter profits this year to Dollars 30.8m, Tisa
is the jewel in Telefonica's crown.
Its Latin American ventures started with the bargain basement purchase of a
20 per cent stake in Entel Chile in 1989 for Dollars 48m. The biggest recent
acquisition was the record Dollars 2bn paid to acquire 35 per cent of Peru's
CPT-Entel last March. Tisa has exploited its roots in a common Hispanic
culture to snap up opportunities in Latin America.
Tisa has stakes in 20 different companies, including local and long distance
operators, data transmission and mobile telephone units and yellow pages
franchise holders. As one Telefonica official put it: 'Before we were the
wall-flower at the party but now, dressed as Tisa, everyone wants to dance
with us.'
Tisa's strategy has been masterminded by a close-knit troika of Telefonica's
chairman, Mr Candido Velazquez-Gaztelu, Mr German Ancochea, the group's
chief executive, and Mr Inaki Santillana, Tisa managing director. The three
are frequent travellers to Latin America, which they view as the natural
stamping ground for the Spanish group and the launch pad for its elevation
to the high table of global telecommunications operators.
Telefonica owns 76.2 per cent of Tisa, with the Patrimonio del Estado, the
Spanish government's portfolio, holding the remaining 23.8 per cent.
Telefonica is attracted to GTE as a partner for its management expertise as
an operator in all the main US markets - national, local, data and cellular.
The two companies have co-operated extensively in CANTV, the Venezuelan
operator. A GTE-led consortium, in which Tisa is as a minority shareholder,
took a 40 per cent stake at the privatisation of CANTV in 1991.
Telefonica believes that its links with AT&T, through Unisource, are not
incompatible with a GTE partnership. A Telefonica official said the two
alliances were 'complementary' because GTE is primarily a local operator,
like Telefonica, serving mostly small customers in specific territories,
whereas AT&T is a long-distance traffic carrier with particularly strong
links to the large corporate sector. The logic behind an agreement with AT&T
is that the US giant will help handle Tisa's global traffic.
A GTE alliance would complement Telefonica's membership of Unisource for the
same reasons. By joining the Dutch, Swedish and Swiss venture, Telefonica
believes it gains access to European-based multinationals. The official
said: 'We simply don't have in Spain any Unilevers, Astras and any Nestles;
we have many more lines than the other Unisource partners but we haven't got
their sort of clients.' By hooking up Tisa to Unisource, Telefonica expects
to manage a profitable link between European business and Latin America.
According to Mr Juan Cueto, chief analyst at the Madrid broking house
Ibersecurities, which this week issued a report on Tisa, the package put
together by Telefonica's strategists will outstrip in terms of business
volume the alliance between BT and MCI, the second largest US long-distance
operator. It would also be a serious rival to the other putative
international alliance, that between the French and German state operators
and Sprint, the third-largest US long-distance operator.
Telefonica's current thinking is to sell an initial stake of around 10 per
cent of Tisa to GTE by issuing new equity in the subsidiary. This would
raise some Dollars 600m-Dollars 700m, available to increase its investment
in Latin America in partnership with GTE. Privatisations in Bolivia,
Colombia, Ecuador and Nicaragua are on the horizon, and Telefonica is
exploring prospects in Cuba and in Brazil.
The company's balance sheet will be bolstered by the forthcoming disposal of
its 20 per cent stake in Chile's Entel, now worth some Dollars 200m,
following a ruling by the local anti-trust commission which has forced Tisa
to choose between its holdings in Entel and in CTC, the other Chilean
operator, in which it holds a 43 per cent stake bought from the Bond
Corporation for Dollars 468m in 1990.
The nature of the involvement in Tisa by AT&T and Unisource remains unclear.
They might become strategic shareholders through an equity issue similar to
that envisaged for GTE. Alternatively, the Spanish government's Patrimonio
del Estado might dispose of all or part of its Tisa shares in their favour.
The Spanish state still holds a 32.2 per cent stake in Telefonica, which
could be reduced in due course.
Telefonica is anxious for the alliances to be as 'hard' as possible, which
on international form implies an equity exchange to underlie any operating
and marketing agreement. However, one of the few certainties is the
determination of Telefonica to retain a 51 per cent stake in its subsidiary.
Tisa is its golden egg; it is not prepared to see it pass into other hands.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940722

