FT944-14423

FT  22 OCT 94 / Arts: Measured to not very good effect - The RSC's latest
Measure for Measure at Stratford is somewhat disappointing


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


The more I see Measure for Measure, the more remarkable a play it appears.
It enquires, as acutely as anything Shakespeare ever wrote, into the nexus
of morality, justice, sex, governance and life. And it achieves its drama by
putting life in the scales with life, sin with sin, ruler with ruler, lover
with lover. And this sense of balancing like with like enters into its very
language: 'Grace is grace,' 'blood, thou art blood,' 'truth is truth.'
Three hair-raising scenes bring their dilemmas in the play to its height:
two between the postulant nun Isabella and the deputy ruler Angelo (Act 2,
Scenes 2 and 4) in which her innocent pleas on behalf of her sentenced
brother Claudio impress, then seduce, Angelo, and in which he then asks her
to sacrifice her chastity to gain her brother's life; and one between
Isabella and Claudio, in which she tells him to die, rather than ask her to
yield her chastity to Angelo.
But, once these scenes are over (90 minutes into the three hour play), then
either the plot sags (since the Duke tells us at once what is going to
happen) or it rises, as the Duke brings it to its resolution. For the latter
course to occur, it needs an actor who sees that the Duke, as Escalus says,
'above all other strifes, contended especially to know himself.'
Not so in Steven Pimlott's new production for the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Here the Duke is Michael Feast, who gives much the same atrocious
performance as he delivered as Becket in Pimlott's 1993-94 RSC staging of
Murder in the Cathedral; and this time his cadaverous resemblance to the
Grim Reaper is absolute. Everything here is insincere, over-emphatic, fake
lower middle-class, and melodramatic. There is no quest for self-knowledge,
none of the ironic Shakespearian sense of a ruler who abdicates to find out
more about ruling, and zero generosity to his fellow-actors. He is all
contrivance, especially when feigning to be relaxed.
Elsewhere, things are better. Pimlott knows how to tell the story clearly,
and he emphasises the exceptionally urban character of this play. But, as in
Feast's performance, the production tends to be, on the one hand,
melodramatic and, on the other, schematic. 'Effects' abound. Stella Gonet's
Isabella, who has a fine basic blend of spontaneity and zeal, screams
several times too often; Alex Jennings' Angelo, as 'precise' and 'severe' as
others describe him, has analysed his soliloquies until they fall apart
before our very ears.
Both Gonet and Jennings are cast against the grain: which I applaud. To have
Gonet this chaste and Jennings this humourless is not yet persuasive, but it
may bring rich harvests in the time to come. Toby Stephens is, for once, a
Claudio cast from strength (just watch him listen to the Duke); and Barry
Lynch's Lucio has a relaxed ease making his every scene refreshing.
Some of the best performances are in smaller roles - notably Monica Dolan's
plaintive, unhappy Juliet and Bille Brown's bewildered, silly Elbow.
Designer, Ashley Martin-Davies places the action somewhere not very
precisely in the 20th century and puts the Duke's throne on one side and, on
the other, the electric chair. Geddit?
If you need to see Measure for Measure, this production does not actually
get in the play's way. There have, however, been three excellent stagings in
recent years - Nicholas Hytner's (1987) and Trevor Nunn's (1991), both for
the RSC, and Declan Donnellan's this year - which this in no respect
approaches.
In repertory at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

941022

