FT941-5495

FT  05 MAR 94 / Books: A questionable theory of relativity - This survey of
family life reveals more about its author than society, argues AC Grayling


   By AC GRAYLING


THE HITE REPORT ON THE FAMILY by Shere Hite Bloomsbury Pounds 16.99, 424
pages
Shere Hite made her money and name some years ago with what she called
'reports' on female and male sexuality. If they had really been reports,
consisting of carefully gathered and dispassionately analysed data, they
would not have been best-sellers. But they were not what they pretended; far
from being exercises in social science, their real attraction lay in
gratifying our voyeuristic instincts by telling us sexual anecdotes, thinly
tacked together on a string of Hite's opinions. They were not reports but
polemics, hitching a ride on the back of sexy tales.
In her new 'report', this time on the family, Hite uses precisely the same
technique. She recounts anecdotes told by people unidentified as to age,
occupation, nationality, ethnicity, and quite often sex. Some of the
anecdotes are a line or two long, some occupy several paragraphs. These
disjointed slivers of autobiography are followed either by generalisations
about the state of the contemporary family, or recommendations about how
families ought to be. Most of the anecdotes and linking remarks - and
therefore the book's main themes - concern sex in one way or another:
nudity, masturbation, spanking, incest, childhood sensuality and sexuality,
the eroticism of motherhood, sexual abuse, menstruation, fathers' jealousy
of daughters' boyfriends, and so, interminably, on.
According to Hite, children between the ages of five and 15 get too few
cuddles, because they have to sleep alone and because touching between
adults and children borders too closely on sex. Parents, she claims, are
afraid of children's 'active sexuality'. She deprecates the resulting
paucity of physical comfort in children's lives, and argues therefore that
we should 'reconceptualise' sexual contact between adults and children so
that there can be more of it. There should be lots of embracing and lots of
frankness about everything sexual. In particular, says Hite, the mother
should be acknowledged as the 'erotic centre of the household', and her
childrens' closeness to her body and breasts should not be curtailed
immediately after infancy.
The picture that emerges might best be described thus: Hite's utopian family
is a snugglesome group consisting of a languorously erotic mother, a gaggle
of highly sexed children, and perhaps a father, all nude and fondling each
other on a fluffy rug in front of the fire. This sentimentalised
para-sexuality is Hite's recommended antidote to the 'patriarchal family',
described as embodying socially-ordained power structures which are
'undemocratic' and unresponsive to childrens' needs.
There is a Quaker saying that 'all the world is queer except me and thee,
and even thee's a bit peculiar at times'. Reading Hite's contextless
snippets from other people's reminiscences is like peering down on a strange
planet. Is it generally true that parents stop cuddling their children at
the age of five? Is it really true that children are highly sexed? Is
spanking typically an act of erotic sado-masochism? Hite answers yes every
time. The world she describes is barely recognisable, not just to the
average reader, but to serious researchers in the same sociological fields.
This is where scrutiny is invited of her claim to be 'reporting' a
statistical survey. In response to damaging criticism of her earlier
'reports', Hite has sandwiched the main text of this book between 'notes on
research, methodology and statistics' at the beginning, and, at the end,
half a dozen brief testimonials from American academics, telling us chiefly
that since most research in social science is dodgy, we should not fault
Hite's research for being likewise.
We can ignore the fact that women undergraduates constitute the largest
single group of respondents in Hite's survey, and that the whole sample is
highly skewed towards well-educated youth. We can ignore this because Hite,
in the service of her personal agenda, quotes selectively from just those
anecdotes that fit her case. It is no surprise that the resulting picture is
idiosyncratic; it is one person's view, whose aim is not to tell us how
things are but how they should be.
The raggedness of Hite's discussion is demonstrated by her ignorance of
scholarly work on the history and nature of the family. Barely any of the
main studies in the field are mentioned. She seems not to know that what she
calls the 'traditional' - the nuclear - family is a very recent phenomenon;
her simplistic belief that Christianity's 'Holy Family' provides its
historical paradigm is risible. But it is the shallowness and vapidity of
her discussion of her material - itself, as we see, highly tendentious -
which scuppers the enterprise. If we wish to understand families, and find
out whether they are failing and if so what needs to be done, Hite's book is
the last place to look.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940305

