FT941-5442

FT  07 MAR 94 / Bad old days have gone though wage concerns remain: Britain


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Economics Correspondent


When Britain left the exchange rate mechanism in September 1992, many
commentators thought it was about to descend into its old pattern, with a
devaluation designed to boost competitiveness merely ending in increased
inflation.
Few thought that, nearly one and a half years later, retail price inflation
would be just 2.5 per cent. In 1993, growth was much stronger and inflation
far weaker than analysts had expected at the start of the year. What is not
clear is whether this is just a temporary blip, or whether Britain is
starting to escape from its inflationary past.
Most economists feel that UK inflation will stay within the government's 1-4
per cent target range during this year and next. One key factor has been the
low growth of wages. Average earnings grew by just 3 per cent in the year to
December 1993. This low wage growth enabled manufacturers to absorb some of
the cost increases caused by sterling's devaluation, and helped keep prices
from rising.
Now the focus of inflationary fears has switched. The effects of devaluation
on import prices have disappeared from the system and manufacturers' input
costs are falling - by 2.5 per cent in the year to January. But wage rises
may now be starting to pick up, in part because unemployment has fallen
faster than expected.
Most economists agree that Britain still has an output gap, although not on
its size. Pessimists such as Mr Bill Martin of UBS think, however, that
Britain is very close to capacity and that inflation will pick up sharply in
1995, rising to 7.7 per cent in the fourth quarter.
But Mr Tim Congdon, one of the British chancellor's six independent economic
advisers, expects an annual rate of inflation of just 1.7 per cent in the
fourth quarter of 1995. He believes the output gap is still substantial and
that the lagged effects of slow monetary growth in the early 1990s are still
working their way through the system.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940307

