FT944-6047

FT  01 DEC 94 / German hopes for Europol dashed


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


Cherished German plans to build up Europol, the embryonic pan-European
police agency to fight organised crime in the EU's border-free single
market, ran into determined opposition from France, the UK and Spain
yesterday.
The German presidency of the EU had hoped to get long-delayed agreement on
the Europol convention finalised yesterday at a meeting of the Union's
justice and interior ministers in Brussels, ready to unveil at the Essen
summit of EU leaders on December 9-10.
The dispute over Europol's role and scope, in which Germany and France, the
driving axis of the EU, are on opposite sides, is unlikely to be resolved
until next year, Chancellor Helmut Kohl conceded in Bonn yesterday at a
pre-Essen Franco-German summit with President Francois Mitterrand. France
takes over the EU presidency in January.
France insists that national police officers attached to Europol must have
access not only to standardised data pooled in Europol, but also more
sensitive intelligence. The latest German proposal, backed by all its other
partners, would restrict access to sensitive data except where Europol and
national liaison officers attached to it, were directly involved. The German
position reflects concerns that national police forces do not lose control
of the security of their most delicate operations.
Mr Charles Pasqua, the hard-line Gaullist French interior minister, is
determined to keep the Europol project firmly under national government
control, and in this general aim he has strong support from Britain and
Spain. Mr Pasqua did not attend yesterday's meeting, in what some French
officials hinted was a message that police force co-ordination is a matter
for intergovernmental co-operation rather than joint EU action.
France and the UK also rule out German ambitions for Europol to develop an
eventual operational cross-border role. In a vain attempt to salvage some
sort of agreement last night, the German presidency argued for the
short-term expansion of Europol's only functioning body, the anti-drugs unit
in the Hague, to cover issues like cross-border car theft networks,
plutonium trafficking, and illegal immigrant smuggling. Germany's partners,
however, rejected any move until a common philosophy and legal framework for
Europol is agreed.
Spain wants Europol to have counter-terrorism within its remit from the
start. Madrid's preoccupation with terrorism also blocked any advance
yesterday on controversial new EU measures defining the right of asylum,
which Spain wants limited to nationals from non-EU countries, following an
acrimonious dispute with Belgium over the granting of temporary refuge to
alleged Basque terrorists.
Including politically sensitive terrorist operations in Europol's
cross-border duties would, however, provide additional arguments against
France's demand for fuller national police access to the agency's files and
data base.
Underlying these rows are sharp differences over the Maastricht treaty's
'Third Pillar' on co-operation in internal security affairs, which allots a
still undefined role to EU institutions. The UK and France are against the
majority view that the European Court of Justice should have an appeal and
adjudication role, that the Court of Auditors should be responsible for
Europol's accounts, and that the European parliament should oversee the
agency.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941201

