FT941-3578

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (25): The mellowing of Mintzberg
 -Christopher Lorenz believes there has been a reversal of a noted
campaigner's past extremism / Strategic planning


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning
by Henry Mintzberg
Prentice Hall, Pounds 19.95
458 pages
Henry Mintzberg, a management professor at Montreal's McGill University, has
spent the last 20 years campaigning around the world against the
ultra-rational, mechanistic, highly detailed, and mainly top-down sort of
strategic planning popularised in the 1970s by the Boston Consulting Group,
and in the 1980s by Harvard's Prof Michael Porter.
The results of such planning processes are often rendered inadequate or even
dangerous by shifting events. In their place he has championed the
diametrically opposed idea that strategy is only effective if it is created
by a trial-and-error process of 'crafting' - a combination of intuitive
anticipation, and rapid reaction to events. Rather than being planned in
deliberate detail beforehand, on the misguided assumption that companies can
'know' the future, the Mintzberg doctrine is that effective strategies often
'emerge' from outside events, or from the everyday actions of
entrepreneurial managers at all levels.
Since the mid-1980s, his message has penetrated a growing number of
companies. Over the same period, events in the 'real' world - of politics,
economics and industrial competition - have reinforced the realisation that
no amount of detailed planning can help companies such as General Motors,
IBM, Kodak, Philips and Volkswagen react to - let alone anticipate and mould
 -their constantly shifting environment.
One might, therefore, expect a book with this title to be a mere celebration
of the defeat of Mintzberg's bete noir: the left-brain processes (linear,
verbal, analytical and purely rational) which have always dominated the
teaching and practice of corporate strategy.
The book certainly celebrates the sort of right-brain thinking (intuition,
pattern-recognition, and synthesis) which he has always advocated. But it
does much more than that. In a phrase, it represents the mellowing of
Mintzberg.
His documentation of planning's fall from grace is thorough in the extreme.
He explains at length, for instance, why there is such a gulf between
'strategy' and 'planning'. The first may be either an emergent 'pattern', or
what he calls a deliberate 'perspective'. He defines the second as merely 'a
formalised system for codifying, elaborating and operationalising the
strategies which companies already have'.
Most of his criticisms of the old strategic planning school are fair, if
brutal. It suffers from two key fallacies, he says. The first is that
thought should be detached from action, with strategy decided only by top
management and central staff, rather than by practising managers. The second
fallacy is that planning, despite being a purely analytical activity, can
create the sort of synthesis which is required to develop strategy. As he
says: 'Strategy-making is an immensely complex process involving the most
sophisticated, subtle and at times subconscious of human cognitive and
social processes.'
Lesser butts of Mintzberg's criticism include: top management's mistaken
faith in supposedly 'hard' data; the propensity of some managers still to
cling to the discredited world of medium and long-term forecasting; and the
enthusiasm of others for the 'multiple scenario' techniques pioneered by
Shell.
Only on the last of these does Mintzberg misread reality, and mislead the
reader: Shell's approach is not, as he claims, based on the idea that, since
the future is unpredictable, 'then by speculating on a variety of futures,
you might just hit upon the right one'. In reality, the essence of Shell's
admittedly complicated approach is to encourage managers to develop
strategies which are resilient to very different possible futures.
Mintzberg's peccadillo is unfair, but not venal enough to take the edge off
the freshness of the final quarter of the book, where he rehabilitates
planning and planners.
Instead of working in their old top-down way, Mintzberg argues that planners
have critical roles to play in support of line managers. They should
challenge managerial thinking by posing the right questions, not by seeking
the right answers. They should help 'articulate, justify and elaborate'
(fill-out) the strategic vision of leaders at any level.
Mintzberg calls this sort of activity 'strategic programming', but says it
need not always be formal. Instead, he even acknowledges that planners may
need in some cases to act as what he calls 'strategy finders': recognising
and broadening the impact of strategies 'emerging' unnoticed from the
organisation's experimentation and messy learning, or from the actions of
its competitors.
In other words, a degree of rationality and planning matters after all. 'Too
much planning may lead us to chaos, but so would too little, and more
directly,' Mintzberg concludes. That is obvious commonsense, but it is still
quite a volte-face from his past extremism. In many ways, the book's title
should be reversed to 'the fall and rise of planning'.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940315

