FT944-6053

FT  01 DEC 94 / Clarke drive to avert fuel tax revolt: Labour leader calls
on Tory rebels to join Commons vote to block VAT increase


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and PETER NORMAN


Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, last night launched a post-Budget
campaign to head off a Tory rebellion on the planned increase in value added
tax on domestic fuel.
Amid signs at Westminster that this week's Budget had calmed the recent
panic on the Conservative back benches, Mr Clarke was preparing a series of
one-to-one discussions to persuade rebel MPs to drop their opposition.
Mr Clarke told colleagues he was confident, though not certain, that the
government would defeat a Labour attempt next week to reopen the issue of
whether the VAT rate on domestic fuel should rise from 8 per cent to 17.5
per cent.
The febrile atmosphere at Westminster was eased also by confirmation that Mr
John Major's opponents on the right of the party had failed to muster enough
support to force a challenge this year to his premiership.
The annual deadline for nominations for the party leadership passed without
a rival contender being named. The main figures who had been seeking to
mount a challenge conceded they had failed to muster the required signatures
of 34 MPs.
But the emergence of a cabinet split on whether Mr Major should offer a
referendum on the next stage of European integration provided a reminder of
the tensions beneath the surface over Britain's relations with Brussels.
Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, and Mr Major have both recently softened
opposition to the idea of an eventual referendum.
But it is thought Mr Clarke and Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade secretary,
are implacably opposed to the idea of offering a commitment now. The
cabinet's two leading pro-Europeans are thought to judge that a referendum
pledge would not solve the central problem of finding policies to win the
support of a broad majority in the Tory party.
Mr Clarke's initiative on VAT came after Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader,
published details of a Commons motion for next Tuesday which would allow MPs
to vote during the passage of the Finance Bill on whether to freeze VAT on
fuel. The Labour leader appealed for support from more than half a dozen
Tory MPs who have indicated they were considering rebelling against the
government on the issue.
But the chancellor plans to warn would-be rebels that Labour is seeking a
platform to wreck the Finance Bill. Defeat for the government in next week's
vote would provide a dangerous precedent for future Budgets, giving the
opposition much greater leverage over the government's fiscal policy.
At a briefing for economic journalists, Mr Clarke said the government had
announced cumulative compensation for value added tax on domestic fuel and
power of Pounds 1.3bn. The payments - through increased pensions, benefits,
the home heating efficiency scheme and cold weather payments - compared with
expected revenues of about Pounds 3bn in this financial year and 1995-96.
Mr Clarke said he found the position of those opposing the VAT levy 'faintly
incredible'.
Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, urged Tories worried about the move
to 'wrestle with their consciences' and help defeat the government on the
issue.
Cabinet divided over Euro poll, Page 11; Budget reports, Pages 12 and 13;
Samuel Brittan, Page 23; Observer, Page 23; Bonds, Page 34; Currencies, Page
36; London stocks, Page 46

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941201

