FT944-14388

FT  22 OCT 94 / Arts: Burt Lancaster: good guy - Obituary


Burt Lancaster, who died in Los Angeles yesterday at the age of 80, was one
of the most varied and skillful male leads Hollywood has ever produced.
His ruggedly-handsome face and chiselled physique allowed him to achieve
stardom in the beefed-up, superficial American cinema of the 1950s, a time
when pectorals seemed more in demand than talent. But though Lancaster was
certainly never lacking in the muscle department, he did manage to pack
nearly every performance with emotional depth and great intelligence. It was
this skill that eventually allowed him to work well into his eighth decade,
long past the time that most of his contemporaries had been put out to stud.
Born the son of a postal clerk in 1913, Burton Stephen Lancaster grew up on
the mean streets of Harlem, using his prodigious physical skills to earn a
sports scholarship at university and then to win a job on a vaudeville
acrobatic team. Never truly successful on the hard-knocks variety circuit,
Lancaster worked at various menial jobs to make ends meet, and when the
second world war came along he was only too eager to give up acrobatics for
a stint as a special forces operative in the US army. Upon returning to
civilian life he took up screen acting, striking gold with an astonishing
debut performance as Swede in the 1946 noir classic, The Killers. After
years of nervy little tough guys like Bogart and Cagney, the war-weary
public seemed ready for this calmly regal star.
Although the next few years saw several 'heavy' roles in forgettable B-films
such as Brute Force and Kiss the Blood off my Hands, Lancaster soon
abandoned macho-heroics for more varied parts. Most memorable of these were
his work as a creepy, incestuous gossip columnist in Sweet Smell of Success
(1957) and the lovelorn sergeant warden in From Here to Eternity (1953).
This latter film raised Lancaster to icon status for his steamy beach
grapple with Deborah Kerr.
During this period, Lancaster also had the wisdom to opt out of the studio
grind, forming his own production company with agent Henry Hecht. In this
capacity he was to produce several notable films, including the
academy-award winning Marty (1955).
Lancaster won his sole acting Oscar in 1960 for his powerful portrayal of a
conman evangelist in Elmer Gantry, a film which completed his transition
from celluloid hunk to thinking actor. Subsequent performances in Judgment
at Nuremberg (1961) and Birdman of Alcatraz (1962) established him as the
premier male lead of the early 1960s, an actor who could satisfy the
public's desire for rugged good looks while at the same time pleasing the
critics. Lancaster's most mature performance came when he took on the
challenge of portraying the wistful Sicilian prince in Visconti's The
Leopard (1963). Several commentators had ranked this as one of the greatest
acting turns of all time.
The next 10 years were perhaps more notable for the roles Lancaster turned
down than for those he accepted. He rejected the lead in Patten to earn his
rent in Airport, a film he publicly judged to be 'junk'. Even more
amazingly, he also refused to be considered for the title role in The
Godfather. For the first time in his career, Lancaster had lost his nose for
the right move. Like his contemporaries Kirk Douglas and Tony Curtis, he
seemed destined to become another wrinkling superstar condemned to cameo
hell. Remarkably, however, he managed to stage a comeback as he approached
his 70th year with his deeply-felt portrayal of an ageing Mafia hood in
Louis Malle's Atlantic City (1980). Three years later he was to score again
as the melancholy oil billionaire in Bill Forsythe's magical Local Hero.
Indeed, Lancaster's performance in Field of Dreams (1989) as an aged
baseball player who gets another chance to play served as a fitting coda for
an actor who was able to keep on having his turns at the plate.
One of the hallmarks of Lancaster's professionalism and generosity as an
actor was his unrivalled record of providing co-stars with Oscars, from
Shirley Booth to Anna Magnani, from Frank Sinatra to David Niven.
His own four nominations spanned 30 years, from From Here to Eternity to
Atlantic City - the fact that he lost out for that latter film to a feeble
Henry Fonda can be put down to Hollywood's indulgence for maudlin sentiment.
Not that it matters. While most actors would be happy to seem ageless as
they hit the twilight years, it was Burt Lancaster's special grace always to
seem full of the ages.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

941022

