FT944-11039

FT  08 NOV 94 / UK Company News: Allied Domecq in Pounds 265m sale - Food
ingredients disposal represents 'another significant step' in strategy


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


Allied Domecq, the UK food and drinks group that has decided to concentrate
on spirits and retailing, yesterday sold its food ingredients businesses for
a total of Pounds 265m.
Kerry, the Irish food group, has agreed to pay Dollars 402m (Pounds 248m)
cash for DCA Food Industries, Allied's US food ingredients subsidiary, and
Margetts Foods of the UK.
Separately Allied has agreed the sale of a DCA joint venture interest, not
in the US, to a third party for Dollars 25m.
Mr Tony Hales, Allied chief executive, said the sales represented 'another
significant step' in the group's strategy.
'We are pleased to have found a committed buyer for DCA in Kerry,' he added.
New York-based DCA makes ingredients such as food coatings for the
industrial, food service and supermarket segments of the market. Margetts
makes jams and processes fruit for yoghurt, ice-cream and bakery products.
The businesses had annual revenues of Dollars 333m and operating profits of
Dollars 31.8m for the year to last February. Analysts suggested that Allied
had got a good price, at well over Dollars 1 per dollar of sales.
Kerry, which yesterday described its purchase as 'a major strategic
acquisition', is to finance the deal through a combination of bank
borrowings and a placement. Yesterday it placed 7.8m ordinary shares at 335p
apiece with institutional investors, raising IPounds 26m (Pounds 25.6m).
Borrowings will more than double to IPounds 360m, giving gearing of well
over 100 per cent. The group aims to cut this to less than 90 per cent by
the end of next year.
The deal has been backed by Kerry Co-operative, which owns 52 per cent of
the group, and is expected to be completed next month. It will lift the
annual sales of the group's food ingredients businesses to about Dollars
1bn, accounting for more than half total turnover.
Allied Domecq changed its name from Allied-Lyons after paying Pounds 739m
last March for control of Pedro Domecq Group, the Spanish drinks producer.
Domecq is best known in the UK for sherry brands such as La Ina, but 50 per
cent of its profits last year came from Mexico, where it owns Presidente,
the largest-selling brandy in the world.
The group's extensive food and beverage businesses, with a total turnover
last year of about Pounds 1bn, were put up for sale in the summer. Among
prospective buyers for DCA were Dalgety and Grand Metropolitan in the UK and
Heinz in the US. The Tetley tea and European bakery businesses remain on the
market.
Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, beat SG Warburg of the UK to advise
Allied on the disposal of the food ingredients businesses. Warburg continues
to advise Allied on the sale of the beverages and bakeries units.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

941108

