FT943-13279

FT  20 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Standard Chartered's brave new order - A
look at the reorganisation planned to prevent further scandal


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


On one of the panes of a large stained glass window which decorates Standard
Chartered's Hong Kong headquarters are the Chinese characters 'dong fang
hung' - the East is Red.
The phrase comes from a celebrated Cultural Revolution hymn to Mao Zedong,
the late Chinese dictator, but it could well describe faces among Standard's
top executives.
The past 20 days have not been the best in the bank's 144-year history.
On June 28, there was the censure from the Securities and Future's
Commission, Hong Kong's corporate watchdog, over the participation by its
securities company and merchant bank in questionable share price support
schemes.
Then came the revelation at the weekend that two top executives from
Mocatta, Standard's gold and silver bullion dealer, had been sacked after
employees in Malaysia and the Philippines had offered bribes to central
bankers to direct their bullion purchases through Mocatta.
With memories of the bank's unfortunate experiences in the Bombay securities
trading scandal still fresh in investors' minds, it seems as if Standard is
never going to get it right in the east.
Neither of the two scandals which have jolted the bank this year compare in
scale to that of Bombay, which necessitated a Pounds 269m provision for
possible losses in 1992. Moreover, the Mocatta incident came to light as a
result of current management's action.
For Mr John McFarlane, an executive director now stationed in Hong Kong, the
scandals were the result of inadequate management control - which he plans
to put right.
As part of a reorganisation of the bank's businesses - a Standard Chartered
Markets division is being created - Mr McFarlane plans to concentrate
initially on issues relating to compliance, fiduciary responsibility and
code of conduct.
For the new markets division, he will soon announce two new executives.
The first, a global operations manager, will be responsible for the group's
back office procedures. The second appointment will focus on compliance,
market risk and regulation.
'I don't want to be at the mercy of local managers as to the operating
integrity of the businesses . . . I want a robust series of independent
controls that bite hard on the business and communicate rapidly up to me,'
he says.
Won't this bureaucracy slow down business?
Mr McFarlane contends that today's manager spends far too much time on
administrative detail and not enough on the development of the business.
The new positions will free managers to develop the bank, while giving Mr
McFarlane a 'magnifying glass' on their business.
He is also equally firm that Standard will not be involved in any businesses
where bribery or unethical behaviour is an entry or operational requirement.
'If that means we do not operate in a certain line of business or offer a
certain product, then that's fine. It's not for us,' he says.
Mr McFarlane clearly believes that the bank is able to hold these beliefs
about business practice and successfully execute the strategy recently laid
out by its top executives. This sees Standard as 'an Asian and emerging
markets bank', which will engage in international banking to service its
clients from those regions.
He was involved in the development of this strategy, which to him is a
recognition of the obvious. The bank has more than 60 per cent of its net
assets in Asia/Pacific and the Middle East and south Asia. More than half
its profits derive from Asia/Pacific alone, the largest slice of which comes
from its banking operations in Hong Kong where it occupies the number three
slot after Hongkong Bank and Bank of China.
Mr McFarlane, a management school graduate, liberally peppers his analysis
with phrases such as 'key success factors', 'focus', and 'matrix
management'. Standard has divided its business into three broad functions -
corporate banking, personal banking, and markets - which overlay geographic
responsibilities.
Mr McFarlane will manage Standard's global markets unit from Hong Kong,
while Mr David Moir, another director, manages the bank's corporate banking
function from Singapore.
Standard Chartered Markets, as the new group will be known, consists of four
businesses:
Investment banking: comprising stock broking and corporate finance. Mr
McFarlane is personally supervising Standard Chartered Securities and
Standard Chartered Asia - the bank's Hong Kong broking and investment
banking subsidiaries that were censured by the colony's regulators.
He says his priorities are first to make sure of the 'absolute integrity' of
the operating companies: 'We will not tolerate another control failure in
these areas.'
Then he plans to address strategic business development issues, recruitment
of 'world class' executives to manage the businesses and, finally, their
management for long-term profit.
'You need to be local in markets but at the same time you need a
distribution presence in London and New York, in particular,' he says. 'We
do not yet have critical mass in investment banking. We are not as large as
we need to be.'
Treasury. This makes a large contribution to Standard's profits. Mr
McFarlane says the bank is particularly strong in 'exotic currencies'.
London, New York, Hong Kong and Singapore are 'hubs' in the trading of
reserve currencies, while its other branches specialise in trading local
currencies.
He says the growth opportunities for trading currencies in Asia is
'tremendous', given the rapid rates of economic growth which countries in
the region have achieved.
In terms of development, however, he believes the bank could leverage its
position in exotic currencies better, and improve its position in currency
options.
Financial institu-tions, which manages relationships with the bank's main
counterparties. 'It is the 'relationship management' arm for our key
financial institution clients,' Mr McFarlane says.
Bullion trading. Mocatta is, he says, enjoying a very good year.
Mr McFarlane says that the division of the bank into three business segments
and Standard Chartered Markets into four distinct groups adds clearer
definition to and tighter control over its operations.
'The simplification of our strategy will help us grow profits and improve
the quality of our earnings,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940720

