FT942-12814

FT  28 APR 94 / World Trade News: US to fund flat panel displays - Dollars
1bn government package for development and manufacture


   By LOUISE KEHOE and MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   SAN FRANCISCO, TOKYO


The US government is expected to announce today a Dollars 1bn package to
fund the development and manufacture of flat panel displays, such as those
used in portable computers. This will represent the largest ever US
government-funded programme for commercial technology.
Currently, Japanese companies dominate the Dollars 4bn flat panel display
market. This has long been a concern for the US Defence Department, which
increasingly uses flat panel displays in military systems, as well as for
the US computer industry, which is dependent upon foreign suppliers.
Industry groups have been urging the US government to provide funding to
help establish flat panel display manufacturing in the US for several years.
Previous Republican administrations balked at their proposals to inject
government money in commercial ventures.
The Clinton administration, however, has increased technology development
funding and is expected to announce matching funds of up to Dollars 500m for
companies that are willing to establish flat panel display manufacturing in
the US.
The goal of this part of the programme is to establish four large-scale
manufacturing sites in the US that eventually would supply about one-sixth
of world demand for flat panel displays.
US companies, and groups of companies, have previously come up with similar
proposals. Until now, however, such ideas have floundered because US
companies have been unwilling to invest in such a highly capital intensive
venture.
To date, US government funding has focused largely on research and
development. The Defence Department's Advanced Research Program Agency has
provided funds to companies developing equipment for the manufacture of flat
panel displays. The Pentagon is also subsidising the construction of a pilot
production line.
These efforts will now be expanded, with the Defence and Energy Departments
expected to provide a total of Dollars 450m, over the next five years, in
grants to companies that invest in flat panel display research.
Flat panel displays are considered to be one of the few critical
technologies in which the US has failed to keep pace with foreign
competitors. Sharp of Japan, the world's largest producer by far, is
estimated to have a 50 per cent market share of the market. NEC, which has
about 14 per cent of the market, aims to raise that to 30 per cent by next
year.
In order to stay ahead in the race to dominate the expanding flat panel
display market, Japanese companies have been aggressively building up
capacity. Sharp, which already has 2 plants and produces about 100,000
ten-inch display panels a month, is adding a third one that is planned to
come on stream next year. It also plans to expand its US subsidiaries'
capacity.
NEC, which opened a second plant earlier this month, estimates production
will reach 250,000 and expects its LCD sales to more than double to Y100bn
as a result.
Hitachi is also investing in a new LCD plant to raise capacity to 30,000
ten-inch panels a month while Toshiba is also planning to increase capital
investment in LCD facilities.
In addition, IBM and Toshiba have a joint venture for manufacturing flat
panel displays in Japan, formed in 1991, which provide the diplays used in
IBM portable computers.
South Korean manufacturers including Samsung and Goldstar Electronics have
also recently entered the market.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940428

