FT942-16223

FT  12 APR 94 / World Trade News: Delays threaten Dollars 870m Czech oil
investment plan


   By PATRICK BLUM


   VIENNA


The future of a proposed Dollars 870m investment by a consortium of Agip,
Conoco, Shell and Total will be put at risk unless the Czech government
endorses the project at a meeting of its economic council today, sources
close to the consortium say.
A decision on the project, involving two Czech refineries and an oil
pipeline linking the Czech Republic with Germany, has been awaited for
months by consortium members, worried that nationalists in the government
who oppose foreign participation will cause further delays and render the
project unfeasible. Under the proposal the consortium would take a 49 per
cent stake in the refineries, with the government keeping 51 per cent for
the foreseeable future.
The two refineries are included in the wave of voucher privatisations now
moving into the decisive stage when voucher holders bid for shares in
specific companies. The consortium said the government must make clear its
intention to bring foreign partners into the refineries which are to be
combined within a single company as outlined in its own privatisation
programme for the oil and petrochemicals industry. Failing this, the
refineries' ownership structure will become too diversified, with competing
shareholders in the two refineries making an effective bid unworkable.
The consortium envisages investing Dollars 280m in the Chemopetrol Litvinov
refinery, in northern Bohemia near the German border, and about Dollars 240m
in the smaller Kaucuk Kralupy refinery, some 60km north of Prague.
The consortium also proposes to invest about Dollars 150m, a third of the
cost of a new oil pipeline to be built between Ingolstadt in Germany and the
two Czech refineries. A further investment of around Dollars 200m in working
capital will be needed to help start up the pipeline and other costs.
The Czech Republic imports practically all its crude oil, about 6m tonnes a
year, from Russia, making it prone to political pressures from Moscow. The
new pipeline, with an annual capacity of 10m tonnes, would 'attach' the
Czech Republic to west Europe, an analyst said. It would provide greater
security and more flexibility, by carrying different products, and could
boost Russian oil exports to Germany. It awaits approval from the Bavarian
authorities, and is expected to be completed by early 1996.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940412

