FT941-4171

FT  12 MAR 94 / Smith contemptuous of 'punch-drunk' Tories


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, yesterday delivered a contemptuous attack
on the Conservative government, saying it had run out of imagination and
energy and was kept going only by its desire to stay in office.
He told the annual conference of the Labour party in Scotland at Dundee that
the government was like 'a punch-drunk boxer, kept going only by his desire
to stay on his feet'.
It was almost impossible to find a leading Tory who was not preparing for a
leadership contest, he said. 'Whether the prime minister likes it or not,
every speech by leading cabinet ministers is now scrutinised for signs of
whether or not that particular minister is trying to improve his chances of
succeeding Mr Major.'
He said government priorities were dictated by the odds one could get on the
leadership prospects of Mr Kenneth Clarke, Mr Michael Heseltine and 'the
fading Michael Howard.'
In a reference to last week's clear-out of much of the board of Celtic
football club in Glasgow, he said: 'While ministers scurry around trying to
prepare for a boardroom coup, don't they understand that the country doesn't
care who the managing director is? The country doesn't want a boardroom
coup. From everywhere comes a stronger and more familiar cry - sack the
board.'
Mr Smith attacked the government's bill for reforming local government in
Scotland, which is in its committee stage in the Commons.
He said the bill had 'shambolic proposals' which were drawn up not by an
independent government commission but by 'Tory ministers sitting down with a
map and pencil and drawing up the boundaries' to make sure there was as much
Tory blue as possible on the political map.
He said the establishment of a Scottish parliament was unfinished business
for him, because he had been the minister responsible for devolution in the
last Labour government.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940312

