FT944-11047

FT  08 NOV 94 / Citibank enters UK retail market


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


Citibank, the US money centre bank, is entering retail banking in Britain
for the first time. The bank expects to open six branches by the end of 1995
in an effort to build a global branch banking network.
The bank has opened its first retail branch in the Strand in London and
expects to open a further three in London. This follows the opening of three
'model' branches in Paris last year.
Citibank executives said yesterday that it might eventually establish a
large network by acquiring a building society. But for at least three years,
it would only offer a niche service for professionals who travel widely.
It will offer 24-hour telephone banking, and sophisticated automated
terminals which can be used in the US for stockbroking. Customers are
required to keep at least Pounds 2,000 in a current account to avoid fees.
The bank has about 500 branches in Europe, including 301 branches in
Germany, 96 branches in Spain and 62 branches in Belgium. It bought the
former Kundenkreditbank (KKB) in Germany in 1974, changing the name three
years ago.
Mr Victor Menezes, executive vice-president in charge of consumer banking in
the US and Europe, said the bank was 'not planning a mass market assault',
in Britain but would aim at the 'large international population' in the
south-east.
It wanted to establish a niche presence first, and might then reconsider an
expansion into the broader UK retail market.
Citibank is aiming to attract 'tens of thousands' of UK customers. But, Mr
Menezes said that the main aim was to establish a link in its global network
of branches, which includes 117 in the Asia Pacific.
Citibank already has a Dollars 2.2bn (Pounds 1.3bn) residential mortgage
portfolio in the UK, making loans through intermediaries. In the early
1970s, it closed a small network of 'money shops' which had offered personal
and consumer loans.
The bank's retail franchise in emerging markets is highly regarded by
analysts. According to the bank, its Dollars 10.9bn of revenue from consumer
businesses last year outstrips the Dollars 8.5bn of Disney, and the Dollars
7.4bn of McDonald's.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

941108

