FT942-14906

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (7): Simplicity and
clarity at last - On this page, John Griffiths examines The implications of
UK tax changes for company car owners


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


On April 6 the Inland Revenue introduced a new regime for taxing the private
benefit employees enjoy from the use of their company cars.
Out went the awkward 20 year-old system under which tax payable was assessed
by means of scale charges on a matrix of car price and engine capacity
bands. In came a much simpler system, based on a straightforward percentage
of a car's list price plus extras at time of purchase.
The new regime has a considerable impact on individuals and their current
cars, creating thousands of winners and losers in net tax payment terms. But
it is claimed by the Government not to increase the overall burden of
company car taxation. In the Government's view, the company car became tax
neutral - in other words, as a benefit it became taxed fairly - when scale
charges were last increased for the 1993/94 tax year.
Impact on individuals aside, there is one very considerable benefit in the
new regime for all involved in company cars:
Because it is based on fixed percentages of list prices, the regime is
self-adjusting. Provided the government makes no changes to the percentages
themselves - and this would be difficult now that it has proclaimed the
level of company car taxation to be fair - the assessed taxable benefit will
rise automatically with new car prices. Fleet managers and company car users
alike should have a more stable framework within which to plan policies or
make car choices.
For the motor industry and the dealers, especially, the new regime should
thus end the period of uncertainty which traditionally set in before each
Budget, as rumours circulated about how much company car taxes were likely
to rise that year.
Particularly at the end of the 1980s, there was good reason for the company
car sector to be fearful every time the Chancellor rose to his feet, because
company car taxes were more than doubled within five years.
The essential elements of the new regime are:
All employees earning over Pounds 8,500 a year and with the benefit of
private use of a company car are liable to pay tax on this benefit.
The benefit is calculated as a percentage of the list price of the car plus
extras, and is variable by two factors - the business mileage covered each
year by the user, and the car's age. The highest percentage, 35, applies to
a user covering less than 2,500 business miles a year in a car less than
four years old. This percentage is reduced by one third, to 22.33 per cent,
where the business mileage is between 2,500 and 18,000. When business
mileage is over 18,000 this percentage is halved, to 11.67 per cent.
In turn, each of these percentages is reduced by one-third in cases where a
car becomes more than four years old during the tax year under assessment.
Thus, the 35 per cent assessment would become 23.3 per cent; the 23.33 per
cent drops to 15.56 per cent, and the 11.77 to just 7.78 per cent.
As a result of intensive lobbying by luxury car makers such as Rolls-Royce
and Aston Martin, whose Pounds 100,000-plus cars would be excessively
disadvantaged by the scheme, there is a cap, or list price upper limit, of
Pounds 80,000 above which the same tax would be assessed irrespective of
price.
When the outlines of the list price scheme were announced, speculation was
rife that a market could rapidly develop in extras fitted after the
purchase, to lower the tax burden.
Since then, however, the Inland Revenue has framed its definitions more
tightly and the list price has to comprise:
manufacturer's, importer's or distributor's published list price on the day
preceding registration, plus VAT (the 10 per cent special car tax was
abolished in two stages last year);
delivery charges, including VAT;
list price of accessories installed before the car is delivered to the
employee, also including VAT and fitting charges;
plus the list price, plus VAT and fitting, of any accessories fitted
subsequently costing more than Pounds 100.
Accessories in this category fitted before July 31 are exempt. Employees can
make a capital contribution to the car, for example in order to obtain a
better vehicle than the one to which they are ordinarily entitled.
Doing so reduces the list price pound-for-pound for tax purposes up to a
maximum contribution of Pounds 5,000. Any higher payment by the employer
will be disallowed for tax purposes.
The Inland Revenue has also moved to plug one small loophole in the previous
taxation regime which allowed mainly perk users to run expensive classic
cars on a low-tax basis. These were classified, under the old regime, as
merely cars over four years old of a certain engine capacity, even if the
car in question was a Pounds 250,000 Ferrari from the 1950s or 1960s.
Hopes that a similar car could be valued for tax purposes on its 40-year-old
list price have been dashed: if it is adjudged to have an open market value
of Pounds 15,000 or more the Inland Revenue will value it.
There are no changes to the basis on which fuel provided for an employee's
private benefit is taxed. This is the one area which is not self-adjusting
and for the current tax year is assessed at Pounds 640 for a car of under
1.4 litres, Pounds 810 for 1.4-2 litre cars, Pounds 1,200 for over 2 litres,
and Pounds 580 and Pounds 750 respectively for diesels of under and over 2
litres.
In all cases, the employee will actually pay 25 per cent or 40 per cent of
all the above amounts, depending on his or her marginal tax rate.
Employers must also pay National Insurance contributions amounting to 11.2
per cent of the benefit to the employee of private use of the car and on the
fuel benefit where applicable.
They will face a number of other new obligations, including to make
quarterly returns, starting in July, identifying who has received, changed
or handed back a company car and when, together with details of model, fuel
used, and price, any contribution by employee and the expected annual
business mileage.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940418

