FT943-750

FT  28 SEP 94 / World Trade News: US fears delay of Uruguay Round law


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


The Clinton Administration yesterday sent the long awaited legislation to
implement the Uruguay Round to Congress in the hope of getting passage
before the end of the Congressional term.
The most immediate obstacle to passage may be Senator Ernest Hollings, a
South Carolina Democrat. The Senator, who represents textile producers, is
not expected to support the pact.
As chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, he has the power to hold the
legislation up for 45 days of hearings. This would make passage this year
impossible.
Business lobbyists are conducting a frantic campaign to convince Republicans
not to deny the president a victory on trade for partisan reasons.
Mr Mickey Kantor, the US Trade Representative, said yesterday Senator
Hollings was 'very happy with major parts' of the bill but 'not happy with
other parts.' 'No deals have been offered and no deals have been cut
 ..(but) Senator Hollings is a friend of this Administration,' he said.
Mr Kantor said the legislation would include a one year extension of the
generalised system of preferences, which offers duty-free tariffs to
developing country industries and extension of a modified 'Super 301' under
which the Administration lists country's trade barriers and tries to
negotiate them out of existence.
Confusion surrounds the intentions of the Republican leadership, which has
traditionally supported international trade initiatives.
Having successfully killed off health insurance reform, they are now
considering denying President Clinton a trade victory.
Mr Kantor insisted the legislation would pass this year with bipartisan
support.
There is a high degree of nervousness in the business community because it
is unclear if legislation submitted this year could be taken up in the new
Congress under 'fast track rules' which forbid amendments. The implementing
legislation might have to be re-introduced and then move to Congress like
other bills, where it would be subject to amendment and filibuster in the
Senate.
It all boils down to a high-risk strategy for one of the Administration's
most important initiatives.
Business lobbyists are expressing bitterness. They believe trade officials
tarried over the legislation, wasting valuable time in its efforts to get
new fast track authority. Because the Administration sought to include
environment and labour initiatives opposed by business and Republicans, it
ultimately was forced to jettison the fast track.
The Administration has had to work in an environment of intense political
warfare which now has some Republicans threatening to destroy their own
decade-long initiative because it was brought to a finish by a Democratic
president.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940928

