FT943-12841

FT  22 JUL 94 / Restless investors ask Signet to reshape


   By TIM BURT


Signet, the jewellery group formerly known as Ratners, yesterday faced calls
for a capital reconstruction from two groups of disaffected shareholders.
The investor groups, both representing preference shareholders, demanded
action to overhaul the share structure and raise fresh capital for the
company.
Pressure for a restructuring has grown since Signet's announcement earlier
this year of annual pre-tax losses of Pounds 85.4m and a sharp increase to
Pounds 58m in preference dividend arrears, which remain unpaid since January
1992.
Mr Julian Treger, an adviser to the UK Active Value Fund - a large holder of
US dollar convertible preference shares - told the company's annual meeting
that dividend arrears could rise to around Pounds 100m this year.
'Whilst this situation persists, the group has no realistic possibility of
access to the capital markets to support the growth of the business and this
makes it increasingly unlikely that ordinary shareholders will see dividends
or real value for a very long time,' he said.
Mr James McAdam, chairman, ruled out an immediate reconstruction, saying the
demands were inappropriate. 'First we must get a positive earnings stream.
We have considered a restructuring but we don't think the time is right. We
must have a cake before we start cutting it up.'
Mr Treger, the South African corporate financier who helped rescue Greycoat
from receivership, said he would consider supporting proposals by US
shareholders for an extraordinary meeting. Plans for an EGM have been drawn
up by Delta Dividend Group, based in San Francisco, which wants Signet's
variable term preference shares listed on Nasdaq and its share capital
restructured within a year.
Signet's annual meeting also heard an allegation from Mr Brian Smith, former
general manager at the Colindale warehouse in London, that there was a
Pounds 500,000 stock theft in 1992. The company admitted there had been a
higher than average stock loss, which had been investigated. It said
although there was 'suspicion of theft', nothing had been proved.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940722

