FT941-3592

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (11): Does Britain need the
German model? - The financial systems are different, says Geoffrey Owen. But
the link between the difference and industrial performance is less certain /
Corporate governance


   By GEOFFREY OWEN


Keeping Good Company: a study of corporate governance in five countries
by Jonathan Charkham.
Oxford University Press, Pounds 19.95.
389 pages
Banks, Finance and Investment in Germany
by Jeremy Edwards and Klaus Fischer
Cambridge University Press, Pounds 30.
252 pages
German industrial companies are widely believed to have a competitive
advantage over their British counterparts, because they are less subject to
short-term pressures from the stock market, are less vulnerable to the
threat of takeover and enjoy more constructive, long-term relationships with
their banks and shareholders.
It is partly for these reasons that Jonathan Charkham, in his study of
corporate governance in five countries, concludes not only that Germany is
the best, but that Britain's industrial decline will continue unless it
moves closer to the German model.
That the German financial system is different from the British one is clear.
Much less certain is the link between that difference and the industrial
performance of the two countries.
Too many assertions on this topic are based on misleading or partial
accounts of how the German system works. Thus a useful complement to
Charkham's book is this careful study by Edwards and Fischer, of the role of
German banks in supplying funds to companies and in monitoring their
management.
Germany has fewer publicly quoted companies than Britain, and within this
small group only a minority have widely dispersed shareholdings on the
Anglo-American pattern. Most of them have a dominant shareholder with at
least 25 per cent of the equity; this is usually a non-financial enterprise
rather than a bank.
This structure has several implications.
First, owner-managed firms account for a much larger proportion of German
industrial output than is the case in Britain. The small and medium-sized
unquoted companies which dominate much of German industry have little
relevance to Britain's corporate governance debate, which is mainly
concerned with the gulf between managers and shareholders. Most of these
companies fall below the threshold at which supervisory boards are required.
The idea that bank representation on supervisory boards is important for
German competitiveness must be qualified by the fact that firms with this
structure account for no more than 30 per cent of total turnover in the
German economy.
Second, Edwards and Fischer cast doubt on the view that, in the large quoted
companies, the presence of banks on supervisory boards confers advantages in
the provision of long-term finance and in the early detection of financial
stress or managerial failure.
There is no evidence that banks which are represented on boards of companies
make more long-term loans to those companies. Strong competition within the
banking industry, including the savings banks and the co-operative sector,
limits the scope for exclusive relationships; the 'house bank' in a large
firm is typically no more than first among equals in a group of several
banks.
To the extent that banks become aware of impending financial strains, it is
in their role as lenders, not as board members.
Most banks loans are secured by collateral, which reduces the banks'
incentive to intervene in troubled companies to stave off bankruptcy.
Interviews conducted by the authors suggest that, unlike Japanese banks,
'German banks do not in general get directly involved in the reorganisation
of a firm in financial distress and do not possess any personnel who are
specialists at turning unprofitable firms around.' In the case of large
quoted companies, the authors concede, board membership may have 'some
limited positive effect' in encouraging them to intervene, because their
reputation is at stake.
The third distinctive feature of the German system is more relevant to the
corporate governance issue. Where a shareholder has a stake of 25 per cent
or more in a company, it has a greater incentive to monitor management than
the typical British or American institution, whose shareholdings rarely
exceed 1-2 per cent. In addition, the presence of large, semi-permanent
investors makes hostile takeovers difficult if not impossible.
The holders of these large stakes are often suppliers or customers of the
company concerned. The shareholding is seen as part of a set of 'implicit
contracts' which encourages long-term, high-trust relationships between the
two parties. There is stability and commitment - missing in most British
companies.
Does this network of share stakes work to the benefit of all shareholders
and of the German economy as a whole? Edwards and Fischer point out that
some of the companies (including the three big banks), which hold large
stakes in other companies, do not themselves have a dominant shareholder;
they are among the minority of cases where shareholdings are widely
dispersed. It is not obvious that the managers of these companies, not
subject to monitoring by their own shareholders, have a strong incentive to
monitor their fellow-managers in the companies where they hold shares.
Indeed, there is a risk of managerial collusion, to the detriment of both
sets of shareholders. 'Representation of firms on each other's supervisory
boards, and in particular the extensive networks among firms which are
created by common bank supervisory board representation, may allow cartel
arrangements to be made, so that profitability increases for reasons
unrelated to efficiency improvement.'
That the system limits the scope for hostile takeovers may be an advantage.
But it is arguable that the absence of the take-over threat has allowed some
German companies to pursue expansionist ambitions which have been damaging
to their own shareholders and of questionable benefit to the economy. If
British and American companies are too quick to dispose of temporarily
loss-making businesses, the Germans sometimes hold on to them for too long.
Charkham accepts that the German system has a tendency towards rigidity, but
in his view it has a huge advantage over Britain in providing a stable
framework within which managers can take long-term decisions. On balance, he
thinks, the fear of takeover is 'distracting, destructive and inhibiting.'
The need for hostile takeovers would be reduced if investors were more
committed to companies and more active in overseeing their performance.
The necessary moves in this direction, Charkham argues, will not occur
without government intervention. The first step would be the creation of a
Royal Commission which would, among other things, reconsider 'the role and
effects of hostile takeovers.'
Yet Charkham provides no evidence that Britain's industrial decline, a
central theme in the book, is linked to weaknesses in corporate governance.
He notes, for example, that Britain is not represented 'among the major
players in the electronics and computer industries.' But in these two
sectors the short-termist US, with all its failings in corporate governance,
is far stronger than long-termist Germany. Success in electronics has little
to do with the presence or absence of hostile takeovers.
Charkham is on stronger ground in calling for improvements in the
composition and conduct of boards of directors. The process by which
non-executive directors are appointed, and the functions which they are
expected to fulfil, remains one of the least satisfactory features of the
British system.
The other four systems which Charkham describes - those of Germany, France,
Japan and the US - all have their flaws, but he thinks the British system is
more flawed than most. He comments approvingly that in Japan there is a
consensus that 'the shareholders' interest does not have to be satisfied by
a growing dividend stream . . . shareholders' interests may be pushed to the
back of the queue.' This reflects a Japanese concept of what companies are
for, which is very different from Anglo-American attitudes. But whether the
supposed downgrading of shareholders is a central ingredient in Japanese
economic success is another matter.
None of the five countries has found a perfect solution to the corporate
governance problem. Just as the Japanese and German system of interlocking
share stakes has potential costs as well as benefits, the same is true of
Britain's reliance on takeovers and an active stock market. No doubt there
are many things wrong with the management of British companies, but there is
no compelling evidence that the pressure on them to maximise shareholder
value is a competitive disadvantage.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940315

