FT944-2961

FT  15 DEC 94 / Credit Suisse top contender for Budapest Bank stake


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


Credit Suisse, part of the CS Holding financial services group, has emerged
as the top contender to take a controlling stake in Budapest Bank, a
Hungarian state-owned bank.
If completed, the deal would be Credit Suisse's first foreign acquisition in
commercial banking and involve the largest single investment by a western
bank in eastern Europe.
A committee of the Hungarian finance minister, the privatisation
commissioner and the managing director of Budapest Bank, Mr Lajos Bokros, is
to take the decision. It is believed to favour Credit Suisse above the other
two bidders, ING Bank of the Netherlands and Allied Irish of Ireland.
Credit Suisse confirmed it had put in an offer but said it was unaware it
had been preferred. 'We have an interest in the bank. Whether it is the bid
that is going to the government we don't know', a spokesman said. The
Hungarian authorities said that there were three bidders.
Credit Suisse still has to conduct a 'due diligence' evaluation of Budapest
Bank and agree precise terms with the Hungarian authorities.
But government officials have, through their advisers Salomon Brothers, said
they will consider the sale of the majority stake that Credit Suisse would
demand.
The investor would pay about Dollars 100m (Pounds 61m) into the company for
its stake, taking Budapest Bank's capital above the 8 per cent of assets
target set by the Basle-based Bank for International Settlements.
Credit Suisse recently opened a branch in Moscow and the acquisition in
Hungary would allow Credit Suisse to pursue its strategy of seeking 'home
markets' outside its native Switzerland.
Credit Suisse's expansion into eastern Europe will allow CS Holding to offer
a full range of financial services in the region. Credit Suisse would be
following CS First Boston, the subsidiary of CS Holding, which has become
the leading international investment bank in the region with offices in
Moscow, Budapest, Prague and Warsaw.
The bid for Budapest Bank comes after the collapse of talks with
Creditanstalt Bankverein of Austria, which would have brought its east
European commercial banking operations to its proposed alliance with Credit
Suisse.
Budapest Bank is the third significant commercial bank in the region to be
offered to western investors from the sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941215

