FT941-5512

FT  05 MAR 94 / Food & Drink: How to pick west coast hotshots - Jancis
Robinson reports on assorted developments in California wine


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


When I heard that Australia's most prolific and forthright wine writer was
to write a California wine atlas on the basis of a single visit, I thought
it was a joke - especially since James Halliday has been a voluble critic of
some California winemaking practices.
This lawyer, vigneron, columnist and author of 25 books on Australian wine
had his own misgivings, according to an interview he gave the newsletter The
New York Wine Cellar. 'I quite frankly went to California with considerable
apprehension because I had had some personal difficulties with many of the
California styles. I wondered, first, how I was going to do justice to the
wines and, second, how I could write a book that people were going to buy.'
In fact, Halliday's Wine Atlas of California (Angus & Robertson) is a
triumph - a lively portrait of an industry in transition peppered with
praise and judiciously spiked with cynicism. It is full of up-to-date
information and has some stunning photographs by Oliver Strewe. It is
overpriced in Britain at Pounds 40, however, and this is not the first wine
atlas with cartography as its weakest point.
Bob Thompson's The Wine Atlas of California with Oregon and Washington
(Mitchell Beazley) may be Pounds 15 cheaper and have clearer maps, but it
proves that the closer you are to a wine region, the more difficult it can
be to pick out its distinguishing marks. Emboldened by this observation, I
am daring to make the following generalisations:
FASHION: California is nothing if not fashion conscious. And, for the moment
at least, fine wine is varietal, named after the grape from which at least
75 per cent of it was made.
The hottest variety of the moment is Merlot, the Pomerol grape, perceived as
Cabernet Sauvignon (the Medoc grape) without the pain. Only Merlot managed
an increase in average California grape prices last harvest, and one market
analyst - they have such things in the Napa Valley - predicts that between
1987 and 1998, total sales of Merlot will have increased almost tenfold.
Duckhorn of Napa Valley was many years ahead of the pack on this one, and
Lay & Wheeler, of Colchester, Essex, sells the 1991 version which is
well-balanced with a nice, dry finish for about Pounds 15 a bottle (fashion
has done nothing to depress Merlot prices). A California Merlot aiming more
exhibitionistically at a lush Pomerol style is Havens Reserve Merlot. Its
1991 is Pounds 16.74 at Bibendum, the wine merchant of London NW1 (tel:
071-722-5577). It hosted the Cheval-Blanc tasting described, incidentally,
by Edmund Penning-Rowsell last week - not the synonymous restaurant.
ODDBALLS: Rhone varieties such as Syrah, Mourvedre and Marsanne have been on
a roll in California for some time now (see Les Jumeaux 1991
Cabernet/Mourvedre blend from Jade Mountain, Pounds 11.50 from Morris &
Verdin, London SW1, 071-630-8888, for sumptuous velvety intrigue).
The prototype Rhone Ranger is Randall Grahm, of Bonny Doon, who has moved on
in search of varietal thrills anew. He is heavily into Italian and Hungarian
varieties this season, and was heard muting his enthusiasm for the Friuli
variety Schioppettino with a wistful 'but the cardinal rule of selling wine
is that if you can't pronounce it, you can't sell it'.
Morris & Verdin also has his delightful dry, characterful white Malvasia
Bianca Ca del Solo at Pounds 7.50. Why can't Italians put this much flavour
into white wine?
THE PEST: No mention of California is complete without the P word, or is it
a Ph word - phylloxera. The dreaded vine louse is destroying vines by the
thousand in Napa, Sonoma and other north coast areas, and Pierce's disease
is wreaking its own havoc.
Or, you can look at it the quintessentially California way as 'the chance of
a lifetime' to get the rootstock right at last, to plant the right variety
in the right place, with the right spacing and trellis system.
BIG BOY: Ernest Gallo dominates the American wine scene. It is a reflection
of his power that, while every other producer is trying to move discreetly
downmarket in search of turnover (typically with a second label or two),
Gallo is striding to the top of an already overloaded ladder of ambition,
notably in terms of pricing, but also in production techniques. 'Ah,
Gallo]', whisper California barrel salesmen in their dreams.
THE SURPRISE: Who would have thought that California would have had such
success with the capricious muse of red burgundy, Pinot Noir? Yet California
is one of the few sources of viable alternatives to Cote de Beaune wines, if
not (yet) the best of Cote de Nuits. Kistler's first Pinot, a 1991 from the
McCrea vineyard, is a rich, sensual treat at Pounds 17.59 from The Wine
Treasury of London SW6 (071-371-7131). Even better value is Pellegrini's
1991 Olivet Lane bottling at Pounds 8.89 from the same source.
Morris & Verdin has the British allocation of Au Bon Climat's definitive
Pinots, while Raeburn Fine Wines of Edinburgh (031-332-5166) still ships
tiny quantities of some even rarer California Pinots.
Wine maker Saintsbury continues to turn out Pinots Noirs, with its lighter
bottlings of Garnet, regular Carnero, or the new Reserve label - from
Bibendum of London NW1, Adnams of Southwold, Suffolk, Bottoms Up and many
others.
For value, Fleur de Carneros, at about Pounds 6 from Weavers of Nottingham
and Majestic, is hard to beat.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940305

