FT944-11078

FT  08 NOV 94 / Arts: The Ugly Man - Theatre


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Brad Fraser is currently as hot as pepperoni, with plays like Unidentified
Human Remains and Poor Superman creating a buzz with both critics and
audiences. This young Canadian writer deftly mixes at-the-edge scenarios
involving gay sex, nudity, violence and betrayal, with cool insouciant
dialogue and a dry wit. The Ugly Man, enjoying its London premiere at the
Battersea Arts Centre, is minor Fraser, but still well worth a detour down
Lavender Hill.
Fraser had the bright idea of taking his plot from one of the most gory of
Jacobean melodramas, Middleton's The Changeling, and then encouraging his
contemporary characters, who talk with the direct simplicity of comic strip
balloons, and inhabit scenes as short and pointed as those in an Australian
soap opera, to run riot.
The Co-Active Theatre Company has decided to locate the play in the equally
decadent society of the southern states, or rather the fantasy South of
Tennessee Williams, where every closet is crammed with skeletons and inside
every virgin is a desperate whore. The result is a theatrical Twin Peaks,
scary yet funny, grotesque yet childlike.
By some miracle the cast of CAT Factory deliver it straight, with not a
trace of a nudge or a wink. Martin McDougall as Leslie, who plays a
physically and mentally abused gay with a hair-lip, manages to speak the
line 'He's twice the man you'll ever be' with a quivering conviction that
touches the soul.
The 'man' concerned is the servant Forest, the scarred stranger, the Ugly
Man, whose murderous, rapacious, undeviating villainy is motivated not by
aimless violence but by revenge. This is the key role and Martin Malone
exactly captures the physical stillness hiding a barely controlled menace.
Forest is impelled towards evil; for Veronica, (Stephanie Prince), the young
virgin bride, evil is a drug. She quickly progresses from twisting her
doomed mother Sabina (Louise Plowright) round her finger, to manipulating
men: her naive fiance; her calculating lover; the besotted Forest, who will
kill for a kiss.
Such Grand Guignol needs a realistic setting. Director Michael D'Cruze has
located the action in Arizona for no obvious reason, but designer James
Hendy has come up with an impressive barn like set, dominated by a giant
wheel, handy for grinding out justice slow. The power of the production
tells in the little touches, like Veronica's white dress streaked scarlet,
unmentioned by the others, but shrieking testimony that she has sold her
soul to the Devil.
The climax cuts across the controlled playing - it is easier to accept a
body strewn stage when the characters are decked out as 16th century
Spaniards - but The Ugly Man does nothing to dispel the belief that Fraser
is one of the most exciting writers working in North America.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

941108

