FT942-15279

FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Turkey (4): The region's reluctant activist -
Foreign Policy


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


Few areas of the world have seen such dramatic change. From the collapse of
communism, to the emergence of the new Black Sea states, and now to the
historic endgame being played out in the Middle East, there appears to have
been in almost permanent state of flux in the region round Turkey.
It is not hard to find Turks today who long to recreate the cold war when
the country was a stalwart flank of western defences. Turkey's position at
the crossroads of Europe and Asia means it still commands a key importance.
However for Turkey, such strategic certainties are a thing of the past. The
Moslem world's only Nato member is today groping for a new identity, to
build onto and complement the traditional twin pillars of its foreign policy
 -its security relations with the US and its deepening political and
economic ties with its partners in Europe.
The result is that for the first time since the birth of the republic in the
1920s, Turkey is starting to play a decisive, if somewhat reluctant, role in
its immediate neighbourhood - in the Balkans, in the conflict in the
Caucasus, and not least in north Iraq.
Devising a comprehensive policy framework for such a patchwork of relations
presents special problems. Firstly, many of the bordering states were once
part of the Ottoman empire and carry with them the natural suspicions of
former subjects. In North Iraq, the Kurdish question presents a particular
challenge given Turkey's own large and troubled Kurdish minority.
There is also the problem that Turkey, however much it tries to project a
regional policy, is all too often seen as siding with its co-religionists.
Related to this is the danger that policy is too often driven by the
pressures of public opinion. The bloody events in Bosnia-Hercegovina and to
a lesser extent in Azerbaijan's conflict with ethnic Armenian forces in
Nagorno Karabagh have caused the sort of popular outrage not seen since the
intercommunal violence in Cyprus which eventually prompted the Turks to
invade in 1974.
Given such a background, western diplomats believe Turkish policy has been
both cautious and realistic. There are nonetheless a number of clear policy
objectives. With the increasing volatility of regional politics, it is no
longer possible to adopt the sort of benign neglect which once characterised
Turkey's stance to its neighbours.
With the end of the cold war, and the preoccupations of the Europeans with
their own internal wrangling, Turkey needed a new role. Saddam Hussein's
invasion of Kuwait seemed to throw up the bit part Turkey wanted. Thrust by
geography, into supporting the allied war effort, the Gulf conflict seemed
like a defining moment in Turkey's relations with the west. Today a more
cynical appraisal is heard as Turks complain of the economic costs and the
vital dangers posed by the creation of the Kurdish entity in north Iraq.
Turkey's relations with the former Soviet satellites presented equal
difficulites. However, the creation of the Black Sea economic agreement did
much to convince these new friends that they were not just exchanging one
form of domination for another. Relations with the Arab world will continue
to be tempered by colonial grievances and strategic calculations relating to
Turkey's control of much of the region's water. Yet even here, Turkey has
made efforts to forge ties, particularly economic ties, and is actively
supporting US efforts to solve the Arab-Israeli conflict.
More broadly, the real test has been how to match Turkey's security concerns
with those of its western allies. As the ongoing disagreement over Bosnia
has shown, these interests do not always coincide.
In the Balkans, Turkey's policy goals are particularly complex. On one
level, there is the security concern that the crisis could suck in other
regional countries - Greece, Albania and perhaps Bulgaria, which would bring
the conflict much closer to Turkey's borders.
The popular perception is that the west's inaction is part of a bid to rid
Europe of its Moslem populations. As a Moslem country, which sees itself as
European, Turkey can hardly stand idly by. At a popular level the crisis has
served to highlight what is perceived as western double standards towards
the Moslem world, and has inevitably fed the resentment that many Turks feel
towards their European 'friends'.
What is needed is a policy framework that is both consistent and
comprehensive. In late 1992, Turkey played host to a conference in Istanbul,
attended by almost all the regional countries to the Yugoslav conflict. By
so doing, Turkey staked its own claim to be considered as a Balkan country.
It also implicitly rejected the notion that a solution to the conflict could
be found only through the good offices of international bodies such as the
United Nations and the European Union.
Today the international community appears to have inched round to Turkey's
long-held view that Serbian aggression has to be met with force. However, in
Ankara this is little cause for satisfaction. Too much innocent blood has
already been shed.
For Turkey, the threat of the 'spill-over' from the Bosnian war is not
simply a theoretical question; it is a matter of vital national interest.
The country's anger at the west's failure to stop the slaughter is all the
more acute given that Turkey, as a Nato member, is nominally a party to that
western inaction.
'The approach of the EU from the start has been how to divide
Bosnia-Hercegovina into three. We believe the EU has never tried to maintain
an integral Bosnia-Hercegovina. This is not justice for Bosnia,' says one
senior Turkish official.
With some feeling he describes the London conference hosted by Mr John
Major, Britain's prime minister, as 'mere window dressing'. He is equally
forthright about the Geneva peace process. 'We are no part of that plan. All
it has achieved is to prolong the fighting.'
The Turks are bitter for a number of reasons. As a former Ottoman
dependency, Turkey feels a moral responsibility to Bosnia. At home, this
sense of kinship is heightened by the presence of a 2m strong Bosnak
community - Moslem Slavs who settled in Turkey in the early 1890s when the
territory was annexed by the forces of the Austro-Hungarian empire.
Moreover, having recognised the independence of Bosnia, the Turks insist
that the international community is morally bound to help preserve the
integrity of the republic's borders.
Upholding the sanctity of borders is in many ways the guiding principle of
Turkish foreign policy, whether in underpinning its arguments in Bosnia or
in the Caucasus or in its own refusal to concede the need for a more
flexible line on Kurdish demands for autonomy. However, sticking to this
principle places Turkey in a potentially awkward dilemma, particularly if
the conflict spreads to Kosovo, where Turkey would have to decide on the
'rights' of the ethnic Albanians who make up 90 per cent of this formerly
autonomous Serbian province.
Taking a longer view of the Bosnian crisis, Ankara is all too aware that the
tragedy could be taken up by the more Moslem radical states, jeopardising
Turkey's influence within the Islamic movement. Mr Hikmet Cetin, Turkey's
foreign minister, has frequently voiced his fear that the tragedy in Bosnia
could become the focus in the future for an outbreak of international
terrorism against western interests.
On more than one occasion, Turkey has felt uncomfortably out of step with
its allies - the west's refusal to lift the arms embargo to allow the
Bosnian Moslems to defend themselves being the most clear-cut example.
The long-term danger is that by increasing Turkey's sense of rejection, it
will merely play into the hands of anti-western Islamic interests. The
west's perceived double standard towards the tragedy in Bosnia, if not the
overriding cause, was definitely a contributing factor behind the dramatic
gains made the Moslem-backed Refah party in last month's local elections.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940415

