FT941-17046

FT  06 JAN 94 / UK Company News: ICL moves to protect profits - Restructure
measures accelerated in face of weak computer markets


   By ALAN CANE


ICL, the UK-based computer company in which Fujitsu of Japan has a majority
stake, is accelerating measures to protect its profitability in the face of
persistently weak computer markets.
Yesterday it announced that it intended to establish its UK manufacturing
and supply business as a contract electronics business. The autonomous,
wholly owned subsidiary will trade as Design to Distribution (D2D) with
operations in Kidsgrove, Ashton-under-Lyne, and Stevenage.
It also said it had sold its half interest in International Network Services
to General Electric Information Services in a move designed to cut away
non-core activities.
The aim in creating D2D, ICL said yesterday, was to improve the new
company's attractiveness as an electronics contract manufacturer by
distancing it from the parent company, for which it manufactures computers
and circuit boards worth some Dollars 300m (Pounds 203m) a year.
ICL already manufactures equipment for Sun Microsystems of the US and Meiko,
a supercomputer manufacturer with offices in the UK and the US. It also
makes equipment for a number of unnamed US computer companies.
Mr Alastair Kelly, D2D's managing director, said his aim was to build the
company into Europe's leading contract electronics manufacturer: 'By 1996 we
will be targeting Dollars 300m of non-ICL revenue, much of which will be
with US corporations looking for European manufacturing'.
It is part of chairman and chief executive Mr Peter Bonfield's plan to
restructure ICL as some 26 semi-autonomous business units.
The value of the INS deal was not disclosed but is believed to be under
Pounds 30m.
INS is a leading provider in the UK of electronic data interchange services
such as electronic ordering and invoicing. In 1992 it made Pounds 2.9m
before tax on revenues of Pounds 17m.
Mr John Thorpe, newly appointed managing director, said that INS and GEIS
had a similar business focus, while the electronic data business was
peripheral to ICL's core interests. With GEIS backing, it would expand into
Europe, market its software internationally and provide tough competition
for BT, AT&T and IBM.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940106

