FT941-3323

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (7): The
paperless office pays off for structured tasks - The electronic office / The
paperless office is as far off as ever for what might be termed wide-ranging
jobs. But for highly structured tasks, such as handling insurance claims or
invoices, cutting down on paper can lead to substantial gains in
productivity


   By JOIA SHILLINGFORD


A number of new technologies make it possible for modern offices to cut back
on paperwork - they include image processing (which converts paper documents
into electronic images), workflow (which controls the flow of work between a
group of workers), electronic mail and electronic data interchange.
Image processing and workflow:
At General Accident's 1-2-1 division, which sells insurance directly to the
public, a Pounds 1.5 million AT&T GIS image processing system has speeded up
claims processing and increased productivity by 20 to 30 per cent.
Bob Thomson, personal lines operations manager for General Accident, says:
'We're working in a very competitive environment and wanted to make
significant savings. A lot of resources were going into filing and looking
for paper, and we wanted all documents to be accessible from a single
source.'
Now the 1,000 to 1,500 items that arrive in the post every day are scanned
into the image processing system and assembled into electronic files, which
can be viewed on a computer. 1-2-1's 54 staff (who spend most of the time on
the phone) thus have everything they need to work on a claim on screen,
without having to get up and look for files.
Image processing and workflow software are also being used at the UK offices
of US oil company, Amerada Hess. They have enabled the company to process
higher volumes of invoices without increasing the number of accounts staff.
Amerada Hess' system, developed in conjunction with US image processing
company Filenet, scans every paper invoice into a computer system.
If the invoice is straightforward and the goods have been received and match
the original purchase order, the bill is paid. If it needs to be verified by
an engineer or a senior accountant, it is sent to their computer screens
electronically via Digital Equipment's Teamlinks package.
Once approved the invoice is automatically sent to the general ledger
department for a cheque to be issued. The system is faster and more
efficient than the old system in which all accounting information was typed
in to the computer from a paper invoice, and sometimes added to by an
engineer or accountant, and it now takes only minutes to locate one of the
50,000 invoices Amerada receives each year, rather than a day or longer.
Electronic mail
However, image processing and workflow are not the only route to reducing
paper. David Ferris, a British-born but US-based electronic mail (e-mail)
consultant says that use of e-mail can cut back on paper and give huge gains
in productivity.
He says that these gains will not necessarily come from interpersonal
messaging of the 'Are you free for lunch on Friday' variety, but rather from
the use of 'mail-enabled' applications, where an application such as word
processing or electronic forms has an e-mail option built in. Mr Ferris
says: 'Automating simple business forms, such as expenses, can cut a
company's costs by between one and two per cent of revenues.'
For example, time sheets created using JetForm software and sent via Lotus
Development's cc:Mail or Microsoft Mail, save California-based
diskette-maker and CD-ROM duplicator, Trace Dollars 270 a year per employee.
The system costs Dollars 44 a year per employee, giving a financial return
of more than 400 per cent a year.
E-mail can also provide other, less measurable benefits, such as improved
decision making, better communication across time zones, more up-to-date
market information, faster reactions to unexpected events, and shorter
product-development times from geographically dispersed teams. E-mail can be
used on all sorts of computer, but the fastest growing area of the market is
e-mail for local-area networks of PCs.
Another growth area is e-mail for executives who spend a lot of time out of
the office. One of the latest products designed for mobile e-mail users is
Lotus' cc:Mail Remote for Windows. This allows executives to exchange
messages with their in-house Lan e-mail system and keep in touch with what
is going on back at base. Larry Crume, vice president of messaging at Lotus,
predicts that it will be the company's biggest selling product this year and
could hit sales of a million copies.
Electronic data interchange:
At present, many large companies use e-mail primarily for internal
communications. By contrast, electronic data interchange (EDI) is used
mainly for inter-company communications, where cutting out paper can
significantly speed up the processing and transmission of information. (EDI
or paperless trading is the name given to the exchange of structured
business documents, such as orders and invoices, directly between
computers.)
For example, a sales management system underpinned by GE Information
Service's public EDI network, helped to cut the time it took for US orders
to arrive at Benetton's Italian clothing factories from three-to-ten days to
just hours.
Use of EDI is expanding. In Britain, 8,400 companies have adopted it and new
types of paperless EDI message are being developed all the time. For
example, a UK EDI standard for utility bills has been developed and is
waiting for European endorsement, and despatch and binding messages are
being developed for users in printing and publishing.
But large scale users of EDI have one big problem - how to communicate with
even very small suppliers or customers via EDI.
One solution is to use what is known as hybrid EDI where those who aren't
equipped to receive EDI documents electronically receive them on paper. A
number of options are available including BT's EDI-to-fax service for its
EDI*Net customers and the Royal Mail's Edipost (EDI-to-post). Here, EDI
messages are sent to the Royal Mail's electronic data centre and then
converted to paper for delivery by post. Recipients can phone back their
responses, which in turn will be converted into EDI messages.
Barriers to the paperless office
Hybrid EDI is a sensible compromise but it underlines just how difficult it
is to get rid of paper when paper is accessible to every business from the
corner shop to the multinational.
Another problem is that electronic images of paper documents are not legally
admissible in court, even though they can include signatures, and are
difficult to alter.
For example, Amerada Hess files copies of its paper invoices, in case its
auditors, consortia partners or the VAT office want to see them, and General
Accident is keeping paper records of documents scanned into its imaging
system on site for six months before deciding what to do with them. Jeff
Goldberg, an analyst at researchers Dataquest, says: 'The promised paperless
office has become the 'paperfull' office, partly because computers have not
yet achieved the readability, or portability, of paper.'
This is good news for printer companies - 'more and more data is being
stored on computers and people want to output it in a variety of ways,' says
Kevin Spinks, printer business manager at printer company, Lexmark. 'This
creates more and more paper and the demand for printers is growing at 15 to
20 per cent a year. I can't see the paperless office taking off this
century.'
Joia Shillingford is editor of the Financial Times newsletter, Business
Computing Brief

The Financial Times


London Page V

940316

