FT942-14855

FT  19 APR 94 / Fears that Brazil debt deal may fail to end uncertainty:
Angus Foster and Stephen Fidler wonder if the slips 'twixt cup and lip are
over after years of uncertainty


   By ANGUS FOSTER and STEPHEN FIDLER


Mr William Rhodes, chairman of the steering committee of banks which on
Friday completed the restructuring of Brazil's Dollars 49bn (Pounds 33.5bn)
of commercial debt, is fond of the saying 'many a slip 'twixt cup and lip'
to refer to the unpredictability of debt deals.
He and Mr Pedro Malan, the Brazilian central bank governor, were at last
able to toast the deal after a rush to meet the deadline of Friday midnight
in New York. But both men may have wondered, after more than a decade of
uncertainty about Brazil's debt, whether the slips were really over.
Legally, the restructuring is finished and most participants probably hope
its long and at times acrimonious negotiations can be forgotten.
The deal will help restore Brazil's standing with the international
financial community. However, the country's political and economic
uncertainty probably prevents the type of sudden rush of confidence seen
after other Latin American deals.
But there are two problems. First, the Dart family of the US, who hold about
Dollars 1.4bn of debt, refused to take part in the restructuring and may try
to challenge it through legal action. Secondly, Brazil holds presidential
elections in October and the front-runner in the polls, the left wing Mr
Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, leads a party committed to seeking better terms
from its bank creditors.
'Completion is a cause for a good deal of celebration, but some trepidation
also,' a Brazilian banker remarked.
The restructuring agreed on Friday was the longest in the 14 years of the
debt crisis with negotiations beginning in October 1990.
The deal was also the most complicated of the 'Brady' restructurings - named
after the 1989 initiative by then US Treasury secretary Nicholas Brady -
since it offered creditors a complicated package of six options. These
involved a range of securities and interest rates and rescheduled debt
principal for up to 30 years.
Under the deal agreed on Friday, Brazil issued Dollars 7.3bn of
collateralised discount bonds; Dollars 8.4bn of collateralised par bonds;
Dollars 8.5bn in debt conversion bonds; Dollars 2.1bn of new money bonds;
Dollars 1.7bn in interest reduction bonds; Dollars 7.3bn of interest
reduction bonds with capitalisation; and Dollars 5.6bn of past due interest
bonds.
A further Dollars 2.1bn will be converted into discount and par bonds once
collateral is delivered in the next two years. Brazil delivered Dollars
2.8bn of the Dollars 4.6bn due as collateral on Friday and drew down Dollars
353m under the new money option. The central bank estimated the agreement
would reduce by Dollars 4bn Brazil's external debt. It will also lead to
further savings of Dollars 4bn in reduced debt servicing costs.
Brazil is the last of the big four Latin American debtors to secure a Brady
restructuring. Mexico led the way, followed by Venezuela and Argentina.
Brazil's deal broke new ground because interest arrears of some Dollars 17bn
were negotiated separately and before the restructuring of some Dollars 31bn
of principal debt.
It was also the first debt agreement to be concluded without an accord in
place with the International Monetary Fund, although Nigeria completed a
deal while out of compliance with the targets of its Fund programme. Brazil
failed to win an IMF accord last month, mainly because the IMF was concerned
about the stability of the country's economic reforms.
Mr Michael Atkin of the Institute for International Finance, a study group
in Washington owned mainly by international banks, said before the deal's
closing: 'The completion of the deal without the IMF seal of approval would
break new ground and signals a shift in the importance attached by the
markets to the Bretton Woods institutions.'
The lack of an IMF accord meant the Brazilian government could not secure a
special issue of zero coupon US Treasury bonds to act as a guarantee in the
restructuring. Instead, Brazil was forced to buy those bonds directly from
the market. Brazil has admitted it started buying zeros in October in case
the IMF accord was not granted.
In spite of the IMF setback, the banks remained keen to complete the deal.
They feared a further delay would lead to the deal being shelved before the
elections.
Lawyers for Brazil's central bank and the country's bank creditors will now
be waiting to see what action, if any, the Darts will take. The family - led
by Mr Kenneth Dart who was recently reported to have become a Belize citizen
 -is likely, along with other investors, to have taken sharp losses with the
declines in recent weeks of sovereign debt prices.
While the banks wait for the Darts, there was good news last week from Mr da
Silva. He and fellow moderates won a fierce debate about foreign debt in the
Sao Paulo branch of his Workers' Party (PT).
This may mean his party's election stance will be to seek renegotiation of
Brazil's foreign debt rather than a debt moratorium, as many PT radicals
demand.
Mr Alozio Mercadante, another PT moderate and possible finance minister if
Mr da Silva wins, said: 'The present government is at the end of its mandate
and is weak, so cannot be the best interlocutor of our foreign debt. This
new debt agreement can therefore only be temporary.'
The bankers' hope must be that either the PT's poll lead drains away or that
an incoming PT government will have many other domestic priorities before
that of fighting its bank creditors. Otherwise, the banks may start
reminding Mr Rhodes of his favourite saying.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940419

