FT941-12891

FT  28 JAN 94 / Attack on public sector waste: Errors cost millions, says
MPs' report - Labour hits at 'fall in standards'


   By JAMES BLITZ


An unprecedented attack on the level of waste and corruption in Britain's
public sector yesterday forced Mr John Major to deny that public standards
had declined under the Conservative government.
The House of Commons public accounts committee, one of parliament's most
powerful bodies, said there had been 'a departure from the standards of
public conduct' established during the past 140 years.
The committee catalogued numerous examples of 'inadequate stewardship of
public money' by bodies such as the Welsh Office, the Wessex Health
Authority and the Ministry of Defence. In some cases, mistakes had cost tens
of millions of pounds of public money.
Mr Robert Sheldon, the Labour MP who chairs the committee, said there are
'large numbers of people who tell me how they want to get rid of
corruption'.
He added: 'Once you have corruption you are in trouble and it is very
difficult to break out of it.'
The report was seized upon by Mr John Smith, Labour's leader, as another
example of how the government was failing to meet the standards of conduct
that it was encouraging in the public.
He urged Mr Major in the Commons to explain the 'devastating catalogue of
incompetence, mismanagement and waste of public money' by the government and
its agencies.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, said people 'are being asked
to pay unprecedented levels of taxation only to see your government hand
that money over to quangos and executive agencies, to throw away on waste,
corruption and fraud'.
However, Mr Major said the report clearly showed that there had been 'no
decline in standards' and that the PAC welcomed the government's recent
drive for efficiency.
Downing street officials rejected Labour calls that Mr Major should broaden
the appointment system for positions to quasi-government bodies, arguing
that the government was 'perfectly capable of choosing honest and competent
people'.
The PAC's report crystallised the investigations into the accounts of
government departments and quangos that it has carried out in recent years.
Committee members felt the report was needed to highlight the range of
failings uncovered.
The report said there had been 'inadequate financial controls' exercised by
bodies such as the Foreign Office, the Department of Social Security and the
National Rivers Authority. But it reserved its greatest condemnation for
errors by the Wessex Health Authority and the Department of Employment.
It said there was 'grave concern' that the health authority had wasted at
least Pounds 20m trying to implement a regional information systems plan. At
the Department of Employment, 'doubtful and incorrect' payments to training
providers had amounted to nearly Pounds 80m.
Mr Sheldon said the fall in public standards had become particularly
apparent in recent years, and was partly associated with the government's
civil service reforms. 'It is hard to keep standards when you have
revolutionary changes and people coming in from outside,' he said.
The creation of executive agencies and more than 140 quangos had meant
people were coming into government who were used to taking short cuts. 'That
doesn't make sense when you are dealing with public money,' Mr Sheldon said.
Pounds 135m spent on scrapped rail link, Page 9
Editorial Comment, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940128

