FT943-763

FT  28 SEP 94 / African trade union rights abuse 'acute'


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


Trade union rights violations in Africa remain 'widespread and acute',
according to a report produced by the International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions. The document is to be discussed at the Pan-African conference
on organised labour, opening today in Cotonou, Benin.
Structural adjustment policies imposed by bodies like the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund as well as January's devaluation of the CFA
franc in the former French colonies in Africa are blamed for creating
economic conditions where the exercise of trade union rights has become a
'virtual impossibility'.
'The most widespread problem is in situations in which pressures to reduce
public expenditure have brought unilateral reductions in the collectively
agreed wages of public employees or quite simply have led to the non-payment
of wages for periods of several months,' says the report.
It points to pay cuts and detention of union leaders in Cameroon, Niger,
Gabon, Benin and Chad.
Both in Zimbabwe and Malawi, trade unions have been bypassed by the creation
of parallel workplace bodies subject to employer or government control, it
points out. However,only Sudan, Libya and Equatorial Guinea among African
states actually outlaw independent trade union activity.
It suggests trade unions have to operate 'frequently in the context of
serious denials of basic civil liberties'. In Lesotho, it argues there has
been 'extreme and arbitrary brutality' against trade unions, while in
Morocco, union leaders have been jailed for exercising their right to free
expression.
The survey says as many as 16 African countries make it 'almost impossible'
for unions to use legal strikes as an effective means of advancing
employees' interests.
The Challenge of Trade Union Rights in Africa from ICFTU, Bd Emile Jacqmain,
155B-1210 Brussels, Belgium.
Fax 32-2-21884.15

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940928

