FT942-15975

FT  13 APR 94 / Belgium searches its colonial soul


   By GILLIAN TETT


   BRUSSELS


Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, Belgian prime minister, insists there will be no 'out
of Africa' policy. But as more Belgian citizens were evacuated from Rwanda
yesterday, political soul-searching has started in Brussels.
Amid fears that this week's massacre may have had a distinct anti-Belgian
twist, with at least 16 expatriates having died in the violence, the
government now admits it is re-evaluating its policies towards its former
colonies, Rwanda and Burundi.
The process is likely to be painful. For since Belgium pulled out of Rwanda,
which it administered between 1917 and 1962, it has been treading a foreign
policy tightrope.
On the one hand, recognising that its colonial legacy could not allow it to
abandon the country, Belgium has been keen in recent years to provide
humanitarian support for Rwanda - with 1,500 Belgians in the country,
Belgian nationals have dominated aid agencies in the country, while Rwanda
and Burundi have absorbed BFr1bn (Pounds 190m) a year, by far the largest
slice of Belgium's overseas aid budget.
On the other hand, Belgium's own historical role in the country - which saw
it supporting the minority Tutsi group against the majority Hutus - has left
it opposed to becoming entangled in the country's internal political
disputes, in spite of calls that it should take a more active role.
In recent years, the Belgian government has preferred to operate under
United Nations auspices, sending some 400 troops into Rwanda in the
aftermath of the 1990 peace accord signed between the Rwandan factions in
Arusha.
But as fighting has raged in the past week, local radio stations have
repeatedly accused the Belgians of conspiring with the Tutsis, in support of
the rebels now advancing on the capital Kigali. And panic-stricken reports
from foreigners leaving the city have fuelled fears in Brussels of an
anti-colonial backlash. Mr Francois Nagurukiyintwali, Rwanda's ambassador in
Belgium, insists that these reports have been exaggerated.
And as Belgium's own coterie of African experts points out, the anti-Belgian
sentiment is probably confined to a minority. Mr Filip Reyntjens, professor
of Rwandan and Burundi studies at Antwerp university, believes that only a
small group on the right wing of the Hutu-dominated political parties are
actively anti-Belgian, although he concedes this sentiment is probably also
shared by parts of the army.
Nevertheless, some Belgian politicians are calling for a complete
withdrawal. Others, incensed at the sight of Belgian troops standing by in
the face of brutal massacres, are insisting that the only a thoroughgoing
intervention could guarantee peace.
The Belgian government has indicated that its paratroopers will probably
withdraw once the evacuation is completed, but insists that either
'abandonment' or full intervention is out of the question.
Officials stress that any policy re-evaluation is likely to take some weeks.
In the interim the government is focusing its diplomatic efforts on the UN.
Mr Willy Klaes, foreign minister, was last night due to meet Mr Boutros
Boutros Ghali, UN secretary general, to discuss the future of UN operations
in the country.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940413

