FT941-4072

FT  12 MAR 94 / Briefcase, Q&A: Gentleman's agreement


During the past two or three years, I have lent my eldest son a lot of money
to help with his business. We have a gentleman's agreement without formal
documentation. It is unlikely, however, that he will be able to repay me in
full for many years, possibly not in my lifetime.
My will leaves all my possessions to my wife. If she dies before me, they
are to be shared equally between my two sons. Does my son have to declare
the loan as income? Should I declare it as a gift? Are there implications
for income and inheritance tax?
Although no documentation was drawn up, a contract of loan still exists, and
you might now wish to document the terms as evidence of what was agreed
orally at an earlier date. No income tax implications arise for either you
or your sons. You receive no taxable interests; your son received the money
as capital.
For IHT purposes, the loan is not a gift. Your estate still has the right to
receive the money back. This right will be valued as part of your estate at
death and it will be inherited by your successors.
In the event that it is inherited by your sons, one half of the principal
amount will still be owed by one brother to the other. Given the
circumstances of the loan (ie, it is unlikely that it can be repaid on
demand), the value of the right received by you when you made the loan
originally is probably lower than the actual money lent.
The diminution in the valuation of your estate is a 'transfer' for IHT. I
consider this to be a potentially exempt transfer (PET) which might become
taxable if you die within seven years of making the loan. Alternatively, if
it is not a PET, it could be within the Pounds 150,000 nil rate band.
As your son repays the loan, this has no inheritance consequences for him.
It reduces the value to your estate of the right to receive the balance of
the principal outstanding.
If you wish to write off any part of the principal outstanding, the waiver
must be effected by a deed. Informal waivers (ie, by letter) are not
effective for tax purposes. A waiver constitutes a potentially exempt
transfer on each occasion one is made.
If you were to survive for seven years from the date of the transfer, then
no IHT will be payable at all and it would not affect your nil rate band. If
you were to die within the seven-year period, then the transfer could fall
within the nil rate band in any event.
Reply by Barry Stillerman.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All enquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940312

