FT944-2942

FT  15 DEC 94 / UK Company News: VideoLogic to play with NEC - Shares rise
11 1/2 p on a deal expected to be worth millions of dollars


   By ALAN CANE


VideoLogic, the small multimedia company, has signed a development agreement
expected to be worth millions of dollars with NEC, the Japanese electronics
group, after a breakthrough which could revolutionise the computer games
business.
Neither VideoLogic nor NEC would comment on the value of the deal, but the
total will include an immediate payment and royalties on sales of the
system.
The news boosted VideoLogic's shares, which rose 11 1/2 p to 51p against 45p
at which it was demerged from Avesco, the broadcast equipment and services
company, earlier this year. At one point the shares fell to 22 1/2 p.
VideoLogic has already pioneered a number of advances in video technology
for personal computing which have attracted contracts from companies such as
International Business Machines and Compaq.
It has now developed a technique for creating three dimensional images which
are substantially more realistic than any so far developed, at about a tenth
of the price. Shadows, for instance, can be accurately depicted.
The radical cost reduction promises to bring games, at present limited to
arcade machines, into the home.
VideoLogic also published interim results yesterday, showing losses of
Pounds 3.7m (Pounds 2.5m) on revenues 23 per cent ahead at Pounds 5.5m.
Losses per share were 3.4p (2.9p).
The outcome confirmed the company's October warning of continued heavy
spending on research and development and falling personal computer prices.
Mr Derek McLaren, chairman, said the company had considered whether to go
for short-term profits or to continue investing in the research needed for
the multimedia breakthrough. If the company had opted for short-term
profits, he maintained that there would have been no possibility of the NEC
deal.
Existing products include semiconductor chips and printed circuit boards
which make it possible for PCs to handle video images and high fidelity
sound. It has designed multimedia chips for IBM and Compaq and has a
manufacturing agreement with Intel.
Under the latest deal, it will supply NEC's IT division exclusively with
multimedia products. It is developing the prototype of the games system
which should be ready for market by the end of 1995.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

941215

