FT942-15614

FT  14 APR 94 / Government signals halt to pre-privatisation pit closures


   By MICHAEL SMITH


The government yesterday signalled a halt to pre-privatisation pit closures
as it unveiled details of the five British Coal regions it is offering for
sale to the private sector.
It said it expected to complete the sale of the regions, comprising 16 deep
mines and 32 open cast sites, by the end of the year.
British Coal confirmed yesterday that it is to close Kiveton colliery in
South Yorkshire in the autumn.
Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, said it was a 'fair assumption' no other pits
would be closed before the industry is privatised, other than Tower in south
Wales, whose closure British Coal announced recently, and Kiveton.
In addition to the five packages, the government is to offer for sale on a
stand-alone basis seven pits which are being closed, including Kiveton and
Tower. Mr Eggar said up to 32 pits could be operating under private sector
ownership next year.
This is because up to nine other mines are being leased out under different
arrangements. 'Not so long ago people were talking about the industry being
left with 10 pits so there has been quite a change,' said Mr Eggar.
His comments were viewed as optimistic within the industry, since it is
unlikely that many of the stand-alone pits being offered for sale will be
bought.
N M Rothschild, the merchant bank advising the government, is to mail the
glossy 24-page document outlining the five packages to around 100 companies,
including 30 or 40 overseas.
Companies interested in buying one or more of the packages have until May 25
to qualify to take part in the sales process. This will cost them Pounds
15,000 for each region and Pounds 5,000 for each stand-alone mine and will
entitle them to confidential information to inform their bids.
Mr Eggar said it was impossible to say how much the packages would be worth.
One reason for that is that questions surrounding the liabilities,
particularly arising from subsidence, have yet to be resolved. Mr Eggar said
they would be defined in time for a detailed information memorandum to be
sent out to serious bidders in June.
Prospective bidders will also need to take a view on the possibility of
future closures which seem highly likely in the next few years.
Yesterday's 'preliminary memorandum' details showed that the 16 deep mines
and 32 opencast sites being offered for sale in the five regions produced
41m tonnes last year.
For sale: fossilised industry, one owner, Page 10
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940414

