FT943-1007

FT  27 SEP 94 / US warns Moscow on complacency


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


Mr Lloyd Bentsen, US Treasury secretary, yesterday urged Russia to quicken
economic reform while simultaneously taking additional steps to control
inflation.
Speaking in advance of today's summit between presidents Bill Clinton and
Boris Yeltsin, he said: 'Russia's progress has been better than most people
expected, but the danger now is that complacency could lead to a severe
setback.'
Specifically, Mr Bentsen said that adoption of a tougher fiscal budget could
release Dollars 8bn to Dollars 10bn (Pounds 5bn to Pounds 6.3bn) in western
assistance already promised at the G7 summits. Pegging the rouble on the
foreign exchange markets 'would bolster market confidence by delivering an
effective Dollars 6bn currency stabilisation fund'.
'Let me be clear,' he went on, 'our support policy has been successful
because our lending is conditional. For Russia to get all this money I've
mentioned, it needs a bold economic reform programme.'
Mr Bentsen was complimentary about Russia's political and economic
achievements. He noted that inflation was down to about 5 per cent a month
from more than 20 per cent a month last year; that real interest rates were
now positive, real incomes rising, not declining; and that 50 per cent of
gross domestic product was now in privatised hands.
But Russia, he went on, 'must finish the privatisation job and not get stuck
half-way'. More companies needed to be sold and more land released from
state control.
'In the long run our relationship must be based on trade and investment, not
aid,' Mr Bentsen maintained. US assistance approved by Congress is due to
fall next year to Dollars 850m from the Dollars 2.5bn of 1993-94.
The Clinton administration is broadly satisfied with the present state of
relations with Russia, although nervous about political developments over
which US influence is marginal at best.
Rifts with Moscow over the former Yugoslavia have been carefully avoided so
far, through strong Russian involvement in the Bosnian 'contact group'. The
US worked hard to help resolve the difficult issue of the status of Russian
military and civilians still in the Baltics, and has tacitly acknowledged
Russian hegemony over some former Soviet satellite states, such as Georgia.
At the same time, Nato's 'partnership for peace' programme has seen the
first joint exercises between Russian and western forces. Last week
President Clinton ruled out further reductions in the US nuclear arsenal
until cuts already agreed with Russia had been implemented, but the US is
likely to remain open to further Russian initiatives.
But, as Mr Bentsen's speech was designed to make clear, the greatest
positive contribution the US believes can be made to Russian domestic
stability is greater integration with western economies.
'The present situation in Russia worries me,' he said, 'and I can't tell you
how this will turn out. But I do know that to avoid slipping backward,
Russia must take a bold step forward.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940927

