FT942-12788

FT  28 APR 94 / South Africa Votes: Hard road for Natal's rural voters


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   MTENGWANE, NATAL


'No, no, no, no, no. I'm not allowed to go there.' Shaking his head and
speaking with resignation, Induna Cele, headman of the Mtengwane settlement
in southern Natal, explains why he did not cast his vote at the local
polling station, only a spear's throw away across an intervening hill.
Asked why, Mr Philip Mavundla, a fellow villager, has a simple reply.
'Because they are ANC and we are IFP,' he says, referring to the area's two
rival parties, the Inkatha Freedom party and the African National Congress.
The polling station, at Nkonka school, is located in an ANC area. The
Mtengwane villagers and the hundreds of people in the voting queue at the
school agree that no IFP member would dare come there to vote. Everyone
would know them, said the voters at Nkonka school, and they would not come
out alive.
Unfortunately for Inkatha, there is no polling station in Mtengwane, or in
any nearby IFP area. So the people of the village have had to travel at
least 10km to vote in the white town of Port Shepstone and other white
areas.
It is not clear why this is so: perhaps Inkatha's late entry into the
electoral process prevented the Independent Electoral Commission from
setting up a polling station in time. Perhaps the IEC was naive enough to
think the nearby Nkonka school would do for both warring communities.
Neither reason explains why the IEC could not have brought one of its mobile
polling stations to Mtengwane.
But if Inkatha was disadvantaged by this omission, the kwaZulu 'homeland'
government headed by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Inkatha leader, did all it
could to overcome this handicap: the government sent buses to collect the
residents of Mtengwane and other Inkatha areas - ignoring ANC areas where
transport was also needed - to take them to vote in white areas. And it
would be a brave villager who declined to go with them.
On the other side of the hill at Nkonka school Mr Cedric Sokhulu, deputy
presiding officer and former principal of the school, insists all are
welcome at the polling station, which is protected by a handful of police.
But he acknowledges most voters are ANC supporters - except for one elderly
woman who insisted she was prepared to vote for only one man: Jesus (and
proceeded to insist that Mr Sokhulu point out his picture on the ballot
paper).
Other elderly voters showed up with folded pictures of the ANC's Mr Nelson
Mandela pressed into their hands by anxious children fearful that granny or
grandad would otherwise vote for the wrong party. They, too, demanded that
Mr Sokhulu show them their leader's picture on the ballot paper.
Far below, in the white town of Hibberdene, the polling queue reflected  -
even more than at Nkonka school and in Mtengwane - a picture of the new
South Africa. Thousands of black voters queued for hours in a 2km string
which wrapped around the local library, and there were only 12 rather lonely
looking whites in the queue. They said they were sure more whites would turn
up later: but the prospect of sharing one long queue with blacks may have
put them off.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940428

