FT941-4073

FT  12 MAR 94 / Briefcase, Q&A: They're worried that I might die


I run a family investment portfolio in which several members have invested
Pounds 3,000 each. Not surprisingly, some are worried they might lose their
money should I die. I have thought of three options, although each has
flaws:
1. To draw up a will. The trouble is, each time somebody cashes in their
unit or invests more money, I would need to prepare a new will and have it
witnessed.
2. To write out IOUs. These would not be ideal, though, as the value of the
portfolio changes from day to day. Besides which, would they have any
'legal' effect?
3. To issue certificates in the same way as unit trusts. Again, though, I am
concerned over the legality question and how exactly to proceed.
As I understand it, family members give you money to invest on their behalf.
You buy the shares (or other investment property) in your own name but,
presumably, keep a record of how much each family member contributes. In
effect, therefore, you own the shares as trustee for the various family
members.
The shares are not your property, although your name might be on the
certificates. Consequently, you cannot include in your will any provision
for the disposal/distribution of the portfolio investment, as a will can
provide only for the devolution of your own property.
It appears to me that, since what exists here is a trust, you should draw up
mutually-agreed written terms for its operation, including what will happen
on your death. This can be done quite informally so long as the written
constitution states clearly the intentions of the investors.
One suggestion is for the constitution to provide that, on your death, an
appointed person realises the investment assets in your name and that the
proceeds be distributed to the family members in proportion to the amounts
they have invested. Any contribution of your own into the portfolio remains
your own property; nevertheless, it can remain part of the trust property
with yourself as trustee and your estate as beneficiary. The above
suggestion deals with this situation.
Reply by Barry Stillerman of accountant Stoy Hayward.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All enquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940312

