FT944-10873

FT  09 NOV 94 / Investors keep eye on Zedillo's peso policy: Pressure for
Mexico devaluation


   By DAMIAN FRASER


When Mr Ernesto Zedillo, Mexico's next president, takes office on December
1, domestic and foreign investors alike will be watching for his
administration's views on exchange rate policy.
Despite a depreciation of more than 10 per cent against the dollar this
year, some economists worry that the peso is over-valued. Mexico's current
account deficit is expected to widen to about Dollars 28bn this year, or
more than 7 per cent of gross domestic product. With capital flows
insufficient to finance the deficit, reserves have fallen by about Dollars
10bn since February, and short-term interest rates have risen to 14.1 per
cent, more than 7 per cent in real terms.
Normally sanguine economists now conclude that for interest rates to come
down and economic growth to accelerate from the modest 3 per cent expected
for this year, a devaluation is necessary. 'It is a medium and long-term
problem rather than a short-term one: but eventually we are going to have a
change in exchange rate policy,' says Mr Jonathan Heath, head of the
economic consultancy Macro Asesoria Economica.
Mr Zedillo publicly backed the renewal of the pacto between government,
business and unions in late September, which permits a daily slide of the
peso against the dollar equivalent to 4.3 per cent in a year. Anything more
than that would require central bank intervention.
However, partly due to the rise in US bond yields and continued political
uncertainty in Mexico, the pacto has failed to bolster confidence in the
currency, or reduce interest rates. Yesterday the peso was trading at 3.42
to the dollar, just below the central bank limit of 3.45.
Mr Zedillo's close advisers insist - as they must - that there is no need to
devalue. 'Capital account inflows determine the deficit and not the other
way round,' says Mr Jaime Serra Puche, the trade minister who is one of the
front-runners to become finance minister under Mr Zedillo. 'The day you stop
having capital inflows then the rhythm of imports will slow down.'
Such a relationship has not held this year. In the six months to June the
current account deficit grew by 23.9 per cent to reach Dollars 14.2bn; the
surplus on the capital account fell by 21.6 per cent to Dollars 12.45bn.
While lower capital inflows will eventually reduce imports, many observers
believe the best mechanism to induce the adjustment is through a devaluation
of the currency.
Using a different argument, Mr Serra predicts that import growth will fall
as the rapid restructuring in Mexico's industrial sector slows. He says
import growth in recent years has been unusually high because companies have
replaced obsolete machinery with imported capital goods. Once this process
is over, he says, new capital goods imports will complement rather than
substitute for existing capital goods, leading to a narrowing between the
rate of growth of imports and exports.
But for the moment industrial restructuring is continuing, indicating that
the economy will be dependent on foreign capital for some time. With high US
interest rates turning sentiment against most emerging markets, Mr Zedillo
may seek to bolster confidence in the currency by announcing a series of
pro-market economic reforms, such as new privatisations, further opening of
sectors such as energy to private capital, and deregulation.
Such steps or similar ones, along with an expected improvement in the
political climate after Mr Zedillo takes office, may prove sufficient to
calm the markets. But if investors remain nervous, Mr Zedillo faces three
unpalatable choices: maintaining or raising current high interest rates to
draw in short-term capital; increasing the current rate of maximum
depreciation of the currency; or pushing for a one-off devaluation.
Keeping interest rates high would hurt economic growth and make it difficult
for Mr Zedillo to reach his target next year of 4 per cent. It would put
further pressure on Mexican companies that are struggling under high
financing costs. And as Mr Serra argues, high interest rates are one of the
causes of the trade deficit; Mexican companies, he says, are finding it
difficult to compete with importers of intermediate and capital goods
because they cannot offer attractive credit terms to customers.
Some members of the Salinas administration have argued in favour of
increasing the daily depreciation of the exchange rate band, believing that
such a move would improve competitiveness and take pressure off the
currency. But with investors expecting a more rapid depreciation of the
currency over time, they may demand higher interest rates to compensate for
the greater exchange rate risk. 'Widening the band would be the worst of all
worlds,' says Borja Ussia of Grupo Moneda in Mexico City.
Government officials insist that a one-off devaluation would be even more
damaging. They argue that interest rates would rise after a devaluation,
with investors concerned that inflation would rise as import prices
increase. And many of Mexico's largest companies would be hit with huge
losses on the foreign currency loans they have taken out in recent years.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941109

