FT941-12855

FT  28 JAN 94 / More power to the investor: The SEC's review of share
trading in US


   By RICHARD WATERS


The New York Stock Exchange has seen its stranglehold on trading in US
shares progressively eroded in recent years. In 1986, the 'Big Board'
handled 86 per cent of all the trading in the stocks which it lists: by last
year, that had fallen to 79 per cent. The rest is being funnelled into a
wide array of competing trading systems, some run by regional exchanges,
some by broker-dealers.
The bosses of the 'Big Board' refer to this as the 'fragmentation' of the
equity markets. The Securities and Exchange Commission, however, has a
different view. A 79 per cent market share (and the 87 per cent market share
enjoyed by the competing dealer market, Nasdaq, in the unlisted shares that
it trades) 'would be envied in any other industry'.
The SEC yesterday, in its first thorough review of the regulation of the US
equity markets since 1971, gave broad support to greater competition between
market trading systems. It proposed a deluge of detailed regulation and rule
changes to make sure that competition operates fairly, and allows investors
to place orders with their brokers in the confidence that they will get the
best prices available in any market.
The rapid rise in share trading in the US in the past two years has
intensified the competition for investors' business, and led to some
practices which the SEC now wants to see better controlled. Last year, 67bn
shares were traded on the NYSE, a huge increase over the record 51bn the
year before. The previous peak, in 1987, was 47bn.
The SEC's proposals fall into four broad areas. First, it is calling for
greater transparency in the markets to give better disclosure of the prices
at which shares are traded. It might be argued that the US already has the
world's most transparent stock markets.
The regulators have asked for all 'limit orders' (instructions placed by
investors for their brokers to buy or sell shares once the price hits a
certain level) to be listed electronically, giving a clearer view of the
supply and demand for shares. Also, they have re-opened a contentious topic
first tackled in the early 1980s: that all buy or sell orders, no matter
where they are placed, should be made public to allow traders in any market
to bid for them.
The SEC has also asked the exchanges to reduce the minimum price spread on
stocks to Dollars  1/16 , rather than the current Dollars  1/8 . This is
meant to produce finer pricing of shares, leading to lower spreads between
buying and selling prices and so saving investors money. (It would also cut
into dealers' profits.)
Second, the regulators want to reinforce the rules which ensure that
investors get the best price when placing their orders with a broker. At
present, a broker may channel an order to a particular dealer in return for
a cash payment (known as 'payment for order flow') or other goods and
services (known as 'soft commissions', or soft dollars.) The SEC has
resisted calls to ban these arrangements, but says that they should all be
fully disclosed to investors.
Third, the SEC is trying to make competition between stock exchanges and
other trading systems fairer. It has proposed better reporting to regulators
of trades carried out on private, automated trading systems to allow them to
be properly regulated - though it has stopped short of demanding the same
full publication of trades that exchanges have to adopt. These suggestions
fall short of the sort of full-scale extension of regulation called for by
the NYSE and others.
Fourth, the changes would remove some of the barriers which prevent some of
the trading in NYSE from moving to other trading systems. Under NYSE rule
500, companies listed on the premier market cannot de-list unless a
two-thirds majority of their shareholders approve the move. This could
prevent companies from moving to other markets, the SEC says: the NYSE rule
should be amended to leave it to directors.
The changes will be made through amendments to the SEC's own rules and those
of the exchanges and self-regulatory organisations. They will amount to the
first overhaul of securities regulation in the US since the more
wide-ranging deregulation of the early 1970s.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940128

