FT944-2898

FT  15 DEC 94 / International Company News: Tenneco plays key piece in
sell-off game - The group's last big unit sale leaves holes that must be
plugged


   By LAURIE MORSE


Tenneco's decision to float its Albright & Wilson chemicals subsidiary on
the London Stock Exchange early next year is probably one of the last big
pieces to be moved in the restructuring chess game.
The flotation will bring in some useful cash - it is expected to raise some
Pounds 600m (Dollars 937.3m) - but the loss of such a company, and others
during Tenneco's three-year restructuring, presents a a challenge: how will
Tenneco plug the resultant profits and sales gap?
However, the move to divest a significant UK-based subsidiary when the
company is pursuing a global expansion strategy shows Tenneco intends to be
highly selective about its international investments.
Mr Dana Mead, Tenneco chairman, is determined to focus the conglomerate on
just three main businesses - packaging, car parts and natural gas - and shed
extraneous companies seen as either too cyclical or lacking in the growth
potential he is aiming for.
Albright & Wilson is a remnant of Tenneco's ambitious diversification
programme of the 1960s and early 1970s. During that period, the
Houston-based oil pipeline company transformed itself into a industrial
conglomerate, acquiring companies that did everything from underwriting life
insurance to manufacturing motor components.
Many of the businesses that Tenneco acquired were highly cyclical, and some
proved downright unprofitable, leaving the parent company struggling under
high debt loads and small returns for most of the 1980s.
When Albright & Wilson joined the Tenneco stable in 1978, it was one of
several chemical companies in the group's portfolio. The others have since
been sold, but Albright & Wilson remained, its marketability diminished in
part by a long-running recession in the chemicals industry.
The company is a world leader in the production of phosphate-based products
used in agriculture and for such diverse purposes as putting the bubbles in
shampoo and adding zip to carbonated drinks.
Mr Mead's decision to sell the UK subsidiary has a lot to do with the
cyclical nature of the chemicals industry - he must convince Wall Street
that Tenneco is becoming less vulnerable to economic cycles.
At the same time, Albright & Wilson's profitability is benefiting from
worldwide recovery in chemicals prices this year, a factor that should help
to create an eager audience for its flotation.
Tenneco has worked hard to reduce Albright & Wilson's operating costs and
help its Charleston, South Carolina, specialty chemicals unit recover from a
devastating plant explosion in 1991.
That year, Albright & Wilson posted a Dollars 70m operating loss after
taking a Dollars 79m restructuring charge. For the first nine months of this
year, it recorded operating profits of Dollars 53m on revenue of Dollars
715m.
That compares with Tenneco's consolidated nine-month net income of Dollars
376m this year, on sales of Dollars 10.07bn.
Mr Robin Paul, Albright & Wilson managing director, told a group of Tenneco
managers recently his company had the potential to achieve 20 per cent
annual profits growth based on expansion through joint ventures in Mexico,
Morocco, China, and the Pacific Rim.
Mr Mead, however, is betting that selling the company and reinvesting the
proceeds will bring in even higher returns for Tenneco.
Such a move, however, puts even more pressure on Mr Mead to replace lost
income from the Albright & Wilson sale and the spin-off of 55 per cent of
Case Corporation, the farm and construction equipment supplier.
Those two disposals will net Tenneco more than Dollars 1.5bn in cash but
will cost it around Dollars 2.8bn in lost revenues and about Dollars 123m in
lost operating profits.
Mr Mead underscored his commitment to Tenneco's remaining 'core' businesses
this week by announcing he would use Dollars 500m of that money to
repurchase about 7.5 per cent of Tenneco's stock.
The share repurchase is a quick way to boost share value, but will not
satisfy Wall Street, which is reserving opinion on Tenneco's future until,
as one analyst puts it, 'we know what the company is going to look like'.
In the past two months Tenneco has announced a series of small acquisitions
and reinvestments in its core business, amounting to about Dollars 250m.
With the proceeds expected from the Albright & Wilson flotation, Tenneco
would once again have ammunition for a large acquisition. However, Mr Mead
has discouraged those expectations, pointing out that a series of
smaller-scale purchases or investments focused on international growth is
more likely.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

941215

