FT944-2881

FT  15 DEC 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries mixed as data match forecast


   By LISA BRANSTEN and MARTIN BRICE


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US Treasury prices were mixed yesterday as recent trends reversed and the
short end of the market outperformed the long bond.
Late in the day the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  5/32 at 95
25/32 yielding 7.862 per cent. At the short end of the market, the two-year
note gained  3/16 at 99 3/8 , yielding 7.579 per cent.
Inflation has yet to appear in the prices of final goods, according to
consumer price index figures released by the Labour department. In November
the CPI grew 0.2 per cent, bringing yearly inflation to 2.7 per cent.
Although up from the 0.1 per cent figure for October, it was generally in
line with analysts' expectations. The increase was largely due to an uptick
in energy prices following two months of decline.
The figures led to a reversal of recent yield curve flattening as analysts
speculated that the low inflation figures might keep the Federal Reserve
from raising interest rates at the December 20 meeting of its open market
committee. The spread between the yields of the two-year note and the long
bond bounced back near 30 basis points after falling as low as 13 points on
Tuesday.
The spread has tightened sharply since mid-November, when the Fed increased
the interest rate 75 basis points. A flattening yield curve is viewed as an
indicator that market players expect an economic slowdown.
Despite the low inflation data, there were signs of strength further down
the economic chain. Data on industrial production showed a 0.5 per cent
increase for November with capacity utilisation at 84.7 per cent. Capacity
utilisation greater than 85 per cent is generally thought to be a signal of
future inflation, but the market had anticipated such a figure.
UK government bonds took a positive tone from a raft of UK economic data,
and outperformed German government bonds yesterday as the yield spread over
bunds tightened from 126 to about 118. Mr Kevin Gardiner at Morgan Stanley
said gilt performance was driven by short covering in the Treasury market,
and said the market might have underestimated the significance of employment
data. He said: 'The inflation and labour market data suggest that the phoney
war against inflation is over and the real battle is about to commence.'
The December long gilt future moved up  13/32 to about 101 15/16 in late
trading.
German government bonds lagged the rise in the US, with the spread under
Treasuries tightening from 48 basis points to 43 in slow trading. Ms Alison
Cottrell at Kidder Peabody said the eyes of investors would now be on the
Federal open markets committee meeting in the US on Tuesday. Ms Jane
Berryman at Technical Data said bund investors would be following closely
the coming wage round, which may be inflationary as trade unions might adopt
aggressive negotiating tactics to halt falling membership. The March bund
futures contract on Liffe rose by 0.05 on the day to 89.74.
Italian bonds rose yesterday, leaving the March bond futures contract on
Liffe around 98.69 in late trading, a rise of 0.03. Mr Corrado Costantino at
Williams de Broe said the bottom of the current political crisis had not yet
been reached. He said: 'We will have a lot of problems about who will form
the next government.'

The Financial Times


London Page 38

941215

