FT941-4165

FT  12 MAR 94 / Man in the News: Sacrificial spirit of devotion - Wei
Jingsheng


   By TONY WALKER


Wei Jingsheng, China's most prominent dissident, has been cooling his heels
this week in a small inn in the bleak port city of Tianjin about an hour's
drive south-east of Beijing.
It is a moot point whether Wei is under arrest or under surveillance, but
his movements have been severely curtailed while Mr Warren Christopher, the
US secretary of state, is in Beijing this weekend.
Thus, in feudal tradition a naysayer has been banished from the capital to
spare China's rulers a troublesome presence. Chinese history is replete with
such examples. Wei's treatment is a reminder that even in the country's
modernisation phase, official behaviour sometimes owes more to the past than
to the present.
The 44-year-old Wei was reported by his secretary to be in good spirits. For
someone who emerged last year from more than 14 years in jail, including a
stint in a penal colony in remote and harsh Qinghai province, his temporary
'exile' in Tianjin must seem like a mild inconvenience.
Not that Wei, the former Red Guard and People's Liberation Army soldier is
likely to be much fazed whatever his circumstances. Suggestions that he had
suffered a mental breakdown while in jail proved unfounded. 'My will was
strengthened and so was my determination to increase people's awareness of
democracy,' he told the Financial Times recently.
Wei may not have the international stature of a Sakharov, the Soviet nuclear
scientist condemned to internal exile during the Brezhnev years, but in the
Chinese context he is a central figure as the unofficial 'leader' of a tiny,
fragmented dissident community.
Chinese official nervousness of Wei's ability to use an occasion such as Mr
Christopher's visit to amplify his call for political freedom both at home
and abroad is perhaps not surprising.
Fresh in Chinese memory is the embarrassing row that marred President George
Bush's visit to Beijing in 1989 - months before the Tiananmen square
massacre - after moves by the authorities to prevent the dissident Professor
Fang Lizhi from attending a presidential banquet.
That episode, perhaps more than any other, rendered Prof Fang a dissident
hero in his own country, and gave him exceptional prominence
internationally. He was exiled to the US in 1990 and has become a remote
figure to his countrymen.
However, lao Wei (old Wei) as he is known in the dissident community, has
remained close to his roots, and since his release from jail last September
has continued to press his views among his fellow dissidents and in
conversations with journalists and diplomats.
Western officials say that it would be a mistake to exaggerate Wei's
political importance in a country where the few dissenting voices are barely
heard above a whisper; but equally he could become a 'rallying point' in a
time of crisis.
Wei's dissident colleagues make no attempt to hide their admiration for his
commitment and sacrifice. Liu Xiaobo, one of the leaders, or so-called
'black hands', behind the pro-democracy protests of 1989, says: 'He is one
of the few democracy fighters to devote himself totally to the cause. If you
don't have such a spirit of devotion you can't survive very long in such a
totalitarian system.'
Wei cannot be faulted for lack of staying power. He first came to notice in
1978 during the brief Beijing political spring as perhaps the most literate
of the pro-democracy activists who made their voices heard in big-character
posters pasted on the grimy wall of a Beijing bus station on the city's main
boulevard.
His most enduring testament and one that angered Deng Xiaoping was a poster
entitled 'The Fifth Modernisation', which appeared on 'Democracy Wall' on
December 5 1978. This was a cheeky play on the 'four modernisations'
campaign embraced by the Communist party a month or so previously, which had
pointedly excluded any reference to political liberalisation.
'What is true democracy?' Wei had asked rhetorically. 'It means the right of
people to choose their own representatives who will work according to their
will and in their interests. Only this can be called democracy.'
These views were a deep affront to Communist rulers emerging from the years
of chaos of the Cultural Revolution. Their misgivings were compounded when
Wei dared to suggest in contributions to the underground magazine,
Exploration, that the Communist party itself had failed, and, worse, that
Deng himself had a flawed appreciation of China's needs.
This was too much for Mr Deng, who has never shown much squeamishness about
dealing with dissent. In the spring of 1979, Wei was sentenced to 15 years
in jail for leaking military secrets to a foreign journalist and for
counter-revolutionary activities.
The penalties seemed excessive, even by the standards of the time, and Wei's
incarceration proved a blight on China's reputation throughout the 1980s.
His release last September, six months before his jail term expired, on the
eve of the vote awarding the 2000 Olympics to Sydney, was a crude attempt to
boost China's chances of hosting the games.
Whatever Wei's feelings about being used as a pawn in the Olympics chess
game, he showed quickly that he had lost none of his appetite for
controversy. He dared the Communist party to meet the challenge of change.
'China is changing, so how can the Communist party remain unchanged?' he
asked reporters. 'The question is whether that change can keep up with the
pace of change in society. If it can't, then I'm afraid what has happened in
the Soviet Union and eastern Europe will happen here. People will rise up
and topple the government and then there will be turmoil.
'I hope party members will be wise enough to keep pace with the wishes of
the people and thus achieve a smooth transition.'
With Mr Deng slipping away, and with Wei in reasonably good health in spite
of his long ordeal, it is just possible that China's leading dissident may
have the last word.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940312

