FT942-15454

FT  15 APR 94 / World Trade News: Rival for Geneva as WTO site - Marrakesh
Diary


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


Among the unresolved issues at this week's meeting is the delicate question
of the location of the headquarters of the new World Trade Organisation, the
larger and grander body which will succeed the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade next year.
It had been widely thought until recently that the WTO would be sited in
Geneva, home of the Gatt secretariat.
Indeed, Gatt has already begun preparing for its metamorphosis by opening
negotiations to take over the remainder of its lakeside headquarters
building after it is vacated by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees later
this year.
However, there could yet be a surprise. The question of the site was raised
this week at a meeting of ministers from the 'Quad' powers - the US, the
European Union, Japan and Canada - and rumours are circulating that
Stockholm is ready to offer itself as an alternative candidate.
It all looks like an elaborate game of bluff. Says a senior official who
attended the Quad talks: 'We'd like to go to Geneva, but it's a question of
bargaining the terms with the Swiss. We are trying to tell them that if
they're going to be unreasonable, then we'll go somewhere else.'
Yesterday, Mr Gunter Rexrodt, German economics minister, stirred the pot
further by announcing that, as soon as he got home, he would ask his cabinet
colleagues to propose Bonn as the headquarters.
No doubt Switzerland will get the message. After all, no self-respecting
country would want to be accused of gouging rent out of an organisation, a
third of whose members are classified as the world's poorest countries.
No such sense of frugality prevails in Marrakesh, where representatives of
several developing countries are among the guests at the magnificent Hotel
Mammounia. A favourite holiday haunt of Winston Churchill, who painted in
its gardens, the Mammounia's main rooms are an eye-catching exercise in
1920s Islamic art deco.
The accommodation is no less exotic. Sir Leon Brittan's suite, for instance,
is an Arabian Nights fantasy of mirrors and mosaic. The overall effect is of
an oriental courtesan's boudoir. It is rather spoiled, however, by a chiming
doorbell which would seem more at home in suburban Esher. 'I think it's
ghastly,' said Brittan, grimacing as the chimes announced the arrival of
another delegation at his door.
Speaking of boudoirs, first prize for journalistic enterprise - and the
week's most intriguing story - goes to Reuters. One of its intrepid
correspondents bearded Mr Tsutomu Hata, Japan's foreign minister, at his
hotel yesterday and reported that he had just breakfasted with his former
masseuse, now employed by Morocco's royal household.
What can this mean? And what will it do for Mr Hata's prospects of becoming
his country's next prime minister when the news gets back to Japan? I think
we should be told. . . .

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940415

