FT943-699

FT  28 SEP 94 / Business and the Environment: Turning green at the thought -
Why banks focus on lender liability


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


Mention the word 'environment' to your average commercial banker and watch
him flinch. Never mind the booming market for environmental services, the
investment opportunities, the growing demand by consumers for 'green'
products.
His first thoughts are as likely to turn to the mounting bill for cleaning
up toxic waste sites or fears of customers pushed into default by unforeseen
environmental costs and regulations.
A global survey of 60 banks conducted for the United Nations Environment
Programme (Unep) found that the banks' environmental policies focused
predominantly on credit risk management. The environment was a negligible
factor in equity financing; banks have yet to promote 'green' business with
enthusiasm.
When senior officials from 45 of the world's biggest commercial banks met in
Geneva this week to discuss environmental issues, the main topic was lender
liability for environmental risk and how to avoid it. Quantifying risk came
next, followed by 'greening' the banks' own internal operations. Investing
in sustainable development came a long way down the list for most of the
banks at the gathering, which included Britain's National Westminster,
Citibank of the US, the Bank of Tokyo, Deutsche Bank, HSBC Holding of Hong
Kong, the three major Swiss banks and Bank Dagang Negara of Indonesia.
According to Unep, which sponsored the two-day round table, the banking
sector's anxiety over lender liability overshadows all other environmental
concerns. The problem arises because almost everywhere lenders can be held
responsible for some kind of environmental malpractice or simple misfortune
of their clients. Even if banks are not legally liable they may lose their
money if the customer defaults.
The size of the risk is enormous. The cost of cleaning up toxic waste sites
in the US, where the lender liability problem is most acute, is put at up to
Dollars 500bn (Pounds 316bn). But even in the Asia-Pacific region, the World
Bank estimates Dollars 38bn a year will be needed for clean-up operations.
A Unep report prepared for the meeting notes that banks in industrialised
countries have gone to great lengths to protect themselves from liability,
ranging from environmental audits to mandatory bonds posted by borrowers to
cover future potential environmental costs.
Others have chosen a simpler course. In a 1990 survey of local commercial
banks by the American Bankers' Association, nearly half said they no longer
financed certain types of business, such as petrol stations, because of
liability fears. Nearly two-thirds of the banks turned down loan
applications on the same
grounds.
Defensive action by banks to limit risk exposure has seriously inhibited
funding for clean-up projects and investments in environmental protection.
'If a small percentage of the time, resources and talent that has gone into
avoiding legal liability focused instead on finding new solutions to
clean-up and environmental management issues, progress might be made,' the
report comments.
It notes, however, that a number of governments are drawing up guidelines
for lender liability to try to reduce the uncertainty. Unep favours schemes
to pool environmental risk such as collective liability funds and
public-private sector partnerships for clean-up and other environmental
projects.
The banks also swapped experience in making their own operations more
environment-friendly, in areas such as energy efficiency and paper
consumption. A study by Swiss Bank Corporation, for example, showed that a
large bank uses as much electricity as a town of 60,000 people.
Ms Hilary Thompson, head of environmental management at NatWest, says: 'It's
not going to be very easy for a member of the financial sector to turn round
to customers and ask them to do something if they haven't put their own
house in order first.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940928

