FT942-15702

FT  14 APR 94 / Accountancy TV calls in the receivers


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Administrative receivers have been appointed at Accountancy Television, the
specialist service for accountants backed by the Institute of Chartered
Accountants and the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants.
The television service broadcast by BBC Select, the specialist subscription
arm of the BBC, is the second of four services to go into receivership.
It is believed that Accountancy TV only attracted between 1,300 and 1,400
subscribers.
However, about half of those were sent videos through the post, rather than
recording the broadcasts on specially adapted video recorders.
Mr Lee Manning, joint administrative receiver from Buchler Phillips, said
yesterday: 'I am very hopeful that I can sell the business and move
forward.'
There have been several expressions of interest in the business, including
an intention to bid by Television Education Network, the producer of The
Accountants Educational Channel, which distributes programmes on videos
through the post.
Accountancy TV only owes about Pounds 300,000. However, when its main
shareholders, who include the BBC and the financial training organisation
BPP, were asked for bank guarantees they instead decided to call in the
receivers.
The decision is a further blow to BBC Select which was set up with the hope
that as many as 20 specialist services would eventually use BBC transmitters
in the middle of the night to broadcast scrambled subscription services.
Last year the BBC, which invested more than Pounds 10m in the service,
decided that although it would honour existing contracts it would not launch
any new services.
Executive Business Club, which went into receivership last year, survived
after being bought by Lancashire Enterprise Trust and Legal Network
television.
Yesterday it said that it was 'doing fine'.
BBC Select continues to broadcast a number of services which are not
scrambled and which are aimed at nurses and social workers.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940414

