FT943-826

FT  27 SEP 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: US producer says aluminium
demand exceeds expectations


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


The aluminium industry is enjoying a time of extraordinary demand growth,
according to Mr Lloyd O'Carroll, corporate economist at Reynolds Metals, the
second-largest US aluminium group. He suggests that western world
consumption is set to rise by 7 per cent in 1994 to 16.7m tonnes.
Physical aluminium is being sold at very high premiums to London Metal
Exchange prices nearly everywhere in the world. 'This tells me that the
physical market is pulling the LME, rather than the LME pushing the market,'
he adds.
Mr O'Carroll says that European demand is causing the greatest surprises.
Orders for flat rolled aluminium are up 20 per cent from last year's
depressed levels and orders for extrusions are up 10 per cent. This could
easily translate into a 5 per cent rise in primary aluminium consumption in
Europe this year.
In Japan, which like Europe was expected to provide only weak or flat demand
for this year, the recovery in aluminium sales growth is proving faster than
in the previous two cyclical economic recoveries. The underlying trend is
very strong but the Japanese, conscious that they are the world's biggest
purchasers of the metal, 'are going out of their way so as not to sound too
optimistic'.
For the US, where deliveries of aluminium rose by 11 per cent in the first
half compared with a reasonably buoyant first six months in 1993, Mr
O'Carroll is predicting 10 per cent growth in demand for the full year to
7.94m tonnes.
He says aluminium sales in the US are likely to slow now because the country
is past the mid-point in the latest macro-economic cycle. But. with Europe
and Japan just starting their recoveries, the aluminium market can look
forward to strong world wide growth for the next three to five years. Mr
O'Carroll's analysis puts long-term aluminium demand growth at an annual 3
per cent to 5 per cent.
Aluminium stocks are likely to drop by 500,000 tonnes this year and by
nearly 1.5m tonnes in 1995.
Russian supply remains an enigma, says Mr O'Carroll. In 1993 aluminium
exports from Russia probably were close to 2m tonnes. However, if Russia cut
output by 300,000 tonnes, as part of its contribution to the recent trade
agreement between aluminium producing countries, it was likely that Russian
exports would be flat or down a little next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940927

