FT941-5544

FT  05 MAR 94 / Markets: The Abbey, safe as houses - The Bottom Line


   By ALISON SMITH


If the bank sector were a group of children, Abbey National would be the one
playing quietly on its own, while the others rushed around getting into
scrapes together.
Now almost five years old as a banking group - after a previous existence
going back 150 years as a building society - Abbey still has many of its
former characteristics. These help to explain why its performance has been
steadier than those of its competitors.
The disadvantage of such steadiness, however, is that it lacks the
opportunities for rapid growth in bouncing back from disastrous mistakes.
Abbey's 25 per cent increase in pre-tax profits in 1993 announced this week,
is relatively small compared with the recovery of other banks such as TSB,
Midland and National Westminster.
Over 1991 and 1992, Abbey's share price outperformed the FT-SE-A Banks Index
as the other bank stocks were more dragged down by the recession. Their
exposure to bad corporate loans, for example, had a greater impact on them
than did Abbey's to bad mortgages. As the other shares fell, their dividend
yields rose relative to Abbey's. But over the last couple of years, the
major clearers have recovered more rapidly than Abbey, reversing the
relative trends on share prices and dividends.
This is not to say that Abbey has made no mistakes: the 1993 results gave
two clear examples of making up for lost ground, in the Pounds 30m
exceptional charge for the disposal of the Cornerstone estate agency, and
the fall in provisions for bad debts in the UK to Pounds 119m (Pounds 227m).
The benefits from these recoveries will not recur on the same scale, but the
Pounds 99m provisions on the European side for 1993 will fall this year,
boosting pre-tax profits for the current year.
With only limited further gains to be reaped for falling provisions,
however, the question is where Abbey's future growth will come from.
Hugh Pye, of BZW research, believes that Abbey is one of the few in the
banking sector which will achieve underlying growth in the coming years,
from increases in profits for the life insurance business and the treasury
operation.
Scottish Mutual, a wholly-owned life-insurance subsidiary, contributed
Pounds 40m to pre-tax profits in 1993, while Abbey National Life contributed
Pounds 21m. Pre-tax profits from the treasury operation rose sharply to
Pounds 145m, from Pounds 100m in 1992.
Peter Toeman, banking analyst at Hoare Govett, is more sceptical about the
future contribution these two elements of the group can make, and emphasises
the competition for the core UK retail banking operation which is putting
pressure on the group's net interest income. UK retail banking accounted for
Pounds 618m of the Pounds 704m pre-tax profits.
Toeman says that even if Scottish Mutual and Abbey National Life provided an
extra Pounds 20m-Pounds 30m in pre-tax profits this year, a 10-basis-point
fall in the lending margin would cut Pounds 60m from Abbey's profits.
John Aitken, analyst at UBS, questions how sustainable the treasury profits
are. Even those who believe they will continue to grow believe that they
will not grow as rapidly as they did in 1993.
Whatever doubts analysts may have about Abbey's future growth prospects,
however, they are agreed on one matter: Abbey pays good dividends.
Each year since its conversion, Abbey has raised its full-year net dividend
per share. The 1989 dividend of 5.7p per share compared with the 14.0p
dividend for 1993, shows compound growth beyond that of Lloyds bank, the
best performing of the major clearers, where the 1989 dividend was 13.3p per
share compared with 22.1p in 1993.
It has, however, been able to maintain that consistency only by changing its
policy that dividends should be covered by earnings three times. The 1993
dividend is covered by earnings just 2.1 times.
This emphasis on income may suggest that Abbey's relationship with its
shareholders is still reminiscent of that of a building society and its
members. If it is to produce livelier prospects, both Abbey and its
shareholders may have to accept that greater rewards come only with greater
risks.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940305

