FT943-806

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Mauritius (3): S Africa may emerge as rival - A
new offshore business sector


   By TONY HAWKINS


Abolition of exchange controls and the deregulation of the foreign exchange
and money markets in the 1994 budget are crucial steps forward in the
country's efforts to establish a strong offshore business sector.
Most of the island's exchange controls were dismantled during the 1980s, but
it was only in this year's budget that Ramakrishna Sithanen, the finance
minister, sealed the process by lifting the remaining 5 per cent capital
transfer tax and removing the final obstacle to full exchange rate
convertibility.
At the same time, he announced that the Bank of Mauritius would become a
market player rather than the market maker in the foreign exchange market.
In effect, this means that the central bank 'indicates' a central rate for
the rupee each day, intervening in the market when necessary by buying and
selling dollars.
More important perhaps the liberalisation of the domestic money markets.
Bank Rate, previously changed at intervals of one year or even longer, is
now tied to the Treasury Bill rate - 1 per cent above the average bill
auction rate. To increase competitiveness, the liquid assets ratio applied
to commercial banks and the prescribed assets ratio for insurance companies
are to be phased out.
This means the government will have to compete for funds with private sector
fundraisers and the parastatals. Mr Sithanen hopes that this will lead to an
active secondary market for government paper, allowing the central bank to
conduct open market operations more effectively.
These measures have had two main impacts in the markets: interest rates have
firmed in line with the minister's stated intention of tightening monetary
policy to bring down inflation from 9.5 per cent in the 1993-94 fiscal year
to 5 per cent next year. Portfolio management opportunities are changing,
with financial institutions and individual investors offered a wider menu of
increasingly market-determined options.
Both developments will help the drive to establish Mauritius as an efficient
offshore business centre. Mauritius needs to move quickly given the probable
emergence of South Africa as a rival centre, as and when Pretoria eliminates
its exchange controls.
Already there is talk of Durban being developed as a free port, which would
undermine the Mauritius initiative on that front, and while the South
Africans are unlikely to push the offshore business option as such, the
reality is that - political stability permitting - Johannesburg is set to
become the regional business hub.
Nonetheless, Mauritius does have regional competitive advantage. It is the
only Indian Ocean offshore business centre; it has cultural and language
advantages South Africa cannot match. An impressive battery of
double-taxation agreements is encouraging financial and marketing companies
to set up shop on the island. The double-taxation agreement with India means
that companies investing there can do so via Mauritius, avoiding capital
gains tax in the process. Where it owns at least 10 per cent of an Indian
company, a Mauritian offshore company pays a withholding tax on dividends of
only 5 per cent, instead of the normal 20 per cent.
The offshore banking venture has done better than forecast. By mid-1994,
seven banks - Barclays, Banque Nationale de Paris Internationale, Hongkong
and Shanghai Banking Corp, Bank of Baroda, State Bank International, Edmond
de Rothschild and Banque Internationale des Mascareignes - had assets of
Dollars 400m.
Growth slowed from Dollars 125m in 1992-93 to Dollars 75m in the past year.
The two biggest players - on an asset basis - were Barclays and State Bank
International, a joint venture between the government-owned State Commercial
Bank and the State Bank of India.
However, with no new participants on the horizon, some bankers detect a
change of emphasis with offshore banking increasingly seen as an ancillary
operation, feeding upon and contributing to the growth of a broader offshore
business centre encompassing the freeport, international investment
institutions and global warehousing.
The growth record here is impressive, especially when set against sluggish
growth on the part of the offshore banks. Two years ago, just 10 were
registered offshore companies, increasing to 225 in mid-1993 and more than
1,000 by last month, including 21 investment funds with an asset base of
more than Dollars 1.7bn.
Three main factors explain this explosive growth. First, there are the
attractive incentives offered to companies that qualify for offshore status
 -zero taxation of profits earned in offshore operations, free profit
repatriation, concessionary personal tax arrangements for expatriate staff
at half normal tax rates, no withholding taxes on interest and dividends and
no capital gains tax.
The second factor is the liberalisation and deregulation of the Mauritian
economy and especially its financial sector, while the third is
liberalisation elsewhere, especially in India and China, but also in parts
of Africa.
Offshore business is unlikely to match the EPZ's role as an engine of growth
for the rest of this century. But the fact that it has performed so
impressively has bodes well for the future. But in taking this road,
Mauritius will run into increasingly fierce competition from a first world
that is anxious and determined to protect its jobs and earnings from such
service activities.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940927

