FT941-17031

FT  06 JAN 94 / International Company News: Swiss telecoms group's scramble
 -Ian Rodger examines Ascom's struggle to regain credibility after last
year's reports of heavy losses


   By IAN RODGER


Such is the sorry state of Ascom that a newspaper article yesterday
reminding investors the Swiss telecommunications equipment maker had lost a
semi-exclusive contract with the local PTT was enough to cut 5 per cent off
the value of the shares.
Ascom responded quickly, pointing out it had just signed a new contract for
selling private branch exchanges (PBX) to the PTT, and expected to maintain
its dominant position in this SFr300m (Dollars 202m) a year market. But to
little immediate effect.
The group lost most of its credibility in the financial community last year
when its profit forecasts were overtaken by reports of heavy losses. It
sacked its chief executive, Mr Leonardo Vannotti, early last month and
announced its third divisional reorganisation in as many years.
But no one expects a quick turnround. Ascom was formed in 1987 from the
merger of three traditional protected suppliers to the Swiss PTT. It was
then apparent that the domestic market would be liberalised, and the hope
was that a merged group could acquire sufficient scale to become a
competitive international supplier.
Today, the prevailing view among analysts and perhaps even within the group
is that it cannot.
'This is a classical example of a merger that did not work,' says Mr Roland
Leutenegger, an analyst at Bank Julius Baer in Zurich.
The problem, analysts say, is that none of the group's main businesses is
large enough to be internationally competitive. Moreover, the group does not
have the resources to buy large scale, and a stifling ownership structure
prevents it from raising new capital.
The Hasler Werke Foundation, owner of the largest of the predecessor
companies, has a 54 per cent voting stake and is required by its statutes to
maintain a majority. However, as it has only modest resources, it cannot
allow Ascom to raise new equity capital nor make large scale, equity related
joint ventures.
Since Mr Vannotti's departure, the shares have risen about 20 per cent,
apparently in anticipation of a tough turnround expert being appointed as
the new chief executive. But analysts are sceptical.
'The problem is not as simple as in other turnrounds,' Mr Volkan Gocmen, an
analyst at Geneva bankers Pictet & Co, says.
The group has some successful product lines that it could sell off in a
first stage, such as its payphones and ticket vending and automatic teller
machines. But it has no businesses where it could be reasonably certain that
massive new investment would pay off, he argues.
In the directors' December restructuring announcement, they said the three
new divisions would operate independently to 'facilitate co-operation with
one or more industrial partners'. They have also appealed to the Swiss
government to alter the statutes of the Hasler Foundation.
Agreement has already been reached to hive off the loss-making private
mobile radio division to a joint venture that would be controlled by
Germany's Robert Bosch and observers expect that co-operation arrangements
with Ericsson of Sweden in transmission products will be expanded.
Recent interest in the shares may therefore be a play on the group's net
asset value. At the end of 1992, this was SFr2.45bn or SFr2,600 a share. The
1993 loss is widely expected to be close to SFr300m or SFr700 per share, but
that would still leave the book value above yesterday's close of SFr1,375
per bearer share.
Mr Leutenegger rates the shares a hold on this basis, even assuming the need
to devalue some assets.
Mr Gocmen is more sceptical. 'Who is going to be interested in buying
telecoms production capacity in Switzerland?' he asks.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940106

