FT942-12537

FT  29 APR 94 / Lloyd's moves to calm fears on liabilities plan


   By RICHARD LAPPER


Lloyd's of London yesterday moved to calm fears that the insurance market
may not have enough capital to set up NewCo, a reinsurance company into
which most of its US asbestosis and pollution liabilities would be
transferred.
Ms Heidi Hutter, director of the NewCo project, said she did not 'want to
play down the complexities of the capitalisation issue' but 'this should not
be a major source of concern for Names'.
Ms Hutter was speaking at a conference of about 300 Names, the individuals
whose assets have traditionally supported the market, organised by the
Association of Lloyd's Members.
The insurance market announced that it aimed to transfer assets and
liabilities on policies underwritten before 1986 into NewCo last year.
Earlier this week an independent report claimed Lloyd's ability to obtain
capital for the new venture by discounting its reserves - taking into
account the value of future investment income - was limited. This is due to
the use by Lloyd's syndicates of so-called 'time-and-distance' policies.
These are reinsurance policies similar to investment contracts designed to
mature as pollution and asbestosis claims emerge.
The report said that as much as Pounds 2.8bn of about Pounds 4bn held in
reserve by Lloyd's was in the form of such policies.
Ms Hutter conceded that some of the reserves had already been discounted in
this way, but said she became 'impatient when I read suggestions that the
purchase of the T&D policies has somehow left a hole in Lloyd's reserves'.
She added: 'We know that the market holds significant reserves that have not
been invested in time-and-distance policies and might therefore be
discounted without compromising the security afforded to policyholders.'
In addition, Lloyd's had other sources of capital available to it, including
the central guarantee fund, which pays claims when Names cannot meet their
obligations, and outside investors.
NewCo expects to reach a preliminary assessment of the market's assets and
reserves in relation to pre-1986 assets and liabilities later this year. It
aims to obtain approval for the new company from the Department of Trade and
Industry next year, in time for the company to begin operation in December
next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940429

