FT944-6114

FT  30 NOV 94 / International Company News: 'Worst is over' for Japanese
brokers


   By GERARD BAKER


   TOKYO


The long slide in the fortunes of the Big Four Japanese securities companies
is over, according to a report to be published later this week by Moody's,
the US credit-rating agency. But growing competition, a lack of
diversification by the brokers and a failure to cut costs sufficiently
sharply will continue to present difficulties in the next few years, the
agency said yesterday.
'The worst is over' for Nomura, Daiwa, Yamaichi and Nikko, Moody's said, and
the ratings outlook is essentially stable. 'The industry environment has not
deteriorated over the past two years, but it has not improved either. Nor do
we expect it to recover to anywhere near the levels experienced in the late
1980s,' said Ms Deborah Kinzer, a Moody's vice-president.
In 1989, the favourable operating environment enabled the brokers to enjoy
ratings on unsecured debt as high as AAA, the highest, but the agency
currently rates debt at the top-ranked broker, Nomura, at just A1.
In that five-year period, the volume of equity trading on the Tokyo Stock
Exchange, the brokers' core business, has fallen by more than two-thirds and
the decline has hurt firms' earnings. The four brokers' combined pre-tax
profits have collapsed by more than 80 per cent since 1990.
The principal threat to the Big Four in the next few years is the arrival of
the subsidiaries of Japan's leading banks into the securities market. Banks
are now permitted to issue and sell bonds - an activity which has been one
of the few bright spots in the securities market in recent years. They have
already begun to erode the dominance of the leading brokers, and are
expected to take an even larger slice of the business in the years ahead.
Moody's also says the brokers have not yet adjusted to the decline in share
trading volumes by cutting their costs. Personnel costs and staff numbers
peaked about three years ago, but have fallen only slightly since then,
returning to the levels of 1989, a year when equity trading volumes were
three times their current level.
The report says the Big Four also face risks associated with weak affiliates
and closely-related companies. However, the agency points out that the
brokers are all well-capitalised. 'In fact we view capital as their major
credit-quality strength,' said Ms Kinzer.

The Financial Times


London Page 55

941130

