FT942-14372

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (11): You can save - and still sit at
the front - Discounts


   By MOTOKO RICH


Wider seats, a better choice of meals and premium service for the business
traveller need not come at a premium price. Cut rate deals are not just for
the globe-trotting student or the family holidaymaker - discount prices can
now be found at the front of the aircraft.
If you know where to look, savings of thousands of pounds are there for the
taking. Due to an overburdened market and the growing business of travel
agents targeting the executive traveller, up to 40 per cent of all business
and first-class flyers now use discounted tickets for their journeys.
'There are so many airlines that there is over-capacity,' says Mr Bill
Kirkwood, sales and marketing director for Thomas Cook Travel. 'There are
more seats than (the airlines) can fill at full fare prices.'
The glutted market means better prices for the business consumer. Within
Europe, most major airlines publish cheaper rates in business class. On the
route from London to Paris, full return fares are around Pounds 318 in the
business cabin. British Airways offers a Pounds 240 return ticket in
business class, with travel restricted to BA only.
Passengers whose schedules mean they might need to switch airlines will have
to consider the higher price. For a further discount, British Midlands
offers passengers a Pounds 225 return fare from Paris to London for those
who only need three days for the trip. Similar discounts are available to
other European destinations.
For travellers from continental Europe to London, buying tickets in London
may be the best way to save money. Mr James Foster, of First Call Business
Travel, recommends that regular flyers from the continent buy one single
ticket to London, followed by a series of returns originating in London.
Because of currency fluctuations, tickets bought in Britain are generally
cheaper than those purchased on the continent.
The most dramatic savings are available on long-haul flights. To get the
best deals on these routes, executive clients should visit a specialised
travel company. Airlines do not directly advertise their cheaply-priced
first and business class tickets to passengers, and travel agents can often
find cheaper deals by combining airlines or negotiating stopovers that will
bring prices down.
In Britain, most major airlines regularly set 'net fares' to sell on a
limited basis to qualified travel management companies. With these tickets,
customers can achieve savings of up to 60 per cent off published prices.
A business class return fare from London to New York, for example, with a
published fare of around Pounds 2,130, can be found for Pounds 1,180 by
First Call Business Travel in London. In first class, that route usually
sells for just under Pounds 4,000. Discount agents can find a fare as cheap
as Pounds 1,500.
The London to Tokyo route has a published fare of about Pounds 4,900 for
first class and Pounds 3,180 in the business cabin. Rock-bottom tickets of
Pounds 1,295 in business class are available from special discounters.
In the US, airfares fluctuate more frequently and depend on more variables
than fares in Europe. Rather than purchasing 'net fare' tickets, travel
companies find the best deals by searching through their vast computer
reservation systems. Ms Regina Schneider, of Rosenbluth Travel in
Philadelphia, the third largest travel management company in the US with
1,600 corporate clients, says computerised technology helps the company stay
abreast of 'thousands' of fare changes each day.
US travel management companies often work with business clients to draw up
annual travel budgets and search for composite deals, rather than helping
clients to book cheap tickets on a trip-by-trip basis. US Travel, for
example, helps companies negotiate with airlines for a series of discounts.
'We find discounts on a global level rather than on a one-shot deal,' says
Ms Gusty Taler, spokesperson for US Travel.
Working with such companies can yield significant savings. US Travel's
international rate desk found a business class ticket from New York to
Frankfurt for Dollars 1,490. The published fare on that route is Dollars
2,772. Similarly, on a San Francisco to Paris route, a first-class traveller
could purchase a ticket for Dollars 4,022, a route that usually sells for
Dollars 6,846.
Wherever you go, it pays to use a travel agent or travel management company.
When choosing a travel company, Ms Roma Battye, of American Express Airfare
Centre, advises executive flyers to use 'one with a dedicated unit that
looks after cheap fares'.
'It is important to use a travel management company which has substantial
clout in the market,' says Thomas Cook's Mr Kirkwood. Signs of a good travel
agent are a centralised reservation service and trained staff. You should
always have a choice of fares for any route you specify.
'Always get the travel management company to search for the best thing that
is available,' says Mr Kirkwood. 'Don't just buy the first thing that is
offered to you.' Thomas Cook has a 'fair fares' deal under which the company
promises to match any fare cheaper than that which it offers on the same
route.
Brand loyalty is nearly impossible in the discount market, as the cheapest
fares are often offered on non-traditional airlines for the particular
route. 'There are ways to undercut prices if you are prepared to fly by
certain 'third-world' airlines,' says Mr Foster at First Call Business
Travel.
Discounted fares may also mean that flexibility is reduced. All such fares
are sold for a particular airline. 'With the special fares you cannot chop
and change from airline to airline,' says Ms Battye. For business travellers
with uncertain timetables, such restrictions could mean that you would be
stranded if you missed your flight.
Mr Foster says that such restrictions are not as draconian as they sound. If
a customer misses a flight, most airlines will re-route passengers on
alternative flights. Naturally, these details should be checked before you
head for the airport.
A good travel agent will try to find the maximum flexibility for you in a
discounted ticket. But Mr Kirkwood advises executive travellers to 'look at
the business itinerary and figure out what kind of restrictions they can
live with to save money.'
Rosenbluth Travel's Ms Schneider offers a few other suggestions for
corporate travellers: consider buying full price coach tickets for upgrades
to business class. Many airlines offer such deals, and travel companies can
find them for you. And several airlines now have special classes where
customers pay coach prices but get business or first class service. Virgin
Atlantic has a 'mid class', for example, and Continental advertises a
'business first' class.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940420

