FT941-16960

FT  07 JAN 94 / Georgian leader seeks truth on 'death' of his rival


   By REUTER


   TBILISI


The Georgian government said yesterday it had sent officials to investigate
the reported death of ousted president Zviad Gamsakhurdia, but the head of
state, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, said his demise would make little difference
to the country, Reuter reports from Tbilisi.
Mr Shevardnadze's office said a team of interior minister officials, headed
by the deputy prosecutor-general, had left for the western region of Zugdidi
to try to establish the truth about Mr Gamsakhurdia's fate.
The former leader's wife, Mrs Manana Gamsakhurdia, said on Wednesday that
her husband had killed himself on New Year's Eve after the failure of his
latest attempt to return to power. With the whereabouts of Mr Gamsakhurdia's
body unknown, conflicting versions of his reported death surfaced, and at
least one of his aides rejected the reports as disinformation.
However, a senior official of Chechnya republic, a southern Russian region
where Mr Gamsakhurdia had spent most of his exile since being ousted two
years ago, said it was certain the Georgian ex-president was dead.
'The leadership of Chechnya possesses reliable information about the death
of Zviad Gamsakhurdia,' said Mr Shamsudin Yusef, the Chechen foreign
minister.
The Itar-Tass news agency quoted the Chechen president, Mr Dzhokar Dudayev,
as saying that Mr Gamsakhurdia had died 'to stop the bloodshed' in his
homeland.
Mr Shevardnadze told Itar-Tass that Mr Gamsakhurdia, his bitter rival, was
in any case a 'political corpse'. His death, if confirmed, was of little
importance for the country, he said.
Earlier, in an interview with Reuter, Mr Shevardnadze also rejected reports
that Mr Gamsakhurdia, 54, chose to end his life after being encircled in a
military operation. 'We did not track him down, and indeed there was no need
to do that, because we believed, and still believe, he did not represent a
serious political force,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940107

