FT941-12889

FT  28 JAN 94 / NYSE dominance challenged as SEC overhauls market rules


   By RICHARD WATERS


   WASHINGTON


The New York Stock Exchange's dominance of share trading in the US is likely
to come under greater attack following yester day's unveiling of an overhaul
of the rules governing the US equity markets.
The changes are the result of a two-year study by the Securities and
Exchange Commission, set up to investigate whether the framework of
securities regulation in the US has kept pace with changes in the way the
markets operate.
While promoting greater competition between the NYSE and others for share
trading, the SEC backed away from full-scale deregulation. Mr Brandon
Becker, director of market regulation, said: 'We concluded that the US
markets are working very well as they are.'
The regulators have instructed the NYSE to amend two rules which prevent
trading in listed companies from being conducted on other markets. Companies
will no longer need the support of two thirds of their shareholders to
abandon their listing on the NYSE, but will be able to make the move subject
to board approval.
The big broking firms who are members of the NYSE, the world's biggest
exchange, will also no longer be forbidden to transact business elsewhere
when the exchange is closed, though the rule will remain in force while the
market is open.
This change should help attract back to the US share trading business which
is handled abroad, particularly in London, the SEC said.
The SEC also backed away from the imposition of heavy new regulations on the
private trading systems and broker-dealers which are already handling an
increasing amount of business away from the NYSE and other exchanges. These
alternative trading mechanisms have spurred the exchanges to improve
services and bring down costs for investors, it said.
The review, known as Market 2000, was the SEC's first extensive look at its
rules since the early 1970s.
Investor power, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940128

