FT943-1027

FT  27 SEP 94 / Belgian foreign minister chosen as next Nato chief


   By BRUCE CLARK


   LONDON


Mr Willy Claes, a Belgian socialist with controversial views on the future
of central and eastern Europe, was endorsed yesterday as the next
secretary-general of Nato by ambassadors of its 16 members.
The new Nato chief, at present Belgian foreign minister, will face the
challenges of easing transatlantic tensions over Bosnia, guiding Nato's
debate on enlargement of its membership and defining a new role for the
military alliance.
The path was cleared for his appointment by the withdrawal of Mr Uffe
Ellemann-Jensen, a former Danish foreign minister. Mr Claes, 55, is expected
to be appointed formally at a Nato foreign ministers' meeting within two
weeks.
The danger of a rift in US-European relations eased last night as it emerged
that the US and Bosnian governments were inching back from their commitment
to an early end to the UN arms embargo on Bosnia.
Bosnian president Alija Izetbegovic is expected to propose a compromise of
several months' delay in lifting the embargo, when he addresses the UN
today.
That would release the US administration from its promise to Congress that
moves towards lifting the embargo would start on October 15. Nato's European
members say authorising arms supplies to Bosnia would endanger UN ground
forces. However, co-ordination of Bosnian policy will still require deft
diplomacy from Mr Claes. In recent weeks, the alliance's political
leadership has had to work hard behind the scenes to soothe the anger of
senior US military officers over the cautious UN attitude to air strikes
against Bosnian Serbs.
Mr Claes opposed deployment of new US missiles in Europe in the 1980s but
more recently has strongly defended a continuing US role on the continent.
As foreign minister, he irked Turkey, a Nato member, by voicing sympathy for
the country's Kurdish minority while opposing its recourse to separatist
violence.
His views on the prospects for integrating central and eastern Europe into
western institutions are expected to cause continuing controversy.
Mr Claes last year drew a strong distinction between the political outlook
of countries of Protestant or Roman Catholic heritage - such as Poland, the
Baltic states, Hungary and Slovenia - and those of Orthodox Christian
tradition, such as Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Russia.
Among the first group, he said, western influence was stronger, and European
integration was becoming a 'goal within reach'. In the second, which had
more authoritarian traditions, progress towards democracy was much slower
and more difficult.
Claes boosted by success of Belgian EU presidency, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940927

