FT942-14371

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (12): Almost the last word in airborne
comfort / A look at what is on offer in business class


   By KATE BEVAN


'The destination is more important for the economy passenger, but in
business class, frequent travellers pay much more attention to the flight.'
So says one large carrier which, in common with other airlines, concentrates
a great deal of money and effort on business class.
There is no denying that business class is much more comfortable than
economy - wider seats, more space, better food and service. But not all
airlines are the same. Such arcane points as differences in seat pitch - the
distance between rows - seat width and in-seat entertainment are just
scratching the surface.
Most business classes, such as those on the US carrier United and British
Airways, have a seat pitch of about 40 inches. By comparison, the pitch in
economy is usually about 32 inches, while those travelling at the really
expensive end of the aircraft in first class can look forward to 60 inches
in which to stretch out.
The best airlines to go for if legroom is your main consideration are the
ones that have thrown out the old first class/business class distinction and
have concentrated on a 'super business class' such as Virgin Atlantic and
Continental of the US.
Virgin and Continental both have seat pitch of 55 inches - nearly as good as
first class on other airlines. Width is also important, with most business
classes offering a seat of 19 or more inches wide. By comparison, economy
passengers are squashed into about 17 inches.
Regular travellers say there is little to beat the comfort in this type of
business class. This small but expensive end of the aircraft is what makes
the money for airlines, and the money spent on the product reflects this.
Continental has spent more than Pounds 11m on upgrading its aircraft, and is
spending a further Pounds 11m on advertising and marketing its BusinessFirst
brand.
Virgin says that it makes 40 per cent of its revenue from just 10 per cent
of its passengers - those flying in Upper Class, its 'super business class'.
United, which maintains the first class/business class distinction,
emphatically says it is well worth spending the money on the front end of
the aircraft.
A regular traveller will sit in as many designs of seat as there are
airlines. Virgin sings the praises of Upper Class seats on its new Airbus
A340 aircraft, promising a fully adjustable neck rest with adjustable
tilting, all controlled by a touch-sensitive panel in the arm rest.
Continental says its seats cost Pounds 5,000 each and have electronic
control of motorised leg rests, head rests and lumbar supports.
Seat gadgetry has also spread to other airlines with the more traditional
division between first and business classes. British Airways, for example,
which first launched its Club World brand in 1988, now offers the business
class traveller adjustable lumbar support, larger 'ears' to create a cradle
for the head and enhanced foot rests.
This array of gadgetry makes the more standard offerings from Qantas, the
Australian carrier, look positively mean in comparison, even though its
seats, with padded leg rests and contoured head rests are certainly
comfortable.
Space is an important factor for business travellers, and one that airlines
are taking seriously by attention to seat pitches and widths. Even
apparently minor points such as the width of arm rests is important to some:
one regular woman traveller remarked that she has often had to concede a
narrow arm rest to her neighbour.
The space to move around also contributes to a feeling of exclusiveness.
Virgin is resurrecting the old idea of aircraft lounges, where first class
passengers could break the tedium of a long flight by propping up a bar and
lounging on a sofa. It has created a lounge area on its aircraft, and will
be installing sofas by the bar.
Entertainment is important for some passengers, and most airlines now offer
in-seat facilities with varying degrees of sophistication.
Many carriers such as Qantas have a route map so that the geographically
curious can try and pinpoint the specks of light 35,000 feet below. Qantas'
map also provides information on height - both metric and imperial measures
 -as well as speed and distance from destination.
Most offer blockbuster films, as well as news, sport and comedy channels,
but a drawback on many of these is that they run in a continuous loop and
travellers have to wait until the sequence starts again if they miss the
beginning, although airlines promise that is being addressed.
On a long flight, the food is important. Airlines pride themselves on their
catering at the expensive end of the aircraft. Qantas includes Sydney Rock
oysters and emu on its menu, offering both Australian and European wines.
British Airways has recently introduced a programme designed to deliver the
traveller to his or her destination in a less bloated state - Well-being in
the Air. A standard menu might offer shrimp and bean salad for a starter,
together with lighter options such as seared and baked vegetables in a
balsamic vinegar dressing. Foodies will note that balsamic vinegar has
recently taken off in the way that extra-virgin olive oil did in the 1980s.
A main course could offer a choice between beef in red wine and anchovy
sauce, or for the more health-conscious passenger, vegetarian polenta with
woodland mushrooms, leeks and peppers.
Virgin, on the other hand, concentrates on the feel-good factor by inviting
top chefs such as Raymond Blanc to offer a dish and propose guest wines.
It is often the little touches that make a difference. Qantas staff make
sure that a glass of water is on hand to prevent dehydration, while BA
extends its Well-being in the Air programme to include a leaflet on
exercises to keep the circulation going. Virgin carries a beauty therapist
on most flights to provide massages and beauty treatments.
Some airlines even tuck you in for the night. First launched by BA in first
class, and now copied by Virgin in Upper Class and Cathay Pacific in its
business class, is the sleeper service. This provides a seat which goes
almost flat out, a duvet or blanket, pillow and sleeping suit, and is
preceded by a meal before take-off in the departure lounge.
The good news for the business traveller is that even with all this
technology and feel-good treatment, airlines are constantly reviewing and
upgrading their products. It can only get better.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940420

