FT944-2883

FT  15 DEC 94 / International Bonds: McDonald's targets short-dated
eurodollars


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


McDonald's, the US fast-food group, became the latest high-profile US
corporate borrower to target the short-dated area of the eurodollar market
yesterday.
Elsewhere, Pakistan made a successful debut in the eurobond market,
Argentina launched its first offering in the French franc sector and Jordan
announced that it had awarded the mandate for a Dollars 50m eurobond,
marking its return to world capital markets.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development announced that it
intended to borrow up to a net Ecu900m next year in medium to long-term
debt. This follows a net Ecu910m borrowed this year, at an average
after-swap funding cost of 38 basis points below Libor.
McDonald's launched a Dollars 200m issue of two-year bonds, offering a
coupon of 8 per cent and priced to yield 18 basis points over US Treasury
bonds.
The bonds were sold to retail investors in Switzerland and the Benelux
countries, lead manager Morgan Stanley said.
This continues the trend of recent weeks which has seen US companies such as
Walt Disney, PepsiCo and Heinz taking advantage of the strong demand from
continental European retail investors for short-dated dollar offerings.
Dealers estimate that funding costs in the two-year eurodollar sector are
currently around 15 basis points lower than in the US domestic bond market.
Pakistan made its eurobond market debut with the launch of a Dollars 150m
offering of five-year bonds, which is expected to be be priced today at
around 380 to 385 basis points over US Treasuries.
Dealers expressed disappointment that the offering was not Dollars 200m as
initially rumoured. However, lead manager Bear Stearns said the issue
established a liquid benchmark, which is held by institutional investors,
and which will trade well in the secondary market.
A syndicate official said that although Pakistan had no immediate plans to
tap the eurobond market again, the offering would pave the way for issuance
from the country's private sector.
Argentina made its debut in the French franc sector with the launch of a
FFr1bn offering of three-year bonds, which is expected to be priced today at
around 250 basis points over French government bonds.
ANZ and Paribas are rumoured to have won the mandate to lead manage Jordan's
return to world markets, with an issue of seven-year bonds by the
state-owned Telecommunications Corporation.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

941215

