FT942-12847

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (11): Pace of investment
quickens - Fund managers are taking a far more serious interest in emerging
markets


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


Not many years ago, many pension fund managers regarded Mexico as a good
place for hats but certainly not as a serious investment prospect. Political
uncertainties, custodian and settlement problems and the lack of trading
liquidity associated with so-called emerging markets far outweighed brokers'
claims of the huge returns which could be made.
Yet the outstanding performance of emerging markets since the late 1980s and
the strong investment cult that has grown up have prompted a growing number
of pension fund managers to take a far more serious interest in these
fast-developing economies in Latin America and the Pacific Basin.
Ex-communist bloc countries in central and eastern Europe which are now
pursuing free market economics are also attracting their attention.
Mr Peter Jeffreys, managing director of Fund Research in London, says that
UK pension funds have been fairly slow to accept emerging markets as a
separate asset class, mainly because of the lack of liquidity. However, the
growing number of dedicated emerging market funds appears to have helped to
reduce their concerns.
He notes that the scale of institutional investment in emerging markets is
still very small. He estimates that just under 1 per cent of institutional
equity assets are in emerging markets which in turn account for around 6 1/2
per cent of the world's stock market capitalisation. 'There clearly is
massive scope for more of this kind of investment,' he says.
For the pension funds which invested in emerging markets before they became
fashionable, the rewards have been large. According to Lipper Analytical,
closed-end global equity funds in emerging markets made total net asset
value (NAV) returns in dollars of 382.6 per cent over five years to the end
of 1993. This compared with total NAV returns of 74.6 per cent in developed
markets.
Dutch pension funds have been among the first to spot the opportunities in
emerging markets, which, according to the World Bank, account for 80 per
cent of the world's population and 15 per cent of the world's economy.
Pensioenfonds PGGM, the second largest pension fund in Europe and the
largest private pension fund in the Netherlands, started investing in
emerging markets in 1986 and now has 5 per cent of its Fl 15bn (Dollars
7.8bn) equity assets in these markets. Mr Marinus Keyzer, PGGM's chief
economist, says that this percentage is expected to rise to 7 1/2 per cent
of the fund's equity assets in the near term.
Mr Keyzer gives both professional and altruistic reasons for PGGM's decision
to invest in these markets. First, he points to what he calls the
'demographic time bomb' in western Europe where the population is getting
older and the birth rate is declining. 'It is the opposite in emerging
markets, where the population is much younger,' Mr Keyzer says.
The demographic advantage of emerging markets is strengthened by their
fast-developing economies where the growth rates far exceed those in OECD
countries. 'We are investing in new and dynamic companies which will become
market leaders in those countries,' says Mr Keyzer.
He adds that as a pension fund, PGGM has a responsibility to make a social
investment in these countries and by investing in their stock markets, it is
contributing to the growth of their economies and the formation of their
capital markets.
Although PGGM takes the strategic investment decisions in-house, it uses
outside managers to manage its holdings. Of its investment of Fl 750m, Fl
600m is held in a growth fund established by the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), the private-sector arm of the World Bank, but managed by
Los Angeles-based Capital international.
The growing number of pension funds which have investments in emerging
markets also tend to use outside managers rather than invest directly in
these markets though there appears to be a trend towards building up
in-house expertise.
Postel Investment Management, for example, has been involved in emerging
markets for some years but until the arrival of Mr Allan Conway as head of
overseas equities in September 1992, the investments were handled by the Far
Eastern and US investment managers. 'The smaller markets tended to become a
side issue and therefore were neglected,' Mr Conway says. 'Also, the
investment minds are different. Somebody used to covering the US or Japan
has a different approach to someone looking at Indonesia or Peru.'
Postel now regards emerging markets as a separate asset class and has set up
a centralised team of investment managers to assess global emerging markets.
'This front-line decision has enabled us to significantly increase our
exposure,' Mr Conway says.
Postel has about 2 per cent of total assets of Pounds 28bn in emerging
markets, and Mr Conway expects this proportion to grow over the years. 'But
I'm not sure we will get to 30 per cent,' he says, referring to the level
which some modern portfolio theorists put forward as the optimum for
achieving minimum risk and maximum return in a diversified equity portfolio.
By contrast, some pension fund managers are unwilling to pay the premium
which is now inherent in emerging markets. Mr John Hemingway,
deputy-chairman of PDFM's investment committee, is distinctly unenthusiastic
about emerging markets at present. 'We are value investors and we don't like
overpaying for assets,' he says.
PDFM has virtually no exposure to emerging markets, apart from Hungary.
'Many investors say these markets won't go below the average world
price/earnings rating but we are not convinced by that,' he says.
For example, PDFM invested heavily in Hong Kong after the Tiananmen Square
massacre. 'Hong Kong was then on a p/e of eight and had eight years to run
before the handover to China,' says Mr Hemingway. PDFM sold out last year
when the market's p/e hit the high teens and there were just three years
left before the colony was returned to China.
Mr Hemingway, describing his investment approach as that of a vulture rather
than an eagle, points to various markets which have fallen out of favour due
to political or economic woes, such as Mexico or Turkey, which might become
interesting in the coming months. 'We look to buy at a discount to the
average world market rating in order to compensate for the political risk,'
he says.
Mr Hemingway adds that some clients have asked for explanations why PDFM has
not participated in the cult of the emerging market. He says they have
accepted his reasons against a background in which the fund has performed
well for them. 'An outperformance of 1 or 2 per cent on 50 per cent of the
fund's assets is better than a 10 per cent outperformance on 0.5 per cent of
the assets,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940427

