FT941-3596

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (7): Tea and cake, then
nationalisation - A good managing director may not make the right chairman,
concludes Ian Hargreaves, and an executive who attains great heights early
needs to be watched / Company history: 1


   By IAN HARGREAVES


The History of the British Petroleum Company Vol. II,
The Anglo-Iranian Years, 1928-54
by J H Bamburg
Cambridge University Press, Pounds 50
639 pages
The subject matter of this book is one of the most gripping stories in 20th
century British business.
It tells how Anglo-Iranian Petroleum, which had made the first commercial
oil discovery in the Middle East in 1908 and six years later fallen under
majority control of the British government when it ran short of capital,
then became, in the 1930s, a leading member of the international oil
industry, before its dramatic nationalisation by the Iranian government in
1951.
The last page of the book contains a photograph, taken in December 1954,
showing two workmen replacing the Anglo-Iranian plaque outside Britannic
House in Finsbury Square, London, with one reading: 'The British Petroleum
Company Limited.' Truly, the formative period of a great British company had
occurred.
During the years covered by this volume, Anglo-Iranian was Britain's largest
single overseas investment and its fortunes a matter for concern at the
highest level in Washington as well as London. It thus found itself in the
crosswinds of competing geopolitical interests: located alongside Britain's
imperial passage to India, Anglo-Iranian was a crucial supplier of fuel to
the British armed forces in two world wars.
For Washington, the undisputed priority by the early mid-1940s was the
preservation of a friendly regime in a country whose northern borders adjoin
the Soviet Union. From a management point of view, it was an explosive
political blend.
The dominant figure at Anglo-Iranian in the earlier part of this period was
Sir John, later Lord, Cadman, who was chairman from 1927 to 1941. Cadman, a
professor of mining turned Whitehall technology adviser, was
international-minded, gregarious and an easy member of Britain's ruling
class.
His successor, William Fraser, started out in his father's Scottish shale
oil company, organised the transfer of that industry to Anglo and became
Cadman's managing director in 1929 at the age of 35. As chairman from 1941
to 1956, this 'autocratic, abrasive and uncompromising' Scot was regarded by
civil servants as a dangerous liability to their delicate diplomatic efforts
in Teheran and Washington.
Dr Bamburg, who has become BP's in-house historian since the first volume in
this series was published in 1982, grants Fraser a somewhat better press
than in some other accounts - although he agrees that the company 'could ill
afford any shortcomings' in the area of international relations and links
with government in a period of such acute political turbulence. Against this
he suggests that, as Cadman's managing director, Fraser was responsible for
running and developing the business whilst Cadman politicked at full
throttle.
Fraser also shared with Cadman a commitment to technological advance and to
financial caution, the latter of which has not always been a quality typical
of the oil industry, or even of British Petroleum.
Among the managerial lessons of a story told here with abundant detail but
insufficient colour, narrative drive and thematic focus, is that a good
managing director does not necessarily make the right chairman and that a
top executive who attains great heights at an early age needs to be watched,
lest he be content for an undemanding board to grow old with him. There was,
the author notes, 'a creeping movement towards gerontocracy.'
It is also evident that from its earliest days, Anglo-Iranian's top
management failed to delegate clearly to those nominally running its crucial
Persian activities. Perhaps this was a function of the company's excessively
narrow focus on production and refining in Iran. That can only be partly
excused by the political pressure it felt from Teheran to pump up oil
volumes and revenues in a period which, like the present, was characterised
by global over-supply and abortive attempts to erect pricing and marketing
cartels.
This failure in strategic thinking in the pre-war years was thus reinforced
by an unsatisfactory managerial structure and perhaps reflected also in a
lack of invention and drive on the marketing side of BP, where executives
tended to look for the nearest shared distribution deal, rather than
attacking the market with determination and originality.
Meanwhile, BP's handsomely profitable business created few incentives to
attack the bureaucracy which was spreading its tentacles in London. Some
will find the most enjoyable page in this book a memorandum from an external
consultant, on the daily pattern within one 'grossly overstaffed' section of
the company.
At 3.15 pm, this report noted, 'again an air of relaxation became apparent
as tea and cake were expected. After tea there was a general feeling that
the back of the day's work was broken and clerks felt themselves at liberty
to read, crochet, make out menu cards, draw or gossip.' Subsequent reforms,
the author writes, 'had little impact on the overall shape of the managerial
structure.'
The drama of nationalisation, however, like all corporate crises, brought
its benefits. Anglo was forced to look beyond Iran for supplies and to
broaden its planning horizon. By the time the plaque was changed in Finsbury
Circus, British Petroleum was a much-changed company, although its struggle
for regional balance and a more flexible culture has continued to the
present day.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940315

