FT943-12830

FT  22 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Car safety fears behind First Technology
advance


   By ANDREW BOLGER


Mounting concern over vehicle safety helped First Technology, which supplies
sensors and crash dummies to the car industry, sharply increase
profitability.
Pre-tax profits jumped by 76 per cent to Pounds 4.1m in the year to April
30. Sales were 31 per cent higher at Pounds 34m, with overseas sales
accounting for 89 per cent of the total.
The shares rose 14p to 319p.
The automotive electronics division, which accounts for 75 per cent of
profits and turnover, benefited from strong car sales in America and the
rapid growth of new business in Europe. Sales were up 43 per cent.
The group said its fuel cut-off sensors were being fitted by Fiat,
Peugeot/Citroen and one other unnamed manufacturer, which together could
eventually add up to a total of 5m vehicles a year.
The safety and crash division, which supplies dummies to manufacturers,
increased profits on only marginally-increased sales. The group said the
current year had started well. New product launches included child dummies
and a pregnant woman.
First Technology said that in North America and certain parts of Europe,
including the UK, key economic indicators looked good for the medium term.
In most markets, the economic position was finely poised between recession
and the first signs of recovery.
Mr Fred Westlake, chairman, said: 'Overall, we believe the outlook is more
encouraging than it has been for a considerable period of time.'
He said the group was interested in developing its sensor business in Japan
 -probably through a joint venture or licensing arrangement with a local
manufacturer.
Earnings per share increased by 61 per cent to 17.33p (10.75p). A final
dividend of 2.5p makes a total for the year of 3.5p (1p).
COMMENT
Car safety trends seem to be going First Technology's way, and an increasing
number of European manufacturers are joining the US leaders in fitting the
group's fuel cut-off sensor to their vehicles. The fall in gearing from 52
per cent to 19 per cent means the group can even consider making
acquisitions again, although only closely related business would be
considered. A more immediate prospect is expansion through a joint venture
in Japan, where the group currently has no exposure. Forecast profits of
Pounds 4.7m put the shares on a prospective multiple of 16 - in line with
the sector. Given the orders outlook, they look good value - and the group's
niche market position could also make it an attractive acquisition target.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940722

