FT941-16852

FT  07 JAN 94 / Judgment and handling other people's money / A look at JP
Morgan's involvement with Banesto


   By JOHN GAPPER and PETER BRUCE


Six days before the Bank of Spain imposed a new management on Banco Espanol
de Credito (Banesto), it was told of an alternative. An audacious plan had
been devised by executives of JP Morgan, the US bank, led by Mr Roberto
Mendoza, a Morgan vice-chairman. It was a last attempt to save Spain's
fourth-biggest bank and its chairman Mr Mario Conde, from a gathering
crisis.
The plan involved writing down Pta265bn (Pounds 1.25bn) of Banesto's
deteriorating assets in a 'big bang' that would wipe out more than half its
capital of Pta412bn, and leave it Dollars 725m short of the central bank's
minimum level of capital that banks must hold against assets. Banesto would
compensate by issuing more capital and selling half its holding in a
Portuguese bank.
Mr Luis Angel Rojo, the Bank of Spain's governor, was not convinced. On
December 28, after Banesto's shares had been suspended by the stock exchange
commission amid rumours of intervention, he acted. By sacking the board on
which both Mr Conde and Mr Mendoza sat, he detonated a controversy which has
now raged for a week around both Banesto and Morgan.
Morgan's involvement with Banesto since 1987 has turned into one of the
stiffest tests of its attempt to broaden from its roots as a pure commercial
bank by providing a range of services, backed by its own capital, to its
corporate clients. The US bank appears to have demonstrated loyalty to one
of its clients in the toughest times, but has it shown good judgment?
An even tougher question is whether it acted wisely in backing one of its
clients with the capital of others. Morgan both advised Banesto and made it
the first investment for its Dollars 1.1bn Corsair fund, 90 per cent of
which is held by other US investors. When Banesto issued Dollars 775m of
shares on Morgan's advice last summer, the US bank bought Dollars 175m of
them through Corsair.
The Bank of Spain's action raises the possibility that Morgan made two
misjudgments in its original assessment of Banesto. First, it may have
underestimated the seriousness of the Spanish bank's condition. Second, it
may have misjudged the political risk it was running in allying itself with
a bank that had a history of poor relations with the central bank.
The fact that Banesto was in a poor financial condition at the time of the
intervention last Tuesday is not in itself evidence of a Morgan misjudgment.
It was precisely because Banesto was a weak bank and its shares were trading
well below the level of other Spanish banks that it represented a chance for
Corsair to make strong capital gains as it recovered.
Morgan's original plan for Banesto was straightforward. It intended to raise
fresh capital of Dollars 1.1bn to restore Banesto's capital ratios to the
high level common among Spanish banks. This would allow it to absorb
problems with loans that grew over-rapidly between 1988 and 1991. It would
gradually sell its holdings in industrial companies, boosting capital
further.
But by last autumn, it was becoming clear that Banesto's problems were
bigger than Morgan had acknowledged. As Bank of Spain inspectors and
Morgan's executives dug into Banesto's loans and equity holdings, they
discovered an over-valuation of assets - put by the central bank at Pta503bn
and by Morgan at Pta372bn. The scale of the problem forced Morgan to
rethink.
Morgan's solution reversed a key plank of the original plan. Rather than
Banesto trying to absorb losses gradually while sustaining its capital,
Morgan decided that it should mimic the US banks which deliberately and
aggressively wrote down their less-developed country debt exposures in the
late-1980s to restore investor confidence in their earnings potential.
The fact that Morgan switched its plan for Banesto indicates some degree of
miscalculation in its first assessment of the bank. Yet Morgan could argue
that the miscalculation was not so large that Banesto was inevitably doomed.
After all, it had predicted some fall in asset quality throughout 1993 and
into the first half of 1994 in last summer's offer document.
Given another management and another central bank, the plan might have been
accepted. Even after the write-down, Banesto would have complied with
international capital adequacy standards, which are less demanding than the
Bank of Spain's. But in practice, this was irrelevant. Banesto was not only
supervised in Spain, but had a history of disputes with the central bank.
Should Morgan have rated the risk of a clash with the Bank of Spain to be
unacceptably high? There was clearly some risk, given Mr Conde's habit of
defying Mr Mariano Rubio, the former governor. Although the central bank has
indicated that Banesto may yet be restructured in quite a similar manner to
Morgan's plan, it did not trust Mr Conde to implement it.
All is not lost for Morgan, even if it did misjudge the risks. It intends to
maintain the Corsair stake in Banesto for five years, by which time
Banesto's shares could have achieved the capital gains the US bank
originally foresaw. This is a distant hope, given the likelihood that
Corsair's holding will be diluted in a restructuring, but it is not
impossible.
If Banesto's new management achieves this, Morgan as a shareholder may come
to be grateful for the Bank of Spain's actions. At the least, the central
bank has already neatly eliminated any potential conflict of interest
between Morgan's corporate finance client, Banesto's former management, and
its other set of clients, the US investors whose money it placed in Banesto.
The question of whether Morgan can comfortably combine such roles in the
future may be the enduring legacy of Banesto for the US bank. As long as it
only commits its own capital to clients, the potential for tension is
limited. But events in Madrid in the past week show the controversy it can
provoke by backing one client with the capital of others.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940107

