FT942-15378

FT  15 APR 94 / Leading Article: Sizing up the watchdogs


The inherent conflict between the interests of shareholders and consumers in
privatised utilities makes it inevitable that there will be a continual
debate about regulation. It is, at present in Britain, a rather noisier
debate than usual. Not only have some utilities been calling for a radical
overhaul of the regulatory regime; two leading institutional investors,
Prudential and Barclays de Zoete Wedd Investment Management, are pressing
water companies to appeal to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission if their
regulator's new price limits turn out to be tough. Sir Bryan Carsberg,
director-general of fair trading, has now stepped in with a warning against
over-ambitious reform of the system. On the whole, Sir Bryan has the better
arguments.
While shareholders and consumers have both done well out of the utilities
since privatisation, it is the shareholders who have had the better deal.
The government was insufficiently ambitious, early on, in introducing
competition into hitherto monopolistic industries; pricing formulas did not
take into account the full scope for efficiency gains. Now that the pricing
arrangements have been tightened and increased competition brought to bear,
both management and investors feel uncomfortable. That is precisely what
ought to be happening. There is no reason why customers should, in the words
of Mr Ian Byatt of Ofwat, find themselves on 'an endless price escalator'.
Nor should the utilities be an engine of inflation in the wider economy.
Regulatory improvement
That is not to say that there is no room for regulatory improvement. The
regulators have frequently been accused of a lack of openness in their
deliberations over the industries' affairs. That, admittedly, could not be
said of Mr Byatt in his protracted and well publicised review of prices.
Indeed institutional investors would not be in a position to question his
methodology if it had been otherwise. But there remains a wider question
about formalising procedures for disclosure and scrutiny of the regulatory
process.
Mr John Baker, chief executive of National Power, has argued in the
Financial Times for a clearer definition of the role and objectives of
regulation, together with a quick appeals procedure to an ad hoc panel of
the MMC. He and others have called for the replacement of a single regulator
with a tribunal of between three and five members, along with the creation
of a single joint utilities regulator and a monitoring process to measure
regulatory performance against goals.
Greater transparency
It is hard to disagree with those proposals that call for transparency. In
capital-intensive industries with long investment pay-back periods there is
a premium on predictability and the reduction of regulatory risk. Whether
wider upheavals are called for is the more contentious issue.
In practice the supposed 'cult of personality' among the watchdogs, which
was probably necessary in the early days of privatisation when powerful
industrial barons were reluctant to submit to a new regulatory regime, is on
the wane. It is not obvious that there would be great synergy in combining
the regulation of industries as different as telecommunications and water. A
fruitful dialogue between the regulators already exists; and there is a risk
that an element of competition between different watchdogs, a benefit of
present diversity, would be lost.
Moreover, an all-powerful, high-profile regulatory giant might be more
susceptible to political pressure than the present plurality of watchdogs.
The same worry would arise with tribunals if their membership was open to
the representatives of specific interests. A fast-track appeals procedure to
the MMC has more appeal. But the danger here might be that the present
trench warfare between conflicting interests would become institutionalised
in a destructive fashion.
On balance the present system has worked surprisingly well, avoiding the
standard pitfalls of regulatory capture and excessive legalism of the kind
that dogs US utilities regulation. A steady evolution thus looks more
desirable at this stage than a radical overhaul. But the legitimacy of the
evolutionary approach would be enhanced by a regular review of the
regulatory process. The Office of Fair Trading is the appropriate body for
this task.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940415

