FT941-12926

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (13): Small firms air their woes - Rod McNeill
talks to small and medium-size exporters who complain of slow or inadequate
backing from their banks, and to banks who view the matter differently, but
say that changes are afoot / Bank watch / United Kingdom


   By ROD MCNEILL


Small and medium-sized UK companies looking to boost exports point to
continuing obstacles and hidden costs in securing assistance from banks.
John Sweet, chairman of Semitron Industries, a Swindon-based manufacturer of
semiconductors looking to step up exports to the Far East and Europe, says
'on the whole, the banks have not been terribly interested'.
He adds: 'It took us five weeks to get clearance on (a factored) account in
Italy - the customer was one of the biggest telecommunications companies in
Italy. While you are waiting, the product is sitting on the shelf waiting to
be shipped.'
For Mr Sweet, the banks do not help ease small companies' concerns over
international payments. 'We are spending so much time as the business
expands chasing around making sure we get paid.'
Sonix, Cirencester-based designer and manufacturer of data communications
equipment formed 18 months ago with venture capital backing from Schroders
and Boston-based Greylock Management, illustrates the challenges facing even
successful start-up ventures.
The company, which expects sales of Pounds 5m for the year to March 1994, a
10-fold increase on first year sales, is about to launch an aggressive
export campaign across western Europe which it hopes will boost sales to
Pounds 9m by March, 1995.
Bob Jones, founder and managing director, highlights several difficulties
with the banks: 'We look for normal banking facilities, such as money
transfer and cheque clearance. But obviously we look for a lot more.
However, the banks are indifferent towards exporting.'
He adds: 'The banks look for the ultimate in security these days. They are
very good up to the point where they actually have to take risks.'
Factoring invoices is often the only route for start-up companies looking
for flexible funding, but there are hidden costs. 'Inevitably, because of
the hassle factor, companies do not apply themselves with the same vigour to
collecting international debt as they do in the UK', believes Mr Jones.
Furthermore, some factoring companies reduce the amount companies can draw
down against factored international debts unless the debts are covered by
export credit insurance.
According to Mr Jones: 'If we factor a foreign invoice, the factoring
company insists that we insure it through export credit insurance - so there
is an extra cost and penalty to us. So the factoring company is almost
admitting that it is going to have problems collecting the debt.
'Not only are we not being encouraged to export but we are also being
hindered by factoring companies making it more difficult for us to export.'
On the question of export credit insurance, the director of one factoring
company comments: 'It is not in our nature to insist. We recommend they do
insure open-account debt, that is, exports without the backing of letters of
credit or bank guarantees.'
Meanwhile, UK banks scored poorly in a recently completed survey by Coopers
and Lybrand. Roger White, one of the leaders of the survey team, says: 'The
two big issues companies face are late payments and export credit insurance,
which is expensive and hard to get, but assistance to exporters is still a
problem and nobody seems to come out particularly well, including the banks.
'It is hard work for small and medium-sized enterprises and there is a major
opportunity for the banks to help those businesses, but at the moment they
do not seem to be very forthcoming.'
The banks refute such criticisms yet admit that changes are afoot. Kevin
Jennings, NatWest's Director of Commercial Banking Services, says: 'If there
is a credible business plan, the finance is there in various formats. We
have no doubt that many more of our customers could get their products into
overseas markets.
'In fact, in 1994 we shall be approaching all commercial customers -
especially our medium-sized businesses - with a checklist of key criteria to
help them consider whether they could and should start to export their
products.'

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940127

