FT941-3489

FT  16 MAR 94 / Manx VAT is cut to boost tourism


   By SUE STUART


Value added tax is to be cut on some tourism-related services in the Isle of
Man in a bid to boost the industry, Mr Donald Gelling, the Manx Treasury
minister, said yesterday.
Presenting the island's 1994 budget, Mr Gelling also announced a six-month
penalty and interest remission scheme from April 6 for those with income tax
and VAT liabilities relating to income omitted or understated in
declarations since April 1987.
The treasury hopes the amnesty, designed to enable people and companies to
regularise their liabilities without incurring penalties or interest
charges, will produce several million pounds of estimated outstanding tax
debts.
Mr Gelling insisted that the lower VAT rate, levied after negotiations with
the UK, would not apply to goods that could be exported to the UK mainland.
The Manx treasury is believed to be considering levying the lower rate on
hotel accommodation and restaurant meals.
The Isle of Man, a Crown dependency with its own parliament, the Tynwald,
has a customs and excise agreement with the UK under which VAT is levied at
the same rates and on the same items as in the UK. The amount raised is
passed to the UK and the Isle of Man receives a rebate calculated on its
population.
Mr Gelling said yesterday: 'I have been able to agree (with the UK) a degree
of flexibility on some tourist-related non-exportable services. Our
objective is to ensure that this hard-won flexibility is best used to
stimulate economic activity and growth.'
He said he hoped to finalise details before the end of the summer to allow
the island's flagging tourist industry time to prepare adjusted price levels
for next year.
Mr Gelling said the recession on the island had bottomed out. 'Company and
VAT registrations are up and there is increased economic activity.'
Net expenditure for the coming year is estimated at Pounds 200.5m, to be
balanced by income of Pounds 193.7m and Pounds 7.66m of unspent capital
brought forward from last year. This year's capital expenditure programme is
Pounds 42.61m, and the island's reserve fund will be maintained at Pounds
66.51m.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940316

