FT942-16011

FT  12 APR 94 / World Trade News: China 'must move further on rights'


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


A senior US commerce department official yesterday said China would have to
improve its human rights record further if President Bill Clinton was to
renew its Most Favoured Nation trade status in June.
China had made 'slow but discernible progress' in some areas, said Mr
Jeffrey Garten, undersecretary for international trade, but the
administration was 'deeply troubled' by the recent arrests of Chinese
citizens.
MFN status for China allows its goods the same tariff treatment as other US
trading partners. Loss of MFN would be a big blow to both economies.
Mr Garten was speaking at a US-China trade and investment conference in Los
Angeles, attended by by Ms Wu Yi, China's minister for trade and economic
co-operation.
He welcomed as 'positive' a statement on the universal declaration of human
rights, delivered by the Chinese foreign minister on April 6. Honouring the
declaration is one of the seven criteria set out as a basis for MFN renewal
by Mr Clinton last year.
However, said Mr Garten, actions like the recent detentions and arrests of
Chinese activists 'cast a cloud over our efforts to further co-operation
between our two countries'.
Mr Garten has been gaining a reputation as a thoughtful trade policy
theorist. But he has been criticised for his enthusiastic embrace of
US-China commercial relations as part of the department's aggressive export
promotion policy. Critics say this has sent 'mixed messages' to Beijing.
Yesterday, Mr Garten offered assurances that the US did not seek to infringe
China's sovereignty and three times stressed to a government obsessed by
stability that co-operation would lead to 'stable and prosperous' China.
'Our combined business skills and industriousness can create a powerful
engine for economic growth,' he said. 'The potential benefits to both our
countries in improving trade relations will be felt not only in commercial
terms and economic security, but more broadly in a secure and stable
Asian-Pacific region.'
The US asked only for adherence to universally recognised human rights
standards, which would provide 'a more stable and attractive climate for
trade and investment'.
Administration officials have recently indicated that there would be little
problem in certifying progress on two of the most pressing criteria:
emigration and prison labour.
The US wants more information on political prisoners, and the round-up of
dissidents is seen as a setback. There has been no improvement of conditions
in Tibet, but China has promised to provide information on 106 Tibetan
prisoners.
US officials have also suggested that China's co-operation on MFN this year
may bring an end to the annual renewal process. Mr Winston Lord, assistant
secretary of state, said the administration hoped for a 'normal process' in
the years ahead, ending the annual debate which has divided the Congress
since the Tiananmen uprising.
At present, China, as a non-market economy, must have its tariff status
renewed by the president or it will expire on July 3. Congress has until
September 1 to pass a joint resolution overruling the president, but he can
veto that and it takes two-thirds of the House and Senate to override him.

The Financial Times


International Page 5

940412

