FT943-12753

FT  23 JUL 94 / Japanese spending soars in line with the heat


   By GERARD BAKER


   TOKYO


Across Japan, Asahi breweries have moved to 24-hour production. Sales of
swimsuits at Tokyo's main department stores are up by 50 per cent on a year
ago. In the capital's electrical goods district, Akihabara, Tokyo residents
are buying air conditioners faster than shopowners can stock them.
The heat wave could not have come at a better time for Japan's economy. Just
as the rising yen looked as if it might choke off the recovery, soaring
temperatures have come to the rescue.
'Everything's selling,' says Toshiba, the electrical goods group. 'From our
latest high-tech orange-crusher to the home-made yoghurt maker - all thanks
to the weather. People have even got a name for it - the divine wind.'
Average daily temperatures were 3.6` Celsius higher than normal in the first
20 days of July. Last week in Kyushu, the temperature hit 39.6`C, the
highest since 1979. Since last summer was a damp squib, this year's heat
prefigures a strong recovery in personal consumption.
A summer-long increase of 2.4`C in the average daily temperature raises
consumption by Y500bn (Pounds 3bn), or 0.7 per cent, according to the
Yamaichi Research Institute. Applying the equation to current conditions
suggests a boost to spending this year of 0.3 per cent. Tax cuts - which
come into effect this month - are also lifting demand.
Sales of beer have soared along with the mercury. Every 1`C increase in
temperature pushes up daily beer consumption by about 900,000 bottles, or
2-3 per cent, according to one brewer. Asahi, the country's second largest
brewer, said a 50 per cent increase in sales had forced it to move to
around-the-clock production at six of its eight breweries.
Less intoxicating means of staying cool are also enjoying a bumper season.
Best Denki, the largest mass retailer of consumer electronics, said sales of
air conditioners were at record levels. On the hottest day so far, July 3,
it sold eight times as many as a year previously. Toshiba reported air
conditioner sales up 315 per cent.
Department stores, hammered by 22 consecutive months of falling sales, sense
revival with the soaring temperatures. Sales of swimsuits, hats and other
hot-weather attire are up by 30 to 50 per cent at the Takashimaya chain.
The warm weather has also come just at the right time for the country's rice
crop, according to a survey published yesterday. Bumper crops are expected
for the first time for four years - 10 per cent higher than average.
Fears of summer violence in Paris, Page 2
Seeking to allay Seoul's fears, Page 3

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940723

