FT941-3311

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (21): A
better way to manage contracts - A simple document image processing system
installed by the pharmaceuticals company Medeva looks set for wider use
following quick installation and enthusiastic reports from staff


   By JOHN KAVANAGH


Medeva, the UK pharmaceutical manufacturer, has installed Archis software
from Belgian company Softcore to manage images of contracts, typically with
other manufacturers, licensees and distributors.
Medeva has installed a network of five Apple Macintosh computers at its
offices in Leatherhead, Surrey, partly to run Archis and partly to support
office automation such as word processing, spreadsheet processing and links
to the company's electronic mail system.
The entire stock of 930 agreements, running to 18,000 pages, has been
entered and all new agreements are scanned in immediately.
The paper contracts have always been kept in fire-proof cabinets and a list
was maintained through a simple database system based on the Dbase III
product.
People working on particular agreements would consult the holder of the
list, intellectual property co-ordinator Gail Beale, to see if there were
any other relevant documents, and then hunt them out in the filing cabinets.
All the documents are now on-line to all staff in the department.
'It could take hours to get through these steps and find files, especially
if you wanted, say, all the agreements relating to a particular company,'
says Mr Peter Cozens, head of licensing and product acquisition.
'The files were just stored in chronological order. We can now search on
many criteria, such as company name and therapeutic area, so we can easily
find the history of agreements in a particular field.
'The system has improved the information we have available and our ability
to respond to different situations.'
It took Gail Beale three months to scan-in all the documents and assign
keywords to each one. She and Peter Cozens agree that the system is very
easy to use. A 'find' screen is presented when a user logs-in and a search
is generated by entering the keywords.
Access is being extended to the company secretary's office in London and the
system has attracted the interest of other departments.
'We could turn out to be a pilot for the whole company in document image
processing,' says Gail Beale. 'It's a very impressive system and I could see
other parts of the company getting considerable benefits.'
Software details:
Archis, a document file management package combining document images, video
and data and text files from other systems. The latest version, 2.0, was
launched in September 1993. Price: Pounds 995.
Supplier: Softcore, the Belgian developer, formed in 1988. The UK subsidiary
was formed in Uxbridge, Middlesex, in 1992. It has 47 staff, including five
in the UK. Turnover in 1993 was Pounds 1.5m. Number of users: more than 200,
including more than 50 in the UK.
Hardware and operating systems: Apple Macintosh central processor; Macintosh
workstations or IBM-type PCs running Windows.
Advances in the electronic office: see page 5
For details of forthcoming FT surveys relating to information technology,
see details on page 12.
An in-depth review of office automation appeared in the latest issue of
'Software At Work,' the FT's review of business software, published on
Thursday, March 10.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940316

