FT944-14489

FT  22 OCT 94 / Markets Report: Dollar troubles


   By PHILIP GAWITH


The dollar traded nervously yesterday after touching overnight lows in Asian
trading against the D-Mark and the yen, writes Philip Gawith.
Market sentiment towards the US currency remains predominantly negative, but
traders are reluctant to sell the currency aggressively for fear of being
caught out by central bank intervention.
After touching lows of Y96.50 and DM1.4880, the dollar recovered to finish
in London at Y96.995 and DM1.4954.
Elsewhere, the star performer on the exchanges was the Swedish krona, which
finished at SKr4.758 against the D-Mark, after touching SKr4.7330, from
SKr4.774. It was boosted by another referendum poll showing increased
support for EU membership, and hedging strategies adopted by Swedish
exporters, whose dollar receivables are being hit by the falling US
currency.
Sterling was also slightly firmer on the exchanges. The trade weighted index
finished at 80.4 from 80.2. Against the D-Mark, sterling closed at DM2.4345,
from DM2.4325. Against the dollar it closed at Dollars 1.628 from Dollars
1.62.
Despite the dollar being near record lows, traders reported fairly low
volumes. There were indications, however, that longer-term investors were
starting to re-think their attitude to the currency. Recent weakness has
been mostly caused by short term traders.
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Citibank in London, said that its
volume analysis showed increased dollar selling. He said medium to long term
investors were getting very nervous about the dollar, especially against the
yen. He said Citibank's client base was underweight in the yen, and probably
neutral in terms of its D-Mark holdings.
One corollary of this is that central bank support for the dollar would be
unlikely to succeed, because the market is wrongly positioned.
Mr Mike Rosenberg, managing director of international fixed income research
at Merrill Lynch in New York, cautioned against dramatising the dollar's
plight. 'This is not a free fall, it is a gradual move down,' he said.
Mr Rosenberg said he doubted whether long-term investors would be making
significant alterations in their currency exposure. '1994 has been a
difficult year, and people are not going to be putting on big positions
now,' he said.
The dollar gained some support from Mr Larry Summers, US Treasury
undersecretary, who said the administration favoured a stronger dollar. In
an effort to undo the damage done on Thursday evening, when treasury
secretary Mr Lloyd Bentsen's comments, that the administration would not
intervene to support the dollar, drove it to record lows, he denied there
had been a shift in the US's dollar policy.
Mr Summers said the administration would, when appropriate, be prepared to
intervene in the currency markets.
In its daily operations the Bank of England provided UK money markets with
Pounds 1.325bn assistance, after forecasting a Pounds 1.3bn shortage.
Overnight money traded between 3 3/4 and 5 per cent.
Three month LIBOR was unchanged at 5 15/16 per cent. In the futures markets
the March short sterling contract closed at 92.68 from 92.71.
In Germany, futures lost ground across the board after news that M3 money
supply had grown at an annualised 7.7 per cent in September, above market
forecasts of 6.9-7.5 per cent. This dampened hopes of another cut in German
interest rates.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

941022

