FT941-4050

FT  12 MAR 94 / Food and Drink: Let's hear it for older generations - Wine


   By EDMUND PENNING-ROWSELL


Wines, like policemen, seem to be younger these days. But at least there are
more of the former, and at prices so temptingly cheap that 85 per cent of
bottles sold in the UK cost less than Pounds 3.50.
A wine costing Pounds 10 and above looks decidedly more expensive than it
did, even taking inflation into account. This raises the question: is it
worth buying wines that require time - sometimes a long time - to develop
their special qualities.
This question currently occupies the minds of growers, especially in France,
which produces some of the best wines but relies on a global market. Are
they worth their prices and time - Bordeaux's classed and peer growths, the
red and white grand and premier crus of burgundies, the richer Rhones and
Alsace.
The answer must be subjective, for such fine wines can no more be judged
objectively - on the basis of what the French call qualite prix and the
British value for money - than can a delicious but expensive restaurant meal
or the cost of fashionable clothes. It is mainly a matter of resources - and
how best to spend those available.
Yet, there is a strong case for acquiring fine wines. They have individual
characteristics, seductive bouquets and distinctive flavours, dry or sweet.
There is great variety, and they provide agreeable opportunities for
comparison that can transform a meal.
The cost range is wide, and it is not necessary to pay huge prices to enjoy
them. They call for companions to share them, discuss and even argue about
them. To open such wines on your own is a sad waste.
En primeur and 'futures' marketing has been suspended, at least temporarily,
particularly for clarets, and this is no bad thing. Partly because of
inflation and recession, but also because of misjudgment of a volatile
market, about the only recent claret vintage that could be re-sold
profitably - and that only with careful timing - was 1982.
But these upper-class wines must be bought early for keeping, including the
finer white burgundies and Moselles and Rhines. Times are past when top
growers and merchants could afford to hold stock over many years. Interest
rates are now too high, and capital available must be employed for the next
vintage to be bought.
There is a good case for buying such wines as soon as they are available in
bottle from your preferred retail merchant, which has made its own
selection, at various price levels. If possible, they should be marketed in
six-bottle lots as well as cases.
Of course, older vintages may be bought at auction; but although the
salerooms do their best to ensure the wines offered are in good condition,
you cannot always be sure. Moreover, the particular wines you want may not
be all that easy to come by - indeed, if German or Alsace, almost
impossible.
There are those who ask why, with modern techniques, development of these
fine wines cannot be speeded up. Do we have to wait up to 10 years before
opening a classed- growth claret, and not much less for a superior red
burgundy? The answers mostly are no and yes respectively. Most wines, even
the lesser varieties, are drunk too young. That goes for good champagne too.
One impediment to keeping wine over a period is lack of suitable domestic
accommodation. It should be held in dark, vibration-free conditions with
equable temperatures. Generally, the risk is heat rather than cold, which at
worst may slightly delay maturation. However, most private merchants, who
sell the kinds of wines discussed here, provide temperature-controlled
reserves, currently at a rent of about Pounds 4 to Pounds 5 a year,
including VAT. But, as Jancis Robinson pointed out in a recent article,
guaranteed individual identification must be assured.
Those who take special pleasure in drinking fine, probably at least
relatively expensive, wines - though quality does not always go with price -
may be accused of wine-snobbery. No doubt this exists, but for most
enthusiasts it is a collecting hobby, and one to be shared with others.
Wine drinking like this is an innocent pleasure. The best ratio of drinkers
per bottle, in my view, is four, and the maximum six, for enough should be
available for glasses to be refreshed. Often a wine may develop in the
glass.
Provided that there are no post-prandial car drivers present, such rationing
at a leisurely meal may allow three or four different wines, properly of
ascending quality and age, from the same region, to find their way on to the
table.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940312

