FT942-14872

FT  19 APR 94 / Rate rise hits US bonds and shares: Markets surprised as Fed
signals fresh increase in short-term interest levels


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve, surprised financial
markets yesterday by signalling another rise in short-term interest rates in
an effort to prevent rapid economic growth fuelling inflation.
The quarter-point increase in short-term rates to 3.75 per cent prompted
sharp falls in bond and share prices. Late in the afternoon, the benchmark
long bond had plunged nearly 1 1/2 points, pushing the yield to 7.41 per
cent.
Share prices followed the pattern set by bonds, as they have in the wake of
previous rate rises. The Dow Jones Industrial Average finished 41.05 lower
at 3,620.42, as declining issues overwhelmed advances by an eight-to-three
margin.
The rate increase, the third since the Fed began to tighten monetary policy
on February 4, came sooner than expected. On Wall Street most analysts had
been confident the Fed would not move again until May 17 when its
policy-making open market committee is due to meet.
Mr Greenspan, however, may have decided to take advantage of political cover
extended by Mr Lloyd Bentsen, Treasury secretary, who said at the weekend
that he expected short-term rates to rise by another half-point before the
end of the year.
Senior Clinton administration officials believe there is little or no risk
of a significant increase in inflation but, so far, have opted not to force
an overt confrontation with the Fed.
Ms Laura Tyson, chief White House economist, yesterday reiterated her
support for Fed independence, but argued that short-term rates were rising
in response to faster economic growth rather than expectations of higher
inflation.
The Fed believes rate increases are necessary to re-establish a 'neutral'
monetary policy after a period of deliberate stimulus during the credit
crunch of the early 1990s.
Yesterday's move reflected continuing concern at the Fed that the economy is
expanding at a rate well in excess of its long-run potential rate of growth.
Recent figures have pointed to economic growth at an annual rate of 4-5 per
cent in the current quarter, if not higher. If growth is not checked,
officials fear the economy could hit capacity constraints, putting upward
pressure on inflation.
The quarter-point increase in rates, although intended to bolster the Fed's
anti-inflation credentials, was seen as only an interim measure. Most
analysts expect the Fed to raise rates by another quarter-point at the May
17 meeting. Further rate increases are likely during the summer if economic
growth shows no signs of subsiding.
'The bond market is facing a black hole,' said Mr Robert Giordano, chief
economist at Gold man Sachs in New York. He said bond prices would stabilise
only if there was clear evidence of an economic slowdown or if short rates
were significantly higher. Neither was likely in the next two to three
months.
European government bond markets also tumbled in the wake of the rate rise,
with bond futures prices dropping between 1 and 2 points on the day.
The markets had opened in a sombre mood, digesting the small, rather
disappointing cut in German interest rates from last week.
However, the dollar rose more than a pfennig on the Fed announcement to a
high of DM1.7220, but then fell back slightly to close in London at
DM1.7202. Against the yen it was slightly weaker at Y103.625 from Y103.645
at Friday's close.
Greenspan's early hand, Page 3; Editorial Comment, Page 17; Lex, Page 18;
Government bonds, Page 27; World bourses, Page 39; London market report,
Page 42

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940419

