FT942-12638

FT  28 APR 94 / International Company News: Zenith Data aims to break even
to aid privatisation of Bull


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


Zenith Data Systems, the loss-making microcomputer subsidiary of Groupe
Bull, the French state-owned computing group, expects a strong increase in
sales this year and aims to break even at the operating level, Mr Jacques
Noels, chief executive, said yesterday.
An improved financial performance at ZDS is seen as an important element of
plans to privatise Groupe Bull.
The French company is currently negotiating with industry partners which
could take stakes in the group as part of the government's plans to reduce
its 73 per cent holding.
Mr Noels said that sales should rise by about 30 per cent to Dollars 1.3bn
this year, following a strong first-quarter performance in which turnover
grew by 73 per cent over the same period in 1993. The strong growth
contributed to a 21 per cent increase in sales in the parent company, to
FFr6.2bn (Dollars 1.06bn), in the first quarter of 1994.
According to Mr Noels, the improved sales performance reflected recovery in
the US market, where ZDS is based, improved consumer demand for portable
computers and the benefits of its strategic relationship with Packard Bell
of the US.
Last June, ZDS took a 20 per cent stake in Packard Bell and agreed to supply
note-book and sub-notebook computers to its partner. In return, ZDS gained
access to Packard Bell's marketing and distribution network, which includes
7,000 outlets in the US market.
The ZDS chairman said that he hoped the company would return to profit at an
operating level this year, with profits at the net level targeted for 1995.
He said that cost-cutting measures, including a reduction in the workforce
from about 1,700 to 1,500 by the end of the year, would help achieve this
objective.
Mr Noels declined to specify the results achieved by ZDS last year, but it
is thought to have been a big contributor to Groupe Bull's FFr5.07bn loss.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940428

