FT942-16317

FT  11 APR 94 / International Company News: Ford Motor chief senses a sea
change - John Griffiths examines the group's attempt to become a truly
global force


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


In less than a fortnight Ford Motor's chairman, Mr Alex Trotman, and his
most senior colleagues will be assembling in Toronto to take stock of Ford's
accelerating drive to become a truly global company - and the restructuring
needed to achieve it.
Even at the opening of the New York motor show at the end of last week, Mr
Trotman was playing down mounting media speculation that major management
and other organisational upheavals were imminent as an integral part of that
drive.
But even though the Toronto meeting is unlikely to result in dramatic
headlines - as in the case of the boardroom coup at General Motors, which
saw the ousting of former chairman Robert Stempel - Mr Trotman makes clear
Ford is undergoing a sea-change which will dramatically alter the nature of
its operations by the end of the decade.
'If you're expecting something fantastic to happen at Toronto you'll be
wasting a lot of air fares coming,' Mr Trotman hinted to the pressmen in New
York. 'It's a closed-door management meeting where traditionally we discuss
our problems, such as who's not performing properly. What we call a woodshed
meeting.'
Nevertheless, he admits that part of the speculation has been caused by
'leaks' from study teams, which, he acknowledges 'we've been working on for
quite some while now on how to improve effectiveness - and yes, some of this
we may discuss at the Toronto meeting'.
Mr Trotman was in New York formally to launch the Contour, the North
American version of what Ford intends to be its first 'world' car, after the
failure of an earlier programme to create a Ford Escort 'world car' at the
beginning of the 1980s.
The Contour's European counterpart, the Mondeo, has been on sale for a year.
Ford has spent Dollars 6bn on the project. Much of this is on production and
research and development which will stand it in good stead for future world
projects.
A second 'world' project is already under way, at least in the sense that
work is proceeding apace on the basic body platform on which the next new
range of cars will be built and which is code-named DEW98.
While Mr Trotman insists that 'no final decisions have been made', it is
this platform which is expected to provide the basis for an intended 'small'
Jaguar and a replacement for the Granada/Scorpio in Europe, as well as a new
mid-size range of cars for Ford's core North American market.
However, it was Mr Trotman's thoughts about how the next Ford Escort may be
developed which illustrates in most startling terms what Ford's concept of a
truly 'global' company means - and how it may extend even to making Mazda of
Japan, in which Ford has a 25 per cent stake, a core part of the strategy.
'The next generation (of the Ford Escort) might mean that we have one
development for Ford and Mazda worldwide,' says Mr Trotman.
Both the European Escort and the similarly named but separately developed
North American model will be updated between now and 1998, and these
modernisations do not form part of the global programme.' In that sense,
1998 is already history,' says Mr Trotman.
'But early into the next century it might be that if Ford developed a common
platform for the Escort for Ford and Mazda to use worldwide, it could free
up resources at Mazda to do other things. That's the whole strength of the
global approach. Traditionally Europe and North America would have designed
unique replacements.'
Ford's thinking, already far down the road of discussions with Mazda - where
Ford recently significantly strengthened its board presence - is that
European operations, with their small car expertise, would lead the
development of a truly global Escort, to be built for all markets by both
Ford and Mazda.
This would free not only North American Ford operations to develop
complementary 'world' models using their larger car expertise - but would
allow Mazda to concentrate on parallel development of other, possibly niche
products like minivans or multi-purpose vehicles.
'It would give the companies a broader product range - essentially more
firepower for the same number of battles,' says Mr Trotman. 'The new Escort
would be basically a Ford of Europe design. And while the European teams
were doing that, American teams would be creating a new Windstar van,
Explorer off-roader, new Taurus car . . . all sorts of things.'
Mr Trotman insists a decision on whether the small Jaguar will be built in
the US or Europe is still months away. However, he warned that the strong
British connotations of Jaguar may no longer count for much. 'But he
appeared to lay to rest fears that further substantial restructuring might
still await its European operations: 'Europe is performing well. We've got
through what had to be done; it's behind us and Europe is in a stable
condition now.'
He also flagged Ford's intention substantially to increase its manufacturing
presence in Asia, particularly Taiwan, China and Indian. He predicted that
sales in the region will triple in the next 15 years, worth 'several million
units' to the major motor makers.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940411

