FT942-12850

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (9): Maturity requires
lower risks - Asset-liability studies: balance becomes more critical


   By BARRY RILEY


Leading investment managers say that some 60 per cent of UK pension funds
are still setting peer group-related performance targets, such as beating
the median fund or staying in the second quartile of funds.
But trustees are becoming aware that, as their schemes become more mature,
it is increasingly less likely that an average or consensus strategy will be
entirely appropriate for their particular circumstances.
Last year, an industry-wide survey by the fund managers PDFM showed that 34
per cent of funds were being significantly influenced by asset-liability
modelling in setting their portfolio structure - up from 20 per cent in
1991.
Moreover the Goode committee's recommendation of a minimum solvency
standard, which is likely to be taken up and developed in a forthcoming
pensions white paper, with legislation to follow in 1995, has triggered a
furious debate within professional actuarial circles.
R. Watson, a leading firm of consulting actuaries, said last week that half
of its client schemes worth Pounds 100m or more would have failed to meet
the Goode 100 per cent standard in March 1993. At the most recent major
stock market trough in September 1990 two-thirds would have been below even
the critical 90 per cent level.
Mr Andrew Wilson, a Watson partner, says the figures illustrate 'the need
for schemes to consider increasing assets beyond the ongoing funding basis
established before the Goode Report, or change investment strategy to reduce
volatility.'
The recent decision of the British Rail pension scheme to allocate something
approaching Pounds 1bn to specialist bond portfolios is a sign of the change
of climate. Many big, well-established schemes, both in the public and
private sectors, are catering for much reduced current workforces, but still
have large numbers of pensioners - both in current payment and deferred - on
their books.
For such schemes, the liabilities to pay benefits are no longer primarily
stretched into the distant future but are bunched in the next 10 or 20
years; and indeed, in many cases there is a constant net cash outflow as
benefit payments already exceed contributions. The average NAPF member
scheme now has only 5,000 current members against 4,700 pensioners in
payment and 2,800 deferreds.
Although the biggest category of liability is therefore in respect of final
salary-linked pensions, for which an equity portfolio is generally
considered to provide an appropriate long-term match, schemes also have
large liabilities to pay current pensions and provide for deferred pensions.
These liabilities are different in nature as well as timing. Deferred
pensions, for instance, are statutorily subject to so-called limited price
indexation (LPI) - rises in line with the retail price index up to a ceiling
of 5 per cent.
As for pensions in payment, the picture is much more complex. Many schemes
raise pensions by something like 3 per cent a year, others apply the LPI
formula, and many public-sector schemes offer full indexation. Quite often
private-sector schemes raise pensions in line with prices in practice, but
do not guarantee it.
Matching these liabilities with equities, or with a standard pension fund
asset mix, is looking increasingly hazardous. The purpose of an
asset-liability study is to set out the profile of benefit payments, and
suggest an asset structure that could more safely generate the required
cash.
Last year, index-linked gilts, for instance, received Pounds 2bn of extra
investment from pension funds, according to WM, making this the most popular
asset category for new money. WM attributes this to the desire of some funds
to match liabilities more closely.
Conventional fixed-income gilts offer lower investment risk, but on the
other hand they do not provide a close match for most scheme liabilities,
except for fixed pensions. It has been argued that an LPI gilt might prove
an attractive innovation to many funds. The Goode committee itself suggested
that deferred income index-linked gilts would be a valuable introduction.
The proposal for a minimum solvency standard is critical here, and has set
the cat among the pigeons. Until now, actuaries have been able to absorb
most market price fluctuations of long-term assets within the reasonable
assumptions of their valuation basis. So long as there is no reason to
project a decline in long-term real dividend growth, for instance, a stock
market tumble can be ignored.
But this degree of flexibility is destroyed when a market value-based
solvency test is used. Already, some actuaries have become worried about the
results of the non-statutory discontinuance tests, which they apply to
schemes to check whether there would be enough to pay the current benefits
if the schemes were wound up tomorrow. The problem has arisen because of the
recent tumble in annuity rates.
Now this problem looms much larger, because of the Goode committee's
proposal to apply a statutory minimum solvency requirement. With schemes
holding a record 80 per cent in equities in their portfolios, they would be
exposed to the risk of being forced to top up their schemes after an equity
market crash.
The investment implications could be quite profound. In theory, for
instance, UK pension funds might be advised that, in due course, they should
reduce their equity exposure towards the levels seen in the US. There,
market value-based valuations are the rule, and the average equity exposure
of defined benefit schemes is only about 50 per cent.
Mr Robert Ross, of consultants Frank Russell, has argued that there would be
great risks in funds holding nearly 60 per cent of their assets in a single
asset class, UK equities, as they do now.
Alternatively, UK schemes might decide to retain a high exposure to
equities, but use portfolio insurance techniques through the derivatives
market, in order to protect them against the downside risk of a sharp fall
in share prices.
Since, in the long run, bonds, for instance, have returned 5 1/2 per cent a
year less than UK equities, a big switch to non-equity assets could force
actuaries to recommend significantly higher contribution levels. Using
derivatives would also involve a net reduction in returns.
There is a paradox here, in that weakly-funded schemes are precisely those
that need the highest returns, but in future circumstances they may be least
able to accept risks.
A vigorous debate is certain to take place on the proposed solvency laws
before they are introduced, but whatever happens consultants offering
asset/liability modelling are likely to have a busy time.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940427

