FT941-4060

FT  12 MAR 94 / Arts: Inspired soloists - Record review


   By DAVID MURRAY


Two superlative young violinists have their new concerto recordings on
simultaneous CD release. With Kurt Masur and the Leipzig Gewandhaus, the
ex-Siberian Maxim Vengerov - not yet 20 years old - plays the Mendelssohn
and the hoary old Bruch G minor (on Teldec 4509-90875-2). The American
Joshua Bell, some six years older, plays both of Prokofiev's concerti with
Dutoit and his Montreal orchestra (Decca 440 331-2), who throw in a terrific
Love of Three Oranges Suite for good measure.
Pointless to argue over which of these inspired soloists is the 'better';
better simply to enjoy their distinctive virtues. Vengerov - who struck me
three years ago as the greatest natural violinist I had ever heard, has also
been trained with the utmost seriousness in the 'traditional' repertoire,
Classic and Romantic. He plays dazzling encores, but in more substantial
pieces his phenomenal gifts are placed strictly at the service of the music.
Here, Vengerov's line in the Mendelssohn is at once coolly elegant and
wonderfully intense; his instrument seems capable of all the expressive
inflections of a human voice. For Max Bruch he goes into full-blooded
Romantic mode, just as required, and Masur treats the orchestral part with
enough stern dignity to disguise the fact that this is a fairly bland
period-piece. By contrast, Dutoit's responsibility in Bell's Prokofiev is to
realise as vividly as possible the bizarre colours of the scores, the better
to set off the wicked solo role.
He and his Montreal band (and the sound-engineers) do that to memorable
effect. Indeed, Dutoit and Bell find such richly suggestive depths in the
Second Concerto as to confound the received opinion that it is obviously the
lesser work. In the First Concerto Bell is equal to every virtuoso demand.
There is less devilry in his playing than in some famous performances, but
his uncanny sweetness of tone and utterance - pure, clean-cut, candidly felt
 -makes its own mark; and still in the 'grotesque' episodes he can turn
other-worldly or calculatedly gross in a twinkling.
After Anne Sophie von Otter's triumphant DG programme of Grieg songs last
year, we have another - overlapping Otter's, but very different - from the
young Finnish mezzo Monica Groop (BIS-CD-637), who was much admired at
Cardiff in the 1989 Singer of the Year contest. Von Otter's Grieg is
dramatically forceful (beautiful too, of course), in line with cosmopolitan
fashion since the later 1960s. Native Scandinavian audiences maintain a
soberer taste, as Elisabeth Soderstrom used to tell us.
They resent acting-out and insistent emphases, especially in plain strophic
songs - and even more in those by their national composers. Miss Groop is a
model Scandinavian singer: lovely, open tone, serene simplicity, clearly
attentive to words but never allowing them to bend or warp Grieg's
folk-rooted melodies.
Now a pair of follow-ups, in the cause of Nikolai Medtner (1880-1951) -
fellow-student of Rakhmaninov and Skryabin in Moscow, also a brilliant
pianist and ambitious (conservative, Brahmsian) composer, permanently
resident in Golders Green from 1935. Nikolai Demidenko has been reviving his
piano music with eclat, notably two of the three concerti (on Hyperion
CDA66580). For those who have been intrigued, there are two very grand works
to explore on Russian Disc RD CD 11 019: a sumptuous Piano Quintet in C, and
the huge Violin Sonata op. 44.
Evgeni Svetlanov is the sizzling pianist in both works, and the violinist
Alexander Labko and the great Borodin Quartet match him ('matched', rather:
the recordings date from 1968) in flair and commitment. And in EMI Classics'
'Composers in Person' series, Medtner can be heard delivering his own solo
pieces with scintillating authority, joining Moiseiwitsch in a rollicking
Round-dance, and accompanying Schwarzkopf and Slobodskaya in several sets of
his songs (CDC 7 54839 2, monaural): a fine, illuminating conspectus.
Devotees of the longevitous Catalan composer Federico Mompou (1893-1987)
find something magical in his stripped-down, faux-naf piano idiom, poised
somewhere between Satie and Jean Francaix. I was slightly disappointed to
find that the new Harmonia Mundi CD of his 'orchestral music' (HMC 901482)
offers mere orchestrations by other hands of two piano suites, Suburbis and
the Scenes d'enfants - in professional Impressionist style, attractive but
less striking than the severely black-and-white originals.
There are also, however, two quite unexpected discoveries: Los Improperios,
a noble ecclesiastical 'oratorio' that owes naked debts to Poulenc's Gloria
and Stabat Mater and yet sounds like purest Mompou, and a darkly limpid
song-set, Combat del somni. For those, Mompou at last ventured - in his 70s]
 -to do his own orchestrations, which have the stamp of lean, authentic
character.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940312

