FT943-1012

FT  27 SEP 94 / Germany plans to rebuild its navy


   By MICHAEL LINDEMANN


   BONN


The German armed forces are planning a new troop transporter and floating
headquarters which would, for the first time since the second world war,
give them a naval presence worldwide, Michael Lindemann writes from Bonn.
Since 1945 the navy, which is much smaller than the army or air force, has
had the capacity to operate mainly in territorial waters and has had to make
do with equipment which dates from the war.
Plans for the new ship, referred to by the defence ministry as the All
Purpose Ship, were drawn up after the embarrassing situation last year when
Germany did not have suitable ships to withdraw its troops from Somalia,
where they were part of the United Nations forces.
It has also been suggested that the vessel is designed to show that Germany
is taking its new international responsibilities seriously, following a
decision by the constitutional court in July allowing German troops to be
deployed on missions worldwide.
The ship would be able to transport up to 700 soldiers, lighter combat
vehicles and about six helicopters. It will be large enough to be used as a
floating command centre for operations overseas and will also have hospital
facilities.
'We are trying with as few ships as possible to create as many options as
possible,' the Defence Ministry said.
The ministry would not confirm how much the ship will cost but an article in
Der Spiegel magazine suggested that about DM500m (Pounds 205m) would be
spent, involving a variety of unspecified savings to keep within the overall
defence budget, which has been set at DM47.9bn for the next four years.
Sources indicate the ship would have a displacement of around 20,000 tonnes
and would be operational by the year 2000.
The navy will also order build 15 new corvettes which could be used
alongside the All Purpose Ship.
However, the ministry emphasised that the corvettes, which will come into
service around 2005, would replace the 38 torpedo boats now in use:
'Altogether we will be a smaller but more modern navy,' a spokesman said.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940927

