FT943-12842

FT  22 JUL 94 / Black reveals anger at Cazenove withdrawal: Telegraph
chairman tells Raymond Snoddy that the stockbroker's rebuff after share
controversy 'did the maximum possible damage to our reputation'


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


It is more than three weeks since Mr Conrad Black's Telegraph group suffered
an enormous blow to its pride when Cazenove resigned as stockbroker to the
company.
Talking for the first time about Cazenove's action it is clear that Mr
Black's anger at being publicly rebuffed by one of London's most respected
brokers is growing . They gave us less than two hours' notice that they were
withdrawing from the account,' says Mr Black, surrounded by pictures of
warships in his quiet office in Canary Wharf Tower.
'They left and they did the maximum possible damage to our reputation as a
company,' he added. There does, however, appear to be considerable support
among City institutions for Cazenove's action.
Cazenove withdrew as Telegraph's broker in the wake of controversy in the
City over the group. On May 19 institutions bought 12.5m Telegraph shares at
587p a share but just over a month later when Mr Black cut the cover price
of The Daily Telegraph in response to Mr Rupert Murdoch's cut-price Times,
the group's share price dropped by 191p to 349p. A Stock Exchange
investigation quickly cleared the Telegraph of wrongdoing.
Mr Black claims that Cazenove were told in May that he was not pleased with
its performance in the original share sale and it was made clear before the
price cut row that 'perhaps an orderly, amicable parting of the ways in the
course of the summer would be in order'.
The Telegraph chairman said that on Wednesday June 22 a senior official of
Cazenove, Mr David Wentworth-Stanley, was given a full briefing on the
planned cover price cut. Cazenove, according to Mr Black, said there would
be controversy but 'they absolutely assured us that they would not find it
particularly embarrassing and it would not particularly discomfort them'.
After the cover price cut and the share drop Mr David Mayhew, 'an
exceedingly senior Cazenove official', told Mr Black the price cut had
embarrassed the house and its clients but added, according to Mr Black, that
Cazenove 'will not do anything provocative and we will not withdraw
abruptly'. Mr Black was therefore shocked to be given what he said was two
hours' notice of the withdrawal. He said an agreed statement was issued
saying it was a mutual arrangement.
'We were basically moving them out anyway but not that day for obvious
reasons. Then an unnamed Cazenove official was quoted in the Financial Times
bannered across the front page saying that they had never in living memory
withdrawn from an account like this.'
'This famous firm just scuttled out the back door into the tall grass. That
is just not the behaviour one would expect of Cazenove,' said Mr Black.
Before leaving for a Mediterranean sailing holiday, Mr Black said: 'I feel
outraged at their (Cazenove's) performance but I think in the end these
things have their natural consequences.'
He added: 'I think Cazenove will pay a heavy price for having deserted a
reputable client in a damaging way when in fact that client committed no
impropriety and has been absolved by every relevant and interested party
including Cazenove itself.'
Lex, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940722

