FT941-5443

FT  07 MAR 94 / Improving picture likely to soothe historic fears: Germany


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


The short-term trends in west German inflation are so clear - at least in
the minds of private and public sector economists - that many are now
looking well beyond the end of the current year. Most expect an average rate
of 2.5 per cent in 1995, tailing off to 2 per cent early in 1996. This is
the Bundesbank's magic 'normative' rate, regarded by the central bank
directorate as real price stability.
The signs are certainly firmly set for an average of 3 per cent being
comfortably achieved or even bettered in the current year after 4.2 per cent
in 1993. The annual rate was already down to 3.3 per cent in February,
despite a raft of increases in fuel taxes and insurance and pension premiums
which pushed January's year-on-year inflation up to 3.5 per cent.
Underlying the current downtrend is an increase in the price of goods of
just 2.3 per cent in the past 12 months. Even though some rises are
predicted this year in producer prices and the cost of imports, and allowing
for the likely appreciation of the D-Mark against the US dollar, feeble
domestic demand is expected to counter such effects.
Falling real incomes and sharply rising unemployment last year helped
depress retail sales by a real 4 per cent. No improvements are in sight
since real earnings are likely to decline again this year and next, despite
the current industrial unrest over pay negotiations. Meanwhile, continuing
fierce international competition will tend to reduce the price of industrial
products.
This promising picture was clouded for much of last year by sharply rising
rents and high charges for private services. But the tide has turned, and
both trend lines now point firmly downwards. Rents, which have an 18 per
cent weighting in the consumer prices index, were soaring by almost 7 per
cent year-on-year last summer. They are now going up by less than 5 per
cent. The cost of private services - 25 per cent of the CPI - formerly
rising by 7.5 per cent is now increasing at around 5 per cent.
Other favourable factors include federal and local governments'
understandable reluctance to increase taxes or administered prices in an
election year.
Unquantifiable, but not to be forgotten, is an inbuilt, historical dread of
inflation among the German people.
A recent survey by the Munich Imas institute found 70 per cent of the
population were finding life uncomfortable. The main sources of their
depression were fear of unemployment (65 per cent), crime (60 per cent) and
inflation (55 per cent).

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940307

