FT944-10983

FT  08 NOV 94 / International Bonds: World Bank launches long-awaited Y200bn
global issue


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


The World Bank yesterday launched its long-awaited global yen deal, a Y200bn
issue of 10-year bonds with an offer spread of 9 to 11 basis points over
Japanese government bonds.
However, syndicate managers said the offering, due to be priced today, was
destined almost entirely for Japanese investors and would excite little US
and European interest.
Merrill Lynch, Nikko Europe and Nomura International are lead managing the
issue, the World Bank's first global yen offering since June 1993.
'Nobody outside Japan is currently buying yen-denominated issues,' said one
syndicate manager. 'The distribution of this bond will be almost entirely
into Japan.'
However, a source close to the deal reported firm European demand, in
particular from UK investment funds, and central banks, with many investors
switching out of existing global yen bonds, such as the World Bank 5 1/4 per
cent 2002 and World Bank 4 1/2 per cent 2003.
'This bond offers a pick-up in yield of 2 to 4 basis points, which is
attractive to investors,' he said.
He added: 'This deal is attracting more European interest than standard
euroyen issues have done this year.' He expects only about 60 per cent of
the bonds to be sold to Japanese investors.
In the dollar sector, Bank South Australia launched a Dollars 250m issue of
five-year floating-rate notes offering 35 basis points over three-month
Libor.
JP Morgan, the lead manager, said there is continuing demand for
floating-rate dollar assets, especially in the higher yielding sectors such
as the Australian dollar market.
The lead reported broad support for the offering from institutional and
retail investors in Asia and Europe, especially the UK.
At the shorter end of the dollar sector, the Council of Europe Resettlement
Fund launched a Dollars 150m offering of two-year bonds priced to yield 14
basis points over US Treasuries.
The Fund has an annual short-term borrowing requirement of approximately
Ecu1.1bn and an annual long-term funding programme - which is used for loans
to member countries - for this year of about Ecu650m, most of which is
already completed, a Fund official said. In 1993, the long-term borrowing
requirement was Ecu1.1bn.
The Fund tapped the two-year area of the sterling sector in October. It last
came to the dollar market in May with a similar two-year deal.
Lead manager BZW reported firm demand for the bonds from European retail and
institutional investors.
Syndicate managers said that the offering was fairly priced and offered good
value.
One syndicate manager said: 'The two-year dollar sector has been hit hard by
the speculation about a rise in US interest rates and is therefore now
unlikely to fall much further.'
Also in the two-year dollar sector, Union Bank of Switzerland launched a
Dollars 150m offering of bonds priced to yield 5 basis points over US
government bonds.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941108

