FT941-5689

FT  04 MAR 94 / Survey of World Tyre Industry (9): Mini-market gets up and
goes - The Argentine industry which is growing fast


   By JOHN BARHAM


Argentina barely registers in the world tyre market. But, like other Latin
countries, its relatively small domestic market has shaken off decades of
torpor and begun growing at a rapid pace.
In the last three years domestic output has grown by a third, reaching 6.3m
units in 1993, with each of Argentina's four tyre companies holding about
one quarter of the market. Total sales, including imports, was worth Dollars
520m last year.
The industry's sudden expansion began soon after Mr Domingo Cavallo
announced early in 1991, just after his appointment as economy minister,
that he would make Argentina's peso convertible. This, plus aggressive tax
reduction, privatisation and liberalisation policies restored consumer
confidence and led to an explosion in demand for every conceivable product -
including cars and tyres.
The economy has expanded by one quarter since 1991 and Mr Cavallo is
predicting a further 6.5 per cent growth this year. The car industry is
hoping it can push sales to 500,000 units in 1994, an increase of almost 50
per cent over last year.
Few business people in Argentina think the economy can continue growing at
its present rate. However, tyre companies are optimistic that the fast
growth in car sales - which are projected to grow at an annual rate of 5-6
per cent to the end of the decade - will mean a steady growth rate for them
as well.
That is the good news. The bad news is that with the elimination of
once-impenetrable trade barriers, margins have narrowed, competition has
grown and costs remain stubbornly high.
This presents serious challenges for Fate SA, Argentina's only independent
tyre maker. It is competing not only with multinationals Firestone, Goodyear
and Pirelli but with increasingly aggressive exports from multinationals in
Brazil.
Argentina and Brazil, together with Uruguay and Paraguay, are setting up a
regional trade block called Mercosur that has already substantially reduced
trade barriers between the four.
This has allowed companies operating from the far larger Brazilian market to
attack the local market. Imports have grown by 40 per cent since 1991 to
capture almost one fifth of the market, with the Brazil-based multinationals
in the lead.
Privately-held Fate is fighting back by cutting jobs, reducing costs and
investing cautiously. Restructuring and import competition pushed it into
the red, and it only recently returned to profit. It lost Dollars 14m in
fiscal 1992, Dollars 7m in 1993 and this year hopes to earn Dollars 2-3m.
The long-term outlook naturally depends on the future health of the wider
economy. Companies expect growth to settle down to more sustainable rates
soon.
But businesses still complain of an uncompetitive exchange rate. They also
want the government to reduce high operating costs by reforming Argentina's
rigid labour laws and further reducing the corporate tax burden and
controlling the escalating cost of utilities and services that are less
exposed to imports.
It is hard to see how Argentina's tyre industry can survive in its present
shape. Four manufacturers seems too many and in the case of Fate, a wholly
family-held company, it is hard to see how it can survive in a market
dominated by giants.
The pace of trade integration with Brazil will be a vital factor in deciding
the industry's future. Argentine tyre companies are already narrowing their
range of products and meeting the market's needs with imports from Brazil
and further afield. By the same token, once the Brazilian market returns to
normality, negligible exports should pick up allowing Argentine companies to
gain economies of scale.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940304

