FT944-6034

FT  01 DEC 94 / Stock market bar to China pension funds


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


China has banned pension schemes from investing in the country's volatile
stock markets, insisting that funds go into approved government securities.
A finance ministry decree stated that pension funds must not be used to
purchase stock or for any kind of direct investment. It stipulated that 80
per cent should be spent on treasury bonds, with the balance held in bank
deposits.
'These funds, an important ingredient of a fledgling social security
network, should be risk-free and not be used for other purposes,' said a
joint circular issued by the ministries of finance and labour earlier this
week.
China has recently accelerated steps towards a national social security net
for urban dwellers. A national superannuation scheme is part of this plan.
The decree follows speculation that the authorities were about to relax
restrictions on pension fund investment in the country's stock market.
But Beijing has clearly decided that for the time being China's stock
markets are too risky. The markets have followed a rollercoaster ride this
year.
The Shanghai composite index peaked at 1,052.94 on September 13, up from the
year's low of 325.89 on July 25. The composite index stood yesterday at
683.59, down about 40 per cent since September.
The finance ministry directive also laid down rules for the investment of
unemployment insurance funds and health funds, insisting that the bulk of
these be used to purchase government securities.
China is becoming more dependent on treasury bonds to finance its budget
deficit and huge infrastructure requirements. More than Yn100bn (Pounds
7.5bn) of treasury bonds were issued this year and there are plans for a
similar amount next year.
Stock market officials have been calling for the establishment of Chinese
unit trusts, but the government has been unwilling to approve the move
because of concerns about its ability to regulate them.
Official attitudes to the markets range from the sceptical to the downright
negative. Mr Lu Heping, deputy director of the finance ministry department
of social security, reflected these negative views in remarks published
yesterday by China Daily.
'The high-risk stock market is by no means the right investment option for
the funds, especially with the absence of a sound legal framework,' Mr Lu
said. 'The safest instrument for the funds is state bonds, which have an
interest rate about 2 percentage points higher than bank deposits.'
The finance ministry decree follows reports of misuse of pension fund money.
The circular said that 'misused money' should be retrieved within six
months.
Funds are believed to have been channelled into the stock market and real
estate projects, some of which have not been successful.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941201

