FT944-14389

FT  22 OCT 94 / Arts: Young writers show dramatic talent - The world is
likely to hear more of these budding playwrights


   By IAN SHUTTLEWORTH


The showcase season of this year's 21st Royal Court/Marks & Spencer Young
Writers' Festival consists for the first time of two alternating double
bills rather than a single clutch of plays.
The writers, aged between 15 and 22, all display a heartening degree of
promise and one of the works on show is a little gem in its own right.
Corner Boys by 16-year-old Derry lad Kevin Coyle is a sometimes acute
teenage-view of teenagers. Although set in Derry, it is concerned less with
a particular city than a particular generation, the nothing-in-particular
youngsters whose late spokesman Kurt Cobain adorns the T-shirt of one of the
characters.
The series of vignettes draws much laughter of recognition as Dave and Barry
awkwardly work up to asking Angela and Kerry out for a big date at a cafe or
down at Kentucky Fried Chicken - and also as they try in vain to deal with
the neighbourhood psycho, Chopper. When Coyle occasionally tries to be flash
or profound his script rattles, but when the piece sticks closer to home it
maintains a satisfactory chunkiness.
Essex Girls by Rebecca Prichard is a fairly blatant comic-tragic contrast.
In the first act, a trio of would-be suss babes hang out, smoke and talk sex
in the girls' toilets of a comprehensive school. In the second, depressive
Kim - effectively abandoned by the drunkard father of her son - is visited
in her high-rise by her best friend, who tries desperately to snap her out
of her lassitude for even a short while.
The latter scene goes beyond simply subverting the considerable humour of
what has gone before, and gives the play the air of an exercise in
technique. Nevertheless, Prichard will certainly learn to structure her
dramas less obtrusively (this is her first play) and already has a
sensitivity for character and a keen ear for dialogue.
Roxana Silbert's direction is alert to the moods of the plays, and creates
an evening of solidity rather than sensation. The most impressive
performance on the bill is that of Siobhan Hayes as Kim in Essex Girls, who
capably conveys her character's mood of grey rather than black depression.
Co-director Jane Collins has the better deal in terms of material.
Fifteen-year-old Hayley Daniel's Looking for Home kicks off the second bill,
portraying the arguments of a divorced mother and her 13-year-old daughter
with an often uncomfortable rawness. Sam and her mother both say exactly
what they feel, partly because theirs is not a relationship that observes
polite conventions and partly because Daniel has yet to acquire the skill of
coating her characters with such a veneer.
Yet the glimpses into Sam's childish fantasies, and the fact that they
complement rather than supplant her grip on reality, are affecting, and
Sarah-Jane Potts is quite remarkable in her professional stage debut in the
role.
The jewel in the festival's crown, though, is The Knocky by Michael Wynne,
aged 21. The Kelly family celebrate their grandmother's 70th birthday on a
Birkenhead estate amid a culture of long-term unemployment and constant
theft - as the story begins, son Joseph himself knocks off the family video,
later joking that hot VCRs are virtually an alternative currency. The play
is an impressive blend of hilarity and poignancy, grit and sardonicism.
Wynne's dialogue is frequently so marvellous that I was reduced simply to
noting down my favourite lines, such as 'I hope he's cut down on those pot
noodles - he smelt like he had an alien up his arse last time.'
This is kitchen-sink drama in the 'everything but the . . .' sense. Young
Steven, a witness to his brother's burglary, lurks under a grey cloud of
petulance while sister Lizzie agonises about the morality of the 'dodgy
money' she earns at nights - another strong performance from Potts, matched
by Elizabeth Berrington as the irrepressible aunt to whom she unburdens
herself - and Ma Kelly keeps the family together in best Boswellian fashion.
Wynne somehow manages to put a triple twist into an almost wordless ending,
played out against the bathetic strains of Dionne Warwick.
The world is likely to hear from most of these writers again, and in Michael
Wynne's case this particular corner of the world can hardly wait.
Royal Court Theatre Upstairs until November 5 (071 730 2554)

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

941022

