FT942-14606

FT  20 APR 94 / Last-minute deal brings Inkatha into S Africa poll:
Buthelezi abandons original demands in dramatic retreat


   By PATTI WALDMEIR, MICHAEL HOLMAN and MARK SUZMAN


   PRETORIA, JOHANNESBURG


South Africa's three main political leaders yesterday charted a course for
peace when they reached a last-minute deal to allow the mainly Zulu Inkatha
Freedom party to participate in all-race elections, now less than a week
away.
In a dramatic retreat, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the Inkatha leader,
abandoned demands for important changes to the South African constitution
and a postponement of the April 26-28 election. He stunned a Pretoria press
conference when he said Inkatha would participate in national and regional
elections, and signed an agreement which satisfied almost none of his
original demands.
Mr Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress leader, who met Chief
Buthelezi and President FW de Klerk for eleventh-hour talks yesterday,
hailed the deal as 'a leap forward for peace, reconciliation,
nation-building and (an) inclusive election process'.
The dramatic improvement in South Africa's political fortunes delighted the
local markets. Pessimism of recent days gave way to relief, and the news
boosted the Johannesburg Stock Exchange index by 2.2 per cent.
The financial rand, the country's investment currency, rallied by 8 per cent
against the dollar.
The deal was welcomed by political figures abroad. US president Bill Clinton
called it 'one more act of collective statesmanship that bodes well for the
prospect of free and fair elections . . . and for the success of the future
government of national unity'.
Chief Emeka Anyaoku, Commonwealth secretary-general, praised the three
leaders for 'looking beyond narrow partisan interests'.
Even before the official announcement, Inkatha election posters were going
on display in Natal, suggesting that its efficient party machine will launch
a formidable campaign in the six days before voting.
In Ulundi, the capital of the KwaZulu 'homeland' which Chief Buthelezi
heads, there was jubilation among members of the local legislative assembly.
Thousands of Inkatha supporters are expected to take part in a rally today
at Ulundi, marking the start of the party's campaign.
Chief Buthelezi said he had decided to compromise on his demands 'to avoid a
great deal more (of the) bloodshed and carnage which we have been witness to
in recent months', although he cautioned against expectations of an
immediate cessation of the hostilities which have left more than 500 people
dead in the past six weeks.
'There's no way that in the next seven days violence is going to vanish. We
are not so naive to think that,' he said, as fierce gun battles continued in
townships near Johannesburg between his supporters and Mr Mandela's.
All three leaders applauded the role of Prof Washington Okumu, a Kenyan
mediator, in negotiating the deal, which will entrench the position of Zulu
King Goodwill Zwelithini in the country's constitution.
It also provides for international mediation of other constitutional
disputes - notably the question of devolution of power from central to
provincial governments - only after the elections.
Boost for rand, Page 4
God - and realpolitik - bring in Buthelezi, Page 4
Editorial Comment, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940420

