FT944-10978

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (4): Statistical
jungle needs standards - Benchmarks and performance measurement


   By BARRY RILEY


The rapid expansion of global investment management, covering a wide variety
of geographical markets, has highlighted the need to standardise performance
measurement.
In the past, performance measurement has too often been a statistical jungle
in which every management firm has claimed to have outperformed against some
sort of index or other benchmark over some period or other. Allegedly
'typical' portfolios have been presented as indicative of actual client
experience.
Industry-wide historical performance figures have been visibly flattered by
so-called 'survivor bias' as the records of poorly-performing discontinued
funds have been dropped from the databanks.
In the extreme cases, longer-term performance histories have been cobbled
together out of claimed records of different funds, often managed by
particular teams which may even have moved between different firms. These
stitched-together records are apparently known by measurement buffs as
'Frankenstein' figures.
Attempts are now being made at a clean-up. Last year, in the US, the
Association for Investment Management and Research published its performance
presentation standards. This move followed closely on the introduction of a
voluntary pension fund investment performance measurement code in the UK.
Now the European Analysts' Federation (Effas) has decided to set up a
permanent commission on performance measurement, headed by Dugald Eadie,
until recently the chairman of the World Markets Company (WM), one of the
two main performance measurement specialists based in the UK.
Effas felt that there was a need for a European initiative in this area. By
building on the work of the AIMR and the promoters of the UK code it might
be practical to develop global standards, without too much wasteful
duplication.
Mr Eadie is hoping to propose a working programme by early next year and,
perhaps ambitiously, to develop a set of global standards by the end of
1996. It could take much longer, because developing a global code will
require a struggle with basic cultural differences.
In the US, the problem has been seen as largely an ethical one, in that
portfolio management firms - typically quite small - operating in a
competitive environment will be tempted to manipulate performance data in
their commercial favour.
Hence the emphasis on presentation, because the provision of performance
data to consultants and prospective clients is a crucial element in the
marketing activities of US money management firms.
In other countries, however, competitive bidding for mandates is often less
of an issue, but reporting to existing clients and controlling risks may be
more so. On the technical side, questions about the treatment of income,
taxation and currencies are also bound to loom quite large.
According to Mr Eadie, who is moving his own job from measurement at WM to a
marketing responsibility at the London fund managers Henderson
Administration, measurement standards are driven by the marketing process in
each country. 'The issue hasn't even arisen in Japan because there is no
competitive market for fund management there,' he says.
In the global arena the development of relevant securities market indices is
particularly important for performance measurement. Indices are required as
benchmarks against which managers can compare their achievements. However,
the global markets represent a constantly moving target.
For example, the growth of the emerging markets has prompted the committee
which controls the FT-Actuaries World Index to expand the 24-country index
series to include Brazil and Thailand. But this introduction has been
delayed for a month until the beginning of November because of the
difficulties faced by managers running global index funds in making their
initial investments in Brazil.
Similar difficulties can arise in bonds. Salomon Bros and JP Morgan, which
both produce widely-followed World Government Bond Indices, upset certain
fund managers two years ago when they introduced Italian bonds to their
indices.
Not all investors considered that Italian government paper was of true
investment quality, a doubt which was mollified by the 1993 bond bull market
but which has recently once again resurfaced as Italian bond yields have
headed back towards 12 per cent.
The problem of over-dominant indices is an increasing source of concern to
fund managers. The indices were designed to measure portfolios, but too
often it now works the other way around, with the managers slavishly chained
to the indices.
The global equity indices do, however, offer flexibility, being constructed
on a building block basis, so that different subsidiary indices can be
easily extracted. The Morgan Stanley Capital International series is the
longest-established and is especially widely followed in the US.
The capitalisation weights in these indices cause constant problems,
however, especially in the case of Japan, which at one stage in the late
1980s represented more than 40 per cent of the FT-A World Index and still
accounts for some 30 per cent. Thus the World ex US Index has an exposure of
45 per cent to Japan, representing a dangerous concentration of risk.
Some global funds have dabbled with GDP weights, in an attempt to reflect
basic economic realities rather than financial valuations, which can be
distorted.
Another option is to use equal weights, although this may be difficult in
practice to the smallest markets where liquidity is restricted and dealing
is difficult.
Still another approach, seen particularly in the UK among pension funds, is
to adopt a peer group benchmark. According to WM, the overseas equity
portfolios of UK pension funds currently have a 23 per cent weighting in
Japan, much lighter than the World ex UK capitalisation weighting of 33 per
cent.
In practice most UK fund managers assess their risks against the performance
of other similar funds rather than against the World Index. According to WM,
the overseas equity portfolios of UK pension funds outperformed the FT-A
World Index by 14 per cent in 1993 (but with Japan relatively firm they will
have substantially underperformed it so far in 1994).
Was this 14 per cent excess return a good performance, or did it reflect
extravagant risk-taking? This is the kind of tricky conceptual challenge
that global performance measurement has to help answer.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

941108

