FT942-12179

FT  30 APR 94 / Diary of a Private Investor: Unanswered questions - Kevin
Goldstein-Jackson examines the Crest share settlement system


   By KEVIN GOLDSTEIN-JACKSON


The recent Grand National reminded me of Crest, the proposed new share
settlement system which is expected to begin operations in 1996. The Bank of
England's Crest project team is galloping towards the finish. But is it like
a blinkered horse, focused mainly on the requirement to cross the finishing
line? Will it be brought down by any of the obstacles placed before it? Or
can it jump over everything, regardless?
According to the Treasury, charged with the task of creating legal fences,
the Crest specification is due to be published next month. By the end of
this year, draft legal rules should be ready for another consultation
exercise, after which the finished regulations will be presented to
parliament by the end of 1995 so that Crest can meet its planned 1996
operational target.
All sorts of documents have been produced. Very few private investors have
seen any of them, let alone had a chance to comment. True, both Pro-Share
and the UK Shareholders' Association have had a say - but their combined
membership is fewer than 15,000. In the UK, there are well over 10m private
investors. Does the average private investor know what is likely to happen?
What weight is being given to those who submit their views to the Bank and
the Treasury?
The introduction of 10-day rolling settlement on July 18 this year, with a
planned five-day settlement system starting early in 1995, means that many
private investors have received letters from their stockbrokers urging them
to make use of the broker's nominee services. Such letters have included
phrases such as: 'Most clients will find it impossible to maintain
certificates and transfers (if) they are to meet these new time scales for
settlement, particularly in the light of postal delays.'
Using a nominee service is put forward as the only way to meet the new
deadlines. But many brokers are also proposing to charge investors for using
nominee services. What happens if investors decide, instead, to keep their
share certificates in their own name and find some other way to settle share
deals within the new, short time scales?
According to the Bank, such investors 'and their brokers will, of course,
have to bear the costs of processing and transporting that paper through the
system. A dematerialised transaction through Crest will, therefore, be
cheaper to settle than a paper-based trade; but please note that we believe
certificated transactions in the Crest world need cost no more than they do
in the current environment.' Although such transactions need not cost more,
it seems likely that they will.
Perhaps private investors should deluge the Bank with copies of their
brokers' letters? Sorry - the Bank says it 'could not cope' with such a
large amount of correspondence.
So, as brokers are likely to continue to urge their clients towards Crest's
dematerialised trading system, using nominees and without having share
certificates, what happens if an investor wants to change from broker A to
broker B?
Under the present system, an investor with shares registered in his own name
simply takes his share certificate/s to Broker B and the shares are sold. It
is quick and easy. But in the dematerialised world with nominees, the
investor has to contact Broker A (in whose nominee name the shares are
registered) to get the shares out of that nominee name so that Broker B can
sell them. It might well be that Broker A charges the investor for doing
this.
What, then, happens to competition? If an investor wishes to switch from
Broker A to Broker B because Broker B's dealing charges are lower, such
reduced dealing costs may be cancelled out through the charges made by
Broker A's nominee to give up the shares.
Can the Crest system cope with the likely volume of transactions? According
to the Bank, the 'peak daily transaction volume level in Crest is estimated
at 150,000 transactions' - although this is being 'continuously reviewed'.
More than 1m people paid their fuel bills early to escape the new VAT
charges. Suppose those same people, induced to believe that using Crest and
nominees was likely to be cheaper than keeping share certificates in their
own name, decided to switch into those nominees within the first few months
of the Crest operation. Could the system, and the company registrars, cope?
What regulatory safeguards are being built into the system to insure that,
in the event of another 1987-size crash, brokers will not handle
institutional investors' instructions first and private investors last?
Surely there should be appropriate compensation schemes for investors using
Crest? Much more reliance is having to be placed on brokers inputting the
correct information into the system.
Should there not be automatic compensation for errors, in the same way as
the gas and electricity companies compensate their customers for such
shortcomings as delays in keeping appointments?
Apparently not. According to the Bank, clients are instead 'at liberty to
negotiate such compensation as part of the terms of business they agree with
the broker or nominee. If a broker acts in an inefficient manner and does
not compensate, his clients should consider moving to another broker . . .'
I can just imagine the response from some brokers to the average Sid seeking
to negotiate outside their normal terms.
The position of nominees still needs greater legal clarification. And
investors need greater protection from such events as LEV Investment
Management in 1988 and Diameter Stockbrokers in 1991, when brokers got into
some difficulties and it took considerable time to work out just who owned
what within a nominee name.
There are solutions to these (and many other) problems, just as there were
with Taurus. But will more attention be paid to the views of professionals
with vested interests to protect, rather than those of private investors?
If you want to promote and improve business in a shop, you do not rely
mainly on what other shopkeepers tell you - you have to ask the customers.
Surely private investors ought to count as customers?

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940430

