FT943-13307

FT  20 JUL 94 / Standard to shun places that bribe


   By SIMON HOLBERTON and JOHN GAPPER AND ROLAND RUDD


   HONG KONG, LONDON


Standard Chartered, the UK-based international bank, would withdraw from
countries where unethical behaviour such as bribery was a prerequisite for
doing business, Mr John McFarlane, a bank director, said yesterday.
Mr McFarlane's remarks followed the disclosure that the bank was
investigating allegations that executives from its bullion arm might have
paid commissions to officials in the Philippines and Malaysia to obtain
business.
He said that he had no comment to make on a report in the Financial Times
that the bank was also investigating the disappearance of Dollars 10,000
(Pounds 6,400) of gold coins, allegedly given by the division to a Malaysian
minister as a 'trade sample'.
'We cannot allow any one business to risk the reputation of the bank . . .
We have also made it clear (to managers) that we will not tolerate another
control failure,' said Mr McFarlane, whose bank operates in 57 countries.
The bank is to establish a new operating unit called Standard Chartered
Markets covering its investment banking, treasury and bullion operations. It
will be led by him from headquarters in Hong Kong.
Two senior executives were dismissed by Standard Chartered as a result of
the bank's investigation into expenses claims in its Mocatta bullion arm.
The bank discovered claims said to have been used as gifts to central bank
officials.
Mr McFarlane said it had dealt swiftly with the problems in Mocatta as soon
as they came to light. But he said that such scandals could be 'debilitating
in terms of the impact they have on perceptions of the group'.
It has suffered from a series of mishaps in Asia including a scandal in the
Bombay securities market which required a provision of Pounds 269m against
possible losses in 1992, and involvement in share support schemes in Hong
Kong.
Ministers are concerned the Malaysian government may delay lifting a ban on
UK participation in public contracts. 'We could have done without this,'
said a Whitehall official. 'I fear it has set our chances back.'
Lex, Page 22
Brave new order, Page 25

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940720

