FT941-4070

FT  12 MAR 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Entrepreneurs are sold short


   By GEORGINA JAMES


On January 15, Jane Whitehead told of how her dream of running her own small
shop turned into a nightmare. Georgina James, retail chairman British
Chambers of Commerce reflects on the experience.
As an independent fashion retailer myself Jane Whitehead's article, on the
rise and demise of her childrenswear shop was distressing. It deepened my
concern about the quality and effectiveness of UK business advice.
Did any adviser suggest she get some retail experience before launching into
such a volatile market? Did she discuss the pitfalls with a small
shopkeeper? Apparently not. Practical guidance seems to have been absent.
Absent it still is. Start-up failure rates remain depressingly high in spite
of training and enterprise councils, local enterprise companies, export
agencies, glossy Department of Trade and Industry brochures, business
bureaux, small firms services, college courses and a welter of government
subsidised initiatives.
There is one shining exception: the Prince's youth business trust. This
offers small loans or grants to disadvantaged people under 29 who have been
refused money from every other source. The real no-hopers one would think.
But 70 per cent make it to the end of the first year and 60 per cent to the
end of the third. These figures are more than double the average.
The trust's success is due to its system of giving a start-up unlimited
access to its own guardian angel - a volunteer who also runs a small or
medium-sized company and has experience of the problems.
Contrast this with official agencies. Each needs its own bureaucracy. Each
has financial targets and limits on its activities. Often the majority of
staff are ex-civil servants or managers from big companies, (seconded,
retired or redundant). They are experts in their fields, but not as
versatile as smaller company owners must be. They do not understand small
business culture.
Public funding is necessary because small companies need non-commercial
services. The government view is that it must keep tight hold of structure,
purse strings and policy. This contrasts starkly with its other view, that
direct service provision should be privatised.
It would be possible and proper for independent groups to take on this work
under contract; groups such as chambers of commerce which are directly
accountable to the business community.
At a Moscow conference of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development recently, I was the only speaker who earned my living running a
small business. I was mobbed by Russians eager for practical advice. The
eminent economists, civil servants, bankers and academics who also spoke
were unable to answer their questions.
More recently I met a TEC adviser and his client. He was a retired export
expert from a large clothing company. She had a talent for designing and
knitting jumpers. The TEC had matched them because they were both 'in
textiles'. It was an incompatible pairing. She needed to know things which
those in large companies never learn because so much is taken care of in
other departments.
Many UK business people are bewildered by the haphazard nature of official
help: they feel that bank managers, for example, know more about selling
pensions than they do about the nitty gritty of commercial life.
It is not enough to appoint a few business people to quangos and pretend
that this amounts to 'private sector control'. We have to find a way to
expand the system of linking those with ideas - but no experience and little
money - to those with small business nous and the desire to pass it on.
Until then the careers of many more eager entrepreneurs will be, in Thomas
Hobbes' words, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940312

