FT941-3434

FT  16 MAR 94 / UK seeks Brussels' help on car sales dispute


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


The UK government acknow-ledged yesterday that it was backing away from a
fight with carmakers, who have refused to comply with Monopolies and Mergers
Commission recommendations made more than two years ago aimed at giving
consumers a better deal.
Instead it is hoping that the results of a review of the way cars are
distributed and sold throughout Europe, currently being undertaken by the
European Commission, will remove the need for it to take any further action.
The announcement by Mr Neil Hamilton, corporate affairs minister, provoked
an angry response from Mr Derek Prentice, assistant director of the
Consumers' Association.
'It is quite staggering that the government has not been able to reach an
agreement with manufacturers on the implementation of the MMC
recommendations on the supply of new cars,' he said.
'The MMC decision itself was weak and feeble in our view - more needed to be
done. The very fact that the government has been unable to persuade the car
industry to make the minimal changes recommended by the MMC is an appalling
reflection on the anti-competitive nature of the UK car industry.'
The MMC's report on car distribution and sales was instigated by the Office
of Fair Trading after consumer complaints that UK car prices were
excessively high compared with those of some continental European markets.
It found evidence of monopolies at work but concluded that they were not, of
themselves, necessarily against consumers' interests.
However, the report did identify a number of restrictions imposed by
carmakers on the activities of their dealers - such as limiting their
freedom to advertise outside their own sales territories - which it felt did
operate against the public interest, and recommended their removal.
However, the government hopes that many or all of the MMC's recommendations
will be imposed by the EC as part of its conditions for renewing the 'block
exemption' from EU competition rules under which carmakers are currently
allowed to restrict car sales through exclusive dealerships. The exemption
expires on June 30 1995.
The UK's 7,000-strong network of franchised car dealers, whose own position
would have been strengthened by enforcement of the MMC's recommendations,
last night expressed resigned disappointment at the move.
Verdict on car trade sought from Brussels, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940316

