FT944-14544

FT  22 OCT 94 / A stiff one for drinks lobby: Why it will be difficult to
persuade the chancellor to cut excise duties


   By RODERICK ORAM


With one month to the Budget and two to Christmas, the debate over alcoholic
drink duties and cross-Channel shopping is becoming as clamorous as a
Saturday night pub 'discussion'.
'I've never seen a lobbying year like it,' said a senior drinks executive.
Wednesday brings the first public opportunity this season for advocates of
duty cuts to make their case. The Brewers and Licensed Retailers Association
(BLRA) is appearing before the first ever hearings on the subject held by
the Treasury select committee of backbench MPs. The committee, which has
received some 50 briefing papers on the topic, hopes to publish a report
before the November 29 Budget.
Brewers, along with distillers, pub and off-licence owners and other
interested parties, are taking a different tack this year. In the past they
have argued narrowly for a cut in excise duties on the grounds of equality
of tax treatment and as a necessary stimulus to trade.
This time their pre-Budget submissions to the committee and Treasury have
tried to quantify the wider economic and social damage they claim the rising
tide of drink imports is causing. Switching to the offensive, they have also
sought to show the broader economic benefits of a duty cut.
Cheap imports of lower duty beer from France now satisfy 3.3 per cent of UK
demand, equal to nearly 15 per cent of beer drunk at home, the association
estimates. As imports rise, pubs and clubs will be closed and jobs lost.
'The British way of life will have been changed and the pub-going habit will
be a thing of the past,' says The Real Alternative, the association's
submission to the Treasury.
Moreover, the 1993 lifting of personal import restrictions was 'a smugglers'
charter'. Vans coming back from Calais now account for one-third of all
duty-paid imports of beer 'and customs and excise investigators say that it
is a focus of interest for organised crime'.
The solution, the brewers say, is to halve beer duty to 15p a pint this year
and to the European median rate of 8p by 1997. The rate in France is only
4p. To assuage Treasury fears that the excise revenue lost could never be
recovered elsewhere, the brewers commissioned economists at the Henley
Centre to assess the wider stimulus of duty cuts.
Henley concluded a virtuous circle would prevail. People would drink more,
reversing a steady decline since 1979. This in turn would bring higher sales
of food, wine, spirits and other products in pubs. Higher sales would
justify higher investment to make pubs more attractive, pulling in even more
trade. By 1999, 58,800 full-time equivalent jobs would be created or saved.
Money saved on the unemployed plus taxes gained from higher economic
activity would more than make up for the Pounds 1bn cut in beer duty. The
impact on the public sector borrowing requirement would be positive by 1997
and bring a net gain of more than Pounds 1bn by 1999.
Duty cutters face a huge task to change the government's mind. Sir John
Cope, then the Paymaster General, said in April: 'If we were to sharply cut
the rate of duty, there is no way we would get back more than a fraction of
the billions of lost revenue from increased UK sales.'
The government is clearly sceptical about some of the claims made for the
inroads of imports. Sir John pointed out in April that beer duty rose in
1993, the first year of liberalised imports, to Pounds 2.41bn from Pounds
2.39bn a year earlier.
The association has taken every opportunity to press its case but brewers
acknowledge privately that their campaign could take some years to bear
fruit.
One problem is a lack of hard data on imports. Advocates of duty cuts have
extrapolated national figures from surveys and estimates. Working out how
much of the imported drink is for legitimate personal consumption and how
much is sold illegally to third parties is even harder to quantify.
Yet, the import volume may only be half the association's estimates,
according to Mr Ian Pressnell of Plato Logic, a drinks industry consultancy.
He bases his estimates on primary sources such as the volume of French and
Belgian beer production and the number of cross-channel vehicle and
passenger trips.
He and other critics of the drinks industry figures are also sceptical about
the extent to which a 15p cut in duty would encourage people to drink more.
Beer consumption has been falling because of changing habits rather than
rising taxes, he says.
Given the complexities of the arguments and the government's reluctance to
lose revenue or to gamble that a duty cut would stimulate the drinks
economy, lobbyists are trying a twin-tracked approach of tackling the EU as
well.
Duty rates vary not only between countries but also between types of
alcoholic drink, creating substitute markets and competing products.
Trying to encourage continental countries to raise their low duty rates a
notch may prove easier than persuading the British government to cut its
rates. But however strong the arguments are in London and Brussels, movement
in this Budget is considered highly unlikely.
With nine drink-shopping weeks to Christmas, bargain hunters had better make
their travel reservations.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941022

