FT942-14901

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (10): Multi-coloured
swapshops - A plethora of rival price lists are being used by dealers / An
examination of their merits


   By TONY BOSWORTH


We don't bet on the future and we don't predict the future values of cars,'
says Leslie Allen, director and managing editor of the motor trade's used
car price bible, Glass's Guide, 'because it really isn't possible to see
what will happen in the future.'
Try telling that to the growing band of companies doing exactly that -
publishing rival price guides which claim to predict accurately the price of
cars three or four years ahead.
The need for such information is clear. Leasing companies buying fleets of
new cars want an idea of how much those same cars will fetch tomorrow.
'It's the whole basis of the leasing industry,' says Colin McLean, chairman
of the British Valuers, Rental and Leasing Association's leasing and fleet
committee, 'and clearly the biggest pitfall for lease companies is that they
get the future values wrong.'
But do the price guides get them right? Sometimes not, says Alex D'Adda,
managing director of Evesham-based Leasecontracts, a mid-sized company which
runs 12,000 cars for its UK-based clients. D'Adda has recently spoken out
against price guides, citing what he believes are their vastly inflated
future values for a number of diesel cars when compared with their petrol
counterparts.
'How can one possibly believe, as CAP and Yellow Book are proposing, that a
BMW 525TDS Touring model is going to be worth vastly more than the
equivalent petrol model?', asks D'Adda.
CAP Monitor is published by CAP Nationwide Motor Research, based in Skipton,
North Yorkshire, and is the brainchild of John Procter and John Nolan, two
Yorkshire car dealers who set up the organisation in 1979 and still own it.
Their first publication was the Black Book, brought out specifically to
rival Glass's Guide. Like Glass's, it is a monthly publication which lists
values for used cars. CAP has since launched similar books for different
markets: Red Book for commercial vehicles, Green Book for motorcycles. In
1991, it launched Monitor, the publication which forecasts future values.
CAP will not reveal its subscriber figures, though sales and marketing
manager Joy Whittaker claims 'most of the people who order Glass's also
order CAP'.
Glass's Guide was launched in 1933 and is claimed to be part of the longest
running research organisation in the UK.
Today, Glass's Guide is jointly owned. Thomson Publishing has a 51 per cent
share and the remaining 49 per cent is owned by Hemmings, a small publishing
company. Glass's is the only price guide to have an ABC circulation figure;
the most recent showed 47,000 subscribers.
More recently the Yellow Book joined the fray. Yellow Book is not a product
from CAP as one might suppose, but was launched three years ago by motor
industry research company Sewells International, which later sold it to
consumer publishing group EMAP-Response.
Yellow Book's publisher, Bill Mason, says there are currently 300
subscribers, but adds that the figure is growing rapidly.
CAP's Black Book and Glass's Guide live and breed on today's information
and, in the case of secondhand prices, this information comes from the
trade. Glass's Guide relies mainly on a network of car dealers, auction
houses and fleet managers, all of which feed prices realised in dealerships
and auction rooms into the guide's headquarters in Weybridge, Surrey. Glass
has six full-time editors, each conducting around 250 face-to-face
interviews a month with people in the motor trade.
CAP - it stands for Current Actual Prices - has a team of 15 editors, former
motor trade sales people. They receive price information from a team of 20
researchers, who travel up and down the country visiting dealers and auction
houses and recording realised prices. This information is fed into CAP's
computer, then published.
When it comes to future residual values, the job is not so straightforward,
especially when a new car comes on to the market. How does one work out, for
example, a Rover 600's future value?
Our editors sit down and look at the car in detail,' says Joy Whittaker at
CAP, 'and if it's a new car then they would compare it with an obvious
rival. In the Rover's case, they'd compare it with the BMW 3-series, and
would reach a projected future value based on this comparison. In cases
where there is perhaps no direct competitor, they will take two or three
rivals which are nearest and compare them all.'
Yellow Book does things differently, obtaining its information from David
Henley Systems, a systems and database company which has supplied
information to leasing and fleet management companies for the past 10 years.
Yellow Book turns to economist Professor James Morrell for additional price
information.
EMAP-Response clearly sees a substantial market in price and cost
information for fleet and leasing customers, a factor behind its recent
launch of the awkwardly named TOPCALC system (Total Fleet Operating Cost
Analysis), described as an independent guide to the life costs of vehicle
fleets. This computer-based system can be used to call up information about
any car, covering a range of 10,000 to 40,000 miles a year.
The system can give the total costs of the operating life of the car over
any period up to four years, or they can be broken down into monthly and
pence-per-mile figures. Additionally TOPCALC can supply details of car
manufacturers' retail prices, fuel and maintenance costs, factory fitted
options and, the big one, future residual values.
For the companies operating these price guides, it is a highly lucrative
business. For example, Glass's 47,000 subscribers are said to pay a minimum
annual fee of Pounds 125 for the monthly guide and Pounds 250 a year if they
opt for the computer disk version. CAP charges Pounds 130 a year for its
Black Book, which is as well known in the trade as Glass's Guide, and Yellow
Book costs Pounds 274.
But how well do these guides do their job, and do they exert an influence on
the market which is out of proportion to their ability and knowledge?
'There has certainly been a concern in the industry that CAP Monitor and
Yellow Book try to predict, rather than forecast, and there is a
difference,' says Howard Thomas, operations director at Lease Plan, Europe's
largest car leasing company, running more than 200,000 cars for clients.
'Obviously, because our whole industry is based on the final value of a car
we purchase today, mistakes can be very costly indeed. I simply don't think
some of the price guides have enough information to make some of the
judgments they do.
'This is underlined by the cases where the rival guides sometimes show
thousands of pounds difference on the same car. The reality here is that the
motor trade pays in pound notes - they are the ones who realise the real
value of a car.'
Alex D'Adda at Leasecontracts says that he, too, has seen differences in the
values of cars in the price guides, and it worries him. 'We recently sold
Pounds 2m worth of used company cars, cars whose residual value had to be
worked out three years ago. We had to get it right. One per cent out, and
we'd have been seriously out of pocket with obvious implications for our
company and our cIients. We have to put our money where our mouth is, the
price guides don't have to do that.'
The BVRLA is also concerned about the residual values of cars and is not
content to rely on the price guides. Over the past two years, it has been
building its own comprehensive database, taking confidential information
from 28 of its most representative member companies on projected residuals,
as well as realised residuals.
The results of the BVRLA Residual Value Survey are supplied to the 28
companies which contribute, giving them a good picture of trends in the
industry. All other BVRLA member companies can receive the report for a
small fee.
'We have to remember that it's always going to be very difficult to forecast
three or four years ahead,' says McLean, 'and we also have to look at
factors other than the car itself - for example, the likely inflation during
that period, any changes in taxation, price of fuel, anything like that
which could influence the final value. As far as the price guides are
concerned, I don't feel that they exert too much influence in the market.'

The Financial Times


London Page V

940418

