FT944-10924

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (23): Sleeping giant stirs - The rural
masses show their consumer power


   By JIMMY BURNS


Kherala, in the state of Haryana, some 50km south of Delhi, fits the image
of the age-old village whose traditional values Mahatma Gandhi sought to
preserve. But take a closer look and you'll discover the modern age
tentatively knocking on many a front door.
Set well back from the main highway to the capital, the bulk of Kherala's
population of 4,000 live in squat huts made of crude cane and cattle dung.
But most of the huts have TVs, electrical kitchen gadgets and an assortment
of mass-marketed toiletries. Oxen plough the nearby fields, but tractors
spray the fertilisers and transport the labourers, and piped water is
gradually replacing the village well. Scooters and mopeds are also
disturbing the rural idyll, rivalling the ox as a status symbol.
India's villages, where 80 per cent of the population live, retain much of
their immemorial quality. But the agrarian reforms of the last two decades
together with the migration to the cities of many villagers has brought
about a significant rise in agrarian purchasing power and a change in
consumer patterns. Cultural change is also being hastened by the spread of
TV.
According to research undertaken in recent years by India's National Council
for Applied Economic Research (NCAER), the importance of rural markets for
manufacturerd consumer goods is increasing and will increase further as a
result of the government's liberalisation programme.
Although most of India's lowest income families live in the villages, they
are an important market for some specific consumer goods which are anything
but traditional.
The most recent extensive survey carried out in 1992-93 show that 75 per
cent of bicycles and portable radios, and 60 per cent of table fans, sewing
machines, and wrist watches, sold in India were bought in rural areas. Rural
markets also accounted for a 72 per cent share in national sales of washing
cake.
The NCAER survey found that the rural share of other consumer sales has been
rising in relation to sales in the cities. In a sample study over a four
year period between 1989-93, the percentage of black and white TVs bought in
rural India rose from 44 to 47 per cent; of colour TVs from 19 to 31 per
cent; cassette recorders from 42 to 49 per cent; video recorders from 5 to 8
per cent; toothpastes from 30 to 38 per cent; washing powders from 48 per
cent to 52 per cent; and electric bulbs from 30 to 32 per cent.
But perhaps the most revealing statistic, since it suggests the amount of
spare cash in farmers' pockets, is that while in 1960 the average rural
household spent 81 per cent of its income on food, today it spends less than
70 per cent.
During the 1980s, companies and advertisers devised their strategies for
rural markets on the assumption that consumer preferences in the average
Indian village would be not much different from urban centres. In recent
years a geater effort has been made to understand the particular cultural,
social, and economic conditions that exist within the villages.
Pradeep Kashyap, a marketing consultant, who has organised workshops on
rural markets for the Asian Centre for Organisation Research and Development
(ACORD), says: 'Having been trained in a westernised culture, we tend to
approach even the rural market with certain urban mindsets. That doesn't
always work. To effectively market a product, we have to get off our high
horses and understand rural ways.'
To illustrate the idiosyncracies of the rural mind, Indian advertisers like
to recall the following anecdote regarding sales of hair dye in the villages
of Gujarat. A few years ago it was discovered that sales of the dye had shot
up to three bottles per consumer a month. It was subsequently discovered
that far from being used for the villagers' hair, the dye had been used on
the local cattle. It was felt that the shinier the cow's coat, the better
the chance of getting a good price at the local market.
In Kherala, rural ways are exemplified by the family of Mr Lackhan Singh
Sarapanach, a 45 year-old farmer who has served for several years as the
elected head of the village body. His wife Subhebra recalls that when she
first came to the village as a teenage bride, women rarely ventured from
their huts, and spent their time either grinding corn or washing clothes.
Today the mill stone lies abandoned in the Sarpanach larder, and a machine
is used for the task. Subhebra cooks over an electric stove instead of
firewood. She still washes the clothes by hand. But her clothes are no
longer home spun, and she uses commercial washing powder.
Her daughter Neelan, 16, likes to buy make up and ready-made clothes in the
town market. Her ambition is to buy a car. Jaisingh, her 23 year-old
brother, wears jeans and gym shoes and likes to ride motor scooters. He
plans to leave for Saudi Arabia as a construction worker in the hoping of
earning enough money there to increase his family's limited supply of
electrical gadgetry.
And yet the Sarapanach family are neither spendthrift nor uncritical of
modern life. The family tailors its bigger purchases according to what it
can afford and is without a refigerator or a gas stove.
Subhebra is not convinced that the shampoo she now uses is superior to the
mixture of mud and tree extract with which she washed her hair as a young
girl. 'I notice that people's hair in the village is not as thick and strong
as it used to be,' she says. The shampoo is, however, affordable and saves
her time.
There are no Body Shops in Kherala. The local store reflects the modesty of
disposable incomes and the complex nature of consumer aspirations. There are
unmarked bags of rice and bottles of vegetable oil, indicating that on
staple foods at least the villager remains product loyal rather than brand
conscious.
On the shelves there are several different brands of washing soap,
toothpaste and combs prominently displayed while the only available brand of
bras are kept modestly in boxes. There are also a variety of biscuits and
two different brands of light bulbs. But the most popular confectionery
remains a local sweet made of sugar cane, herbs, and butter milk.
The Sarapanachs do much of their shopping in the town market, where there is
a wider range of products. However the head of the family insists: 'I don't
buy something simply because someone tells me I should buy it. It needs to
be worth it price wise and accessible. And what matters to me is not the
packaging but whether it really makes my life easier.'
Market research done on other villages in India suggests that consumption
patterns of rural consumers generally remain distinct from those of urban
consumers. While many villagers are earning their wages in the towns, caste
and religion continue to play a dominant role in their villages, insuring a
high degree of social conformity and respect for tradition. Status symbols
remain important, as do strong personal relationships.
These factors are likely to put an increasing onus on companies developing
marketing strategies which are sensitive to the peculiar needs of rural
communities. Already advertisers have had to accept that sexual innuendo and
images of boys and girls frolicking over a can of fruit juice jars with
village tradition. And companies find that using long-standing dealer
networks (often using extended families and internal village hierarchies)
can prove more useful than sending in outsiders.
This marketing will be watched closely by government officials. While
anxious to promote economic development in rural communities, officials
realise the need to protect more positive aspects of traditional life such
as artisan crafts.
Several non-government agencies are promoting traditional weaving and wood
working in some villages with an eye on exports. But the days when villagers
themselves buy what they make may have gone forever.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

941108

