FT942-15409

FT  15 APR 94 / Trade gap closes as exports to EU rise


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


Britain's trade gap narrowed sharply in January, due to a fall in imports
and a surge in exports to the European Union, official figures issued
yesterday show.
The Central Statistical Office said the UK's visible deficit narrowed to a
seasonally adjusted Pounds 916m in January, from Pounds 1.57bn in December.
Commentators were expecting a deficit of Pounds 1.31bn.
Britain had its best trade performance with the EU since August 1993,
reporting a deficit of Pounds 128m compared with Pounds 903m in December.
Exports to the EU rose to Pounds 5.36bn, compared with Pounds 4.89bn in
December. Imports from the EU fell to Pounds 5.49bn in January from Pounds
5.79bn in December.
Total exports increased to Pounds 10.42bn in January, from Pounds 9.96bn in
December. Total imports fell to Pounds 11.33bn in January, compared with
Pounds 11.53bn in December. But in the three months to January, a more
reliable indicator of the underlying trend, total exports fell 3 per cent
compared with the previous three months and the trade balance widened.
Mr Richard Needham, trade minister, welcomed the figures as 'a very
encouraging start to the year'. He described January's fall in the deficit
with EU countries as 'significant'.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, said Britain was 'not
sustaining its competitive position, and we are failing to pay our way in
the world by making and selling our goods'.
Mr Simon Briscoe, UK economist at SG Warburg Securities, said: 'Although
this sharp correction in January provides some good news and considerable
relief after the bad news in previous months, the trend is still worrying.'
The CSO's figures suggest that one reason for the UK's poor long-term export
performance is that manufacturers are continuing to protect their export
margins by raising prices. Export prices increased 3 per cent in the three
months to January, in spite of a 4 per cent fall in volumes in the same
period. Import prices were little changed.
The latest figures again raised doubts about the new system for gathering EU
trade statistics. The CSO is carrying out an inquiry into the system -
Intrastat - after fears that it underestimates imports. Preliminary findings
are expected to be available shortly and will be incorporated into the next
whole-world statistics due on May 12. They could show a substantial change
to the trade figures. Mr John Marsland, UK economist at UBS, said: 'This
month's large increase in exports is rather incredible and we should avoid
getting too optimistic.'
The CSO said its latest estimate of underlying trends in the value of trade
showed little change in either exports or imports, implying a flattening in
the trend of the visible deficit. In volume terms, excluding oil and erratic
items such as ships, aircraft and precious stones, it estimated no change to
the trend in exports but a  1/2 per cent per month increase for imports.
The rise in exports was due largely to increased exports of fuels and
manufactured goods. The deficit of trade in finished manufactures narrowed
to Pounds 598m in January, compared with Pounds 1.08bn in December. The
surplus of trade in oil grew to Pounds 340m in January, up from Pounds 214m
in December.
Surveys of the UK's biggest economic regions published yesterday confirmed
that the recovery is fairly evenly spread across the country, Paul
Cheeseright, Philip Coggan, and Ian Hamilton Fazey write.
In the West Midlands, the regional group of chambers of commerce reported
that companies in the services sector have started to recover more quickly
than those in manufacturing.
The survey, covering 594 companies, showed that 57 per cent of companies in
the service sector had more orders at the end of March than three months
before.
A survey by the chambers of commerce in north-west England showed that
manufacturers are investing more in plant and machinery.
A London Chamber of Commerce and Industry survey showed that employment and
investment intentions are picking up but there has been a slowdown in
domestic business growth.
Two of the biggest chambers of commerce, Westminster and London, yesterday
announced their intention to join forces in a move that will bring together
5,000 London businesses employing around 1m people.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940415

