FT943-870

FT  27 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Director quits after failed coup -
Community Hospitals lifts annual pre-tax profits by 26%


   By TIM BURT


Community Hospitals Group, the private medical care company, yesterday said
one of its senior directors had left the group following a failed boardroom
coup.
Mr Oliver Prentice, managing director of the company's continuing care
division, resigned earlier this month after the board rejected his bid to
oust Mr Alan Dexter as chief executive.
Although the company released few details of the dispute, it admitted there
had been a clash of personalities between Mr Dexter, who led the group to
flotation in 1989, and Mr Prentice, widely credited with building its
nursing homes business.
'I knew Oliver had aspirations to become chief executive, but this was a
surprise move,' said Mr David Croker, finance director. 'He asked the board
to make a choice, and when they backed Alan he had no alternative but to
leave.'
Mr Dexter claimed there was no strategic argument with Mr Prentice, who is
negotiating a compensation package based on his two-year rolling contract
and Pounds 77,000 annual salary.
City analysts suggested that Mr Prentice might have quit because he feared
that plans to invest up to Pounds 2.5m on enlarging the group's Duchy
Hospital in Cornwall would divert funds from nursing home development.
The continuing care division, comprising 13 nursing homes, homecare services
and sheltered accommodation, helped lift pre-tax profits by 26 per cent to
Pounds 7.7m (Pounds 6.1m) in the year to June 30.
Although the division saw profits increase by more than a third to Pounds
2.35m (Pounds 1.76m), its contribution was overshadowed by Pounds 8m (Pounds
6.2m) from the hospital division.
The two sectors underpinned a 26 per cent increase in operating profits from
Pounds 7.96m to Pounds 9.99m on increased turnover of Pounds 57.6m (Pounds
49.4m).
The improvement was helped by growth in private medical insurance and maiden
contributions from three new nursing homes and a new hospital in Colchester,
which opened in January.
Mr Dexter said the group planned to consolidate operations at its 10
hospitals and gradually win greater market share for the continuing care
business.
Earnings per share rose from 14.3p to 17.2p and an increased final dividend
of 7.9p (6.9p) has been proposed.
While welcoming the results, analysts left profit forecasts for this year
unchanged at about Pounds 8.7m, putting the shares, up 1p at 256p yesterday,
on a forward multiple of 13.8.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940927

