FT941-12786

FT  28 JAN 94 / People: Ford rings some top changes


John Oldfield, a vice president of Ford Motor and head of all Ford's car
development and engineering in Europe, is retiring from the US carmaker.
He has been appointed executive chairman of Aston Martin Lagonda, the UK
luxury sports car maker.
Oldfield will take over from Walter Hayes, chairman of Aston Martin since
1991, who will be 70 in April, the mandatory Ford retirement age.
Hayes will remain on the board of Aston Martin, which became a 75 per
cent-owned Ford subsidiary in 1987.
Oldfield's move to Aston Martin has opened the way for the promotion of
Richard Parry-Jones, Ford of Europe's chief engineer for vehicle engineering
 -and a rising star in the Ford organisation - to become Ford of Europe vice
president for product programmes and vehicle engineering and design.
Parry-Jones, 42, will become a key member of the new generation management
team that is being formed at Ford of Europe by Jacques Nasser, 46.
Nasser took over as chairman in January last year with the task of halting
the mounting losses of Ford's European operations.
Parry-Jones's position as head of all of Ford's car development and
engineering in Europe will be crucial to determining the US carmaker's
fortunes in Europe during the second half of the 1990s and beyond.
An engineer educated at Salford University, he joined Ford in 1969 and has
held senior positions in product planning, engineering and manufacturing in
Europe and in the US.
He will take over from Oldfield responsibility for forcing the
implementation of simultaneous engineering methods in Ford of Europe with
the aim of wringing greater efficiency and productivity out of Ford's
product and manufacturing engineering operations in the UK and in Germany.
He has previously headed the manufacturing operations at Ford's Cologne
plant, where the Fiesta and Granada Scorpio are assembled, before becoming
Ford of Europe chief engineer in 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940128

