FT944-14452

FT  22 OCT 94 / Finance and the Family: Just for women - A look at a new
illness insurance policy


   By BETHAN HUTTON


The possibility of getting breast or cervical cancer worries many women. So,
a new policy from Pinnacle Insurance which pays a cash sum if they develop
either might seem a good idea.
Called Viva, the women-only policy provides a set level of cover: a cash sum
of Pounds 10,000, followed by 12 monthly payments of Pounds 500, after
diagnosis of breast or cervical cancer. Premiums range from Pounds 7 a month
for those aged 18 to 29, to Pounds 18 monthly between 50 and 59.
Yet, few women reading the promotional leaflet - to be inserted in magazines
 -will realise that, for a slightly higher premium, they could get cover for
all kinds of cancer as well as heart attacks, strokes, multiple sclerosis
and many other serious illnesses.
Critical illness insurance - which is available to both sexes - is one of
the fastest-growing areas of the insurance market but the term is still
unfamiliar to many. The basic idea is to provide a lump sum if a person
develops one of a specified list of serious ailments.
The cash can be used to provide an income (if the victim cannot return to
work) or pay for such things as home alterations, holidays or nursing care.
The illness does not have to be terminal, or stop the insured person
working. More than 90 per cent of claims are for cancer, heart attacks and
strokes.
The insurance is available in a variety of forms: as a stand-alone
protection policy or linked with life assurance, so that the sum assured is
paid either if you die or become ill. Many insurers have now begun to offer
it as an optional extra for mortgage protection policies.
It is also relatively inexpensive. A premium of Pounds 20 a month would buy
a woman aged 29 cover of Pounds 53,125 at Eagle Star, Pounds 43,218 at
Scottish Provident, or Pounds 40,047 at Allied Dunbar. For the same premium,
a woman of 49 would get cover of Pounds 19,318 at Eagle Star, although she
would pay Pounds 26.36 to Allied Dunbar for cover of Pounds 16,000. Men
would pay more, as would smokers. But cover added on to a mortgage is even
cheaper.
Although breast and cervical cancer are the two most emotionally-charged
illnesses women face, Viva is a relatively expensive way of covering them:
it makes more sense to insure against the full range of critical illnesses.
And, rather than buying any kind of financial service directly from a mail
shot or magazine insert, always talk first to an independent financial
adviser.

The Financial Times


London Page V

941022

