FT942-14482

FT  20 APR 94 / They've really got a hold on EU: US investment banks are
increasingly dominant in European financial markets


   By JOHN GAPPER and NORMA COHEN


Along Fleet Street, where Britain's national newspapers used to dominate the
skyline, a new set of institutions has moved in. By taking the place of the
Daily Telegraph and others, US investment banks such as Goldman Sachs are
changing the face of the City. It is not the only way in which they are
upsetting traditions in financial centres across Europe.
The boom in securities markets over the past two years has allowed the
American 'bulge bracket' firms - so called because they have the lion's
share of the US investment banking business - to strengthen their grip in
Europe. They have achieved it so effectively that European merchant banks
which once dismissed them as a competitive threat are increasingly
struggling to keep up.
Perhaps more than anything, what the US banks have brought to London is the
blueprint for life after the Big Bang deregulation of the City in 1986. 'The
Americans brought us the integrated securities house,' says Mr Nick Verey,
director at investment bank SG Warburg, one of the UK firms which itself has
set out to follow the blueprint.
The US model of investment banking - combining stockbroking, underwriting,
trading, corporate advisory and fund management services under a single roof
 -was unheard of in London before deregulation. This model has been imitated
by many European firms, but some are still struggling to combine the roles
of different financial specialisms.
The US push into Europe has been well-rewarded in the past year. Their
corporate finance arms that advise on acquisitions and help companies to
raise capital have gained business from the wave of cross-border
transactions and privatisations. At the same time, the securities broking
operations of US firms have made windfall profits in buoyant trading
conditions.
This is in sharp contrast to the late 1980s when several US investment banks
arrived in London after Big Bang. Some made costly errors competing with
established players in gilt-edged market-making and corporate bond
underwriting. They also found it hard to dislodge old loyalties between
companies and their merchant banks.
Yet few European banks now underestimate the force of the competition from
the US. The difficulties encountered by US firms in London forced them to
build pan-European operations. 'For us, European work was everything, so we
went at it with intensity,' says Mr Richard Sharp, Goldman Sachs' chief
operating officer for European investment banking services.
The question is whether US investment banks will maintain their commitment
to Europe in harder times. The tightening of US monetary policy in the past
two months has disrupted capital markets while European privatisations and
corporate restructuring are likely to subside in the long term. 'The US
partners of these firms may get sick of Europe pretty fast as soon as
profits flag,' says a director of one European bank.
A number of reasons lie behind the strong push into Europe by the US firms
in the 1990s:
The control exercised by 'bulge bracket' firms over equity and bond
underwriting in the US market brought them strong profits from which to
finance expansion. Despite fierce competition, the US markets are more
profitable for investment banks than those in Europe. Equity underwriting
fees in the US range between 5 per cent and 7 per cent of the value of the
transaction, compared with about 1 per cent in Europe, and the volume of
capital market issues is far higher.
This gives them two advantages. One is strong capital with which to
underwrite securities transactions. A second is that they have cash to
expand - and can even afford to make errors. 'They have got extremely deep
pockets, and they can devote resources of the highest quality,' says Mr
James Sassoon, a director of SG Warburg. US firms' influence with investors
in the US means that European companies raising capital - and governments
privatising enterprises - often need their help. 'Governments tend to hire
the flagship local bank first, and then a US firm to make sure the
transaction gets done,' says Mr Kevan Watts, head of investment banking in
Europe for Merrill Lynch.
The large number of graduate business schools gives US firms access to a
wide pool of trained staff. 'It helps to have a lot of skills, and that
needs mass,' says Mr John Studzinski, managing director of Morgan Stanley's
financial advisory arm in London. US firms pioneered techniques of valuing
companies and their subsidiaries during takeover battles in the 1980s, and
retain an edge over some European firms. 'We tend to have a different
approach to valuation and tactics from some Europeans. We are more
free-thinking, and we fight for the highest price,' says Mr Alan Gillespie,
a managing director of Goldman Sachs.
The US firms brought with them expertise in the design and trading of
derivatives. The growth of the London Financial Futures Exchange (Liffe)
coincided with the rise of US firms in London, and although futures and
interest rate and currency swaps were well established, trading in these
products was largely engineered by the US houses.
European derivatives trading exchanges have gained trading volume from US
participation. 'Before the Americans, there was no such thing as a 'local'
on the floor of Liffe,' recalled the head of one commodities house. Locals
are individuals who trade financial futures purely for speculative purposes
and are credited with providing much of the liquidity and momentum needed
for trading.
Although the US banks remain selective - concentrating on advising the
biggest blue chip companies and trading only in selected bond and equity
markets - these factors have led to their rapid growth in Europe. Goldman
Sachs' operation in London has grown from 150 staff a decade ago to 1,750
today. Last year Merrill Lynch made 20 per cent of its pre-tax profits in
Europe and the Middle East compared with 10 per cent in 1991.
US firms still carry out advisory and underwriting work mainly in
cross-border transactions, but they have established some hold in domestic
markets from which they were earlier excluded. Even in Britain, which has a
long merchant banking tradition, banks such as Schroders and SG Warburg face
a threat to their traditional monopoly of large industrial companies.
Mr Gillespie of Goldman Sachs says big UK companies now tend to employ a US
firm as well as their merchant bank. 'For a while the merchant banks fought
against it, but they accept it now,' he says. 'Having someone in the room
who does not think just from the perspective of south-east England can be a
useful stimulus,' says Mr Watts of Merrill Lynch.
Yet the US banks face obstacles to reinforcing their hold in Europe. One
difficulty is that they are costly operations which recoup expenses by
charging high fees. There is still some resistance to this among European
companies. 'Americans accept fees as a fact of life. Europeans have to be
convinced of the value they are getting,' says Mr Studzinski.
A second difficulty is that European banks can learn the techniques which
give US banks an edge. An example is the US practice of bookbuilding -
canvassing institutional funds to establish the best price for an equity
issue - which has now been copied in Europe by banks such as SG Warburg.
Perhaps most important, European banks can still play effectively on the
perception that US firms lack commitment to European markets, and fail to
understand them fully. Mr Guy Dawson, head of corporate finance at Morgan
Grenfell, the UK merchant bank owned by Deutsche Bank, says that German
companies may still harbour doubts about US rivals.
'All other things being equal, European companies prefer to deal with
European banks, if they are credible institutions. A German company knows
we're there to stay,' he says. US banks argue perceptions are changing since
some have now been around for several decades. 'The new kid on the block
argument wanes after a few years,' says Mr Sharp of Goldman Sachs.
Yet the argument will resurface if the unhappy turn in the bond and equity
markets leads US banks to retrench in Europe. Some Europeans argue that
their US rivals remain relatively unstable institutions, driven by a trading
ethos rather than commitment to long-term client relationships, and
vulnerable to defections by highly-paid staff in bad times.
'On the whole, the American firms are very fragile. They are run on an
explosive mixture of fear and greed, and are hard to hold together when
things get tough,' says one director of a European bank. US firms'
commitment may be more enduring this time, but increased competition in less
stable capital markets will test their appetite for Europe.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
        TOP 10 ADVISERS OF CROSS-BORDER MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1993 ranking
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1 Morgan Stanley                           6 First Boston/CSFB/CS
2 Wertheim/Schroder                        7 JP Morgan
3 Morgan Grenfell                          8 Lazard Houses
4 SG Warburg                             9 Lehman Brothers
5 Goldman Sachs                           10 Hambros
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Global Investment Banking, Salomon Brothers (February 1994)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940420

