FT942-12324

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (24): Old names
compete for new money - Private banking / As the scene changes, prospective
clients should beware of snobbery / High Street Investment


   By ROBERT MILLER


The private banking market of the 1990s is more about serious money
management than serious wealth.
The old names synonymous with private banking, like C. Hoare & Co, Coutts,
Robert Fleming and Child & Co, no longer take it for granted that longevity
and snob appeal attract private clients. Nowadays they have to battle for
their market share with some of the newer entrants, such as Lloyds Private
Banking and Barclays Private Banking, or Credit Suisse and Chase Manhattan.
This month Midland announced that it, too, would launch a private banking
arm in July.
But the term 'private banking' has always been misunderstood, says Michael
Maslinski of Coutts & Co, now owned by National Westminster: 'Historically,
it meant that the bank was actually privately owned by the partners, and not
the type of service it offered. So you had C. Hoare & Co in London, Brown
Brothers Harriman in New York, and Lombard Odier in Geneva.
'Today, different banks have different interpretations of private banking.
Some see it simply as a way of more profitably servicing those clients who
want something over and above a domestic bank account. The serious ones,
however, offer an all-round bespoke service with instant access to a special
manager who can provide quick answers and solutions, or at least knows where
to go to get the right information. Clearly, that type of service is more
likely to appeal to people in a higher income or asset bracket.'
But the 300-year-old Coutts, which once boasted Charles Dickens and Frederic
Chopin as clients and still retains strong links with the arts and
entertainments world, has not abandoned all its links with the past. Says
Maslinski: 'We still retain frock coats, to symbolise the old traditions and
values.'
To use any private banking facility solely for its current account services,
because of its name or smart livery, will prove costly. Coutts prefers its
clients to maintain an average balance of Pounds 3,000 on a current account.
If they do, then there are no bank charges. If, however, that balance is not
maintained, then charges start at Pounds 30 a quarter plus 75p for every
cheque or any other type of transaction that goes through the account. Some
concession is made, though, to clients who are just about to start out on
their money-making careers. Students enjoy free banking with Coutts if they
remain in credit.
On the investment management side, Coutts offers a portfolio service of unit
and investment trusts for Pounds 50,000 or more. The initial fee is 2 per
cent and 1 per cent thereafter. The discretionary management service, which
also includes equity investment, requires a portfolio of Pounds 100,000 or
more.
Even new entrants to the market, such as Barclays Private Banking, find
little demand for a simple banking service, although clients can have a
cheque-book in the special livery. Michael Tomalin, managing director of
Barclays Private Banking, says: 'It is certainly not a lead product, and
some of our clients actually have their current accounts with another bank.
'We see ourselves as being in the business of wealth management. The three
core areas of our business are investment management, banking, and financial
planning through the use of trusts and offshore vehicles. When I say
banking, I don't mean cheque-books for private clients, but providing access
to markets which trade in Treasury products such as swaps, fiduciary
deposits, derivatives and foreign exchange.
'What appeals to many of our clients is the fact that we are not just a
UK-based business. Britain is just part of a worldwide network.'
Broadly speaking, Barclays' Private Banking clients are expected to have a
minimum portfolio of around Pounds 250,000. But the average., according to
Tomalin, is 'Pounds 1m or more'.
Lloyds Private Banking makes no concession to special current account
facilities. Its clients use the standard services provided by the parent
bank through high street branches. On the other hand, they can call on a
private network of 43 offices in England and Wales, which have their own
livery and dedicated account managers for each client.
David Terry, a senior manager at Lloyds Private Banking, which has 24,000
clients with some Pounds 6bn under management, says: 'You don't have to be a
millionaire to be a client with us. Our entry level is Pounds 75,000 of cash
or marketable securities, which generally means shares or fixed-term
deposits.
'That is considerably lower than many of our competitors. Clients receive
independent advice on all aspects of their financial affairs, from asset
management and personal tax planning to wills and estate planning and estate
management.'
Fees start at 1 per cent of funds under management up to Pounds 500,000 and
are negotiable thereafter.
The private banking market is becoming increasingly competitive, and the
choice much wider, as more institutions see the attractions of generating a
healthy and steady flow of fee income from wealthier clients who need more
than straightforward retail banking services.
Terry's advice to prospective private banking clients is 'to assess whether,
for the sum of money you have to invest, you are going to get a full or a
partial service. A full service means access to a dedicated manager at all
times, who knows your business and your particular circumstances and can
advise accordingly. That is the essence of private banking.'
Pencil drawing of Chopin by Franz Winterhalter (1847), taken from the
biography, 'Chopin', by George R Marek and Maria Gordon-Smith, published by
Weidenfeld & Nicolson in 1979

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

940429

