FT942-14734

FT  19 APR 94 / Company car VAT challenge may cost state Pounds 15bn


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


The UK government could face a bill of up to Pounds 15bn for repayment of
value added tax which it is alleged to have collected illegally in
connection with the purchase of company cars since 1978.
Several UK clearing banks, led by Barclays, have lodged appeals with the VAT
tribunal claiming that a Customs and Excise 'blocking order', which prevents
UK businesses reclaiming VAT paid on the purchase of cars for business use,
is incompatible with European law.
The banks have also complained to the European Commission which has given
the UK government until June to respond to allegations that it has failed to
implement the European Sixth VAT Directive properly.
The government could be taken to the European Court in Luxembourg.
Preventing VAT-registered businesses from reclaiming tax paid on cars
results in consumers paying extra on their products, the banks say. This
represents an element of double taxation.
Car leasing companies are particularly badly hit. They say the order
artificially inflates the cost of car leasing and puts them at a
disadvantage compared with the rest of Europe.
The banks, on behalf of their car leasing subsidiaries, want repayment of
VAT from 1978 when the Sixth Directive came into effect in the UK.
By the end of last month 37 companies had lodged claims involving amounts
totalling up to Pounds 1bn. The appeals are due to be heard in the autumn
but lawyers expect the tribunal to refer the issue to the European Court.
Customs has calculated that if the VAT order is declared illegal, the
government could have to pay Pounds 6bn to the car leasing companies alone.
It said last night that efforts were continuing to negotiate a settlement
with the car leasing industry. If the government has to repay all UK
companies which bought cars for business use since 1978, the total bill
could be Pounds 15bn, it says.
It is believed to favour replacing the blocking order with a VAT sliding
scale charge to be paid by companies on the private use of company cars.
Business and the law, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940419

