FT942-12369

FT  29 APR 94 / International Bonds: Cable & Wireless leads quiet day with
Pounds 200m deal


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


Cable & Wireless provided the highlight of an otherwise featureless day in
the Eurobond market with its issue of Pounds 200m of 25-year bonds.
According to lead manager Samuel Montagu, the deal sold out within hours of
the launch, with the bulk of the issue placed with UK institutions seeking
long-dated debt. 'There's been nothing else at the long end (of the
Eurosterling market),' said a syndicate official.
The gilt market, too, has been starved of long-dated supply, with the Bank
of England concentrating issuance at the shorter end of the yield curve.
The lack of a credit rating for C&W was no deterrent. 'UK institutionals
don't really mind - they like UK blue-chips,' said a dealer at another bank.
The 8 5/8 per cent bonds were priced to yield 90 basis points over the 8 3/4
per cent gilt due 2017. The spread narrowed slightly to close around 88
basis points over gilts.
The Republic of Ireland tapped the Dutch guilder market for Fl 250m of 6 7/8
per cent 10-year bonds. Yielding 30 basis points over the corresponding
government bond at re-offer, the pricing was widely considered to be
aggressive.
'Triple-A rated Credit Local issued 10-year bonds at 30 over (government
bonds) last week - Ireland with its lower rating should have yielded at
least 35 over,' said one trader.
However, lead manager Rabobank argued that, although Ireland has a lower
rating (Aa3 from Moody's and AA- from Standard & Poor's), its sovereign
status and strong fundamental outlook justified the pricing. Traders said
the spread widened to around 34 basis points over the government bond, but
Rabobank said it remained stable at 30 basis points over.
In the French franc sector, Volvo Group Finance issued FFr1bn of 6 3/4 per
cent five-year bonds. While traders felt the pricing was reasonable, they
reported little demand for unrated Volvo paper.
However, lead manager Credit Lyonnais said French investors have shown a
healthy appetite for corporate bonds in the five-year sector offering a
substantial yield pick-up over government bonds. The bonds were priced to
yield 67 basis points over the corresponding French government bond.
Elsewhere, ABN Amro Australia and Cadbury Schweppes Australia each issued
ADollars 75m of five-year bonds targeted mainly at retail investors.
Eastern Electricity, the UK regional electricity company, bought back its
Pounds 118m of government debt, redeeming two Pounds 59m tranches of
government bonds maturing in 1999 and 2008. The purchase, financed in part
by Eastern's Pounds 350m bond issue on Tuesday, will involve a redemption
premium of Pounds 27m and will result in subsequent interest savings, the
company said.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940429

