FT942-14806

FT  19 APR 94 / Revival of US airline talks urged


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


United Airlines, the largest US carrier, yesterday urged the US and UK
governments to link their approval for the proposed partnership between
Virgin Atlantic Airways and Delta Air Lines of the US with the revival of
broader negotiations on a new transatlantic aviation agreement between the
two countries.
Mr Stephen Wolf, United's chairman, yesterday said the proposed Virgin-Delta
deal required changes in the bilateral aviation agreement between the US and
the UK.
The Virgin-Delta ticket code-sharing partnership, which requires the
approval of both the US and UK governments, should provide the impetus to
produce 'substantive amendments' to the bilateral agreement to correct 'a
variety of long-standing deficiencies in the agreement', Mr Wolf told the
Aviation Club of Great Britain.
United's position is likely to strengthen the UK government's efforts to
revive the bilateral talks after the US walked away from the negotiations
earlier this year.
The US has insisted on greater access immediately for all US carriers into
London's Heathrow Airport as part of any new 'open skies' agreement with the
UK.
The UK, which is seeking further access to the US domestic market for UK
carriers as well as the lifting of restriction on foreign ownership of US
airlines, proposes a three-stage approach to 'open skies' and access for US
carriers to Heathrow.
United in particular wants changes to to allow it to serve its main US hub
of Chicago from Heathrow. But it also favours the UK's gradual approach to
liberalisation.
Mr Wolf stressed that United did not favour an 'all-or-nothing approach' but
was urging the two governments to identify 'discrete areas in which progress
is clearly possible and focus their immediate negotiating efforts on those
areas'.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, hopes to hold preliminary talks
with Mr Federico Pena, his US opposite number, in the next few days to
follow up on the opportunity the Virgin-Delta deal has given the two
governments to reopen negotiations.
Before its alliance with Virgin, Delta had urged the US government to
renounce the bilateral agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940419

