FT942-15698

FT  14 APR 94 / Minutes reveal sharp rift at the top: Graham Bowley and
Philip Coggan on remarkable rows between Kenneth Clarke and Eddie George


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY and PHILIP COGGAN


For institutions which have prided themselves on secrecy throughout their
history, the published minutes of the monthly meetings between the Treasury
and the Bank of England are remarkable for their candour.
The minutes of the February meeting, in particular, clearly show the extent
of the disagreement between the chancellor, Mr Kenneth Clarke and the
governor, Mr Eddie George.
The governor opened discussions in February by arguing that economic
evidence published since the January meeting had 'if anything, weakened
rather than strengthened the case for an immediate rate cut'.
Mr George said the most likely projection was that economic 'growth would
pick up to perhaps 3 per cent on current policy settings, in part as a
continuing response to the reductions in interest rates at the end of 1992
and early 1993. Although the best projection was that underlying inflation
would remain around the middle of the (1 to 4 per cent) target range, there
were upside risks. The case for an immediate cut in interest rates rested on
a view that the Budget measures would significantly slow down the pace of
growth.'
In Mr George's opinion 'it would be safer to wait for more evidence of the
effects' of the tax increases before acting, the minutes report. 'To cut
rates now in advance of this evidence would run a risk of higher inflation
and some loss of credibility, and he strongly advised against.'
The chancellor's response was to state that 'he was concerned that advice
was erring excessively on the side of caution. He had been more inclined to
cut interest rates last month, and in his view the case for a cut had become
stronger since then'.
'In recent months inflation outturns had consistently been better than
expected, and inflation projections were still being lowered.'
The minutes report: 'The chancellor thought that the monetary indicators
provided a good case for an interest rate cut . . . In addition, pay
settlements remained between 2 and 2 1/2 per cent on average, with a
significant minority of employees accepting a pay freeze.'
Mr Clarke said he was 'determined that inflation should not accelerate
again. However, with a significant fiscal tightening in prospect and
considerable spare capacity in the whole economy, he saw little risk of an
increase in inflation. He was inclined to take the opportunity to cut rates
from their present relatively high levels.'
The minutes then summarise the discussion between the chancellor and the
governor and their officials. Here remarks are not attributed to individuals
because of the Whitehall convention that advice to ministers is
confidential. But someone made the point that 'there was a danger that an
interest rate cut now would be interpreted as being influenced by political
considerations'. That is exactly what did happen, as the eventual cut
coincided with newspaper headlines about the death of Tory MP Mr Stephen
Milligan.
It was during the discussion that the possibility of a  1/4 percentage point
rate cut was raised. On the second day of the meeting, the chancellor said
'he still favoured reducing interest rates now. He saw little risk of
inflation picking up, but a significant risk that the fiscal measures would
slow down the recovery. An interest rate cut in April would be too late to
offset the effect of the fiscal measures. Although he thought an immediate
1/2 per cent reduction would be justified, he saw advantage in a  1/4 per
cent cut. Moving interest rates by smaller amounts was quite common in other
countries, and was consistent with the current low inflation and low
interest rate environment.'
The governor said he could 'agree to a  1/4 per cent, but not to  1/2 per
cent'. The minutes record his parting shot that 'his concern stemmed from
experience that it would be difficult to restrain inflation if it started to
rise'.
However, Mr Clarke got his rate cut which shows that, in spite of the Bank's
hopes for independence, the Treasury is still firmly in charge of monetary
policy.
The minutes of the last three meetings also show that the governor has been
consistently much more optimistic about the UK's growth prospects than has
the chancellor. In the February meeting, for example, while the governor
talked of possible 3 per cent GDP growth, ahead of the official forecast,
the chancellor spoke of 'a significant risk that the fiscal measures would
slow down the recovery'.
Mr Clarke's utterances in the monthly meetings seem less upbeat than his
more public statements on the economy. In March, he said that 'anecdotal
evidence did not suggest that activity was growing strongly.' In February,
referring to the fall in unemployment, for example, he said that 'much of
the employment created so far had been in part-time jobs'.
In addition to the February disagreement, there were signs of a difference
in views in the January meeting. The chancellor then said that 'the
objective case for a further  1/2 per cent cut in rates was quite strong'
but the governor argued that 'the risk associated with cutting interest
rates now was greater than the risk associated with waiting'. On that
occasion, the chancellor agreed to do nothing.
A greater measure of unanimity was achieved at the March 2 meeting: the
minutes reveal that there was no intention to raise bank base interest
rates, as was feared by some commentators in the City.
The chancellor said in March that 'it would be appropriate to consider a
further reduction in interest rates if indicators subsequently suggested
that activity was subdued and inflationary pressures remained under firm
control'.
Meanwhile, the governor said 'there would be a case for a further easing of
interest rates if the evidence suggested that activity was slowing',
although he concluded 'at this stage there was insufficient evidence to
warrant a cut'.
A further meeting between the pair was held on March 30, and minutes will
not be published until May 18.
The chancellor's stated aim in publishing yesterday the minutes of his
monthly meetings with the governor of the Bank of England is to promote
accountability and transparency in the operation of monetary policy.
At a press conference with Mr Clarke yesterday, the governor welcomed the
move. It would enable financial markets, parliament and the public to gain a
better appreciation of the nuances of policy and realise that divergences
between governor and chancellor 'were very rarely black and white.'
Mr George said the February disagreement and his final acceptance of a 1/4
point cut in base rates to 5 1/4 per cent had to be seen in the context of
his January remark that he had 'recommended adopting a bias towards easing'
monetary policy.
Although governor and chancellor appeared the best of friends yesterday,
there may be some costs involved in the new policy of transparency.
Financial markets rarely like to see open disagreement between policy-makers
and there may come a time when the published minutes lead to a sharp, and
unfavourable, market reaction.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940414

