FT942-12626

FT  28 APR 94 / International Company News: US power behind the telephone -
Nynex Network Systems will be advising an emerging Chinese network


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


Nynex Network Systems, the principal international subsidiary of Nynex
Corporation, the US telecoms company, yesterday stole the march on its
competitors and announced plans to advise LianTong Communications, China's
nascent second telephone operator, on its future development.
LianTong, which is the main beneficiary of the ending of the ministry of
post and telecommunications' domestic telecoms monopoly last December, plans
to become a nationwide provider of telecoms services in China within 10
years.
Foreign equity participation in the mainland telecoms market is not
permitted, but Nynex is well placed to benefit from any relaxation in
policy. It is advising on the best way to structure what will be China's
second common carrier, which has ambitions to control around 40 per cent of
the mainland's market within the next decade.
Although China has scaled back plans to develop the country's telecoms
infrastructure to 70m telephone lines by the year 2000, from the 100m
originally planned, most observers still believe Beijing will have to allow
foreign ownership. There are currently around 20m lines in China.
LianTong is jointly owned by three central government departments -
electronics, power, and railways. The latter two possess extensive 'private'
telecoms networks throughout China.
The company is capitalised at Y600m (Dollars 5.8m), but may need as much as
Dollars 10bn through a combination of loans and equipment credits if it is
to realise its ambitious growth plans, according to Nynex executives.
Nynex and the ministry of electronics industry (MEI) will jointly study the
feasibility of interconnecting the telecoms networks operated by the power
and railways ministries. The railway telecoms network is the largest
'private' network in China.
In addition, they will study the technologies needed to deploy advanced
telecoms systems, such as combined telephony and entertainment systems, in
selected Chinese markets. Nynex also said it and the MEI would study the
formation of a joint venture that would help plan a second national telecoms
network in China.
Mr Joseph Farina, president of Nynex Network Systems, said the ministry of
electronics was at the forefront of the movement to transform
telecommunications in China. He said both parties would benefit by 'testing
21st century communications services'.
Mr Henry Van Demark, executive managing director, greater China, said China
was in a special position in being able to consider introducing advanced
technology solutions for basic telecoms needs.
The cost of providing a system capable of providing telephony, video on
demand and karaoke is not much more expensive than a system providing a
basic telephone service. But the longevity of the system - some 30 to 50
years - would be greater, he said.
Initially, however, the Nynex/MEI study will look at how to connect the rail
and power ministries' telecoms networks to see if they could be used as the
foundation for the second telecoms network which LianTong has been approved
to offer. Approval has been given for excess capacity on the rail network to
be used for long-distance communication.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940428

