FT944-2874

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (2): Beirut, city of surprises -
Lebanon's prospects as a financial centre


   By JAMES WHITTINGTON


There used to be a joke in Lebanon that no wealthy family was complete
without its own bank. Not only was it the ultimate status symbol but it was
also useful in raising cash to help fund other family business interests.
For the seriously rich, this lure of personal banking was no joking matter
and, during the 1970s, the number of banks in Lebanon proliferated.
Despite 15 devastating years of civil war in which the political and
economic structures of the country came close to virtual collapse, the
majority of the banks have survived. There are currently 52 Lebanese banks,
14 subsidiaries, and 12 foreign banks operating through a network of over
590 branches - that is roughly one branch per 5,300 residents - making
Lebanon one of the most over-banked countries in the Arab world.
The bursting confidence and resilience of Lebanese bankers is a throwback to
the days before the war when Lebanon was an important international banking
and financial centre. The system of free exchange and strict secrecy
attracted money from a variety of sources; and a number of loans to India,
Renault and even the World Bank were arranged in Beirut before 1975.
Now that hostilities are over and a massive reconstruction programme is
under way, the government of prime minister Mr Rafik Hariri is lobbying hard
to persuade the world that the country can regain its position as a regional
centre for banking and finance.
To meet such aspirations the local banks are working hard to strengthen
their balance sheets, diversify their assets, upgrade their infrastructure,
and modernise their systems and products to catch up with rest of the
banking world.
'There will be major changes (in the banking sector) over the next few
years. The whole business is light years behind and it needs a lot of
investment in infrastructure, services and human resources,' argues Mr Derek
Kelly, a chief executive officer with the British Bank of the Middle East
who moved to Beirut this summer to shake up the bank's operations. At the
top of the list of changes deemed necessary by the central bank, Banque du
Liban, is a shake out of some of the smaller banks - more than 30 banks are
capitalised at less than a million dollars. By February of next year, all
banks must comply with the Basle Agreement and fulfil a capital adequacy
ratio of 8 per cent. This may set in train a series of mergers, though only
a small number of banks are expected to disappear.
For the larger banks, the pressing need is to iron out the distortions left
over from the war. Balance sheets have grown tremendously over the past few
years, albeit from a low base. Total assets increased by 326 per cent from
4.9 trillion (ie million million) Lebanese pounds in 1990 to LP20.9 trillion
by June 1994, with private sector deposits up from LP3.5 trillion to LP16
trillion over the same period as rich Lebanese expatriates returned flight
capital.
But lending to the private sector remains low and the principal currency
used by the banks, and indeed the economy as a whole, is still the US
dollar. Even though the pound has been stable at around 1,700 to the dollar
since February 1993 and the central bank has built up a hefty Dollars 3.8bn
in foreign reserves, the commercial banks do little more than buy
high-yielding Treasury Bills with the Lebanese pound. More than 60 per cent
of deposits and 88 per cent of lending are in dollars. The average credit to
deposits ratio for the sector is only 31 per cent and all loans are short
term for trade and commerce.
In an attempt to encourage the banks to extend more credit in local
currency, the central bank has relaxed its rules on compulsory Treasury Bill
subscription from 60 to 40 per cent of Lebanese pound deposits. More
importantly, interest rates this year have come down from 17 per cent to 14
per cent on 12 month maturities. Bankers believe that as the rate comes down
further, margin pressures will force them to find more borrowers in the
private sector.
Meanwhile, to cope with the demand for medium to long term financing, which
is essential if the country's reconstruction programme is going to be a
success, the Beirut Stock Exchange is being revived.
'We are conscious that the Lebanese economy cannot sustain real growth if we
do not have medium to long term credit. That's why the central bank is
backing all efforts to develop capital markets,' says Mr Riad Salameh, the
central bank governor.
Beirut's stock exchange was one of the most active in the region before it
was closed in 1983 at the height of hostilities.
The core of the new capital market is Solidere, the Dollars 1.8bn
property-development company which is rebuilding the centre of Beirut. The
success of the Dollars 650m Solidere issue earlier this year, which was 42
per cent over-subscribed, formed the basis of a secondary market launched in
late June.
Thirty-two banks and financial institutions have bought seats on the
market's fully computerised trading floor and foreign institutions such as
Paribas, Robert Flemming, Merrill Lynch and the Dutch-bank ING have recently
set up or revived offices in Beirut in anticipation of a fully-fledged stock
market in the new year.
'As a city famous for surprises, Beirut may once again have its day,' says
one banker, hopefully.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

941215

