FT943-13115

FT  21 JUL 94 / Berlusconi faces another minefield: Plans to cut pension
benefits will put further strain on shaky cabinet unity


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


The bruised unity of Italy's right-wing coalition government faces another
tough challenge over plans to cut pension benefits in the 1995 budget.
At a cabinet meeting today Mr Silvio Berlusconi, prime minister, will have
to negotiate a delicate compromise on an issue which has caused serious
divisions. The three-minister economic team has argued that a large cut in
pension benefits will give an essential signal to the financial markets of
Italy's determination to tackle the budget deficit.
But others like Mr Clemente Mastella, labour minister, fear a sharp attack
on pensions would risk a serious confrontation with the unions.
The problem of finding the right formula on pensions, plus other cuts in
social and health spending, has been one of the main causes of the long
delay in formulating the 1995 budget and a three-year macro-economic
programme. This delay, in turn, has worried the financial markets and has
been a factor in the weakness of the lira over the past three weeks.
The prime minister's office announced yesterday a second cabinet meeting was
scheduled for tomorrow. This could mean that all the long-awaited economic
policy decisions may not be made known until then.
The economic ministers have already warned that if sufficient cuts cannot be
found in public spending, there would be little option but to raise taxes.
Last week, the government said it would be building the 1995 budget round a
benchmark deficit of L144,000bn (Pounds 59.7bn), just below 9 per cent of
gross national product.
This would mean finding an extra L40,000bn either in taxes or spending cuts.
Otherwise they said, the deficit would move inexorably upwards to
L184,000bn. Both Mr Lamberto Dini, treasury minister, and Mr Giulio
Tremonti, finance minister, promised last week that fiscal pressure would
not rise above the 1993/1994 levels. Instead, they would be relying on
spending cuts plus a reorganisation of the tax system to make it more
efficient.
They also plan to raise extra funds through a form of tax amnesty by
clearing up a backlog of 3.2m contested tax assessment cases. Another source
of revenue is expected to be a pardon on illegal property development. The
precise terms of the latter are still being disputed.
But the real source of conflict in recent days has been over pensions. The
economic team believes Italy must accelerate the pace at which the
retirement age is moved from 55 to to 60 for women and 60 to 65 for men.
This could even mean women being retired at the same age as men. The deficit
in the state pensions scheme this year is likely to be more than L80,000bn,
or half the total budget deficit.
The unions, who now have more members who are pensioners than active
workers, have warned against tampering with benefits. The only evidence of a
softening of their stance has been to propose the issue be put aside until
autumn. This view has had considerable sympathy from the labour minister,
whose portfolio embraces pensions.
Mr Berlusconi for his part may not wish to follow a path that causes a
confrontation with the unions. But the sole alternative acceptable to the
nervous financial markets would be higher taxes. His most popular election
pledge was lowering taxes and creating a million new jobs.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940721

